 The Western Chalukya decorative inventiveness focused on the pillars , door panels , lintels ( torana ) , domical roofs in bays , outer wall decorations such as Kirtimukha ( gargoyle faces common in Western Chalukya decoration ) , and miniature towers on pilasters . Although the art form of these artisans does not have any distinguishing features from a distance , a closer examination reveals their taste for decoration . An exuberance of carvings , bands of scroll work , figural bas @-@ reliefs and panel sculptures are all closely packed . The doorways are highly ornamented but have an architectural framework consisting of pilasters , a moulded lintel and a cornice top . The sanctum receives diffused light through pierced window screens flanking the doorway ; these features were inherited and modified by the Hoysala builders . The outer wall decorations are well rendered . The Chalukyan artisans extended the surface of the wall by means of pilasters and half pilasters . Miniature decorative towers of multiple types are supported by these pilasters . These towers are of the dravida tiered type , and in the nagara style they were made in the <unk> ( mono aedicule ) and its variants ; the bhumija and sekhari . 
 = = = Vimana = = = 
 The Jain Temple at Lakkundi marked an important step in the development of Western Chalukya outer wall ornamentation , and in the Muktesvara Temple at <unk> the artisans introduced a double curved projecting eave ( <unk> ) , used centuries later in Vijayanagara temples . The Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi embodies a more mature development of the Chalukyan architecture in which the tower has a fully expressed ascending line of niches . The artisans used northern style spires and expressed it in a modified dravida outline . Miniature towers of both dravida and nagara types are used as ornamentation on the walls . With further development , the divisions between storeys on the superstructure became less marked , until they almost lost their individuality . This development is exemplified in the Dodda Basappa Temple at Dambal , where the original dravida structure can only be identified after reading out the ornamental encrustation that covers the surface of each storey . 
 The walls of the vimana below the dravida superstructure are decorated with simple pilasters in low relief with boldly modeled sculptures between them . There are fully decorated surfaces with frequent recesses and projections with deeper niches and conventional sculptures . The decoration of the walls is subdued compared to that of the later Hoysala architecture . The walls , which are broken up into hundreds of projections and recesses , produce a remarkable effect of light and shade , an artistic vocabulary inherited by the Hoysala builders in the decades that followed . 
 = = = Mantapa = = = 
 An important feature of Western Chalukya roof art is the use of domical ceilings ( not to be confused with the European types that are built of voussoirs with radiating joints ) and square ceilings . Both types of ceilings originate from the square formed in the ceiling by the four beams that rest on four pillars . The dome above the four central pillars is normally the most attractive . The dome is constructed of ring upon ring of stones , each horizontally bedded ring smaller than the one below . The top is closed by a single stone slab . The rings are not cemented but held in place by the immense weight of the roofing material above them pressing down on the haunches of the dome . The triangular spaces created when the dome springs from the centre of the square are filled with arabesques . In the case of square ceilings , the ceiling is divided into compartments with images of lotus rosettes or other images from Hindu mythology . 
 Pillars are a major part of Western Chalukya architecture and were produced in two main types : pillars with alternate square blocks and a sculptured cylindrical section with a plain square @-@ block base , and bell @-@ shaped lathe @-@ turned pillars . The former type is more vigorous and stronger than the bell @-@ shaped type , which is made of soapstone and has a quality of its own . Inventive workmanship was used on soapstone shafts , roughly carved into the required shapes using a lathe . Instead of laboriously rotating a shaft to obtain the final finish , workers added the final touches to an upright shaft by using sharp tools . Some pillars were left unpolished , as evidenced by the presence of fine grooves made by the pointed end of the tool . In other cases , polishing resulted in pillars with fine reflective properties such as the pillars in the temples at <unk> , Itagi and Hangal . This pillar art reached its zenith in the temples at Gadag , specifically the Sarasvati Temple in Gadag city . 
 Notable in Western Chalukya architecture are the decorative door panels that run along the length of the door and over on top to form a lintel . These decorations appear as bands of delicately chiseled fretwork , moulded <unk> and scrolls scribed with tiny figures . The bands are separated by deep narrow channels and grooves and run over the top of the door . The temple plan often included a heavy slanting cornice of double curvature , which projected outward from the roof of the open mantapa . This was intended to reduce heat from the sun , blocking the harsh sunlight and preventing rainwater from pouring in between the pillars . The underside of the cornice looks like woodwork because of the rib @-@ work . Occasionally , a straight <unk> cornice is seen . 
 = = = Sculpture = = = 
 = = = = Figure sculpture = = = = 
 <unk> sculpture on friezes and panels changed during the period . The heroes from the Hindu epics Ramayana and Mahabharata , depicted often in early temples , become fewer , limited to only a few narrow friezes ; there is a corresponding increase in the depiction of Hindu gods and goddesses in later temples . Depiction of deities above miniature towers in the recesses , with a decorative lintel above , is common in 12th @-@ century temples , but not in later ones . Figures of holy men and dancing girls were normally sculpted for deep niches and recesses . The use of bracket figures depicting dancing girls became common on pillars under beams and cornices . Among animal sculptures , the elephant appears more often than the horse : its broad volumes offered fields for ornamentation . Erotic sculptures are rarely seen in Chalukyan temples ; the <unk> Temple at Balligavi is an exception . Here , erotic sculpture is limited to a narrow band of friezes that run around the exterior of the temple . 
 = = = = Deity sculpture = = = = 
 In what was a departure from convention , the Western Chalukyan figure sculptures of gods and goddesses bore stiff forms and were repeated over and over in the many temples . This was in contrast to the naturalistic and informal poses employed in the earlier temples in the region . Barring occasional exaggerations in pose , each principal deity had its own pose depending on the incarnation or form depicted . Consistent with figure sculpture in other parts of India , these figures were fluent rather than defined in their musculature , and the drapery was reduced to a few visible lines on the body of the image . 
 Western Chalukyan deity sculptures were well @-@ rendered ; exemplified best by that of Hindu goddess Sarasvati at the Sarasvati temple in Gadag city . Much of the drapery on the bust of the image is ornamentation comprising jewellery made of pearls around her throat . An elaborate pile of curls forms her hair , some of which trails to her shoulders . Above these curly tresses and behind the head is a tiered coronet of jewels , the curved edge of which rises to form a halo . From the waist down , the image is dressed in what seems to be the most delicate of material ; except for the pattern of embroidery traced over it , it is difficult to tell where the drapery begins and where it ends . 
 = = = = Miniature towers = = = = 
 From the 11th century , architectural articulation included icons between pilasters , miniature towers supported by pilasters in the recesses of walls , and , on occasion , the use of wall pillars to support these towers . These miniature towers were of the southern dravida and northern bhumija and sekhari types and were mostly used to elaborate dravida types of articulation . The miniatures on single pilasters were decorated with a protective floral lintel on top , a form of decoration normally provided for depiction of gods . These elaborations are observed in the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri . These miniatures became common in the 12th century , and the influence of this northern articulation is seen in the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi and in the nearby <unk> Temple . 
 The miniature towers bear finer and more elegant details , indicating that architectural ideas traveled fast from the north to the south . Decoration and ornamentation had evolved from a moulded form to a chiseled form , the sharpness sometimes giving it a three @-@ dimensional effect . The foliage decorations changed from bulky to thin , and a change in the miniature towers on dual pilasters is seen . The 11th century miniatures consisted of a cornice ( <unk> ) , a floor ( <unk> ) , a balustrade ( <unk> ) and a roof ( kuta ) with a voluptuous moulding , while in the 12th century , detailed dravida miniature towers with many tiny tiers ( tala ) came into vogue . Some 12th @-@ century temples such as the Kallesvara Temple at <unk> have miniature towers that do not stand on pilasters but instead are supported by balconies , which have niches underneath that normally contain an image of a deity . 
 = = Temple deities = = 
 The Western Chalukyan kings Shaivas ( worshippers of the Hindu god Shiva ) dedicated most of their temples to that God . They were however tolerant of the Vaishnava or Jain faiths and dedicated some temples to Vishnu and the Jain tirthankaras respectively . There are some cases where temples originally dedicated to one deity were converted to suit another faith . In such cases , the original presiding deity can sometimes still be identified by salient clues . While these temples shared the same basic plan and architectural sensibilities , they differed in some details , such as the visibility and pride of place they afforded the different deities . 
 As with all Indian temples , the deity in the sanctum was the most conspicuous indicator of the temple 's dedication . The sanctum ( Garbhagriha or cella ) of a Shaiva temple would contain a Shiva linga , the universal symbol of the deity . An image of Gaja Lakshmi ( consort of the Hindu god Vishnu ) or an image of Vishnu riding on Garuda , or even just the Garuda , signifies a Vaishnava temple . Gaja Lakshmi , however , on account of her importance to the Kannada @-@ speaking regions , is found on the lintel of the entrance to the mantapa ( pillared hall ) in all temples irrespective of faith . The carving on the projecting lintel on the doorway to the sanctum has the image of a linga or sometimes of Ganapati ( Ganesha ) , the son of Shiva in the case of Shaiva temples or of a seated or upright Jain saint ( Tirthankar ) in the case of Jain temples . 
 The great arched niche at the base of the superstructure ( Shikhara or tower ) also contains an image indicative of the <unk> ' sect or faith . Above the lintel , in a deep and richly wrought architrave can be found images of the Hindu <unk> ( the Hindu triad of deities ) Brahma , Shiva and Vishnu beneath arched rolls of arabesque . Shiva or Vishnu occupies the centre depending on the sect the temple was dedicated to . 
 Occasionally , Ganapati and his brother Kartikeya ( Kumara , Subramanya ) or the <unk> , the female counterparts , can be found at either end of this carving . Carvings of the river Goddesses Ganga and Yamuna are found at either end of the foot of the doorway to the shrine in early temples . 
 = = Appreciation = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The Western Chalukya dynastic rule ended in the late 12th century , but its architectural legacy was inherited by the temple builders in southern Karnataka , a region then under the control of the Hoysala empire . Broadly speaking , Hoysala architecture is derived from a variant of Western Chalukya architecture that emerged from the Lakshmeshwar workshops . The construction of the Chennakesava Temple at Belur was the first major project commissioned by Hoysala King Vishnuvardhana in 1117 CE . This temple best exemplifies the Chalukyan taste the Hoysala artisans inherited . Avoiding <unk> , these artists left <unk> spaces where required , although their elaborate doorjambs are <unk> . Here , on the outer walls , the sculptures are not overdone , yet they are articulate and discreetly aesthetic . The Hoysala builders used soapstone almost universally as building material , a trend that started in the middle of the 11th century with Chalukyan temples . Other common artistic features between the two Kanarese dynasties are the ornate <unk> ( pillar bracket figures ) , the lathe @-@ turned pillars and the makara torana ( lintel with mythical beastly figure ) . The tower over the shrine in a Hoysala temple is a closely moulded form of the Chalukya style tower . 
 When the Vijayanagara Empire was in power in the 15th and 16th centuries , its workshops preferred granite over soapstone as the building material for temples . However , an archaeological discovery within the royal center at Vijayanagara has revealed the use of soapstone for stepped wells . These stepped wells are fashioned entirely of finely finished soapstone arranged symmetrically , with steps and landings descending to the water on four sides . This design shows strong affinities to the temple tanks of the Western Chalukya – Hoysala period . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Unlike the Badami Chalukyan temples featured in detailed studies by Henry Cousens ( 1927 ) , Gary <unk> ( 1969 ) and George Michell ( 1975 ) , Western Chalukyan architecture suffered neglect despite its importance and wider use . Recently however , scholars have returned to the modern Karnataka region to focus on a longer chronology , investigating a larger geographical area , making detailed studies of epigraphs and giving more importance to individual monuments dating from the 11th through 13th centuries . 
 The first detailed study of Western Chalukya architecture was by M.A. <unk> ( 1977 ) , who used as a starting point two medieval epigraphs that claimed the architects were masters of various temple forms . This study focused in particular on the riches of the Western Chalukya miniature wall shrines ( <unk> ) . An important insight gained from this work was that the architects of the region learned about temple forms from other regions . These forms to them appeared " exotic " , but they learned to reproduce them with more or less mastery , depending on the extent of their familiarity with the other regions ' building traditions . This conscious eclectic attempt to freely use elements from other regions in India was pointed out by Sinha ( 1993 ) as well . 
 A seminal work by Adam Hardy ( 1995 ) examined the Karnataka temple @-@ building tradition over a period of 700 years , from the 7th century to the 13th century , and reviewed more than 200 temples built by four dynasties ; Badami Chalukya , Rashtrakuta , Western Chalukya and Hoysala . The study covered dravida and nagara style monuments and the differences between the dravida tradition in modern Karnataka and that of neighbouring Tamil Nadu and made it possible to interpret the many architectural details as part of a larger scheme . 
 The temples and epigraphs of the Western Chalukyas are protected by the Archaeological Survey of India and the Directorate of Archaeology and Museums – Government of Karnataka . In the words of historian S. Kamath ( 2001 ) , " The Western Chalukyas left behind some of the finest monuments of artistic merit . Their creations have the pride of place in Indian art tradition " . 
 = = = Notable temples = = = 
 The Mahadeva Temple at Itagi dedicated to Shiva is among the larger temples built by the Western Chalukyas and perhaps the most famous . Inscriptions hail it as the ' Emperor among temples ' . Here , the main temple , the sanctum of which has a linga , is surrounded by thirteen minor shrines , each with its own linga . The temple has two other shrines , dedicated to <unk> and <unk> , parents of Mahadeva , the Chalukya commander who consecrated the temple in 1112 CE . 
 The <unk> temple in the Haveri district has sculptures of deities of multiple faiths . The temple may have been consecrated first as a Vaishnava temple , later taken over by Jains and eventually becoming a Shaiva temple . The hall in the temple contains sculptures of Uma <unk> ( Shiva with his consort Uma ) , Vishnu and his consort Lakshmi , Surya ( the sun god ) , Naga @-@ Nagini ( the snake goddess ) , and the sons of Shiva , Ganapati and Kartikeya . Shiva is depicted with four arms , holding his attributes : the damaru ( drum ) , the <unk> ( chain of beads ) and the trishul ( trident ) in three arms . His lower left arm rests on Uma , who is seated on Shiva 's lap , embracing him with her right arm while gazing into his face . The sculpture of Uma is well decorated with garlands , large earrings and curly hair . 
 Some temples , in a departure from the norm , were dedicated to deities other than Shiva or Vishnu . These include the Surya ( portrayed as ' Suryanarayana ' ) shrine at the Kasi <unk> temple complex and a Jain temple dedicated to Mahavira , both at Lakkundi ; the <unk> temple ( built in a Buddhist architectural style ) at Dambal in the Gadag district ; the Mahamaya temple dedicated to a tantric goddess at Kuknur in the Koppal district , and the Durga temple at <unk> in the Haveri district . 
 = Carmella Cammeniti = 
 Carmella Cammeniti ( previously Silvani and Sister Mary Catherine ) is a fictional character from the Australian Network Ten soap opera Neighbours , played by Natalie Blair . She appeared on a recurring basis from 2003 – 05 , then became a main character from 2006 – 08 , before making a final guest appearance in 2011 . Carmella was created as a replacement for Nina Tucker , portrayed by Delta Goodrem , who was written out of the series when Goodrem became ill . Her early storylines , including a romance with Connor O 'Neill ( Patrick Harvey ) , were originally intended for Nina . The daughter of a protective gangster father , Carmella was initially a " fun , feisty " character . She gradually became " tortured [ and ] depressive " , with storylines which saw her attract the attention of a stalker , become a nun , suffer facial scarring , develop an addiction to prescription medication and lose her husband after a bushfire . 
 Carmella was the second member of the Cammeniti family to appear in Neighbours , after her father , Rocco ( Robert Forza ) . She was later joined by her mother , sister , and two cousins . She had long @-@ standing relationships with Marco Silvani ( Jesse Rosenfeld ) and Oliver Barnes ( David Hoflin ) , the father of her daughter , Chloe ( Sarah May ) . When Blair resigned from the serial in 2007 in order to pursue new projects , the producers arranged for a separated Carmella and Oliver to reunite . The two briefly returned three years later , to consolidate their family unit . 
 Blair won the " Most Popular New Female Talent " Logie Award for her portrayal of Carmella , and was additionally nominated for several Golden Logies and Inside Soap Awards . Critics have deemed Carmella as one of the series ' most popular characters . Blair 's versatility has attracted praise , though several publications have highlighted the implausibility of many of Carmella 's storylines . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Carmella is introduced as a barmaid at the Erinsborough bar Lou 's Place . She becomes romantically involved with her colleague , Connor O 'Neill ( Patrick Harvey ) , to the disapproval of her father Rocco ( Robert Forza ) . A feud with Connor 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Michelle Scully ( Kate Keltie ) , results in Carmella slapping her and leaving the area . She later returns in 2004 , reconciles with Connor and helps him to maintain access to his daughter Madeleine ( Madison Lu ) . To prove that she is business @-@ minded , Carmella becomes a magazine editor . She departs from Erinsborough suddenly after she becomes the victim of a stalker , Frank Romano ( <unk> Amor ) . Before she leaves , she drives around with a shotgun in an attempt to kill Frank . Upon her return , Carmella loses Connor 's affection to Serena Bishop ( Lara Sacher ) . She attempts to ruin their relationship , which results in Serena 's mother Liljana ( Marcella Russo ) slapping her to warn her off . Carmella then tries a different approach ; she borrows money from her mother Lucia ( Maria Mercedes ) to pay for an operation Madeleine needs , then blackmails Connor into spending time with her . She claims to have borrowed the money from a crime mob who are harassing her for repayment , which prompts Connor to steal money to try to pay it back . When Carmella realises the trouble she has caused , she tells Connor the truth and leaves . 
 After a period of absence , Carmella 's mother sends Connor on a secret mission to find her daughter . He discovers that Carmella has become a nun , and is living in a convent as Sister Mary Catherine . During her time as a nun , she grows close to Ned Parker ( Daniel O 'Connor ) , who encourages her to become a recording artist after hearing her sing . Carmella does it to make him happy , but admits that she does not really enjoy singing . She withdraws from their relationship as she feels that Ned is prying too much into her private affairs . 
 Carmella admits she arranged the sale of her cousin Teresa 's ( Hannah Greenwood ) unwanted baby . A fellow nun suggests that she takes time off from the convent . She complies and leaves her role as a nun behind . Teresa has a breakdown and throws a saucepan of boiling water at Carmella , who is left with severe facial scarring and becomes increasingly secluded . She is convinced by Will Griggs ( Christian Clark ) to have plastic surgery to lessen the scarring . Ned tells Carmella that he loves her , but Carmella has fallen in love with Will . Soon thereafter , Will leaves the country without notice . His younger brother Oliver Barnes ( David Hoflin ) arrives , and explains that Will had a double identity . Carmella has short @-@ lived relationships with Oliver and teenager Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) . She becomes addicted to prescription drugs , and later discovers that she is pregnant with Oliver 's baby , and may have harmed the baby through her addiction . 
 Carmella begins an online business with Marco Silvani ( Jesse Rosenfeld ) , and develops an attraction to him . She initially resists as she is still in love with Oliver , but learns to her disappointment that he does not reciprocate her feelings . Carmella gives birth prematurely by Caesarean section ; the condition of her daughter , Chloe ( Sarah May ) , who is placed in the neonatal intensive @-@ care unit , quickly improves . Mother and daughter move in with Marco , prompting a jealous Oliver to file for sole custody of Chloe , though he later rescinds this decision . Marco proposes to Carmella and she accepts , however later that day he is severely injured in a bushfire . Carmella marries him from his hospital bed , and Marco dies shortly afterwards . Following his death , Carmella believes she is haunted by Marco 's spirit . Oliver moves to New York , but she declines his invitation to accompany him . He later moves to Portugal , and in December 2008 , Carmella and Chloe leave to be with him . They briefly return to Erinsborough when Oliver 's mother Rebecca ( Jane Hall ) breaks up with her husband Paul ( Stefan Dennis ) , to convince her to come and live with them . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and characterisation = = = 
 Carmella was created following Delta Goodrem 's sudden departure from Neighbours due to illness . Three months ' worth of scripts were rewritten , and Carmella was introduced to fill the void left by Goodrem 's character , Nina Tucker . As a school graduate , Blair had unsuccessfully auditioned for another role in the serial , but impressed casting director Jan Russ . Six months later , Russ contacted Blair and asked her to audition for the role of Carmella . She was cast immediately , due to the urgent need to fill the void left by Goodrem . She played Carmella on an episodic basis in 2003 , then returned for a longer period in 2004 , and briefly in 2005 . Blair returned to Neighbours in 2006 , and in September 2007 , signed a contract keeping her in the show for another year . 
 The serial 's official website described Carmella as " the youngest daughter of local mafioso Rocco Cammeniti . She grew up spoilt and sheltered from the real world , which made her a force to be reckoned with as soon as she was old enough to break free of her father 's influence . " Carmella underwent many changes during her tenure . Blair initially described her as a " fun , feisty and foxy sort of character " . However , Carmella became depressed through her life 's travails , having been stalked by Frank Romano , sold her cousin Teresa 's baby and subsequently become a nun . Before her official confirmation in the convent , Carmella goes clubbing with ex @-@ boyfriend Connor . <unk> Carmella 's reasoning , Blair stated : " Carmella is thinking , ' Is what I 'm about to go ahead with , - becoming a nun - the right choice ? ' She wants to be sure she 's making the right decision about what she 'll do for the rest of her life . " Blair confirmed that after that night Carmella had " all the answers that she needed " to live the rest of her life . Blair enjoyed the opportunity to play a nun , but was glad when the storyline concluded as it meant Carmella got to have fun again . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Carmella 's relationship with Connor was originally scripted for Nina Tucker , but was transferred to Carmella by the producers on Goodrem 's departure . Upon Carmella 's introduction , her only family member was her mobster father Rocco , who had been sent to prison . In 2006 , Carmella was given a sister , when Natalie <unk> was cast in the role of Rosetta Cammeniti . Blair opined that Rosie 's inclusion brought out different sides to Carmella 's character . Many viewers told Blair they felt the casting was good because they look alike . One of the significant changes to Carmella was that she started having fun again — Blair felt this meant they worked well together . Later , Erin McNaught was cast as her cousin Sienna Cammeniti . McNaught commented that there had been a rivalry between the cousins in their youth , so it would be interesting to see what unfolded between them . 
 Following the dissolution of Carmella 's relationship with Oliver , Blair commented that Oliver would " always have a special place in Carmella 's heart " . Although Carmella began dating Marco , Blair felt that Chloe 's premature birth strengthened the connection between Carmella and Oliver . She explained that Carmella " feels desolate and suddenly the connection Carmella 's always had with Oliver is heightened . Together they name their baby Chloe and it 's Marco who feels shut out . " Following Chloe 's birth , Carmella decided to put her love life to one side , and put her baby daughter first . She told Marco she did not want him in her life ; he planned to leave town without a word to her , except a love note and a present to Chloe . Discussing the state of her relationship with Oliver and Marco at this point , Blair assessed : " I don 't think it 's so much of a love triangle anymore . Oliver made his feelings for Carmella very clear - he doesn 't love her in that way . But he still doesn 't want another man looking after his child . So there 'll be more tension between the [ three ] of them . And things get even more complicated over the next few months . " 
 Marco was later killed in a bush fire disaster . Describing the filming process , Blair stated : " Shooting the scenes for the bush fire and everything surrounding it - the wedding - the funeral - was so draining . It was full on . " Blair had to film scenes involving Carmella singing at Marco 's funeral , which she deemed " close to home " because she had done it at her grandmother 's funeral . She found it distressing , as they filmed in a real graveyard . She had previously been reluctant to sing on @-@ screen but felt it was justified for Marco 's funeral . Blair commented on Carmella 's repetitive bad luck , stating : " She 's gone through so much already , just to get to this point . This should really be a happy time for her , but it 's not . " After all the hurdles she faced , Carmella became a stronger person . Blair said it saw her become well @-@ equipped to look after her child . 
 = = = Departure and return = = = 
 In 2008 , Blair expressed frustration that Carmella had become a " very tortured , depressive character and there was no light at the end of the tunnel . " She described the role , which went through enormous transformations , as being one that had pushed her acting abilities . Blair 's pleas to the show producers to let the down @-@ on @-@ luck Carmella be up @-@ beat again were rejected . In June 2008 , the actress confirmed her plans to leave the series when her contract expired . Speaking of her decision to leave , Blair said : " I made the decision in December [ ... ] I am eager to try new things and go to a place where people have no idea what I have done , I want to experiment with what works for me and what doesn 't as a performer . " Producers confirmed they did not intend to kill her character off , as they hoped for her to return again in the future . A spokesperson for the programme 's broadcaster , Network Ten , stated : " Obviously , we 've loved having Natalie on the show all these years and we 're really sad to see her go [ ... ] and hope to see her on Ramsay Street again one day in the future . " Blair later admitted she was surprised at her rise popularity whilst playing Carmella . 
 Carmella 's exit storyline was devised months prior to Blair 's departure . Producers had planned to reunite Carmella and Oliver and have them leave together , however Hoflin decided to go travelling , meaning he was unavailable for filming . Prior to Hoflin 's departure , he and <unk> filmed scenes showing their reunion . Scripts were quickly rewritten to portray Oliver in Portugal , where Hoflin was in real life , instead of New York where Oliver left for upon his exit . Describing her reaction to Carmella 's scripts towards the end , Blair commented : " After a while I 'd open my script and say , ' Please give me one scene where I 'm smiling ' . And then I 'd read the script and think , ' Damn - no smiling scenes again ' . " Blair had originally hoped that Carmella would be killed on @-@ screen , as she felt a dramatic send off would have been fitting . After the " tragic " final year Carmella underwent , Blair decided she was happy with the exit because " something finally goes right for her " . Blair also opined : " It 's a really lovely story and I think the fans will be happy with it . " Carmella 's " happy exit storyline " saw her leaving in a taxi surrounded by all of her friends waving her off , after they convinced her to start a new life with Oliver . 
 In September 2010 , it was revealed that Blair and Hoflin would return to film scenes in the last two weeks of production in 2010 , and the episodes would be shown in early 2011 . Carmella returns for two episodes in March 2011 . Blair said she could not resist the return , which acts as a catalyst in Rebecca Robinson 's ( Jane Hall ) departure . Blair felt it fitting because both Carmella and Oliver have history with Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) and want to " protect Rebecca and watch out for her best interests " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his book Super Aussie Soaps , Andrew Mercado brands Carmella , the mobster 's daughter , as " the mafia princess " . In 2005 , Blair won a Logie Award for " Most Popular New Female Talent " following her appearances as Carmella . By the time Blair was made an official cast member , The Courier @-@ Mail declared that Carmella was a Ramsay Street favourite . The actress was also nominated for a Golden Logie for " Most Popular Personality " in 2007 , and once again 2008 . Blair was nominated in the category of " Sexiest Female " at the 2007 Inside Soap Awards , and had a joint nomination with David Hoflin for " Best Couple " . Fiona Byrne of the Herald Sun remarked that Carmella was becoming one of the show 's most popular characters . At the following year 's Inside Soap Awards , she was nominated in the " Best Storyline " category for her custody battle over Chloe with Oliver , as well as " Sexiest Female " again . 
 Scott Ellis of the Sydney Morning Herald 's television magazine stated that , even compared to the slightly surreal standards of most soap operas , Carmella has " been through a wringer " . He made a point of the many storylines that transformed the character : " A former party girl turned nun , Carmella has been stalked , slapped , scalded , scarred and even sold a baby . She 's found and lost love at least three times , given birth , fought a custody battle , fought kleptomania , and fought various members of her family . " In the same vein , The Daily Telegraph praised Carmella 's versatility in going from " baby peddler to nun , before suffering severe facial burns that required re @-@ constructive surgery . " Inside Soap opined that 2008 for Carmella was " tragedy after tragedy " . What 's on TV deemed Carmella 's scalding with boiling water her most explosive scene , and the Daily Record called it karma for selling Teresa 's baby . 
 Despite her popularity with the viewers , Carmella was negatively received by Ruth Deller of television website Lowculture . On how to get the magic back into Neighbours , Deller said " Axe Carmella . Or at least make her a nun again , which was the only time she was interesting " . Deller also said she would have rather seen Carmella and Marco leave the show instead of Rosetta and Frazer . The Liverpool Daily Post said that they had seen implausible storylines in the serial , but Carmella seeing Marco 's ghost " takes the biscuit " . However , they concluded " At least he offers Carmella some much @-@ needed support . " The Daily Record said the ghost scenes were more unforgettable than Bouncer 's dream . On the subject of her funeral song they added : " Oddly , none of her friends think she 's gone mad , despite an impromptu version of ' Amazing Grace ' . " Readers of Inside Soap were asked who Oliver should be with out of Carmella and Elle . Carmella came first with sixty @-@ six percent of the vote . 
 = Portland City Hall ( Oregon ) = 
 Portland City Hall is the headquarters of city government of Portland , Oregon , United States . The four @-@ story Italian Renaissance @-@ style building houses the offices of the City Council , which consists of the mayor and four commissioners , and several other offices . City Hall is also home to the City Council chambers , located in the rotunda on the east side of the structure . Completed in 1895 , the building was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 21 , 1974 . City Hall has gone through several renovations , with the most recent overhaul gutting the interior to upgrade it to modern seismic and safety standards . The original was built for $ 600 @,@ 000 , while the 1996 to 1998 renovation cost $ 29 million . 
 Located in downtown Portland , City Hall sits on an entire city block along Fourth and Fifth avenues at Madison and Jefferson Streets . To the south is the Wells Fargo Center , and to the north is the Portland Building . Terry Schrunk Plaza ( named for a former mayor ) is across Fourth Avenue to the east . In addition to more than 87 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) of interior space , the exterior consists of landscaped grounds . The main entrance is located on Fourth Avenue , though for a time it was located on the Fifth Avenue side . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Late 19th century = = = 
 The 1890 @-@ current City Hall replaces an earlier building at Second and Ash streets . In 1869 , the Oregon Episcopal School was founded in downtown Portland , with the women @-@ only St. Helens Hall on the current block of City Hall . 
 The city hired Henry J. Hefty to design the building ; his design was " a huge ostentatious structure that appeared to be modeled on the Kremlin . " The city purchased the block in 1890 for $ 100 @,@ 000 , and construction began in 1892 , but was halted due to dissatisfaction with the design . After the foundation and basement of the building had been built , the new City Hall Commission canceled the contract and tore out the basement and first floor at an expense of $ 125 @,@ 000 . 
 This board terminated Hefty and hired the architectural firm of Whidden and Lewis to design a new building . Ion Lewis and William Whidden were originally from Boston , but were in Portland for the Portland Hotel project , and Whidden had been employed with McKim , Mead , and White . The board also persuaded the state legislature to authorize an additional $ 500 @,@ 000 in bonds to complete the project . Whidden & Lewis designed a four @-@ story structure in a neo @-@ Renaissance style that included a clock tower . Designed to be located in the center portion of the building , the tower was to rise five @-@ stories above the rest of City Hall with a total height of 200 feet . Due to costs , the clock tower was never built . A domed cupola also designed by Whidden and Lewis was never built . The original building design was praised for the details and symmetry . 
 In 1893 , construction at the site was restarted . The contractors were <unk> , Gould and Gladden from Omaha , Nebraska . City Hall was built with un @-@ reinforced masonry walls and slurry concrete floors to save on costs . Construction on the new structure was finished in 1894 or 1895 and the city government occupied the building . Once completed , the building was one of the first large buildings in the Pacific Northwest to have electric wiring , have centralized heating , include public elevators , or be considered fireproof . William S. Mason was the first Portland mayor in the new City Hall , with a total of 34 people working in the building at opening . His successor , Sylvester Pennoyer , called the new building " expensive , unseemly and unhealthful " . 
 Funding for the city hall came from several sources . In 1889 , the Oregon Legislative Assembly approved a sale of $ 175 @,@ 000 worth of bonds by the City of Portland to finance the construction of a new city hall . The building ultimately cost $ 575 @,@ 000 . 
 When built , the surrounding area was composed of dirt roads and private residences . The Southern Pacific Railroad 's 1868 west side rail line ran down Fourth Avenue past City Hall and the county courthouse . The city and county governments fought the railroad to remove the dirty and noisy steam locomotives from this route , succeeding in 1912 . Southern Pacific 's electric interurban line continued on the tracks until the 1930s . In 2007 , light rail lines were added on Fifth Avenue for the MAX Green Line , with trains scheduled to once again run past City Hall . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1902 , two Port Orford cedar trees were planted on the east side of City Hall . One tree was planted on the north side and the second tree on the south side of the building to reinforce the symmetrical aspects of the building . The south tree was replaced in 1999 due to poor health . In 1910 , the city added passenger elevators to the open stairwells . 
 Until 1902 the Portland Public Library , which started as a reading room for sailors and then as a subscription library , was housed in the building . In 1928 , the city began one of a series of renovations on the building to increase floor space . That year one of the two light wells were filled in , blocking off natural light to the lower floors . The city added a new elevator in 1931 . The next remodel started in 1933 , and lasted through 1937 . During this construction the second light well was filled in for more space , and a penthouse apartment was built on top of the roof . 
 In 1910 , the city installed a large boulder on the southeast portion of the grounds . The Oregon Railway and Navigation Company had found the 15 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old boulder in 1897 and moved it to Portland . The ten ton Wallula Stone was discovered in the Columbia River Gorge , and was covered with petroglyphs . It was returned to the Umatilla tribe of Native Americans in Eastern Oregon in 1996 . The old elevators inside were replaced again in 1946 , and in 1948 a runaway truck destroyed part of the stone railing on the Fifth Avenue side , which was then fixed . 
 In the 1960s the mayor 's office was refurbished , a new roof was installed , and new trees were planted on the grounds . In 1964 , the city remodeled the City Council chambers on the second and third floors . Part of the work was to install new lighting to allow television broadcasts from the chamber , while other work added drop tiles to the ceiling , hiding the domed roof . 
 In the early morning hours of November 21 , 1970 , a dynamite fueled bomb exploded underneath the portico , doing $ 170 @,@ 000 in damage . Though no one was injured , windows were blown out , the Council Chamber ( located above the blast ) was damaged , all of the columns of the portico were damaged and replaced , and the Liberty Bell replica was a complete loss . A new bell was purchased for $ 8 @,@ 000 and later moved to Terry Schrunk Plaza . No one was ever arrested or claimed responsibility for the bombing . 
 Later in the decade , Portland upgraded City Hall by adding fire sprinklers and smoke detectors . In 1973 , the sandstone exterior was cleaned and sealed to prevent moisture from eroding the fragile stone . It was later learned that this process was harmful as the silicon coating sealed the moisture inside the rock . In 1974 , City Hall was added to the National Register of Historic Places . The following year the rooftop penthouse was converted into an employee break room that included an outdoor deck . In 1978 , the city constructed a wheelchair ramp to provide access to the handicapped . 
 The 1980s saw additional renovations . The auditor 's office and the mayor ’ s office were both renovated , though work on the mayor 's office halted when funds were exhausted . The city expanded the office of the city 's attorney , and in 1982 the Portland Building was finished across the street . This allowed the city to move many city offices into a single location . Work was also completed on the exterior , while a new roof was finished . In 1985 , the building began a conversion from steam heating . 
 In January 1995 , the City Council voted to remove parking from the grounds of City Hall . Previously , the landscaped yard surrounding the building had been paved to allow the city council members to park their vehicles on site . That month also marked the 100th birthday of the structure . 
 = = = Renovation = = = 
 Discussions about the need to upgrade and renovate City Hall began anew in 1988 . In 1994 , proposals were made to remodel and update the structure to meet modern building codes , with an estimated cost of $ 16 million . Work was to include replacing the concrete floors , structural upgrades , and restoring the original light corridors that penetrated all four floors of the building . In March 1995 , plans were made to renovate the then @-@ 100 @-@ year @-@ old structure . The estimated $ 22 million project was proposed due to the building failing to comply with the city codes for earthquakes and fires . 
 Some preparatory work for the renovation began in November 1995 . On May 3 , 1996 , City Hall closed and offices relocated for the renovation project . The offices were temporarily housed in the former State Office Building ( now Fifth Avenue Building ) nearby on Fifth Avenue . Bing Sheldon served as the architect on the remodel . Drake Construction served as the contractor for the project with <unk> Architects as the design firm . 
 On June 17 , 1996 , a 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) -long boom portion of a construction crane crashed at the construction site , scraping the stone on the east side of the building , but not injuring anyone . Due to the fragile sandstone exterior , the damage on the rotunda was not repaired . In January 1997 , construction crews finished the demolition portion of the project and finished the structural reinforcement part before they began the interior construction phase . 
 Designers restored the light corridors inside the building during the remodel . These two central light courts allowed more natural lighting into the interior of the building . Additionally , the old Fourth Avenue entrance was restored , and the address was changed to 1221 S.W. Fourth Avenue . Renovations also restored the original look of the City Council chamber , with council members now facing the windows . 
 The original red and white marble from the floors was saved and reinstalled on top of the new concrete slab flooring . New marble was used on the fourth floor . Other changes included the addition of central air conditioning , insulation of the roof and exterior walls , and the replacement of the old single @-@ pane windows . Public restrooms were added on the east side on each floor . During construction , the usable floor space in the building was reduced from 50 @,@ 370 square feet ( 4 @,@ 680 m2 ) to 48 @,@ 128 square feet ( 4 @,@ 471 @.@ 2 m2 ) . Restoration of the interior included work on the wrought @-@ iron frame of the stairwell , uncovering the copper plating that decorated the walls in the stairwell , and work on the wrought @-@ iron frame of the elevator shafts . Additionally , nearly 40 % of the building 's structural steel was replaced , the plumbing was replaced , HVAC systems were added , concrete slabs replaced the concrete slurry floors , new electrical systems were installed , shear concrete walls were added , as were new security , fire , and life safety systems . 
 On March 30 , 1998 , City Hall reopened to the public . There were concerns over the cost of the project that increased from around $ 15 million to a final cost of nearly $ 30 million . The city had approved $ 28 @.@ 1 million before the project started . Of the $ 29 @.@ 3 million final cost of the project , construction costs totaled $ 19 @.@ 9 million . Of that amount , $ 17 million was to bring the building up to modern fire and safety standards . Additional funds were spent on artwork , a temporary location for offices , and new furniture among other costs . Reasons given for the additional costs varied from new problems uncovered during the remodel , a booming construction market at the time , and delays in starting the project . 
 Financing of the renovations came from local bonds , with approximately $ 3 million per year coming from the general fund to pay the debt off . Prior attempts at raising private funds for the project had failed . The project was named as the top public project and was an honorable mention in the renovation category for 1998 by Northwest Construction magazine . 
 = = Details = = 
 The four @-@ story building is in the Italian Renaissance style of architecture with a sandstone exterior . The interior of City Hall covers 87 @,@ 500 square feet ( 8 @,@ 130 m2 ) , with 48 @,@ 128 square feet ( 4 @,@ 471 @.@ 2 m2 ) of usable space . Measured along Fifth Avenue , it is 180 feet ( 55 m ) wide . Viewed from above the building is similar in shape to the letter E , with the rotunda as the middle protruding portion of the building . There are two wings that extend toward Fourth Avenue , one on the far north and the other on the far south , each only a single story in height where it is closest to Fourth . The rotunda is three stories high , with the portico comprising the first floor . Granite columns imported from Scotland are used to support the portico . Portland City Council chambers occupy the two other floors inside of the rotunda , on the east side of the building . 
 On the roof of City Hall are 4 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) ornamental urns , originally made of limestone . During the last remodel they were replaced using lightweight material for pedestrian safety . The building features dentil molding where the roof meets the walls , and the fourth floor has a balcony with paired Tuscan columns on the west side . Additionally , the exterior features keystones over the windows on the first and second floors , plus a balustrade along the roof line . Inside the High Renaissance building , the columns of the lobby are covered with a fake marble coating called <unk> . The lobby has marble flooring and oak woodwork . In the atrium the walls are covered in a white tile that was re @-@ discovered during the 1996 remodel . 
 The Pettygrove Room on the second floor is named for Francis W. Pettygrove , the Portland founder who won the coin toss to name the city . The main stairway at City Hall has 77 steps , with iron handrails and tile steps . The building sits 70 feet ( 21 m ) above sea level . Artwork in the building includes works by Norie Sato , a mural by Michael Brophy in the Council Chamber , a constantly changing work called the " Visual Chronicle of Portland " located on the main floor , and changing exhibits . 
 The Governmental Relations office and the office of the city 's attorney are on the fourth floor . On the third floor are the mayor 's office , the ceremonial Rose Room , a balcony for the Council chambers , Audit Services , and the city 's affirmative action office . The second floor contains the city council chambers , two conference rooms , and four commissioners ' offices . On the main floor is the lobby , the Office of Neighborhood Involvement , an information desk , and offices for the city auditor , council clerk , and city treasurer . The grounds of the building include a rose garden , trees , a vegetable garden , and other landscaping . 
 = Adventure Time ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American animated television series Adventure Time , created by Pendleton Ward , originally aired on Cartoon Network in the United States . The series is based on a short produced for Frederator 's Nicktoons Network animation incubator series Random ! Cartoons . The season debuted on October 11 , 2010 , and the season finale was aired on May 2 , 2011 . The season follows the adventures of Finn , a human boy , and his best friend Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . 
 The first episode of the season , " It Came from the Nightosphere " was watched by 2 @.@ 001 million viewers ; this marked a decrease in viewers watching Cartoon Network when compared to the previous season 's debut , although it marked an increase when compared to the previous season 's finale . The season ended with the episode " Heat Signature " on May 9 , 2011 . It was viewed by 1 @.@ 975 million viewers , which marked an increase from the first season finale . The season was originally supposed to end with the cliffhanger two @-@ parter " Mortal Folly " / " Mortal Recoil " , but due to a scheduling error , " Heat Signature " was the last episode to air for the season . In 2011 , Adventure Time was nominated for an Annie Award , and the episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short @-@ format Animated Program . The series nor the episode won , however . 
 After the success of the first , a second season of Adventure Time was quickly ordered . However , the beginning of the series debuted under production constraints and " It Came from the Nightosphere " aired after just barely being finished . The season was storyboarded and written by Adam Muto , Rebecca Sugar , Kent Osborne , Somvilay Xayaphone , Cole Sanchez , Benton Connor , Jesse Moynihan , Ako Castuera , and Tom Herpich , while being produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios . Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released after the season finished airing . The full season set was released on June 4 , 2013 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The season follows the adventures of Finn the Human , a human boy , and his best friend Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . Common storylines revolve around : Finn and Jake discovering strange creatures , battling the Ice King , and battling monsters in order to help others . Various other episodes deal with Finn attempting to understand his attraction towards Bubblegum . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 After Adventure Time debuted on April 5 , 2010 , with " Slumber Party Panic " and " Trouble in Lumpy Space " , the series was quickly renewed for a second season of 26 eleven @-@ minute segments . Around August 2010 , the writing for the second season was finished , and the production staff had started to receive bits of animation from the show 's overseas animation staff . The first episode to enter into production was " Loyalty to the King " , based on its production code . However , it was later temporarily shelved , and aired as the season 's third episode . The third episode produced , " It Came from the Nightosphere " , was instead chosen to open the season . When the network announced the start of season two , the episode was not finished . On the official Frederator site , contributor Eric Homan noted that he would " prefer [ that the series ] stock up on a few episodes before jumping into season two , but it ain 't my network " . The episode was the first episode storyboarded by Rebecca Sugar . During the network pitch of the episode , Ward beatboxed and Sugar played ukulele and the two performed " The Fry Song " . Sugar later called the experience " super terrifying " , although the network did green @-@ light the episode . 
 This season 's episodes were produced in a process similar to the first season 's episodes . First , all of the episodes began as simple two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ page outline that contained the necessary plot information . These outlines were then handed off to storyboard artists , who would then expand the rough outline into a full storyboard . The episodes ' design and coloring were done in Burbank , California . Animation was handled overseas in South Korea , either by Rough Draft Korea or by Saerom Animation . Although almost all of the animation used in the series is rendered through hand drawing each frame , this is not always the case . For instance , the sixteenth episode , " Guardians of Sunshine " , featured roughly 5 minutes of 3 @-@ D animation that emulated the style of 8 @-@ bit video games . For these segments , the series asked animator Ke Jiang for assistance ; she single @-@ handedly " modeled , rigged and animated " the sequence . The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack creator Thurop Van Orman was brought in to work on the season as supervising producer and outline writer when his show entered a hiatus , but left shortly after Flapjack wrapped up production in order to concentrate on other projects . 
 The season was storyboarded and written by Adam Muto , Sugar , Kent Osborne , Somvilay Xayaphone , Cole Sanchez , Benton Connor , Jesse Moynihan , Ako Castuera , and Tom Herpich . Conner had just finished a job working on the series The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack and had subsequently taken on a job as a storyboard artist for Regular Show . However , due to scheduling delays , he was free to work on two episodes of Adventure Time — " Blood Under the Skin " and " Slow Love " — as a freelance storyboard artist . The season was produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios . The season was the last to feature creative director Patrick McHale in a full @-@ time capacity . He was still credited with being part of the story writing team with the premiere of season three , but his level of contribution was more limited than it had been for the first two seasons . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The voice actors include voice acting veterans John DiMaggio ( who portrays Jake the Dog ) , Tom Kenny ( who plays The Ice King ) , and Hynden Walch ( who voices Princess Bubblegum ) . In addition , Jeremy Shada portrays the voice of Finn the Human , and Olivia Olson portrays Marceline the Vampire Queen . Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters , as well as Lumpy Space Princess . Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO , as well as Jake 's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean . Polly Lou Livingston , a friend of Pendleton Ward 's mother , Bettie Ward , plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks . Season two would also introduce The Lich , the series principal antagonist in the episode " Mortal Folly " . The Lich is portrayed by Ron Perlman . The Adventure Time cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor . This is to record more natural sounding dialogue among the characters . Hynden Walch has described these group recordings as akin to " doing a play reading — a really , really out there play . " 
 The series also regularly employs guest voices for various characters . For instance , in the episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " , Martin Olson — Olivia Olson 's real @-@ life father — appears as Marceline 's father , Hunson Abadeer . Peter Stormare appears as Sir <unk> in the episode " Blood Under the Skin " . In the entry " Storytelling " , Sam Marin voiced the <unk> Bear . Rapper Biz Markie guest starred as <unk> in the installment " Slow Love " . Paul Reubens appeared as the Gnome Ruler in " Power Animal " . Stephen Root lent his voice to the Royal Tart <unk> in the episode " The Other Tarts " . Thurop Van Orman voiced the Tree Witch in " To Cut a Woman 's Hair " . Comedian Melinda Hill lends her voice to Doctor Princess in " The Chamber of Frozen Blades " . Henry Rollins and Laura Silverman appeared as Lady Rainicorn 's parents in the episode " Her Parents " . " The Silent King " featured the voice of Michael J. Anderson , who portrayed Gummy , the Royal Goblin Chief of Staff . Finally , Miguel Ferrer appeared as Death in the episode " Death in Bloom " ; Ferrer would reprise his role in the fourth season episode " Sons of Mars " . Jackie Buscarino voiced the titular character in the episode " Susan Strong " . In " Belly of the Beast " , Andy Samberg voiced the character Party Pat . Brian Baumgartner , Toby Huss , and Kate Micucci appeared as the three ghost friends of Marceline in " Heat Signature " . " Mortal Recoil " featured Isabella Acres as a young Princess Bubblegum . Acres would reprise her role in the third season episode " Too Young " . 
 Various other characters are voiced by Tom Kenny , Dee Bradley Baker , Maria Bamford , Steve Little , and Kent Osborne . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season debuted on October 11 , 2010 , with the episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " . The episode was watched by 2 @.@ 001 million viewers . This marked a decline from the first season premiere , which had been viewed by 2 @.@ 5 million viewers , but it marked an increase from the first season finale , which was watched by only 1 @.@ 77 million viewers . " It Came from the <unk> " also marked gains when compared to the same timeslot a year prior ; for instance , 732 @,@ 000 kids aged 6 – 11 watched the episode , an increase by 35 percent when compared to the previous year . The season hit a high with its third episode , " Loyalty to the King " , which was watched by 2 @.@ 541 million viewers . The season ended with " Heat Signature " , which was viewed by 1 @.@ 975 million viewers . The season was originally supposed to end with the two @-@ parter " Mortal Folly " / " Mortal Recoil " , but due to a scheduling conflict , " Heat Signature " was the last episode of the season aired . 
 = = = Reviews and accolades = = = 
 The season 's first episode , " It Came from the Nightosphere " was largely well received by critics . Tyler Foster of DVD Talk called it " a pretty decent example of all the notes the show can hit . " He was particularly pleased with the way " the rift between Marceline and her dad is handled with a nice seriousness that fits right in alongside absurd gags about penguins " . He also noted that " any episode that includes a song is a plus in my book . " It was also called the " real highlight " of the eponymous DVD release by Charles Webb of MTV Geek . IGN writer Matt Fowler later referred to the episode as a " classic " . The episode was later nominated for a 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short @-@ format Animated Program , although it did not win . 
 The series was a candidate for the " Best and Worst of 2010 " , a list compiled by the Bucks County Courier Times ; the series was under the " Best Animated TV Show " category . Patrick Broadnax of the Huntsville Examiner named the series one of " The Most Underrated Shows on Television " . He argued that , in its second season , the show was " shining as one of [ Cartoon Network 's ] best decisions ever . " He praised the spirit of the series , noting that it was reminiscent of the " charm that 90 's cartoon held so gracefully " . He concluded that the show was " goofy , colorful fun that should be able to put a smile on anyone 's face . " Tyler Foster of DVD Talk wrote that the season release was " highly recommended " . He praised that the season was able to " explor [ e ] and [ expand ] on everything that " was set up in the first season of the show . He specifically praised " Power Animal , " Death in Bloom " , " Crystals Have Power " , and " Her Parents " as the best episodes from the set . Foster was slightly critical of the visual presentation , noting that some aliasing was present , but felt that the commentaries were an added bonus . 
 The show itself was nominated for an Annie Award for Best Animated Television Production for Children . However , the series did not win . The episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " was nominated for a 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short @-@ format Animated Program , although the episode did not win . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Warner Home Video released multiple DVDs , consisting of region 1 and region 2 formats . My Two Favorite People , It Came from the Nightosphere , Jake vs. Me @-@ Mow , Fionna and Cake , The Suitor , Princess Day , and The Enchiridion were created for region 1 markets containing some episodes from the second season . The full season set was released on June 4 , 2013 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . All DVD releases can be purchased on the Cartoon Network Shop , and the individual episodes can be downloaded from both the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. On March 30 , 2014 , the second season of Adventure Time will be made available on the Netflix Instant Watch service for online streaming . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = 1987 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season = 
 The 1987 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season was a year of great change for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers ' organization in the National Football League . The season began with the hiring of former New York Giants and University of Alabama head coach Ray Perkins . Perkins had only needed three seasons to build the Giants into a playoff team , and it was hoped that he would be able to repeat the feat with the Buccaneers . 
 The Buccaneers possessed the first overall pick in the NFL Draft , and used it to select University of Miami quarterback Vinny Testaverde . The Buccaneers appeared changed and won four games early in the season , but they notably lost large leads in later games and fell from playoff contention after midseason . The season was marked by a 1987 players ' strike in which regular play was interrupted for a month , while the NFL owners fielded teams of replacement players . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Perkins brought discipline to a team that had been described as " the country club of the NFL " , and rebuilt the team with youth . Perkins claimed that the Buccaneers were more talented than the New York Giants team he had taken over in 1979 , and selected a then @-@ record 20 players in the 1987 NFL Draft . He improved their conditioning program , and instituted three @-@ a @-@ day practices . Perkins ' harsh style was in stark contrast to the laid @-@ back approach of his predecessor Bennett , of whom it was said that his " idea of team discipline was everyone wearing the same color uniform on game day " . Conditioning improvements included emphasizing free weights over Nautilus machines , to improve <unk> . Players were also given pay incentives to work out , although Perkins expressed surprise that players should need extra incentive to improve their conditioning . The improved conditioning paid off early in the season : their opening @-@ week 48 – 10 win over the Atlanta Falcons still ( as of 2012 ) ranks as the most Buccaneer points scored in a game , matched only in Super Bowl XXXVII . The team had a 1 – 1 record when the season was disrupted by the 1987 players ' strike . Unlike in previous seasons , when players ' strikes stopped all play , the owners formed teams of replacement players to play the scheduled games . The Buccaneers had a 3 – 2 record when regular play resumed , and nearly beat a Chicago Bears team only one season removed from its Super Bowl victory . The game had been preceded by much media speculation over whether Bears star quarterback Jim McMahon would play . It was the first week since undergoing surgery after being dropped on his shoulder following a play the previous November that McMahon was in the Bears ' lineup , although Mike Tomczak remained the starter for the game . The Buccaneers took a 20 – 0 lead and dominated the game for three quarters . Late in the third quarter , McMahon came off the bench and sparked the Bears to a 27 – 26 win , their biggest comeback in team history . Two weeks later , Tampa Bay had a 28 – 3 fourth quarter lead over the St. Louis Cardinals . In what is now the third @-@ biggest comeback in NFL history , the Cardinals scored 4 touchdowns to win the game . The Buccaneers did not win again for the rest of the season . It was rare for an NFL team to fall into a season @-@ long losing streak following such a defensive collapse . Once the Buccaneers were out of the playoff picture , Perkins began to prepare Testaverde for the next season . Testaverde 's first start came on December 6 against the New Orleans Saints . His 369 yards on 22 completions set a record for an NFL debut , but his two early fumbles set up a Saints lead that the Buccaneers were not able to overcome . Tackle Ron Heller , dispirited by Coach Perkins ' confrontational attitude and three @-@ a @-@ day practices that he believed were causing unnecessary injuries to the players , got into a fight with Perkins at halftime of this game that led to his being traded to the Seattle Seahawks . In return , the Buccaneers received defensive lineman Randy Edwards and a 1989 6th @-@ round draft pick that was used to select linebacker Derrick Little . Neither made the Buccaneers ' squad . Heller went on to play seven more solid seasons . The Buccaneers finished the season with a 4 – 11 record . Their 3 – 4 division record placed them ahead of the 4 – 11 Detroit Lions for fourth place in the NFC Central . Ron Holmes had eight quarterback sacks despite appearing in only ten games . Ervin Randle , who was named a UPI Second Team All @-@ NFC linebacker , was the only Buccaneer to be singled out for postseason honors . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 = = = The Hiring of Ray Perkins = = = 
 Ray Perkins replaced Leeman Bennett as the third head coach in Buccaneers history . Expectations had been that owner Hugh Culverhouse would hire popular ex @-@ Tampa Bay Bandits coach Steve Spurrier , but Perkins was the only candidate interviewed . Perkins had been approached about the job two years earlier , but was not interested at the time . He was given the same title ( Head Coach and Vice @-@ President of Football Operations ) as the previous two coaches . He brought along seven of his Alabama assistants : linebackers coach Sylvester Croom , assistant coach John Bobo , running backs coach Rodney Stokes , defensive line coach Mike DuBose , strength coach Kent Johnston , head trainer Chris Smith , and defensive coordinator Joe <unk> , who had previously been Charley Pell 's defensive coordinator with the Florida Gators . He rounded out his staff with Kansas City Chiefs secondary coach Doug Graber and receivers coach Richard Williamson , Buffalo Bills defensive coordinator Herb <unk> , SMU defensive coordinator Bill Clay , and Atlanta Falcons offensive line coach Larry <unk> . Perkins also overhauled the scouting staff , firing most of them ( including Jim Gruden , father of future Buccaneers coach Jon Gruden ) shortly after the draft . No reason was given , but some observers , most outspokenly Boston Globe columnist Will McDonough , felt that the Buccaneers ' office was staffed heavily with people whose main experience was in college football , and that the team suffered from a lack of NFL knowledge . Recently fired Falcons coach Dan Henning turned down the offensive coordinator position , as he had been trying to rebuild the Falcons and did not want to relive that experience with another team . Perkins had previously been hired as head coach of the New York Giants on the basis of his experience working with a losing franchise ( the New England Patriots ) that needed turning around . Perkins coached the Giants back to the playoffs , leaving four years later to succeed coaching legend Bear Bryant at the University of Alabama . Ironically , irritation over the 1982 players ' strike was a major factor in Perkins ' leaving the Giants , and became an issue he had to contend with again in 1987 . Frustration with what he saw as <unk> by the NCAA played a part in Perkins ' decision to return to the NFL . Along with $ 750 @,@ 000 a year for five years , Perkins was given free rein to run the Buccaneers however he wanted . Some players were enthusiastic about the Perkins hire . " Coach Perkins will bring in a sense of pride here , and that 's something we 've been missing " , said tackle Ron Heller . Others were upset with Perkins ' military @-@ style manner , saying that he " made playing football a miserable experience " . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 = = = = Draft Trades = = = = 
 The Buccaneers received a <unk> and a 4th @-@ round draft pick from the San Francisco 49ers in exchange for quarterback Steve Young , and a 2nd @-@ round pick from the New England Patriots in exchange for guard Sean Farrell . They swapped 2nd @-@ round picks with the Buffalo Bills , and also received a 4th @-@ round pick in return . The Buccaneers ' original 5th @-@ round pick had been traded to the Patriots for a 6th @-@ round pick the previous year . They received a 5th @-@ round pick from New England in exchange for a 4th @-@ round pick the following year , and a 5th @-@ round pick from the Washington Redskins in exchange for the rights to quarterback Doug Williams . The Buccaneers ' original 6th @-@ round pick was traded to the Pittsburgh Steelers in exchange for center Dan Turk , but they received a 6th @-@ round pick from the San Diego Chargers as part of an earlier deal for linebacker Andy Hawkins . The original 8th @-@ round pick was traded to the New York Jets in exchange for tackle Marvin Powell . Cornerback John Holt had been traded to the Indianapolis Colts in 1986 for the Colts ' 1987 8th @-@ round pick . Linebacker Rick DiBernardo was traded to the St. Louis Cardinals for a 12th @-@ round pick . Dan Sileo was signed as a free agent after the NCAA ruled that he had used up his college eligibility , but the league voided the agreement and declared that he must enter a draft . A special draft was held in which the Buccaneers selected him with a 1988 third @-@ round pick . 
 = = = Vinny Testaverde = = = 
 Using the first selection in the 1987 draft , the Buccaneers selected quarterback Vinny Testaverde , who had led the Miami Hurricanes to a 21 – 3 record in games he started . Looking to avoid a repeat of the previous year 's disastrous selection of Bo Jackson , the Buccaneers signed Testaverde 16 days before the draft began . Owner Hugh Culverhouse wanted to take one last shot at building the Buccaneers into a successful franchise , and made sure that money would not be an issue in signing Testaverde . In training camp , Testaverde failed to win the starting job over veteran Steve DeBerg , who coach Perkins felt gave the team a better chance to win . DeBerg was displaced for the fourth time , having played for the San Francisco 49ers when Joe Montana was drafted , the Denver Broncos when John Elway was traded for , and the Buccaneers when Steve Young was signed . 
 = = = Steve Young = = = 
 When the Buccaneers selected University of Miami quarterback Vinny Testaverde first overall in the 1987 NFL Draft , starting quarterback Steve Young became expendable . He was traded to the 49ers on April 24 , 1987 . The 49ers were concerned about the health of Joe Montana , and were preparing for the possibility that he might not recover from back surgery . The Buccaneers received 2nd and 4th round draft picks in the trade , picks 50 and 106 overall , which they used to draft University of Miami linebacker Winston Moss and Arizona State wide receiver Bruce Hill . They also received an unspecified amount of cash in the deal . Young would spend the final 13 years of his career with the 49ers , a stint which would help him secure a spot in the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2005 . 
 = = = Other Attempted Deals = = = 
 Coach Perkins met for several hours with Oklahoma linebacker Brian Bosworth , who entered a supplemental draft after being kicked off of the Oklahoma team . Perkins and Bosworth were impressed with each other , but the rights to select were awarded lottery @-@ style , and the first selection went to the Seattle Seahawks . The Seahawks drafted Bosworth despite his having sent them a letter telling them not to bother . He expressed a preference to play for the Buccaneers . When the Indianapolis Colts failed to sign linebacker Cornelius Bennett , the second player selected in the draft ( directly after Testaverde ) , they attempted to trade him to Tampa Bay . Perkins had previously coached Bennett at Alabama , but the Colts , looking for extra draft picks to trade to the Los Angeles Rams to get running back Eric Dickerson , wanted two draft picks in return for Bennett . Perkins felt that this price was too steep . Perkins also attempted to persuade Bo Jackson , their first @-@ overall pick from the 1986 NFL Draft who had refused to sign with the Buccaneers , to change his mind and join the team . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = 1987 Players ' Strike = = = 
 The NFL players went on strike during the third week of the 1987 season . Unlike in the 1982 season , in which play was suspended for the duration of the strike , the NFL continued to play a full schedule . Games were cancelled in the third week , but returned in the fourth with rosters of replacement players . These ' scab ' players were in some cases regular players who crossed the picket line , but were usually players who had previously failed to make an NFL team . The Buccaneers ' replacement team was made up of a dozen of their training camp cuts , a dozen more players cut from other teams ' training camps , and 17 former players from the USFL 's Tampa Bay Bandits . The only regular Buccaneer to cross the picket line was center Dan Turk , although three inactive players crossed the picket line by receiving treatment for their injuries . There were a few notable names on the replacement roster . Former Bandits quarterback and Florida Gators standout John Reaves started the first two games , while former Seattle Seahawks and Winnipeg Blue Bombers quarterback Jim Zorn returned to the NFL to start for the Buccaneers in the final replacement game . Former Oklahoma and USFL standout Marcus Dupree tried out for the replacement squad , but was rejected due to health concerns . The replacement players finished with a 2 – 1 record . Several of them , notably Zorn and kicker John Carney , went on to have successful careers as players and coaches . Three replacement Buccaneers , Brian Gant , Steve Holloway , and Paul Tripoli , remained with the team once regular play resumed . Figures later published in the Los Angeles Times showed that the strike cost owners more than $ 108 million in potential income . All teams had less income in 1987 than in 1986 , and the Buccaneers lost money , although they were the closest to profitability of the 21 teams who lost money . 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 = = = Standings = = = 
 = = = 1987 Roster = = = 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 1 : vs Atlanta Falcons = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Buccaneers opened the Ray Perkins era by setting team records for points scored , total yardage , margin of victory , and touchdown passes thrown . Steve DeBerg was 24 of 34 for 333 yards and five touchdowns , throwing touchdowns on each of the Buccaneers ' first four possessions . DeBerg 's five touchdown passes still stands as a Buccaneers record , having been tied by Brad Johnson in 2002 . Perkins , who had played with Joe Namath in college and Johnny Unitas in the pros , and drafted Phil Simms with the Giants , said that DeBerg had one of the best games of any quarterback with whom he had been associated . In a completely dominating performance , the Buccaneers controlled the ball for 38 minutes , allowed no sacks , and converted 14 of 16 third @-@ down attempts . Meanwhile , the Buccaneers defense had four sacks and three turnovers . DeBerg did throw one interception , but on the very next play cornerback Bobby <unk> intercepted David Archer 's overthrow of tight end Ken Whisenhunt . 
 = = = Week 2 : at Chicago Bears = = = 
 at Soldier Field , Chicago , Illinois 
 The Buccaneers forced four turnovers and held Bears running back Walter Payton to 24 yards on 15 carries , but the offense , who also committed four turnovers , was ineffective . One of Payton 's runs was a 1 @-@ yard touchdown that broke Jim Brown 's all @-@ time record of 106 touchdowns . Payton also caught a 9 @-@ yard touchdown pass that clinched the game with 3 : 20 remaining . The Buccaneers had only a field goal to show for four possessions inside the Bears ' 30 @-@ yard line . Vinny Testaverde made his NFL debut after Steve DeBerg left the game in the fourth quarter with a sprained medial collateral ligament . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs Green Bay Packers , Cancelled = = = 
 The players went out on strike in week 3 . The main demand was free agency for all players with at least four years of service . The weekend 's games were cancelled as the owners prepared teams of replacement players . According to owner Hugh Culverhouse , it would not be feasible to make up the cancelled games , with the TV networks already having their schedules set for the open weekend following the season . 
 = = = Week 4 : at Detroit Lions = = = 
 at Pontiac Silverdome , Pontiac , Michigan 
 Despite advance sales of 40 @,@ 000 tickets , only 4 @,@ 919 fans showed up to the first strike game played by replacement players . Neither team had any of its regular players on the roster . Detroit punter Mike Black 's 3rd @-@ quarter fumble on the 3 @-@ yard line set up Harold Ricks ' game @-@ winning touchdown run . The Buccaneers ' three second @-@ quarter touchdowns overcame the Lions ' early 17 @-@ point lead . 17 of the Buccaneers ' points resulted from Lions turnovers . Around 1 @,@ 000 union members , including UAW president Owen Bieber , joined the Lions on the picket lines . Attendance was also likely influenced by a baseball game taking place the same day , in which the Detroit Tigers defeated the Toronto Blue Jays to win the A.L. East Championship . 
 = = = Week 5 : vs San Diego Chargers = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Rick Neuheisel came off the bench to lead the Chargers to three second @-@ half scores . Partly based on this performance , the Buccaneers later signed Neuheisel as a backup quarterback . Although many veteran NFL players crossed the picket line during the week , the Buccaneers were one of only six teams to have no players cross . More than 1 @,@ 000 area union members joined the Buccaneers regulars in picketing the game , with some fans tearing up their tickets and joining them . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs Minnesota Vikings = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The final replacement game featured a Vikings team with none of its regular players , facing a Buccaneers team with only center Dan Turk crossing the picket line . Tampa Bay took a 17 – 10 lead in the third quarter , after Kevin Walker 's 30 @-@ yard interception return and Arthur Wells ' end @-@ zone fumble recovery . The Buccaneers ' offensive output was limited to two field goals . Jim Zorn had been signed to replace the struggling John Reaves . Zorn also struggled , committing three early turnovers , but got his bearings and wound up 20 – 36 for 199 yards . The week was marked by sluggish work during practices . The players , some of whom were facing pressure to return to their regular jobs , were uncertain over whether they would have a game to play in by the time Sunday arrived . 
 = = = Week 7 : vs Chicago Bears = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Chicago Bears quarterback Jim McMahon , on the active roster for the first time in the season , came off the bench in the third quarter to rally the Bears past the Buccaneers . He scored a touchdown on a quarterback sneak with six minutes to go , and tied the game with a touchdown pass to Neal Anderson with 1 : 28 to go . The Buccaneers allowed seven sacks , but led for most of the game . The Bears were aided by the Buccaneers ' poor clock management and their reliance on a conservative offense in the fourth quarter . Perkins denied accusations that they went to a prevent defense and a three @-@ man rush , but admitted that they played too conservatively on defense at the end . Steve DeBerg threw touchdown passes to Calvin Magee and Jeff Smith on the Buccaneers ' first two possessions . On the Bears ' next possession , Ron Holmes ' hit on Mike Tomczak forced a fumble that was recovered in the end zone by Winston Moss to give the Buccaneers a 20 – 0 lead . The Bears scored two quick touchdowns in the second quarter , but the Buccaneers extended their lead with two Donald Igwebuike field goals . With the Bears struggling on offense , McMahon was inserted into the game . McMahon was 12 of 14 for 144 yards and led the Bears to 156 yards of offense in the last two drives , compared with 142 in the first 50 minutes of the game . A win would have tied the Buccaneers with the Bears for first place in the NFC Central . 
 = = = Week 8 : at Green Bay Packers = = = 
 at Lambeau Field , Green Bay , Wisconsin 
 Steve DeBerg opened the second half with an 84 @-@ yard drive ending in a touchdown , and followed that with a touchdown pass to Gerald Carter a minute later . The game nearly became a repeat of the previous week , as the Packers replaced quarterback Don Majkowski with Randy Wright . Wright 's two fourth @-@ quarter touchdowns cut into Tampa Bay 's 23 – 3 lead , but this time the offense was able to hold on to the ball . Two Calvin Magee catches for first downs sealed the victory . The Buccaneers ' 17 second @-@ half points are credited to the coaching staff 's adjustment to the Packers ' man @-@ to @-@ man defense . The Buccaneers and Packers both had the same amount of net yards ( 279 ) , passing yards ( 190 ) , and rushing yards ( 89 ) . Donald Igwebuike 's three field goals broke Bill <unk> 's Buccaneer career record . The victory left the Buccaneers in second place in the NFC Central division . This led to speculation as to whether coach Perkins , who had been able to lead the New York Giants to the playoffs in three years as their coach , would be able to repeat the feat in a single year with Tampa Bay . 
 = = = Week 9 : at St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 at Busch Memorial Stadium , St. Louis , Missouri 
 With the Cardinals down by 25 points in the fourth quarter , quarterback Neil Lomax threw for three touchdowns in a come @-@ from @-@ behind win . One of the touchdowns was to tight end Robert <unk> , the other two to league reception leader J.T. Smith . Donald Igwebuike 's potential game @-@ tying 53 @-@ yard field goal attempt bounced off the crossbar as time ran out . The Cardinals came in on a three @-@ game losing streak , while the Buccaneers entered the game leading the league in takeaways . The attendance of 22 @,@ 449 was the Cardinals ' lowest in four years , the team having announced the previous week their plans to move to another city . Detectives were assigned to guard Cardinals owner Bill <unk> due to death threats . Irritation over DeBerg 's celebrations after his three touchdown passes provided inspiration to some of the Cardinals , who commented , " he 's going to lose his job to Vinny Testaverde in a couple of weeks anyway " . <unk> caught nine passes for 124 yards , while Smith caught eight passes for 96 yards . Said coach Perkins of his team 's performance , " ... they whipped us in every phase of the game . Even down 28 – 3 , they were playing better football than we were " . After the Buccaneers turned three consecutive potential blowout wins into nail @-@ biters , safety Rick Woods said that the team seemed to be playing not to lose instead of playing to win . As an example , he noted that many players turned to see how much time was left on the clock after Cardinals linebacker Niko Noga returned a James Wilder fumble for a touchdown . The next week , Woods was demoted to the taxi squad . Offensive tackle Rob Taylor suffered a strained medial collateral ligament , and center Randy Grimes was also out for the fourth quarter with a hyperextended knee . " We should have gotten a lot more hurt " , Perkins said , and accused his players of allowing positive press coverage to inflate their egos and cloud their judgments . The 25 @-@ point lead , if it had held , would have represented the largest margin of victory in a Buccaneers road win . Instead , it became the largest fourth @-@ quarter comeback in NFL history . 
 = = = Week 10 : at Minnesota Vikings = = = 
 at Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome , Minneapolis , Minnesota 
 The Rob Taylor injury from the previous week became a factor as Steve DeBerg was sacked four times , two resulting in fumbles . Perkins expressed dissatisfaction with Taylor 's replacements , saying " I 'm looking for a left tackle " . Both fumbles were caused by Chris Doleman and recovered by Keith Millard , and both led to scores , including Tommy Kramer 's first touchdown pass since the previous Dec. 14 . Several players were injured , including Vikings first @-@ round draft pick D.J. Dozier . The Buccaneers threw forty @-@ one times , while rushing for a team @-@ low nine attempts . They still had a chance at victory , until Minnesota cornerback <unk> Henderson intercepted a DeBerg pass . He returned the interception 17 yards before fumbling , but the officials ruled him to have been down before the fumble occurred . The instant replay official overturned their call , but the field officials said that they could not return the ball to Tampa because the play had already been whistled dead . This outraged Buccaneer players , who claimed that no whistle had been blown . The Vikings proceeded to run out the clock . The Buccaneers had entered the game with the lead spot in the wild @-@ card playoff race . 
 = = = Week 11 : vs San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Joe Montana completed 29 of 45 passes for 304 yards , and Jerry Rice caught 7 passes for 103 yards and three touchdowns . Quarterbacks Montana and Steve DeBerg entered the game as the number one- and two @-@ rated passers in the NFC , respectively , but DeBerg was held to 205 yards passing . 2nd @-@ year cornerback Rod Jones was victimized on two of Rice 's touchdown receptions . On one of these , Rice found Jones in single coverage , and took the ball 42 yards by simply outrunning him . James Wilder carried the ball 11 times for 48 yards , and scored his first touchdown of the year on a screen pass . Two Buccaneer fourth quarter scoring opportunities ended in turnovers . 
 = = = Week 12 : at Los Angeles Rams = = = 
 at Anaheim Stadium , Anaheim , California 
 Rams running back Charles White rushed for 137 yards and two touchdowns , while quarterback Jim Everett threw for 208 yards and another two touchdowns . The Buccaneers only entered Rams territory twice . According to coach Perkins , " The only guy who played with guts was Steve DeBerg " . With two starting defensive linemen injured , the Buccaneers were forced to use three rookies , two of whom were making their NFL debuts . Early in the second quarter , a Mel Owens interception return set the Rams up for their second score , a run by White . White scored the Rams ' third touchdown shortly afterward . After a Donald Igwebuike field goal early in the second half , the Buccaneers attempted an onside kick , but failed to gain possession . They never again crossed midfield . Sacked three times , DeBerg suffered a hyperextended back that resulted in his being replaced by Vinny Testaverde with 10 : 44 to play . " Beginning next week , we 'll start making preparations for next year " , Perkins said following the loss . 
 = = = Week 13 : at New Orleans Saints = = = 
 at Louisiana Superdome , New Orleans , Louisiana 
 The Saints , having achieved their first winning record in team history , clinched their first @-@ ever playoff spot by defeating the Buccaneers 44 – 34 . The Saints led the game for good after two early Vinny Testaverde fumbles deep in Buccaneer territory . Testaverde was given the starting job over Steve DeBerg , a change that was not revealed until gametime . " ( Perkins ) didn 't want to give the Saints time to prepare for anything new " , said Testaverde . In the second half , Testaverde made the Saints nervous by rallying the Buccaneers to score on four consecutive possessions . Mark Carrier 's 212 yards on eight receptions set a team record , and Bruce Hill contributed 73 yards on five receptions . The rally lifted team spirits . " There 's definitely some light at the end of the tunnel , and it 's not a train " , said Perkins . The rally came after a turbulent halftime , in which Ron Heller urged his teammates not to quit . Ray Perkins , hearing only the word " quit " , punched Heller in the head , breaking his thumb on Heller 's helmet . The Saints ' first playoff @-@ clinching win came on the tenth anniversary of the Buccaneers ' first victory in franchise history , also a road game against the Saints . 
 = = = Week 14 : vs Detroit Lions = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Lions rushed for 190 yards , while holding the Buccaneers to 47 . Lions quarterback Chuck Long was 12 of 23 for 108 yards and a touchdown , while Testaverde was 20 – 39 for 262 yards and a touchdown . The Lions intercepted Testaverde once and sacked him four times , as they broke a four @-@ game losing streak . Testaverde was lucky that it was not worse , as three of his potential turnovers were called back due to Lions penalties . On another two occasions , balls that bounced off of his receivers ' fingertips wound up caught by other Buccaneer receivers . 
 = = = Week 15 : vs St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Tampa Bay led early , but Cardinal defensive back Cedric Mack recovered two Buccaneer fumbles that led to 10 Cardinal points . Neil Lomax tied a team record with 12 straight completions , completing 22 – 29 passes for 233 yards and three touchdowns . With Buc starting cornerback Rod Jones injured , Lomax exploited Bobby <unk> throughout the game . Stump Mitchell rushed for 101 yards and a touchdown . 
 = = = Week 16 : at Indianapolis Colts = = = 
 at Indianapolis <unk> , Indianapolis , Indiana 
 The Colts ' 24 – 6 victory over the Buccaneers clinched their first playoff berth in 10 years , and their first winning record since 1977 . Although Pro Bowl linebacker Duane Bickett did not play , the Colts ' defense did not allow the Buccaneers inside the 20 @-@ yard line . Eric Dickerson ran 33 times for 196 yards and two touchdowns . Colts quarterback Jack Trudeau was 17 of 27 for 426 yards . 
 = Wellard = 
 Wellard is a fictional Belgian Tervuren dog from the BBC soap opera EastEnders . He first appeared in the series on 18 October 1994 , and became EastEnders ' longest @-@ serving pet , before being killed off on 15 August 2008 . Although the character is male , he has been played primarily by three female dogs : Zenna , her daughter Chancer , and her granddaughter Kyte . A fourth dog briefly served as a replacement for Zenna in 1996 , when she was given time off from the show to have a litter of puppies . 
 Wellard was briefly written out of the series under executive producer Matthew Robinson , but returned when Robinson was succeeded by John Yorke . Wellard 's owners for the majority of his duration in the soap were Robbie Jackson and Gus Smith . He was voted " Best Pet " at the 2008 Digital Spy Soap Awards , and named the UK 's favourite soap opera pet in a 2009 Inside Soap poll . Wellard was a fan favourite , and although a storyline that saw him threatened with euthanasia for biting local café owner Ian Beale was poorly received by critics , his death drew generally favourable reviews . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 In November 1994 , Walford resident Robbie Jackson ( Dean Gaffney ) takes in a dog he assumes to be a stray , naming him Wellard . The dog 's owner , Mr Hammond , locates him and demands him back , but Wellard later returns to Albert Square of his own accord . Robbie realises he has been mistreated and has run away . Mr Hammond admits to neglecting Wellard , and allows Robbie to keep him . Wellard fathers puppies with Grant Mitchell ( Ross Kemp ) and Nigel Bates 's ( Paul Bradley ) greyhound , Frieda ; however , the puppies are stillborn . When Robbie begins a relationship with a woman allergic to dogs , she gives him the ultimatum of choosing between her and Wellard : Robbie chooses Wellard . Several years later , when Robbie is due to leave Walford to live in India , Wellard is run over , delaying Robbie 's departure . He is cared for by Robbie 's sister Sonia ( Natalie Cassidy ) , who gives him to her friend Gus ( Mohammed George ) after Robbie 's departure . When Gus is involved in a minibus crash , Wellard is able to save his owner by leading him to a spot from where he can call the emergency services . 
 Wellard is reported to the police when he bites local café owner Ian Beale on the buttocks . He is taken away , with the possibility that he will be euthanised , but Gus and <unk> Wicks ( Matt Di Angelo ) launch a campaign to save him , under the moniker " Walford One <unk> Freedom " ( <unk> ) . When Wellard is put on trial , Ian 's partner Jane ( Laurie Brett ) presents character witness statements for the dog , written by Ian 's children , Lucy ( Melissa Suffield ) and Peter ( Thomas Law ) . Wellard is found guilty , but as a result of the statements , Gus is allowed to take him home as long as he keeps him on a lead at all times . When Gus leaves Walford to travel with his girlfriend Keisha ( Suzie McGrath ) , he leaves Wellard with his friend Mickey Miller ( Joe Swash ) . Mickey sells Wellard to Vinnie Monks ( Bobby <unk> ) , who intends to give him to his girlfriend Shirley Carter ( Linda Henry ) . When it transpires Shirley does not want him , Vinnie gives Wellard to the Jackson family . Bianca Jackson ( Patsy Palmer ) feeds Wellard a chocolate , causing him to suffer from <unk> poisoning . He has to be euthanised , is cremated , and has his ashes scattered on the local allotment . 
 = = Development = = 
 Wellard 's name is a portmanteau of " well hard " , meaning " very tough " . The character was originally played by a Belgian Shepherd ( Tervuren ) named Zenna , who was cast at the age of one . Producers had envisioned Wellard as a " rough , tough mongrel " , and Zenna 's owner , dog @-@ handler Gill Raddings , explained : " She had the look they wanted and the ability to do what was needed on command . " EastEnders ' producers were initially unaware that Zenna was female , and had to find a canine double to serve as temporary replacement in 1996 when it transpired that she was pregnant , going on to deliver 10 puppies . Zenna was retired in 1998 , as she was " losing her looks " . 
 Zenna was replaced in the soap by her daughter Chancer , who was in turn succeeded by her own daughter , Kyte . Kyte played Wellard for seven years , longer than Zenna and Chancer . The dog , whose pedigree name is Minka <unk> Kyte , came to the soap from Raddings ' company Stunt Dogs , along with another EastEnders dog , Terence . She had previous experience in the television and film industry , having appeared on A Touch of Frost , The Jonny Vaughan Show , 102 Dalmatians and Gladiator . Raddings revealed that Kyte came to understand the words " action " and " cut " , meaning the director would sometimes have to give an alternate cue such as " go " during scenes featuring Wellard , as the dog would become instantly alert upon hearing the usual commands , which appeared incongruous in scenes which called for Wellard to be relaxed . Kyte worked closely with Mohammed George , who played Wellard 's owner Gus . George was afraid of dogs as a child , but after working with Kyte for three years , commented that they were so close he " sometimes [ felt ] like [ her ] dad . " 
 Wellard was briefly written out of the show under executive producer Matthew Robinson , but returned in 2000 , when Robinson was succeeded by John Yorke . A show insider commented : " Wellard just disappeared . It seemed odd because Robbie loved that dog and never noticed it had gone . " An EastEnders spokesman stated of his return : " John Yorke believes Wellard should be an integral part of Robbie 's character . " 
 When a 2005 storyline saw Wellard threatened with euthanasia for biting local café owner Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) , James Desborough of The People suggested that EastEnders producers were hoping to emulate the success of a storyline from rival soap opera Coronation Street , which saw fans protest the arrest of character Deirdre Rachid ( Anne Kirkbride ) , going as far as to lobby the UK Parliament for her release . Desborough deemed the storyline " bizarre " and accused the BBC of being " desperate to boost flagging ratings " . An EastEnders spokesman responded that it was simply " a funny story which we hope the nation will get behind . " 
 In June 2008 , it was reported that Wellard was to be killed off . A show insider explained : " Wellard has been a much @-@ loved character and everyone will be sad to see him go . But if you think about it , Wellard was not a puppy when he arrived on Albert Square , so he would be over 100 in dog years by now . It makes sense for him to bow out of the show gracefully . " Raddings commented : " I used to take Kyte on set everyday but I found the scenes when Wellard was put down too hard to watch so I asked someone else to take her to filming . " The scene in which Wellard was euthanised had to be re @-@ edited , as Kyte could be seen breathing when supposedly dead . At the time of his death , Wellard had been in EastEnders for 14 years , making him one of the show 's longest @-@ running characters , and its longest @-@ serving pet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wellard was voted " Best Pet " at the 2008 Digital Spy Soap Awards . His death storyline was nominated in the " Tearjerker " category at the 2008 All About Soap Bubble Awards . In 2009 , a poll by magazine Inside Soap named Wellard as the UK 's favourite soap opera pet . He came second in a poll to find Britain 's favourite TV pet in April 2006 , losing to Lassie , and in March 2008 was named the fifth best dog on television by Anna Pickard of The Guardian , behind Bouncer from Neighbours , Willy from EastEnders , Lassie and <unk> . It was noted in The People in July 1997 that Wellard was " a firm favourite with the soap 's fans " , while in August 2008 , the Daily Mail deemed him " one of [ EastEnders ' ] most well @-@ loved characters . " The dogs received fanmail from viewers hailing them as the best actors on EastEnders . 
 Zenna , Chancer and Kyte were occasional targets of professional jealousy from their human co @-@ stars , and some television critics have suggested that Wellard was a better character than his owner , Robbie . When Michael Greco commented in 2002 that Wellard received better scripts than his character , Beppe di Marco , the Sunday Mirror 's Ian Hyland wrote : " He should try being Robbie Jackson . Wellard gets better scripts and better girls than him . " Similarly , Garry Bushell of The People compared EastEnders with rival soap Coronation Street following a 2003 scheduling clash , observing : " ITV had Richard Hillman 's heavyweight murder confession . BBC1 gave us Robbie Jackson 's heart @-@ to @-@ heart with Wellard . ( Don 't scoff – it 's tough to play moving scenes with a dumb and soppy creature , but Wellard rose to the occasion . ) " . Derek McGovern of The Mirror criticised Gaffney 's acting ability , observing : " Outside of Lassie movies I haven 't seen a dog consistently steal scenes off a human the way Wellard used to pinch them from Dean . " Gemma Bissix appeared in the show as a child actor from 1993 to 1998 , playing Clare Bates . She commented on her return in 2008 that as a child , the dogs playing Wellard were better paid than she was . When Emma Barton , who played Honey Mitchell , was axed from the soap later that year , she spoke of her dismay that Wellard 's death was being marketed as a bigger storyline than her character 's exit . Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury called it " particularly galling " that Barton 's exit was upstaged by Wellard 's death . 
 Hyland was critical of the 2003 storyline which saw Robbie leave EastEnders to move to Mumbai with his girlfriend Nita ( <unk> Solanki ) and her son Anish ( Ali <unk> ) . He explained that the aspect of the storyline which upset him most was Wellard being run over " so the scriptwriters could engineer the inevitable last @-@ minute dash to the airport " , questioning : " What 's Wellard ever done to deserve that ? " The storyline which saw Wellard threatened with euthanasia after biting Ian Beale received negative reviews from critics , deemed " bizarre " by James Desborough of The People , and the " longest , most tedious ever soap storyline " by Jim Shelley of The Mirror . Bushell simply wrote : " Wellard bit Ian Beale . Which one needs the Tetanus jab ? " Tim Teeman of The Times called it the " daftest " storyline of the year , comparing it to a similarly ill @-@ received and long @-@ running storyline given to the unpopular Ferreira family . 
 Wellard 's death drew generally favourable reviews from critics . The Guardian 's Nancy Banks @-@ Smith deemed Wellard to have " died with great dignity [ ... ] Not , as a lesser dog might , making a meal of it . " Grace Dent , also of The Guardian , wrote that she was an " emotional mess " when Wellard was euthanised , calling him " one of the true old guard of EastEnders " . Andy Bollen of the Sunday Mail deemed it a shame Wellard had been killed off , calling him " the most convincing actor on the soap " , while The Mirror 's Maeve Quigley called Wellard 's death sadder than that of human character <unk> Dyer ( Stephen Lord ) shortly afterwards . Wise similarly opined that Wellard upstaged most of the cast , and that his death was more of a " tear @-@ jerker " than the return of Jim Branning ( John Bardon ) who had been absent after suffering from a stroke . The Mirror 's Kevin O 'Sullivan commented : " a canine Oscar to the hound who played Wellard – the pedigree chum whose sad demise after 14 years of fouling Walford 's pavements was genuinely moving . " Shelley wrote that it signified the " [ d ] <unk> of the best actor in the show " , and the South Wales Echo published the obituary : 
 In contrast , however , Laws felt that EastEnders was becoming too depressing , noting that Wellard 's death came at the same time <unk> was murdered and Honey and her husband Billy ( Perry Fenwick ) broke up , writing : " I feel like slitting my wrists when I tune in now . [ ... ] There 's only so much gritty realism we can take in our soaps , and EastEnders is really overloading us at the moment . " In 2013 , Digital Spy 's Naomi Gordon opined that Wellard 's death was one of the eight " saddest fictional dog deaths " , saying " There wasn 't a dry eye in the house . " 
 = = Impact on popular culture = = 
 Wellard is considered a " celebrity " dog , and during his EastEnders tenure , the dogs playing him would occasionally make personal appearances at events , including the dog @-@ show Crufts in 1998 , a fundraising appeal for the Victoria Animal Hospital in London in 2000 , and the first All About Dogs Day at Notcutts garden centre in August 2008 . Satirical impression series Dead Ringers referenced Wellard in a 2004 episode , running the continuity announcement : " Later on ITV1 , new drama featuring the latest EastEnders star we 've signed up for a ridiculous advance . Yes Wellard the dog is Barker , a cop on the edge with a drink problem and distemper . " For Red Nose Day 2007 , Aardman Animations created a Creature Comforts @-@ style short featuring Wellard asking for money for Comic Relief , along with selling his offspring and being put in prison . In January 2012 , Wellard appeared ( with Dean Gaffney ) on Big Brother 's Bit on the Side . 
 = Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena = 
 Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena ( Norwegian : Kanthaugen <unk> ) is a freestyle skiing stadium located in the hillside area of Kanthaugen in Lillehammer , Norway . Opened in 1992 , it was built for the 1994 Winter Olympics . The venue consists of three hills — one each for aerials , moguls and ski ballet . The moguls hill has a capacity for 12 @,@ 000 spectators while the other two have a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ person capacity . The arena is designated as Norway 's national venue for freestyle skiing . It hosted the FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup in 1993 and 1995 , and is scheduled to host freestyle skiing and snowboarding at the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics . The arena is owned by Lillehammer Olympiapark and is located adjacent to the ski jumping hill Lysgårdsbakken . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Kanthaugen has traditionally served as a recreational area for Lillehammer , and has in particular been used for alpine skiing . In 1946 , Norway 's then @-@ largest ski lift was installed between Stampesletta and Kanthaugen . It remained in use until the late 1970s . At the time of the closing , a local businessman proposed that it be renovated and that a tobogganing slide be built from Kanthaugen to Stampesletta . The plans were met by local opposition and were not carried through . 
 Venue planning started after Lillehammer was awarded the Olympics in 1988 . In the bid , Kanthaugen had been envisaged as the site of the sliding center . In 1989 , the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee ( LOOC ) proposed that the ski jumping hill and ski stadium instead be located there . Placing venues at Kanthaugen was controversial , as it would result in permanent encroachments in the one of the town 's main recreational areas . Ultimately , only the freestyle arena and ski jump were placed at Kanthaugen , with the ski stadium placed further away from town . Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena was along with Lysgårdsbakken designed by <unk> Arkitekter . The area development plan was passed in August 1991 . The responsibility for construction originally rested on Lillehammer Municipality , but LOOC took over responsibility in November 1991 . The decision to include aerials in the Olympic program was made in October 1992 . 
 Tore Løkke was selected as the main contractor . Construction cost 20 @.@ 3 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , of which NOK 3 @.@ 3 million was paid for by the municipality and NOK 17 million was paid for by LOOC . The venue was completed in the fall of 1992 and was the first freestyle skiing arena in the world to feature a common spectator area for all three event hills . The temporary structures used during the Olympics were completed in December 1993 . A <unk> park was installed in 2008 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The venue consists of three hills , each tailor @-@ made for aerials , moguls and ski ballet , respectively . Above the Olympic hills is a 1 @-@ kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) long tobogganing hill which uses the competitive area as a finish . At the base of the hill is the spectator area , which featured temporary bleachers during the Olympics . The spectator capacity for aerials and ski ballet is 15 @,@ 000 , while it is 12 @,@ 000 for moguls . Also at the foot of the hill is a jury tower overlooking the aerials hill . The venue is equipped with snowmaking equipment , a T @-@ bar lift and floodlights . The arena is located next to the ski jumping hill Lysgårdsbakken , with which it shares some broadcasting and telecommunications facilities . During the Olympics , 800 square meters ( 8 @,@ 611 sq ft ) of temporary buildings , including tents , were erected at the venue . Kanthaugen is one kilometer ( half a mile ) east of Lillehammer 's town center and owned and operated by Lillehammer Olympiapark , a subsidiary of Lillehammer Municipality . 
 = = Events = = 
 Canada dominated the men 's events during the 1994 Winter Olympics , with Jean @-@ Luc Brassard winning the men 's aerials ahead of Russian Sergey <unk> . In the men 's moguls , <unk> 's Andreas <unk> won ahead of Canada 's Philippe LaRoche and Lloyd Langlois . In the women 's disciplines , Norway was the only nation to take two medals , with Stine Lise <unk> winning the women 's moguls ahead of American Liz McIntyre . In the women 's aerials , Lina <unk> won , claiming Uzbekistan 's only medal at the Olympiad , ahead of Sweden 's Marie Lindgren and Norway 's Hilde <unk> Lid . 
 Kanthaugen has hosted FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup events twice , on 26 to 28 March 1993 and on 3 to 5 March 1995 . It also hosted the Norwegian Freestyle Skiing Championships in 1993 and 1996 . Lillehammer is scheduled to host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics , with Kanthaugen to host freestyle skiing and half @-@ pipe snowboarding . The venue is designated a Norway 's national freestyle skiing venue and is the main training ground for the national team . The area around the venue is a popular recreational area for Lillehammer . Since 1995 , Lillehammer Olympiapark has rented out toboggans for use in the hill , including use of the ski lift . 
 = Edward Bellamy House = 
 The Edward Bellamy House is a National Historic Landmark at 91 – 93 Church Street in the Chicopee Falls section of the city of Chicopee , Massachusetts . Its landmark designation was in honor of journalist and Utopian writer Edward Bellamy ( 1850 – 1898 ) , whose home it was for most of his life . 
 Built in 1852 , Bellamy 's father moved the family into the house after its construction . Bellamy grew up in the house , and returned there after completing his studies and a brief stint of work in New York City . He did much of his writing ( both journalistic and otherwise ) in his father 's study until the latter 's death in 1886 , after which Bellamy 's family took over the entire house . It was in these years that Bellamy wrote Looking Backward , the work that brought him fame . His principal absences from Chicopee were made in a quest to improve his tubercular health , which eventually claimed his life . 
 The property had only two private owners after the <unk> before it was acquired in the 1970s by the Edward Bellamy Memorial Association and restored . The association operates part of the property as a historic house museum , and rents out office space in the remainder . The building is not architecturally distinguished , and has undergone a variety of alterations . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The main part of the house is two stories high , with a gable end facing the street . It is three window bays wide , with the front door occupying the righthand bay . A single story porch extends across the width of this part of the house . The pediment of the street @-@ facing gable end has a small circular window in it . 
 The house has three additions . A single story addition extends from the rear of the house , and a two story addition extends to the main house 's right , with its roof gable perpendicular to that of the main house . A single story ell extends further to the right from the second addition . The main house is numbered 91 Church Street , while a separate entrance from the second addition is numbered 93 . 
 Inside the main house , a stairway leads up from the front entry , with a parlor occupying the space to the left . The dining room is behind the parlor , with the kitchen occupying the first addition . The parlor and dining room have matching fireplaces with black marble mantels . The upstairs of the main house has three bedrooms , one of which has a <unk> desk and bookcases , and may have been used as a study . 
 The two story addition and the ell to its right effectively form a second dwelling space . Accessible via an outside entrance and a door in the main house 's entry hall , this space has seen multiple uses over the course of the house 's history . 
 = = History = = 
 The house was built in 1852 . Rufus and Maria Bellamy moved there from a nearby house when their son Edward was still a baby . Rufus Bellamy was the local Baptist minister , whose church was also nearby . The house was sited near a high point in Chicopee , and would have had views of the growing mill centers of Chicopee Falls and <unk> . The neighborhood was then one of the wealthier in the town ( Chicopee was not incorporated as a city until 1891 ) , where the owners and managers of the local factories lived . Edward Bellamy likened his wealthy neighbors to " the feudal baron dwelling among the people " . 
 Edward Bellamy was the third of four children . In 1867 he attended Union College in Schenectady , New York , and from 1868 to 1869 he lived in Germany with a cousin . From 1871 to 1872 he worked for a time in New York City as a journalist . 
 From 1872 to the end of his life , Bellamy , with three exceptions , made the house his home . In 1876 , in a quest to improve his health ( he suffered from tuberculosis , which would eventually kill him ) , he went on an extended tour to the Sandwich Islands ( now Hawaii ) . In 1882 he married Emma Sanderson , a ward of his father 's since 1874 . When the couple were expecting their second child , they lived in the house next door for a time in 1886 . Rufus Bellamy died in November 1886 , and Edward and his family promptly moved back in . In 1887 he published Looking Backward , a utopian novel that was instantly popular , and brought Bellamy wide notice . In 1895 Bellamy traveled to Denver , Colorado in another bid to improve his failing health . After unsuccessful attempts at treatment , he returned to Chicopee in April 1896 , and died at home one month later . 
 According to a neighbor , Bellamy at first used his father 's study for his writing . In his later years Bellamy would also use other areas of the house for his work , leaving chaotic piles of manuscript paper lying about . When Bellamy helped found the Penny News ( later the Springfield Daily News ) , it began publication in the house . 
 The house remained in the family until 1905 , when Emma Bellamy sold it to a photographer named <unk> . He divided the house , using the right @-@ hand side as a professional space . <unk> was also responsible for enlarging the fourth addition , and replacing a barn on the property with a garage . In 1965 the house was sold to Joseph <unk> , whose only significant alteration was to update the kitchen . 
 The house was added to the National Register of Historic Places and designated a National Historic Landmark in 1971 . 
 The Edward Bellamy Memorial Association purchased the property in 1974 , and conducted major restoration efforts in the 1970s and 1980s , assisted by the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities ( now Historic New England ) . The association operates part of the house as a museum , renting out the other to provide additional income . 
 = = Bellamy and Chicopee = = 
 Despite Bellamy 's lifelong association with Chicopee , he was a detached observer of the social changes unfolding in the growing industrial areas of the town . He was a somewhat reclusive personality who shunned publicity , avoiding social and speaking engagements , including in the years of his popularity following the publication of Looking Backward . He was not widely known within the town . When it was suggested that Bellamy move to Boston to facilitate the production of the journal A New Nation ( begun to support and promote the social and political movements established in the wake of the publication of Looking Backward ) , Bellamy demurred , writing " I have the deepest aversion to change . " 
 Bellamy did , however , draw on the community for inspiration in his writings . The last name of Julian West , the protagonist of Looking Backward , is that of one of his neighbors . Elements of his historical novel The Duke of Stockbridge , based on the events of the 1786 – 87 Shays ' Rebellion , are set in a town resembling Chicopee , and characters in his short story " A Nantucket Idyll " are based on local women . Biographer Arthur Morgan notes that many of his other stories are set in towns based " quite obviously [ on ] the village of Chicopee Falls " . 
 = Icos = 
 Icos Corporation ( trademark <unk> ) was the largest biotechnology company in the U.S. state of Washington before it was sold to Eli Lilly and Company in 2007 . It was founded in 1989 by David Blech , Isaac Blech , Robert Nowinski , and George Rathmann , a pioneer in the industry and Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ) and co @-@ founder of Amgen , Icos focused on the development of drugs to treat inflammatory disorders . During its 17 @-@ year history , the company conducted clinical trials of twelve drugs , three of which reached the last phase of clinical trials . Icos also manufactured antibodies for other biotechnology companies . 
 Icos is famous for tadalafil ( Cialis ) , a drug used to treat erectile dysfunction . This drug was discovered by GlaxoSmithKline , developed by Icos , and manufactured and marketed in partnership with Eli Lilly . Boosted by a unique advertising campaign led by the Grey Worldwide Agency , sales from Cialis allowed Icos to become profitable in 2006 . Cialis was the only drug developed by the company to be approved . LeukArrest , a drug to treat shock , and Pafase , developed for sepsis , were both tested in phase III clinical trials , but testing was discontinued after unpromising results during the trials . Eli Lilly acquired Icos in January 2007 , and most of Icos 's workers were laid off soon after . CMC Biopharmaceuticals , a Danish contract manufacturer , bought the remnants of Icos and retained the remaining employees . 
 = = History = = 
 Icos was founded in 1989 by George Rathmann , Robert Nowinski , and Christopher Henney , each of whom had previously started another biotechnology company : Rathmann had created Amgen ; Nowinski had launched Genetic Systems , later sold to Bristol @-@ Myers Squibb ; and Henney co @-@ founded Immunex , later sold to Amgen . Icos was formed with the goal of developing new drugs to treat the underlying causes of inflammatory diseases and halt the disease process in the early stages . The name Icos comes from icosahedron , a 20 @-@ sided polyhedron , which is the shape of many viruses , and was chosen because the founders originally thought retroviruses might be involved in inflammation . The founders raised $ 33 million in July 1990 from many investors , including Bill Gates – who at the time was the largest shareholder , with 10 % of the equity . The company initially had temporary offices in downtown Seattle , but moved to Bothell in September 1990 . Icos went public on June 6 , 1991 , raising $ 36 million . George Rathmann , seen as a guiding father to Icos , left the company in February 2000 , and was replaced as CEO and chairman by Paul Clark , a former executive at Abbott Laboratories . A former Icos manager named short @-@ sighted leadership by Clark as a factor in the failure of the company to develop any other successful drugs apart from Cialis . 
 = = = Cialis = = = 
 Sold as Cialis and initially codenamed <unk> , tadalafil is a drug prescribed for erectile dysfunction ( ED ) and approved for pulmonary arterial hypertension ( PAH ) . It is a phosphodiesterase type 5 ( PDE5 ) inhibitor , similar in function to sildenafil . In addition to ED and PAH , tadalafil has undergone clinical trials for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia and for female sexual dysfunction . 
 <unk> was initially formulated by Glaxo Wellcome ( now GlaxoSmithKline ) under a new drug development partnership between Glaxo and Icos that began in August 1991 . The drug was originally researched as a treatment for cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and angina , but focus quickly shifted to ED with the success of another PDE5 inhibitor , sildenafil ( Viagra ) , which had been developed by Pfizer . Icos began research on tadalafil in 1993 , and clinical trials started two years later . Glaxo let the partnership with Icos lapse in 1996 , including the company 's 50 % share of profits from resulting drugs , because the drugs in development were not in Glaxo 's core markets . In 1998 , Icos formed a 50 / 50 joint venture with Indianapolis @-@ based Eli Lilly ( Lilly Icos LLC ) to develop and commercialize tadalafil as Cialis . The release of Cialis in the United States was delayed in April 2002 when the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) recommended that Icos perform more studies , improve labeling , and address manufacturing issues . Cialis was approved in Europe in November 2002 and in the United States a year later . The drug was approved for once @-@ daily use for ED in Europe in June 2007 and in the United States in January 2008 . 
 In 2006 , Cialis generated $ 971 million in sales , leading Icos to post its first @-@ ever quarterly profit in August . In May 2009 , tadalafil , to be sold as <unk> by United Therapeutics , was approved in the United States for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension based on data from a pivotal study begun before the sale of Icos to Eli Lilly . 
 = = = = Lawsuits with Pfizer = = = = 
 Pfizer and Lilly Icos have filed many lawsuits against each other in various countries over Cialis and Viagra . Pfizer was given a broad patent on PDE5 inhibitors in Britain in 1993 . Lilly Icos filed a complaint in a London court in September 1999 , and the patent was overturned in November 2000 on the grounds that Pfizer 's patent was based on information already in the public domain when the patent was issued . In the United States , Pfizer filed suit against Lilly Icos soon after receiving a broad US patent for PDE5 inhibitors in October 2002 . The United States Patent and Trademark Office ordered a reexamination of the patent , and , as in Britain , the examiner found that PDE5 inhibitors were not a new invention by Pfizer , voiding the patent . In Canada , Pfizer moved to block sales of Cialis five months after it was approved there , arguing that there could be consumer backlash against Pfizer should Cialis be pulled from the market months later as a result of an ongoing patent lawsuit . A federal judge refused , saying he could not " imagine demonstrations in the street or storming of the barricades because one impotence medicine is made unavailable " . 
 = = = = Blindness warning on label = = = = 
 In May 2005 , the FDA began investigating reports of sudden blindness in users of sildenafil ( Viagra ) . The FDA said it had received reports of the condition , a permanent blindness in one eye known as non @-@ <unk> anterior ischemic optic neuropathy , in 38 users of sildenafil and 5 users of tadalafil or vardenafil ( Levitra ) . Lilly Icos voluntarily amended the Cialis label to warn of the condition . The FDA was criticized for its handling of the matter , as an FDA safety officer had commented on unusual reports of blindness over 13 months before a journal article was published on the issue . United States Senator Chuck Grassley wrote a letter to the FDA detailing his criticism , saying that the FDA 's Office of New Drugs ( <unk> ) had taken no action " despite <unk> 's knowledge of the blindness risks since January 2004 and general agreement among FDA staff last spring that the label should be updated " . Grassley 's letter also suggested that Pfizer resisted adding the blindness warning to Viagra 's label . In July 2005 , the FDA said that Viagra , Levitra , and Cialis labels would all carry warnings on the risk of sudden blindness , though it was unclear whether the drugs were actually causing the blindness . 
 = = = = Marketing = = = = 
 Lilly Icos hired the Grey Worldwide Agency in New York , part of the Grey Global Group , to run the Cialis advertising campaign . Cialis advertisements were described as being gentler , warmer and with a more relaxed feel than those of its rivals , to reflect the longer duration of the drug . ( <unk> has a half @-@ life of 17 @.@ 5 hours , compared to 3 @.@ 5 for sildenafil and 4 @.@ 5 for vardenafil . ) Iconic themes in Cialis advertisements include couples in bathtubs and the slogan " When the moment is right , will you be ready ? " Cialis advertisements were unique among those of ED drugs in that they went beyond describing ED and mentioning the drug 's benefits . As a result , Cialis advertisements were also the first to describe side effects , as the FDA requires advertisements in support of a specific brand name to mention side effects ; ads for Levitra and Viagra did not mention the brand name of the drug , therefore circumventing this FDA requirement . One of the first advertisements for Cialis aired during the 2004 Super Bowl ; Lilly Icos paid more than $ 4 million for the one @-@ minute ad . Just weeks before the game , the FDA required more possible side effects , including priapism , to be listed in the advertisement . Although many parents objected to the ad being aired during the Super Bowl , Janet Jackson 's halftime " wardrobe malfunction " overshadowed Cialis . In January 2006 , a physician was added to the advertisements to describe side effects on @-@ screen , and Icos began running advertisements only where more than 90 percent of the audience was made up of adults , effectively ending Super Bowl advertisements . In 2004 , Lilly Icos , Pfizer , and GlaxoSmithKline spent a combined $ 373 @.@ 1 million to advertise Cialis , Viagra , and Levitra respectively . 
 = = = Miscellaneous drugs = = = 
 Icos developed several drugs whose purpose was to disrupt the process of inflammation in the body . The research program focused on the underlying causes of inflammation rather than specific disorders . The compounds developed by Icos were tested in clinical trials in the areas of sepsis , multiple sclerosis , ischemic stroke , heart attack , pancreatitis , pulmonary arterial hypertension , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , interstitial cystitis , psoriasis , hemorrhagic shock , sexual dysfunction , benign prostatic hyperplasia , rheumatoid arthritis , emphysema , chronic bronchitis , and acute respiratory distress syndrome . 
 = = = = LeukArrest = = = = 
 <unk> , trade @-@ named LeukArrest and also known as <unk> , was developed to treat patients suffering from hemorrhagic shock , which is caused by massive blood loss . The drug is a monoclonal antibody that inhibits the recruitment of white blood cells to the site of inflammation . During testing , few patients were given the drug , because LeukArrest had to be administered within four hours of the injury and informed consent was required ; patients were often unconscious , and relatives had to be reached to give consent . In June 1998 , Icos and many medical centers asked the FDA to waive consent requirements in situations where the patient was at high risk of dying and relatives could not be reached . While some medical ethicists opposed waiving consent , the FDA approved the proposal in August 1998 for five medical centers . Development of LeukArrest was halted in April 2000 when interim data from phase III clinical trials did not meet Icos 's goals of significantly reducing the chance of multiple organ failure and reducing the death rate from shock at 28 days . LeukArrest was also tested unsuccessfully for treatment of heart attack , multiple sclerosis , and stroke . 
 = = = = Pafase = = = = 
 Pafase , also known as <unk> @-@ AH , was developed to treat severe sepsis . Pafase is the recombinant form of platelet @-@ activating factor <unk> ( PAF @-@ AH , also known as lipoprotein @-@ associated phospholipase A2 ) , an enzyme made naturally by macrophages and found in human blood . PAF @-@ AH inactivates platelet @-@ activating factor , a phospholipid that plays a role in the inflammation seen in sepsis . The enzyme was discovered in the mid @-@ 1980s by graduate student Diana <unk> and researchers Steve Prescott , Guy Zimmerman , and Tom McIntyre at the University of Utah . The gene that codes for Pafase was discovered by Icos . Early trials for sepsis showed that the drug reduced the death rate after 28 days and patients were less likely to develop severe respiratory problems . Icos also tested Pafase for acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) . In phase II trials for ARDS , Pafase reduced the death rate after 28 days and reduced the chance that the lungs of the patient would fail . However , Icos halted development in December 2002 when interim data from phase III trials for sepsis showed that the drug did not help patients survive . Scientists at Northwestern University later studied Pafase for necrotizing <unk> , and there is ongoing research on the enzyme for atherosclerosis at the University of Utah . 
 = = = = Sitaxentan sodium and TBC3711 = = = = 
 In June 2000 , Icos and Texas Biotechnology formed a 50 / 50 partnership to research <unk> receptor antagonists for use in the areas of pulmonary hypertension and chronic heart failure . Two drugs , <unk> sodium ( also spelled <unk> ) and TBC3711 , were tested in clinical trials under the partnership . Sitaxentan was designed to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension , and TBC3711 was designed to treat cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension . In April 2003 , Icos sold its part of the 50 / 50 partnership , including any share of <unk> and TBC3711 , to Texas Biotechnology for $ 4 million at closing and another $ 6 million within 18 months . Sitaxentan sodium was later approved in Europe , Canada , and Australia , and was marketed under the brand name <unk> . In 2010 , <unk> was voluntarily withdrawn from the market worldwide due to concerns about irreversible liver damage . 
 = = = = Other drugs tested in clinical trials = = = = 
 Icos tested many other drugs that were not approved . They are : 
 <unk> , an antibody blocking ICAM @-@ 3 , designed to treat psoriasis . 
 <unk> , an antibody blocking <unk> , designed to treat sepsis . 
 <unk> and <unk> , two LFA @-@ 1 antagonists , designed to treat psoriasis . 
 <unk> ( RTX ) , a naturally occurring capsaicin analog , designed to treat interstitial cystitis . 
 <unk> , a <unk> inhibitor , designed to treat emphysema , chronic bronchitis , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and rheumatoid arthritis . 
 <unk> , a <unk> @-@ 1 inhibitor , designed to enhance chemotherapy . 
 = = = Manufacturing = = = 
 Icos manufactured many antibodies for various companies . In August 2001 , the company partnered with Seattle Genetics to manufacture a component of their top experimental antibody drug SGN @-@ 15 . In November 2001 , Icos signed a production agreement with GPC Biotech to manufacture a class of GPC 's antibodies that targeted B @-@ cell lymphomas . In January 2002 , Icos signed an agreement with Eos Biotechnology , under which Icos would produce Eos 's most promising monoclonal antibody candidate , and Eos would have non @-@ exclusive rights to Icos 's <unk> enhanced mammalian protein production technology . Eos 's antibody inhibited angiogenesis ( the formation of new blood vessels ) and was being researched as a treatment for solid tumors . In October 2003 , Icos partnered with Protein Design Labs to manufacture their <unk> antibody . 
 = = Acquisition by Eli Lilly = = 
 After Icos 's experimental drugs failed in clinical trials , Eli Lilly was in a prime position to purchase the company . In October 2006 , Eli Lilly announced that it had reached terms to acquire Icos for $ 2 @.@ 1 billion , or $ 32 a share . After receiving pressure from large institutional shareholders as well as proxy advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services ( ISS ) suggesting the deal should be rejected , Lilly increased its offer to $ 2 @.@ 3 billion or $ 34 per share , a 6 % increase . Again , resistance was voiced by some large shareholders , and ISS advised shareholders against accepting the new offer , which it still deemed insufficient . On January 25 , 2007 , at a special meeting , 77 % of the shareholders voted in support of the acquisition . Eli Lilly closed the transaction to acquire Icos for $ 2 @.@ 3 billion on January 29 , 2007 . 
 As a result of the acquisition , Eli Lilly gained complete ownership of Cialis , and promptly shut down Icos operations and laid off Icos personnel , except for 127 employees working at the biologics facility . Icos was the largest biotechnology company in the state of Washington at the time of the acquisition , and employed around 700 people . In December 2007 , CMC Biopharmaceuticals A / S , a Copenhagen @-@ based provider of contract <unk> services , bought the Bothell biologics facility and retained the existing 127 employees . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 In addition to the layoff of Icos employees , other aspects of the acquisition were equally controversial , such as assertions that Icos was being sold too cheaply and that conflicts of interest existed . The latter related to Icos senior executives , who – despite poor stock performance , in part from failed clinical development programs and an inability to successfully license drugs over the preceding years – were to be massively compensated upon a successful acquisition . 
 Senior executives at Icos received cash payments worth a combined $ 67 @.@ 8 million for selling the company to Eli Lilly . Icos chairman , chief executive , and president Paul Clark received " a ' golden parachute ' worth $ 23 @.@ 2 million in severance pay , cashed @-@ out stock options , restricted stock awards and other bonuses for retention and closing the deal . " Nine senior Icos executives received similar packages , each worth more than $ 1 million . 
 = Amnesiac ( album ) = 
 Amnesiac is the fifth studio album by the English rock band Radiohead , released on 5 June 2001 internationally by Parlophone and in the United States by Capitol Records . Recorded during the same sessions for the band 's previous album Kid A ( 2000 ) and produced by Nigel Godrich , the album incorporates similar influences of electronic music , 20th century classical music , jazz and krautrock . Its lyrics and artwork explore themes influenced by ancient Greek and Egyptian mythology . Bassist Colin Greenwood described Amnesiac as having " more traditional Radiohead @-@ type songs together with more experimental , non @-@ lyrical based instrumental @-@ type stuff as well . " Singer Thom Yorke described it as " another take on Kid A , a form of explanation . " Three singles were released from the album , which were " Pyramid Song " , " I Might Be Wrong " and " Knives Out " . 
 The album debuted at # 1 on the UK Albums Chart and # 2 on the US Billboard 200 chart , and has sold over 900 @,@ 000 copies worldwide as of October 2008 . Though many critics considered it inferior to Kid A , Amnesiac received positive reviews and in 2012 Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 320 in their updated version of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Almost all of Amnesiac was recorded during the same sessions as its predecessor , Kid A , released eight months earlier in October 2000 . The sessions took place in Paris , Copenhagen , and in Radiohead 's Oxfordshire studio from January 1999 to mid @-@ 2000 . Unlike Radiohead 's previous " anthemic " rock albums , the sessions saw influences from electronic music , classical music , jazz and krautrock , using synthesisers , drum machines , ondes Martenot ( an early electronic instrument ) , strings and brass . Drummer Phil Selway said the Kid A and Amnesiac sessions had " two frames of mind ... a tension between our old approach of all being in a room playing together and the other extreme of manufacturing music in the studio . I think Amnesiac comes out stronger in the band @-@ arrangement way . " Strings , arranged by Radiohead guitarist Jonny Greenwood , were performed by the Orchestra of St John 's and recorded in Dorchester Abbey , a 12th @-@ century church about five miles from Radiohead 's studio . 
 The sessions produced more than twenty finished tracks . Radiohead considered releasing them as a series of EPs or a double album , but struggled to find a track listing that satisfied them . Guitarist Ed O 'Brien felt the material was too dense for a double album , and that listeners might skip tracks . Singer Thom Yorke said Radiohead split the work into two albums because " they cancel each other out as overall finished things . They come from two different places , I think ... In some weird way I think Amnesiac gives another take on Kid A , a form of explanation . " The band stressed that they saw Amnesiac not as a collection of B @-@ sides or " leftovers " from Kid A but an album in its own right . 
 Only one track , " Life in a Glasshouse " , was recorded after Kid A was released . In late 2000 , Greenwood wrote to jazz trumpeter Humphrey Lyttelton to ask the Humphrey Lyttelton Band to play on the song , explaining that Radiohead were " a bit stuck " . Greenwood told MOJO : " We realised that we couldn 't play jazz . You know , we 've always been a band of great ambition with limited playing abilities . " Lyttelton agreed to help after his daughter showed him Radiohead 's 1997 album OK Computer . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " <unk> Like Sardines in a <unk> Tin Box " is an electronic song built from compressed loops and vocals manipulated with pitch @-@ correcting processor Auto @-@ Tune to create a " nasal , <unk> sound . " " Pyramid Song " was inspired by the Charlie Mingus song " Freedom " , with lyrics inspired by an exhibition of ancient Egyptian underworld art Yorke attended while the band was recording in Copenhagen and ideas of cyclical time discussed by Stephen Hawking and Buddhism . Selway said the song " ran counter to what had come before in Radiohead in lots of ways ... The constituent parts are all quite simple , but I think the way that they then blend gives real depth to the song . " 
 " <unk> / Pull Revolving Doors " was built on a Roland MC @-@ 505 sequencer with loops of found sounds recorded in the OK Computer sessions . The band disabled the erase heads on their tape recorders so that the tape head repeatedly recorded over itself , creating a " ghostly " repeating melody . " The band used Auto @-@ Tune again to process speech into melody . Yorke described " You and Whose Army ? " as being " about someone who is elected into power by people and who then blatantly betrays them – just like Blair did . " Attempting to capture the " soft , warm , proto @-@ <unk> sound " of the 1940s harmony group the Ink Spots , Radiohead muffled microphones with <unk> and used the ondes Martenot 's resonating <unk> <unk> loudspeaker to treat the vocals . 
 MOJO described " I Might Be Wrong " as a " venomous guitar riff " over a " trance @-@ like metallic beat " . Colin Greenwood 's bassline was inspired by Chic bassist Bernard Edwards . The lyric " never look back " came from advice given to Yorke by his partner : " Be proud of what you 've done . Don 't look back and just carry on like nothing 's happened . Just let the bad stuff go . " According to a studio diary kept by O 'Brien , " Knives Out " took 373 days to record , " a ridiculously long gestation period for any song . " It was influenced by the guitar work of Johnny Marr of the Smiths . 
 " Morning Bell / Amnesiac " is an alternative version of " Morning Bell " from Kid A. O 'Brien said that Radiohead often record and abandon different versions of songs , but that this version was " strong enough to bear hearing again . " On Radiohead 's official website , Yorke wrote that " Morning Bell / Amnesiac " was included on Amnesiac " because it came from such a different place from the other version . Because we only found it again by accident after having forgotten about it . Because it sounds like a recurring dream . It felt right . " 
 " Dollars and Cents " was edited down from an eleven @-@ minute jam inspired by krautrock band Can . Colin Greenwood played a record by jazz musician Alice Coltrane over the recording , inspiring his brother Jonny to write a " Coltrane @-@ style " string arrangement . Yorke said the lyrics were " gibberish but they come out of ideas I 've been fighting with for ages about how people are basically just pixels on a screen , unknowingly serving this higher power which is manipulative and destructive , but we 're powerless because we can 't name it . " 
 " Hunting Bears " is a short instrumental on electric guitar and synthesiser . " Like Spinning Plates " was constructed from components of another song , " I Will " , which Radiohead had tried to record in the same sessions . Unsatisfied with the results , which Yorke described as " dodgy Kraftwerk " , the band reversed the recording and used it to create a new track . Yorke said : " We 'd turned the tape around , and I was in another room , heard the vocal melody coming backwards , and thought , ' That 's miles better than the right way round ' , then spent the rest of the night trying to learn the melody . " Yorke sang the lyrics backwards ; this recording was in turn reversed to create " backwards @-@ sounding " vocals . " I Will " was later released in a different arrangement on Radiohead 's subsequent album Hail to the Thief ( 2003 ) . 
 " Life in a Glasshouse " features jazz band the Humphrey Lyttelton Band . After listening to a demo of the song , trumpeter and bandleader Humphrey Lyttelton suggested arranging it in a New Orleans jazz funeral style . He described the song as starting " with me doing a sort of ad @-@ libbed , bluesy , minor key meandering , then it gradually gets so that we 're sort of playing real wild , primitive , New Orleans blues stuff . " According to Lyttelton , Radiohead " didn 't want it to sound like a slick studio production but a slightly exploratory thing of people playing as if they didn 't have it all planned out in advance . " The lyrics were inspired by a news story Yorke read of a celebrity 's wife so harassed by paparazzi that she papered her house windows with their photographs . 
 = = Art and packaging = = 
 Amnesiac 's cover art was created by Yorke and artist Stanley Donwood , who has worked with Radiohead since The Bends ( 1995 ) . It depicts a weeping minotaur of Greek mythology . Donwood said the artwork was inspired by " taking the train to London , getting lost and taking notes " . Likening London to the mythological labyrinth , he saw the city as " an imaginary prison , a place where you can walk around and you are the Minotaur of London , we are all the monsters , we are all half human half beast . We are trapped in this maze of this past . " 
 For the " special limited edition " of the album , Donwood designed a hardback CD case in the style of a mislaid library book , and said : " We wanted it to be like a book . And someone made these pages in a book and it went into drawer in a desk and was forgotten about in the attic . And the attic was then forgotten . And visually and musically the album is about finding the book and opening the pages . " The special edition won a Grammy Award for Best Recording Package in the 44th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Promotion and tour = = 
 Unlike having released no singles for Kid A , Radiohead released three singles from Amnesiac — " Pyramid Song " , " I Might Be Wrong " and " Knives Out " — accompanied by music videos . In October 2000 , Radiohead began a world tour in support of Kid A , playing songs later released on Amnesiac . In June 2001 , they began the Amnesiac tour , incorporating their first North American tour in three years . Recordings from both tours are included on the live EP I Might Be Wrong : Live Recordings , released in November 2001 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Amnesiac debuted at number 2 on the US Billboard 200 with sales of 231 @,@ 000 , surpassing Radiohead 's 207 @,@ 000 first @-@ week sales of their previous album , Kid A. It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies across Japan . 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Amnesiac has an average score of 75 , five points lower than its sister album Kid A , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Pitchfork founder Ryan Schreiber wrote that " quality aside , the questionable sequencing of Amnesiac does little to hush the argument that the record is merely a thinly veiled b @-@ sides compilation ... Still , Amnesiac 's highlights were undeniably worth the wait , and easily overcome its occasional patchiness . " Guardian critic Alex Petridis wrote that " with the benefit of hindsight , Kid A 's wilful racket now recalls the clatter of a rattle being thrown from a pram . Tantrum over , Radiohead have returned to their role as the world 's most intriguing and innovative major rock band . " Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times felt that Amnesiac , compared to Kid A , " is a richer , more engaging record , its austerity and troubled vision enriched by a rousing of the human spirit . " 
 AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that " where Kid A had shock on its side ... Amnesiac often plays as a hodgepodge " , albeit one with some " amazing moments " , and that the two " clearly derive from the same source and have the same flaws ... the division only makes the two records seem unfocused , even if the best of both records is quite stunning " . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote that the album " makes a lot more sense if you 're already feeling down in the mouth " , assigning it a three @-@ star honorable mention rating . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Several music publications ranked Amnesiac one of the best albums of 2001 . Q placed it among its top 50 , Rolling Stone ranked it the 10th , Kludge the 9th , the Village Voice Pazz and Jop poll the 6th , the Los Angeles Times the 5th , and Alternative Press ranked it best . In 2009 , Pitchfork ranked Amnesiac the 34th best album of the 2000s and Rolling Stone ranked it the 25th . In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked Amnesiac 320th in its updated list of the The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 Amnesiac was nominated for the 2001 Mercury Music Prize , losing to PJ Harvey 's Stories from the City , Stories from the Sea , for which Yorke provided guest vocals . It was the fourth consecutive Radiohead album nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album , and the special edition won a Grammy Award for Best Recording Package in the 44th Grammy Awards . " Pyramid Song " was ranked one of the best tracks of the decade by Rolling Stone , the NME and Pitchfork . 
 = = Reissue = = 
 In 2007 , Radiohead left EMI , parent company of Parlophone , after failed contract negotiations . EMI retained the copyright to Radiohead 's back catalogue . After a period of being out of print on vinyl , EMI reissued a double @-@ LP of Amnesiac on 19 August 2008 , along with albums Kid A , Hail to the Thief and OK Computer as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . 
 On 31 August 2009 , EMI reissued Amnesiac in a 2 @-@ CD " Collector 's Edition " and a 2 @-@ CD 1 @-@ DVD " Special Collector 's Edition " . The first CD contains the original studio album ; the second CD collects B @-@ sides from Amnesiac singles and live performances ; the DVD contains music videos and a live television performance . Radiohead had no input into the reissue and the music was not remastered . In Pitchfork 's review of the reissue , Scott Plagenhoef wrote : " More than Kid A – and maybe more than any other LP of its time – Amnesiac is the kickoff of a messy , rewarding era ... disconnected , self @-@ aware , tense , eclectic , head @-@ turning – an overload of good ideas inhibited by rules , restrictions , and conventional wisdom . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Radiohead ( Colin Greenwood , Ed O 'Brien , Jonny Greenwood , Philip Selway , Thom Yorke ) . 
 Notes 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from the Amnesiac liner notes . 
 Radiohead 
 Colin Greenwood 
 Jonny Greenwood 
 Ed O 'Brien 
 Philip Selway 
 Thom Yorke 
 Additional musicians 
 The Orchestra of St John 's conducted by John Lubbock – strings on " Pyramid Song " and " Dollars and Cents " 
 On " Life in a Glasshouse " : 
 Paul Bridge – double bass 
 Jimmy Hastings – clarinet 
 Humphrey Lyttelton – trumpet and bandleader 
 Adrian Macintosh – drums 
 Pete Strange – trombone 
 Additional personnel 
 Stanley Donwood – cover art and packaging 
 Nigel Godrich – production and engineering 
 Dan Grech @-@ Marguerat – engineering on " Life in a Glasshouse " 
 Gerard Navarro – engineering 
 Graeme Stewart – engineering 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Greek battleship Lemnos = 
 Lemnos , sometimes spelled Limnos ( Greek : Θ / Κ <unk> ) , was a 13 @,@ 000 ton Mississippi @-@ class battleship originally built by the United States Navy in 1904 – 1908 . As Idaho , she was purchased by the Greek Navy in 1914 and renamed Lemnos , along with her sister Mississippi , renamed Kilkis . Lemnos was named for the Battle of Lemnos , a crucial engagement of the First Balkan War . Armed with a main battery of four 12 in ( 305 mm ) guns , Lemnos and her sister were the most powerful vessels in the Greek fleet . 
 The ship saw limited action during World War I. Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I opted to remain neutral until October 1916 , when pressure from the Triple Entente forced him to abdicate in favor of a pro @-@ Entente government . For the remainder of the war , Lemnos operated solely as a harbor defense ship . In the aftermath of World War I , she saw service during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War and the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1919 – 1922 . During the war with Turkey , Lemnos supported Greek landings in Turkey and participated in the final Greek sea @-@ borne withdrawal in 1922 . She remained in service until 1932 , when she was used as a barracks ship and subsequently disarmed . During the German invasion of Greece in 1941 , she and her sister were sunk in Salamis by German Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers . The two ships were ultimately raised and broken up for scrap after the end of the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 Lemnos was 382 feet ( 116 m ) long overall and had a beam of 77 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 8 in ( 7 @.@ 52 m ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 000 long tons ; 14 @,@ 000 short tons ) as designed and up to 14 @,@ 465 t ( 14 @,@ 237 long tons ; 15 @,@ 945 short tons ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft vertical triple expansion engines and eight coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) and a top speed of 17 knots ( 20 mph ; 31 km / h ) . Lattice masts were installed in 1909 . She had a crew of 744 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 in ( 305 mm ) L / 45 guns in two twin turrets , one on either end of the superstructure . Eight 8 in ( 203 mm ) L / 45 guns were mounted in four twin turrets , two on other side of the vessel amidships . The secondary battery was rounded out with eight 7 in ( 178 mm ) L / 45 guns mounted individually in casemates along the length of the hull . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was protected by a battery of twelve 3 in ( 76 mm ) L / 50 guns , six 3 @-@ pounder guns and two 1 @-@ pounder guns . The ship 's armament system was completed by two 21 in ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in her hull . Lemnos and Kilkis were the most powerful vessels in the Greek Navy . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Laid down on 12 May 1904 , the ship was launched on 9 December 1905 and commissioned into the United States Navy on 1 April 1908 as USS Idaho . Greece became engaged in a naval arms race with the Ottoman Empire at the time ; the Ottomans had purchased a pair of German pre @-@ dreadnoughts — Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm and Weissenburg in 1910 — and ordered dreadnought battleships from Britain in 1911 and 1914 . The Greek Navy ordered the dreadnought Salamis from Germany in 1913 and the dreadnought Basileus Konstantinos from France . As a stop @-@ gap measure , the Greeks purchased Mississippi and Idaho from the US Navy , for the sum of $ 12 @,@ 535 @,@ 276 @.@ 58 , on 30 June 1914 . The two ships were transferred to the Greek Navy in Newport News , Virginia the following month , Idaho and Mississippi becoming Lemnos and Kilkis , respectively . Lemnos and Kilkis quickly left the United States after their transfer in July 1914 , due to the rising tensions in Europe following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria the previous month . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in at the end of the month , Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I , decided to remain neutral . The Entente powers landed troops in Salonika in 1915 , which was a source of tension between France and Greece . Ultimately , the French seized the Greek Navy on 19 October 1916 ( see Noemvriana and National Schism ) . Lemnos was reduced to a skeleton crew and had the breech blocks for her guns removed to render them inoperable . All ammunition and torpedoes were also removed . Ultimately , a pro @-@ Entente government under Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos replaced Constantine and declared war on the Central Powers . Lemnos , however , did not see active service with Greece 's new allies , and instead was used solely for harbor defense until the end of the war . 
 After the end of World War I , Lemnos joined the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War and served with the Crimean Expedition . There , she aided the White Russians against the Communists . She then saw service during the Greco @-@ Turkish War , where she supported landings to seize Ottoman territory . The Ottoman Navy had been interned by the Allies after the end of World War I , and so provided no opposition to the Greek Navy 's activities . During this period , she also operated in the Black Sea to support the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . In April 1919 , Lemnos was present in Kaffa Bay , where she provided gunfire support to the Volunteer Army . On 22 April , aerial reconnaissance reported that the Red Army was massing in the town of <unk> ; Lemnos and the British light cruiser HMS Caradoc bombarded the town , forcing the Soviet forces to withdraw . 
 In February 1921 , Lemnos was stationed in Smyrna to support the occupation of the city . Operations came to a close in September 1922 when the Greek Army was forced to evacuate Smyrna by sea , along with a sizable number of civilians from Asia Minor . The fleet transported a total of 250 @,@ 000 soldiers and civilians during the evacuation . Lemnos departed Smyrna on the evening of 8 September with her sister Kilkis . While en route from Smyrna to mainland Greece , Captain Dimitrios <unk> , the commander of Lemnos , formed a Revolutionary Committee with Nikolaos <unk> and Stylianos Gonatas , two colonels who supported Venizelos , who had been ousted in 1920 . The men launched the 11 September 1922 Revolution , and other vessels in the fleet mutinied in support of the coup . King Constantine I of Greece was forced to abdicate in favor of his son , George II . 
 In 1932 , Lemnos was placed in inactive reserve ; sections of her armor plate was removed to build fortifications on the island of Aegina . She was disarmed in 1937 and thereafter used as a barracks ship . On 28 October 1940 , Italy invaded Greece , initiating the Greco @-@ Italian War as part of the Italian <unk> Benito Mussolini 's expansionist program . The Greek army quickly defeated the Italians and pushed them back to Albania . Less than two weeks later , the Italian fleet was badly damaged in the British Raid on Taranto , which significantly reduced the threat the Italian Regia Marina posed to the Greek fleet . Lemnos remained out of service , but spare guns from she and Kilkis were employed as coastal batteries throughout Greece . On 6 April 1941 , the German Wehrmacht invaded Greece to support its Italian ally in the stalemated conflict . The hulk of Lemnos was bombed in Salamis Naval Base by Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers on 23 April . The ship was beached to prevent her from sinking ; her wreck was broken up after the end of the war . 
 = Up in the Air ( song ) = 
 " Up in the Air " is a song recorded by American rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars , featured on their fourth studio album , Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . Written by lead vocalist Jared Leto , who also produced the song with Steve Lillywhite , " Up in the Air " is as an introspective and passionate track reflecting upon human consciousness . It marked a departure from much of the band 's previous work as it incorporates a more electronic @-@ influenced sound as well as elements from new wave music . 
 " Up in the Air " was released on March 18 , 2013 , as the lead single from the album . It premiered on the same day from the International Space Station , after being launched aboard a spacecraft loaded with scientific experiments and other equipments . Critical reception to the song was mostly positive , with much of the praise going to its sonic variety and introspective lyrics . The track peaked at number three on the Alternative Songs in the United States and garnered significant commercial outcomes internationally , reaching the top fifteen of Finland , Lebanon , Portugal , and Russia . 
 The accompanying music video , directed by Leto , features conceptual imagery filled with references to different art forms . It received a largely positive response from critics , who lauded the video 's symbolic nature and visuals . It was nominated for numerous accolades , including three awards at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , where it won Best Rock Video . Thirty Seconds to Mars performed " Up in the Air " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Conan , and included the song on the setlist of their Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour and subsequent Carnivores Tour . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Up in the Air " was written by lead vocalist Jared Leto , who also produced the song with Steve Lillywhite . The latter had previously worked with Thirty Seconds to Mars on the production of the band 's third studio album , This Is War ( 2009 ) . The song was engineered by Jamie Reed Schefman and mixed by Serban Ghenea . John Hanes engineered it for mixing at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . The track features additional programming by Patrick <unk> . It was recorded at The International Centre for the Advancement of the Arts and Sciences of Sound in Los Angeles , California and mastered by Howie Weinberg and Dan Gerbarg at Howie Weinberg Mastering . The song includes a contribution from the band 's fans , credited as the Knights of the White Shadow , who provide additional vocals recorded at the band 's studio . 
 " Up in the Air " was described as an electronic rock song with new wave @-@ style keyboards . It opens with the sound of guitars , followed by drum beats , " kaleidoscopic " synthesizers and a chanted vocal part . After the first verse , which features a four on the floor pattern , the pre @-@ chorus follows , leading to an anthemic chorus as Jared Leto voices the lines " A thousand times I tempted fate / A thousand times I played this game / A thousand times that I have said today " . Kevin Rutherford of CBS Radio called the track a " swift rocker with slight electronic undertones " . 
 Jeff Benjamin from Fuse felt that with its four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor beat , " dance @-@ y " synthesizers and trance effects , the song is " crafted for 2013 's EDM @-@ obsessed music world " . He noticed the piano drama and Leto 's melodramatic vocals about the " portrait of a tortured you and I " . Ryan Reed from Billboard acknowledged the band 's progression , considering the song a departure from the group 's previous arena @-@ friendly alternative rock sound . 
 Kaitlyn Hodnicki from Stature magazine found the " seductive " throbbing beat of the track " completely at ease with Jared 's risqué lyrics " . Leto described " Up in the Air " as a passionate and energetic song that " feels really free " but also features the concept of constraint and tension , particularly evident in the line " I 'll wrap my hands around your neck so tight with love " . Leto explained that the lyric plays on two different levels , giving a sexual connotation to the line , but also the idea of power and control . He further said that the song " has to do with getting to a point in your life where you 're ready to let go of the past , embrace change and become more of who you really are " . 
 = = Release = = 
 In February 2013 , Thirty Seconds to Mars announced that " Up in the Air " would be the lead single from their fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . In partnership with NASA , Thirty Seconds to Mars launched the first copy of " Up in the Air " aboard the Dragon spacecraft on SpaceX CRS @-@ 2 . The spacecraft carried a capsule loaded with more than 1 @,@ 200 pounds of scientific experiments , equipment and the first copy of the song . The mission was launched from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station atop a Falcon 9 rocket on March 1 , 2013 . On March 18 , 2013 , the single premiered from the International Space Station , after a Q & A session with the band and astronaut Thomas <unk> that was broadcast worldwide on NASA TV and VyRT . Annise Parker , mayor of the city of Houston , proclaimed March 18 the Thirty Seconds to Mars Day . City Councilman James Rodriguez presented the proclamation to the band prior to their arrival at NASA . 
 Jared Leto told MTV News that with the launch of the song into space the band wanted to start the new chapter of their career in an " appropriately massive manner " . He explained , " I had been speaking with NASA for quite some time about ways to find something creative to do together . And I presented them with this idea and here we are . " He described the experience as " phenomenal " and " mind @-@ blowing " . " Up in the Air " made its radio debut on March 18 and became commercially available for downloading the following day . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Up in the Air " garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics . Kyle Anderson , writing for Entertainment Weekly , called the song a " throbbing modern @-@ rock anthem " which offers " visceral , hands @-@ up hedonism " . Lewis Corner from Digital Spy gave " Up in the Air " four stars out of five and commented that the band manages to retain its " trademark lad @-@ rock sound while rejuvenating it with chart @-@ friendly electronics " . Ryan Reed from Billboard echoed this sentiment , praising the sonic variety of the song . Emily Zemler , also writing for Billboard , cited the track as the best showcase for the " expansively epic tone " of the album . Chris Maguire of AltSounds regarded " Up in the Air " as the " perfect choice " for lead single , labelling it an " excellent " track . Johan Wippsson of Melodic magazine chose it as a highlight on Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams , and commended its " bombastic and huge choruses " . Brent Faulkner from PopMatters called " Up in the Air " an enjoyable song and praised Leto 's introspective lyrics . Writing for Stature magazine , Kaitlyn Hodnicki opined that the song is " littered " with choruses that " will sound epic live " . 
 Joseph Atilano from the Philippine Daily Inquirer gave the song a positive review , noticing the band 's tendency to " explore and employ technological advances to diversify their sound and to keep them from becoming too predictable " . Adam Silverstein of Digital Spy named it a stand @-@ out track from the album and felt that songs like " Up in the Air " " power up the vibe " . John Watt from Drowned in Sound wrote that the track " briefly crackles with life " . He noticed the song 's verses driven forward by a " barrage of pulsing synths " and " Leto 's emotive wail " , but felt that the chorus was a " stuck round " which failed to " set the song alight " . Dan Slessor of Alternative Press wrote that the track sounded " just too easy " for the distinctive sound of the band . Andy Baber from musicOMH felt that " Up in the Air " continues the " pulsating start " to the album , noticing Leto 's " emotive wailings " abounding over " throbbing synths " . Tamar Anitai of MTV regarded the song as one of the band 's most complex and evocative works . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In United States , " Up in the Air " debuted at number 13 on the Alternative Songs chart on April 6 , 2013 . It became the greatest gainer of the issue , after reaching six million listeners on more than sixty radio stations over its first week , according to Billboard . After ten weeks the song moved to number three , which became its peak . It held out of the top spot by " Safe and Sound " by Capital Cities and " Sweater Weather " by The Neighbourhood . The song entered the Rock Airplay chart at number nine . It moved to number four on June 1 , 2013 , and held the spot for three consecutive weeks . On the issue dated April 6 , 2013 , " Up in the Air " debuted on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number seven . 
 " Up in the Air " reached a peak of number 45 on the UK Singles Chart and number 34 on the Scottish Singles Chart . Following the album release , the song rose to number 12 in Portugal and was the 20th best @-@ selling single of 2013 . It has since been certified gold by the Associação Fonográfica Portuguesa ( AFP ) , denoting sales of over 10 @,@ 000 units throughout the country . The track debuted at number four in Russia and reached number seven in Lebanon . In Finland , according to Nielsen SoundScan , the high digital sales placed the song at number ten on the national record chart . " Up in the Air " also peaked in the top 50 on several national record charts , including Spain , Austria , Germany and the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 On January 30 , 2013 , Thirty Seconds to Mars posted on their website a casting call for extras and off @-@ road vehicles , announcing that they were preparing to shoot a short film for " Up in the Air " . The shooting took place from February 7 – 9 in Long Beach , California at an aerospace manufacturing building . The video was directed by Jared Leto under his Dr. Seuss @-@ inspired pseudonym Bartholomew Cubbins . After filming , Leto revealed that the short film includes art from Damien Hirst , whose painting <unk> Acid Ethyl Ester ( 2010 – 11 ) appears on the cover of Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams . In an interview with MTV News , he unveiled that the crew recruited scores of extras and a number of surrealist street performers to appear in the video . However , he did not reveal much about its concept . The short film was produced by Jared Leto and Emma Ludbrook through Sisyphus Corporation . It was edited by Leto , Eric Greenburg , Matt <unk> , and Forrest Borie . <unk> <unk> served as director of photography . 
 A lyric video for " Up in the Air " was released on March 20 , 2013 on Vevo . It features footage taken from the International Space Station as it orbits Earth . Upon release , James Montgomery from MTV commented that the band " has definitely helped move the lyric video concept forward " . He wrote , " filled with eye @-@ popping time @-@ lapse photography [ ... ] the clip skims along the surface of the earth , providing the viewer with unbelievable images of aurorae borealis , lightning storms and vast grids of twinkling city lights " . The following day , Thirty Seconds to Mars teased a preview of the short film . After several weeks of editing , the band premiered the video for " Up in the Air " on April 19 , 2013 . It was preceded by a series of teasers released through the week . 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The short film for " Up in the Air " features a montage of symbolic imagery using quick @-@ hitting shots . It includes burlesque dancer Dita Von Teese riding a mechanical bull , gymnasts Jordyn Wieber and <unk> Maroney showing off their abilities , performers from Cirque du Soleil , and an assorted array of individuals . It also features a colored chalk fight and a number of animals . Jared Leto described the video as a " celebration of art and movement " . He further referred to it as a " bizarre and hallucinogenic journey through an incredibly surreal landscape " . The short film also features the concept of anti @-@ dancing , which Leto regarded as a way through which the gymnasts ' artistry and abilities manifest themselves . He explained , " I really wanted to capture the artistry and the commitment of what these girls do . What they 're able to do with their bodies is just unreal . It 's incredible . Flawless . [ ... ] You can see the dedication , the time , the energy , the work . " 
 Writing for MTV , Tamar Anitai found the video " highly conceptual " and noted that beyond the " hypnagogic imagery " and " expensive gallery pieces " , the underlying meaning of the short film seems to be " finding the beauty in the bizarre " and the " tension of power dynamics " . She felt that Leto created a " surreal visual fantasia " and interpreted the colored chalk fight near the end of the video as a " call to make art , not war " . James Montgomery of MTV wrote that although " every frame is like a photograph [ ... ] they are all intrinsically linked " . He felt that when combined , the singular images form a " powerfully cohesive unit " , explaining that " they tell a story , convey emotions ( lust , loss , sadness , desire , anger , etc ) without speaking a word " . Chad Childers from Loudwire commented that the meaning of the video is left open to the viewer 's interpretation . 
 = = = Response and accolades = = = 
 The video received highly positive response from music critics . RJ <unk> from Rolling Stone commented that Leto tapped into his cinematic spirit creating a series of " striking visuals " connected by the " extravagant " track . In his review for Loudwire , Chad Childers labelled it a " decadent " short film that " definitely does capture the eye " . Tamar Anitai from MTV was impressed with the video and praised the visual experience , calling it a " living , breathing , spectacular art installation " . John Longbottom from Kerrang ! magazine regarded the short film as one of the " finest works " by Thirty Seconds to Mars , calling it " simply colossal " . Contactmusic.com felt that the " stunning " video is a " sublime return to form " . Hayley Avron from the website found Dita Von Teese 's appearance " steamy " . Writing for MTV , James Montgomery commented that the video " speeds along on striking visuals — bright colors , sinewy bodies , vast expanses , prowling beasts — and Leto 's deft directorial choices " . Steven Gottlieb from <unk> opined that the short film is " massive in every way " , praising its production . Emily <unk> , writing for The Hollywood Reporter , called the video " expansive " and " lavish " , and lauded its dramatic visual imagery . Joseph Atilano from the Philippine Daily Inquirer commended its concept " full of images that represent deep emotions and various states of mind — all of which would get our brains working " . Bethany Lee from 106 @.@ 3 The Buzz found it " interesting and mesmerizing to watch " . He deemed Von Teese 's appearance a highlight of the short film . 
 On July 17 , 2013 , the video received three nominations at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards in the categories of Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , and Best Rock Video . It went on to win the latter . At the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards , it was nominated for Best Video . " Up in the Air " also garnered nominations for the MTV Video Music Award Japan for Best Group Video and the Kerrang ! Award for Best Video . It competed at the 2013 Camerimage , where it was nominated for Best Music Video and Best Cinematography in a Music Video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Up in the Air " was first performed at special concerts , dubbed as Church of Mars , in May 2013 , shortly before the release of the album . It later became a signature part of the opening stages of the Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour which followed , usually appearing as the ultimate song or during the encore . Throughout the tour , Jared Leto chose audience members to join Thirty Seconds to Mars on stage for " Up in the Air " . The song was later moved to the beginning of the setlist as a set opener along with " O Fortuna " , a movement from Carl Orff 's scenic cantata Carmina Burana . Fans and critics responded favorably to the song in a live setting . Danny Crandall of The Sun Chronicle commended the theatrics of the performance , while Grace Carroll from Gigwise noted that until the last note of the song , Leto had the audience " completely in the palm of his hand " . 
 " Up in the Air " was performed on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on May 21 , 2013 , where the band also played " Kings and Queens " from This Is War . A CBS Radio writer commented that the performance " blew everybody away " . On May 22 , 2013 , the song was performed on Conan . Thirty Seconds to Mars performed " Up in the Air " at multiple major festivals , including Rock Werchter , Pinkpop , Download , Rock am Ring and Rock im Park , which saw the band playing as headline act . The song was also included in the Carnivores Tour , a tour on which Thirty Seconds to Mars co @-@ headlined with Linkin Park , and usually appeared at the beginning of the set . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and management 
 Recorded at The International Centre for the Advancement of the Arts and Sciences of Sound , Los Angeles , California 
 Engineered for Mix at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia 
 Mastered at Howie Weinberg Mastering , Los Angeles , California 
 Published by Apocraphex Music ( ASCAP ) / Universal Music – Z Tunes , LLC ( ASCAP ) 
 All rights administered by Universal Music – Z Tunes , LLC 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Sitatunga = 
 The sitatunga or <unk> ( Tragelaphus spekii ) is a swamp @-@ dwelling antelope found throughout central Africa , centering on the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Cameroon , parts of Southern Sudan , Ghana , Botswana , Zambia , Gabon , Tanzania , Uganda and Kenya . The species was first described by the English explorer John Hanning Speke in 1863 . The sitatunga is a medium @-@ sized antelope . Males reach approximately 81 – 116 cm ( 32 – 46 in ) at the shoulder , while females reach 72 – 90 cm ( 28 – 35 in ) . Males typically weigh 76 – 119 kg ( 168 – 262 lb ) , while females weigh 24 – 57 kg ( 53 – 126 lb ) . The sitatunga has a shaggy , water @-@ resistant coat which varies in colour . The body and feet of this antelope are specially adapted to its swampy habitat . Only the males possess horns ; these are spiral in shape , have one or two twists and are 45 – 92 cm ( 18 – 36 in ) long . 
 Sitatunga are active mainly during the early hours after dawn , the last one or two hours before dusk , and night . They are not territorial . Sitatunga are selective in what they eat and feed mainly on new foliage , fresh grasses , aquatic plants , sedges and browse . Females are sexually mature by one year of age , while males take one and a half years to mature . Breeding occurs throughout the year but peaks in the dry season . Gestation lasts for nearly eight months , after which generally a single calf is born . Lifespan recorded in captivity averages 22 to 23 years . 
 The sitatunga is confined to swampy and marshy habitats . Here they occur in tall and dense vegetation as well as seasonal swamps , marshy clearings in forests , riparian thickets and mangrove swamps . Habitat loss is the most severe threat to the survival of the sitatunga . The species has been classified under the Least Concern category by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) , and under Appendix III ( Ghana ) of the Washington Convention ( CITES ) . Though the population is sporadic in some countries , the animal is common in many areas such as the Okavango Delta and Bangweulu Swamp . 
 = = Taxonomy and genetics = = 
 The scientific name of the sitatunga is Tragelaphus spekii . The species was first described by the English explorer John Hanning Speke in 1863 . Speke first observed the sitatunga at a lake named " Little Windermere " ( now Lake <unk> , located in Kagera , Tanzania ) . In his book Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile , Speke called the animal " <unk> " ( Kiswahili name for the animal ) or " water @-@ boc " ( due to its resemblance to the waterbuck ) . The scientific name has often been misstated as T. spekei , and either Speke or Sclater is referred to as the binomial authority . Speke had stated in a footnote in his book that the species had been named Tragelaphus spekii by English zoologist Philip Sclater . However , according to the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature ( Article 50 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 ) and the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature , that acknowledge the person who first described the species , simply declaring Sclater as the authority in a footnote is insufficient to recognise him as the author . Hence , Speke was recognised as the correct authority and T. spekii ( where spekii is the genitive of the Latinised " <unk> " ) was considered the correct name for the species . 
 The sitatunga is placed under the genus Tragelaphus and in the family Bovidae . In 2005 , Sandi Willows @-@ Munro of the University of KwaZulu @-@ Natal ( Durban ) carried out a mitochondrial analysis of the nine Tragelaphus species. mtDNA and nDNA data were compared . The results showed that sitatunga plus bongo ( T. eurycerus ) form a monophyletic clade with the mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) and kéwel ( T. scriptus ) . The greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) split from this clade approximately 8 @.@ 6 million years ago . 
 Within Tragelaphus , the kéwel , bongo , sitatunga and nyala ( T. angasii ) are particularly close relatives . The bushbuck , that includes both <unk> ( T. sylvaticus ) and kéwel , and sitatunga are genetically similar enough to hybridise . Hybrids between bongo and sitatunga have proved to be fertile . The sitatunga is more variable in its general characters than any other member of the tribe <unk> , that consists of the genera Taurotragus ( elands ) and Tragelaphus , probably because of their confinement to swampy and marshy habitats . 
 On the basis of physical characteristics such as hair texture , coat colour and the coat stripes , up to ten subspecies of the sitatunga have been described . However , these factors may not be reliable since hair texture could vary with the climate , while pelage colour and markings vary greatly among individuals . Moreover , the coat might darken and the stripes and spots on it might fade with age , especially in males . The species might even be monotypic , however , based on different drainage systems , three distinct subspecies are currently recognised : 
 T. s. spekii ( Speke , 1863 ) : Nile sitatunga or East African sitatunga . Found in the Nile watershed . 
 T. s. <unk> ( Sclater , 1880 ) : Congo sitatunga or forest sitatunga . Found in western and central Africa . 
 T. s. selousi ( W. Rothschild , 1898 ) : Southern sitatunga or Zambezi sitatunga . Found in southern Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sitatunga is a medium @-@ sized antelope . It is sexually dimorphic , with males considerably larger than females . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 136 – 177 cm ( 54 – 70 in ) in males and 104 – 146 cm ( 41 – 57 in ) in females . Males reach approximately 81 – 116 cm ( 32 – 46 in ) at the shoulder , while females reach 72 – 90 cm ( 28 – 35 in ) . Males typically weigh 76 – 119 kg ( 168 – 262 lb ) , while females weigh 24 – 57 kg ( 53 – 126 lb ) . The tail is 14 – 37 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 14 @.@ 6 in ) long . The saucer @-@ shaped ears are 11 – 17 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 7 in ) long . The sitatunga is almost indistinguishable from the nyala , except in pelage and spoor . Speke pointed out that , though " closely allied " to the waterbuck , the sitatunga lacks stripes and is spotted instead . 
 The coat colour varies geographically , but , in general , is a rufous red in juveniles and chestnut in females . There are white facial markings , as well as several stripes and spots all over , though they are only faintly visible . White patches can be seen on the throat , near the head and the chest . A pair of inguinal scent glands are present . The coats of males darken with age , becoming gray to dark brown . Males develop a rough and scraggy mane , usually brown in colour , and a white dorsal stripe . There is a chevron between the eyes of the males . 
 The body and legs of this antelope are specially adapted to its swampy habitat . The hooves of the male are elongated and widely splayed . The rubbery , shaggy , water @-@ repellent coat is minimally affected by slimy and muddy vegetation . The wedge @-@ like shape and lowering of the head , coupled with the backward bend of the horns ( in males ) provides for easy navigation through dense vegetation . The pasterns are flexible , and the hooves , banana @-@ like in shape , can reach a length of up to 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) in the hindlegs and 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) in the forelegs . The pointed toes allow it to walk slowly and almost noiselessly through the water . Moreover , the colour of the coat provides an excellent camouflage . Hearing is acute , and the ears are so structured that the animal can accurately determine the direction from where a sound has originated . This adaptation is of profound use in habitats where long sight is of very little value due to the density and darkness of the environment . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Sitatunga are active mainly during the early hours after dawn , the last one or two hours before dusk , and at night , and spend a large part of this time feeding . Basically sedentary , they rest in flat areas and reed beds , especially during the hotter part of the day . They seldom leave their swamp habitat during the daytime . Though sitatunga commonly form pairs or remain solitary , larger groups have also been observed . A study in Kenya recorded a herd of as many as nine individuals , comprising an adult male , four females and four juveniles . Loose groups may be formed but interaction among individuals is very low . Individuals generally associate only with their own sex . 
 The sitatunga is not territorial . Males may engage in locking horns with other males and attacking vegetation using their horns . They may perform feinting by raising their forelegs with the hindlegs rooted in the ground as a threat display . Sitatunga interact with each other by first touching their noses , which may be followed by licking each other and nibbling . Alarmed animals may stand motionless , with the head held high and one leg raised . Sitatunga may occasionally emit a series of coughs or barks , usually at night , which may cause other animals to join in , and these sounds can be heard across the swamp . This barking may be used by females to warn off other females . Males often utter a low bellow on coming across a female or a herd of females in the mating season . A low @-@ pitched squeak may be uttered while feeding . Mothers communicate with their calves by bleats . 
 Sitatunga can feed or rest close to southern lechwe herds , but do not interact with them . They often attract yellow @-@ billed oxpeckers , African jacanas and great egrets . Sitatunga are good swimmers , but limit themselves to water with profuse vegetation in order to escape crocodiles . In some cases , for instance when troubled by flies or pursued by predators , the sitatunga might fully submerge themselves in the water except for the nose and the eyes , which they keep slightly above the water surface . Due to its close association with water , the sitatunga are often described as " aquatic antelopes " , like the waterbuck . They often dry themselves under the sun after feeding in water . Predators of the sitatunga include lions , wild dogs , crocodiles and leopards . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Sitatunga are selective and mixed feeders . They feed mainly on new foliage , fresh grasses , sedges and browse . Preferred plants include : bullrushes ( Typha ) , sedges ( Cyperus ) , aquatic grasses ( <unk> , Echinochloa , Pennisetum , Leersia , <unk> and Panicum . Species in Umbelliferae and Acanthaceae are preferred in <unk> Swamp National Park ( Kenya ) , and Fabaceae species are preferred in Bangweulu and Busanga ( in Kafue National Park ) . They feed mostly in the wetland fringes . Diet preferences may vary seasonally in swamps where water levels change notably . Like the gerenuk , the sitatunga may stand on its hindlegs to reach higher branches of trees , or even use its horns to pull down the branches . 
 A study recorded forty major species eaten by the animal , the majority of which were herbs . Sweet potato was the most preferred crop . The study predicted an increase in preference for crops due to seasonal food variations . Another study showed that annual floods affect the seasonal movement and diet of the species . These floods force the animals out of the reed beds onto the flooded grasslands when the water levels are high . At low water levels the cattle take over the flooded plains and send the sitatunga back to their original place . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females are sexually mature by one year of age , while males take one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year before they mature . Breeding occurs throughout the year . When females gather , the males compete among each other for the right to mate , showing polygyny in males . The rutting male approaches the female in a lower bending posture , sniffing her vulva . The female may move slowly or react nervously . Even if the female flees , the male continues pursuing her steadily , without showing any sign of hurry . A receptive female will raise her head with her mouth wide open , following which the male will begin attempts at mounting . At the time of mounting the female lowers her head , while the male first bends and then straightens his forelegs and rests his head and neck on her back . The two remain together for one or two days , during which time the male ensures that no other male can approach the female . 
 Gestation lasts for nearly eight months , after which generally a single calf is born . Parturition occurs throughout the year , though a peak may occur in the dry season . Calves are hidden adroitly , and brought out of cover only in the presence of many other sitatunga . The mother gazes and nods at the calf to summon it for nursing . A calf follows its mother about even after she has given birth to another calf . The mother suckles and licks her calf for about six months . The calf takes time to master the specialised gait of the sitatunga , and thus often loses its balance and falls in water . Males , and even some females , have been observed to leave their herds even before reaching sexual maturity due to intrasexual competition . Lifespan recorded in captivity averages 22 to 23 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The sitatunga is an amphibious antelope ( meaning it can live on both land and water ) confined to swampy and marshy habitats . They occur in tall and dense vegetation of perennial as well as seasonal swamps , marshy clearings in forests , riparian thickets and mangrove swamps . Sitatunga move along clearly marked tracks in their swampy habitat , often leading to reed beds . These tracks , up to 7 m ( 23 ft ) wide , can lead to feeding grounds and nearby riverine forests . The sitatunga hold small home ranges near water bodies In savannas , they are typically found in stands of papyrus and reeds ( Phragmites species and Echinochloa pyramidalis ) . They share their habitat with the Nile lechwe in the Sudd swamps and with the southern lechwe in Angola , Botswana and Zambia . 
 The sitatunga is native to Angola , Benin , Botswana , Burundi , Cameroon , Central African Republic , Chad , The Democratic Republic of the Congo , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon , Gambia , Ghana , Guinea , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Kenya , Mozambique , Namibia , Nigeria , Rwanda , Senegal , South Sudan , Tanzania , Uganda , Zambia and Zimbabwe . It is extinct in Niger , where it formerly occurred in the Lake Chad region , and is feared to be extinct in Togo , where its habitat has been taken over by dense human settlements . While it is localised and sporadic in western Africa , the sitatunga is still common in the forests of central Africa and certain swampy regions in central , eastern and southern Africa . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Habitat loss is the most severe threat to the survival of the sitatunga . Other threats include the increasing loss of wetlands , that has isolated populations ; and long @-@ term changes in the water level , that affects the nearby vegetation and thus bears upon their diet . Vast areas of Bangweulu and Busanga are burnt every year , placing animals like the sitatunga at grave risk given the <unk> of swamps . The sitatunga has been classified under the Least Concern category by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) , and under Appendix III ( Ghana ) of the Washington Convention ( CITES ) . 
 In Senegal , intensive hunting for meat and habitat degradation have made the sitatunga very rare . Formerly it was common throughout Gambia , but now it is confined to a few inaccessible swamps ; a population has been introduced in the <unk> Nature Reserve . On the other hand , though the animal is hunted by locals primarily for food , Botswana still supports a large portion of the total population . The species is of great economic significance for northern Botswana , that produces some of the world 's biggest sitatunga trophies . Its status is unclear in Chad , Ghana , Guinea , Burundi and Mozambique and Zimbabwe . Significant populations still exist in countries such as Cameroon , Central African Republic , The Democratic Republic of Congo , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon , Tanzania and Zambia . The inaccessibility of its habitat has rendered population estimates very difficult . In 1999 , Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated a total population of 170 @,@ 000 , but this is likely to be an overestimate . Its numbers are decreasing in areas of heavy human settlement , but are stable elsewhere . 
 Around 40 percent of the populations ( based on the overestimate of 170 @,@ 000 ) occurs in protected areas , mainly in Okavango Delta and <unk> and Chobe swamps ( Botswana ) ; Dja Faunal Reserve and Lobéké National Park ( Cameroon ) ; Bangassou ( Central African Republic ) ; Odzala National Park , Lake Télé Community Reserve , <unk> and <unk> ( The Democratic Republic of Congo ) ; Monte Alén National Park ( Equatorial Guinea ) ; <unk> Swamp National Park ( Kenya ) ; Akagera National Park ( Rwanda ) ; <unk> and <unk> Game Reserves ( Tanzania ) ; Bangweulu and Busanga swamps ( Zambia ) . However , only a few are of these parks and reserves are well @-@ protected and managed . 
 = 2004 World Series = 
 The 2004 World Series , the 100th World Series , featured the American League ( AL ) champions Boston Red Sox against the National League ( NL ) champions St. Louis Cardinals . The Red Sox defeated the Cardinals by four games to none in the best @-@ of @-@ seven series , played at Fenway Park and Busch Memorial Stadium . The series was played from October 23 – 27 , 2004 , broadcast on Fox , and watched by an average of just under 25 @.@ 5 million viewers . 
 The Cardinals earned their berth into the playoffs by winning the National League Central , and had the best win – loss record in the National League . The Red Sox won the American League wild card to earn theirs . The Cardinals reached the World Series by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers in the best @-@ of @-@ five National League Division Series and the Houston Astros in the best @-@ of @-@ seven Championship Series ( NLCS ) . The Red Sox defeated the Anaheim Angels in the American League Division Series . After being down three games to none to the New York Yankees , they came back to win the 2004 American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) and advanced to their first World Series since 1986 . The Cardinals made their first appearance in the World Series since 1987 . The Red Sox won the World Series for the first time since 1918 , which ended the " Curse of the Bambino " , a curse that was supposed to have been inflicted on the team when Babe Ruth was sold to the Yankees in 1919 . With the New England Patriots winning Super Bowl XXXVIII , the World Series made Boston the first city to have Super Bowl and World Series championship teams in the same year ( 2004 ) since Pittsburgh in 1979 . 
 Mark Bellhorn helped the Red Sox win Game 1 with a home run , while starter Curt Schilling led the team to a Game two victory by pitching six innings and allowing just one run . The Red Sox won the first two games despite committing four errors in each . The Red Sox won Game three , aided by seven shutout innings by Pedro Martínez . A home run by Johnny Damon in the first inning helped to win Game four for the Red Sox to secure the series . The Cardinals did not lead in any of the games in the series . Manny Ramírez was named the series ' Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) . When each team next played in a World Series , both won their respective series — the Cardinals in 2006 ( two years later ) and the Red Sox in 2007 . When the Cardinals won , Tony La Russa joined Sparky Anderson as the only men to have managed World Series championship teams in both leagues , a feat he failed to achieve in 2004 . The Red Sox and Cardinals faced each other again in the 2013 World Series , which the Red Sox also won . 
 = = Route to the series = = 
 = = = Red Sox = = = 
 The Red Sox had lost in the previous season 's American League Championship Series against the New York Yankees . The loss was mainly blamed on the decision by then @-@ manager Grady Little to keep starting pitcher Pedro Martínez in the game in the 8th inning of Game 7 , and Little was fired two weeks later . 
 During the off @-@ season , the Red Sox hired Terry Francona as their new manager . They also signed Keith Foulke as their closer and traded for Curt Schilling as a starting pitcher . The Red Sox played two particularly notable games against the Yankees during the regular season . A game on July 1 , in which they came back from a 3 @-@ run deficit to force extra innings , is best remembered for an incident in the 12th inning , when Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter made a catch on the run before hurling himself head @-@ first into the stands . The Yankees won the game in the next inning to take an 8 @-@ game lead in the American League East . In the 3rd inning of a game on July 24 , Red Sox pitcher Bronson Arroyo hit Yankees batter Alex Rodriguez with one of his pitches . As Rodriguez walked towards first base , he began shouting profanities at Arroyo . Red Sox catcher Jason Varitek positioned himself between the two players . After a brief argument , Varitek pushed his glove into Rodriguez ' face , causing a bench @-@ clearing brawl . The Red Sox eventually won the game thanks to a home run by Bill Mueller in the 9th inning . On July 31 , the Red Sox traded shortstop Nomar Garciaparra to the Chicago Cubs after he had spent eight years with the team . They acquired shortstop Orlando Cabrera and first baseman Doug <unk> in this trade . They won the wild card to earn a place in the post @-@ season for the second year in a row . 
 In the divisional round of the playoffs , the Red Sox faced the Anaheim Angels in a best @-@ of @-@ five series . They won Game 1 largely thanks to a 7 @-@ run 4th inning , and went on to sweep the series . In the 7th inning of Game 3 , with the Red Sox leading by 4 , Vladimir Guerrero tied the game for the Angels with a grand slam . However , David Ortiz won the series with a walk @-@ off home run in the 10th . In the American League Championship Series , the Red Sox lost the first three games against the New York Yankees and were trailing in Game 4 when they began the 9th inning . Kevin Millar was walked by Yankees closer Mariano Rivera . Dave Roberts then came into the game to pinch run for Millar and stole second base . Mueller then singled to enable him to tie the game . Another walk @-@ off home run by Ortiz won the game for the Red Sox in the 12th inning . Ortiz ' single in the 14th inning of Game 5 scored the winning run for the Red Sox , in what was the longest post @-@ season game in baseball history . Despite having a dislocated ankle tendon , Schilling started Game 6 for the Red Sox . He pitched for seven innings , and allowed just one run , during which time his sock became soaked in blood . In the eighth inning , Yankees third baseman Rodriguez slapped a ball out of pitcher Arroyo 's hand , allowing the Yankees to score a run . However , after a discussion the umpires called Rodriguez out for interference and canceled the run . Fans then threw debris onto the field in protest and the game was stopped for ten minutes . The Red Sox won the game and became the first baseball team to ever force a Game 7 after having been down 3 games to none . A 10 – 3 win in Game 7 brought the Red Sox to the World Series for the first time in 18 years . 
 = = = Cardinals = = = 
 Having failed to make the playoffs the season before , and with their division rivals ( the Chicago Cubs and Houston Astros ) expected to be strong , the Cardinals were generally expected to finish 3rd in the National League Central . However , strong offensive seasons from Albert Pujols , Scott Rolen , and Jim Edmonds — during which they each hit more than 30 home runs and 100 runs batted in ( RBI ) — helped them to lead the league in runs scored . They also allowed the least runs of any team in the league . Four of their starters recorded at least 15 wins and closer Jason Isringhausen recorded a league @-@ best 47 saves . They added outfielder Larry Walker in August and finished the regular season with the best win – loss record in the league . 
 The Cardinals faced the Los Angeles Dodgers in the divisional round of the playoffs . Five home runs in Game 1 and no runs allowed by the bullpen in Game 2 helped the Cardinals to win the first two games . A complete game by Dodgers pitcher José Lima enabled the Dodgers to force a Game 4 , during which a home run by Pujols won the series for the Cardinals . In the National League Championship Series , the Cardinals faced the Astros and won the first two games in St. Louis . However , the Astros tied the series in the next two games in Houston , before a combined one @-@ hitter by Astros pitchers Brandon Backe and Brad Lidge gave them the series lead . An RBI single by Jeff Bagwell in the 9th inning of Game 6 tied the game and forced extra innings . In the 12th , Edmonds won the game for the Cardinals with a walk @-@ off home run . Trailing in the sixth inning of Game 7 , a game @-@ tying RBI double by Albert Pujols followed by a Scott Rolen two @-@ run home run and then an RBI single by Larry Walker in the 8th inning helped the Cardinals to a 5 – 2 win and earn their first World Series berth in 17 years . 
 By reaching the World Series with the Cardinals , Tony La Russa became the sixth manager to win pennants in both leagues . This was after La Russa had managed the Oakland Athletics to three straight pennants between 1988 and 1990 and winning the 1989 World Series . He would attempt to join Sparky Anderson as the only men to have managed teams to World Series championships in both leagues . He wore # 10 in tribute to Anderson ( who wore 10 while manager of the Cincinnati Reds ) and to indicate he was trying to win the team 's 10th championship . 
 = = Series build up = = 
 The series was heavily discussed and analyzed by the American media prior to it beginning . Star @-@ News compared the Red Sox and Cardinals position by position and concluded that the Cardinals were stronger in eight positions , the Red Sox in four and the teams were even in one . They predicted that the Cardinals would win the series in seven games . Andrew Haskett of E @-@ <unk> gave high praise to the two teams starting pitchers , but also said that the Cardinals " took a serious blow " when Chris Carpenter was forced out of the series due to an injury to his arm . He also pointed out the ability of both teams to hit home runs , especially in the case of the Red Sox 's David Ortiz and the Cardinals ' Albert Pujols , Scott Rolen and Jim Edmonds . While he praised the Red Sox defense , he called the Cardinals " one of the best defensive teams to ever walk onto a baseball field . " Ultimately he concluded that the series would be close and that the Red Sox would win it . 
 John Donovan of Sports Illustrated praised both teams for how unexpected their reaching the World Series was , saying that they were " not supposed to be here . " He also called the series a " blast from the past " because both teams were very old franchises and had twice previously met in the World Series . In a breakdown of how the two teams matched up , he concluded that the edge was with the Red Sox in pitching and the Cardinals in defense and batting . Ultimately he concluded that Schilling and Martinez would be the " key to [ the ] Series " and that the Red Sox would win in six games . Jim Molony of MLB.com , said he expected the series to play out very differently from the last time the two teams met in the World Series in 1967 . This was because both team offenses had been some of the best in the league during the season , while pitching had been very dominant in 1967 . 
 Dan Shaughnessy of The Boston Globe said that " Bally 's in Las Vegas set the Red Sox as 8 – 5 favorites to win the Series " and that there was " some sentiment in St. Louis that the NL champions have been disrespected . " but also that Red Sox General Manager Theo Epstein " Did not want to dis [ respect ] the Cardinals . " Shaughnessy also quoted Schilling as having said : " There 's a lot of good players in that [ visitors ] clubhouse over there . This isn 't the time for us to be thinking about history . If we get three wins and 26 outs into the fourth win , I 'm pretty sure it will hit us . " Before the series began , Shaughnessy wrote a piece saying that although the Red Sox had beaten the Yankees , the series needed to be won , as it was the only way the Curse of the Bambino , which he had publicized based on the book of the same title in 1990 , would end , and demeaning chants of " 1918 ! " would no longer echo at Yankee Stadium . During the series , he wrote a piece about how much people in New England were thinking about loved ones who had spent their entire lives rooting for the Red Sox , hoping that one day , they would see their Red Sox win a World Series . 
 Both teams had lost in their previous World Series appearances in seven games . The Red Sox lost to the New York Mets in 1986 , while the Cardinals lost in 1987 to the Minnesota Twins . The Cardinals and Red Sox had not won the World Series since 1982 and 1918 respectively . When the two teams had previously played each other in the 1946 and 1967 World Series , the Cardinals won both series in seven games . Having won the All @-@ Star Game , the AL had been awarded home @-@ field advantage , which meant the Red Sox had the advantage at Fenway Park in four of the seven games in the series . 
 = = Series = = 
 = = = Game 1 = = = 
 Saturday , October 23 , 2004 — 8 : 05 pm ( ET ) at Fenway Park in Boston , Massachusetts 
 Before Game 1 , local band Dropkick Murphys performed " Tessie " , and a moment of silence was observed to remember local student Victoria Snelgrove , who had been accidentally killed by police two days earlier as Sox fans had celebrated winning the American League pennant . Steven Tyler , the lead singer of Aerosmith , another local band , performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and Red Sox legend Carl Yastrzemski threw the ceremonial first pitch . 
 Tim Wakefield made his first start of the 2004 postseason for the Red Sox , becoming the first knuckleball pitcher to make a World Series start since 1948 , while Woody Williams , who had won both his previous two starts in the post @-@ season , was the Cardinals ' starting pitcher . In the bottom of the first inning , Williams gave up a lead @-@ off double to Johnny Damon , and then hit Orlando Cabrera in the shoulder with one of his pitches . After Manny Ramírez flied out , Ortiz hit a three @-@ run home run in his first ever World Series at bat . Kevin Millar then scored by virtue of a single by Bill Mueller to put the Red Sox up 4 – 0 . 
 The Cardinals scored one run in both the second and third innings on a sacrifice fly by Mike Matheny to score Jim Edmonds and a home run to right field by Walker , respectively . However , in the bottom of the third , the Red Sox scored three runs after seven consecutive batters reached base , giving them a five @-@ run lead . Dan Haren came in from the Cardinals ' bullpen to replace Williams during the inning . 
 In the top of the fourth inning , Bronson Arroyo was brought in to replace Wakefield after he had walked four batters . Those walks , combined with a throwing error by Millar and a passed ball by Doug <unk> , allowed the Cardinals to reduce the lead to two runs . In the sixth inning , So Taguchi reached first on an infield hit and was allowed to advance to second when Arroyo threw the ball into the stands . Doubles by Édgar Rentería and Walker tied the game at seven . In the bottom of the seventh inning , Ramírez singled with two men on base , and a poor throw by Edmonds allowed Bellhorn to score . Ortiz then hit a line drive that appeared to skip off the lip of the infield and hit Cardinals ' second baseman Tony Womack with " considerable force . " Womack immediately grabbed his clavicle as a second Red Sox run scored . He was attended to once play had ended and replaced by Marlon Anderson . A precautionary X @-@ ray revealed that there was no damage . 
 In the top of the eighth inning , with one out and two men on base , Red Sox closer Foulke came in to pitch . Édgar Rentería singled towards Ramírez in left field , who unintentionally kicked the ball away , allowing Jason Marquis to score . Walker also hit the ball towards Ramírez in the next at bat . Ramírez slid in an attempt to try to catch the ball , but tripped and deflected the ball for his second error in two plays , and the fourth Red Sox error in the game . Roger Cedeño scored on the play to tie the game at nine . In the bottom of the eighth inning however , Jason Varitek reached on an error , and Bellhorn then hit a home run off the right field foul pole , also known as Pesky 's Pole , for his third home run in as many games to give the Red Sox a two @-@ run lead . In the ninth inning , Foulke struck out Cedeño to win the game for the Red Sox 11 – 9 . 
 With a total of 20 runs , it was the highest scoring opening game of a World Series ever . With four RBI , Ortiz also tied a franchise record for RBI in a World Series game . 
 = = = Game 2 = = = 
 Sunday , October 24 , 2004 – 8 : 10 pm ( ET ) at Fenway Park in Boston , Massachusetts 
 Boston native James Taylor performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " before Game 2 and singer Donna Summer , also a Boston native , performed " God Bless America " during the seventh @-@ inning stretch . The ceremonial first pitch was thrown by the surviving three members of the famous Red Sox quartet that had faced the Cardinals in 1946 : Bobby Doerr , Dom DiMaggio and Johnny Pesky ( Ted Williams had passed away two years earlier . ) 
 Despite having a torn tendon in his right ankle , similar to Game 6 of the ALCS against the Yankees , Schilling started Game 2 for the Red Sox . Schilling had four stitches in the ankle the day before , causing him " considerable discomfort . " He was not sure on the morning of Game 2 if he would be able to play , but after one of the stitches was removed , he was treated with antibiotics and was able to pitch . Morris started for the Cardinals on three days rest ( one day less than is orthodox rest for a starting pitcher ) . 
 In the first inning , Albert Pujols doubled with two out , and Scott Rolen hit a line drive towards Mueller , who caught it to end the inning . Morris walked Ramírez and Ortiz in the bottom of the inning . Varitek then tripled to center field to give the Red Sox a 2 – 0 lead . 
 In the fourth inning , Pujols doubled again and was able to score on an error by Mueller . The Red Sox also scored in the bottom of the inning when Bellhorn doubled to center with two runners on base , to give them a three @-@ run lead . Cal Eldred came in to relieve Morris in the fifth inning , after he had walked the leadoff hitter , having already given up four runs in the previous four innings . Mueller committed his World Series record @-@ tying third error of the game , in the sixth inning ; however , the Cardinals failed to capitalize . In the bottom of the inning , Trot Nixon led off with a single to center , and two more singles by Johnny Damon and Orlando Cabrera enabled two more runs to score to make it 6 – 1 . 
 After six innings of allowing no earned runs – which gave him a total of 13 innings against the Yankees and Cardinals with only one earned run allowed on an bleeding ankle tendon with a torn tendon – Schilling made way for Alan Embree , who pitched a scoreless seventh . Mike Timlin replaced Embree in the eighth , in which a sacrifice fly by Scott Rolen reduced the Red Sox lead to four . Keith Foulke then came in to strike out Jim Edmonds to end the inning and also pitched the ninth to end the game . For the second game in a row , the Red Sox won despite committing four fielding errors . 
 With the win , Schilling became only the fifth pitcher to ever win a World Series game with a team from both leagues , having previously done it with National League teams , the Philadelphia Phillies in 1993 , and the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2001 . He later donated the bloody sock he wore during the game to the Baseball Hall of Fame museum . Much of the blame for the Cardinals losses in the first two games was directed at the fact that Rolen , Edmonds and Reggie Sanders , three of the Cardinals ' best batters , had combined for one hit in 22 at @-@ bats . 
 = = = Game 3 = = = 
 Tuesday , October 26 , 2004 — 8 : 30 pm ( ET ) at Busch Stadium ( II ) in St. Louis , Missouri 
 Seattle Mariners designated hitter Edgar Martínez was presented with the 2004 Roberto Clemente Award before Game 3 , having announced his retirement one month before . The ceremonial first pitch was thrown by arguably the Cardinals ' best @-@ ever position player , Stan Musial , and caught by arguably their best @-@ ever pitcher , Bob Gibson . " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and " God Bless America " were sung by country music singer Martina McBride and singer – songwriter Amy Grant respectively . During the game , a sign for the fast @-@ food restaurant Taco Bell that measured 12 by 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m × 3 @.@ 7 m ) and read " Free Taco Here " , was hung approximately 410 feet ( 120 m ) from home plate , over the left @-@ center field bullpen . Taco Bell promised that , if the sign was hit by a home run ball , they would give a free " <unk> Beef Taco " to everyone in the United States . 
 Once again , the Red Sox took the lead in the first inning when Ramírez hit a home run off former Red Sox pitcher Jeff Suppan . Martínez was the starting pitcher for the Red Sox , and in the bottom of the first inning , he allowed the Cardinals to load the bases with one out . Edmonds then hit a fly ball towards Ramírez in left field , who caught it on the run and threw to catcher Jason Varitek at home plate . Varitek tagged out Walker , who was attempting to score from third , ending the inning . 
 In the bottom of the third inning , the Cardinals had two runners on base with no one out . Walker hit a ground ball towards first base , and Cardinals third base coach José Oquendo signalled to Suppan on third to run to home plate . However , halfway towards home , Suppan " suddenly stopped . " Édgar Rentería , who had been running from second base towards third , was forced to return to second when he saw Suppan had stopped . After forcing out Walker at first base , David Ortiz began moving toward Suppan , who had turned back toward third , Ortiz threw to third baseman Mueller , who tagged Suppan out . After the next batter Albert Pujols , was thrown out by Mueller , the inning ended . 
 Trot Nixon extended the Red Sox lead to two in the top of the fourth , hitting a single to right field that scored Mueller , who had started the rally with a two @-@ out double to left @-@ center . Johnny Damon then led off the Red Sox 's fifth inning with a double to right . Singles by Orlando Cabrera and Ramírez , to right and left respectively , scored Damon to make it 3 – 0 . With two out , Mueller singled along the first base line , enabling Cabrera to score the Red Sox 's fourth run . Suppan was replaced by Al Reyes , which meant none of the Cardinals three starting pitchers had finished five innings during the series . 
 Mike Timlin relieved Martinez in the bottom of the eighth inning . He finished with six strikeouts , three hits allowed and retired the last 14 batters he faced . The Cardinals avoided a shutout when Walker hit a home run to center field off Foulke in the ninth inning , but Foulke retired the other three batters he faced in the inning to secure the win for the Red Sox 4 – 1 . 
 On the same day the Red Sox won Game 3 , The Boston Globe ran a piece Dan Shaughnessy wrote that as this win brought the Red Sox on the verge of winning a World Series , how many people in New England were thinking about loved ones who had spent their entire lives rooting for the Red Sox and hoping that one day , they would see the Red Sox win a World Series . 
 = = = Game 4 = = = 
 Wednesday , October 27 , 2004 – 8 : 25 pm ( ET ) at Busch Stadium ( II ) in St. Louis , Missouri 
 Before the game , country music singer Gretchen Wilson , a life @-@ long Cardinals fan , performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner . " Barry Bonds and Manny Ramírez received the Hank Aaron Award for the National and American Leagues , respectively . Former Cardinals players Red Schoendienst and Lou Brock threw out ceremonial first pitches along with <unk> Manning , from the Herbert Hoover Boys & Girls Clubs of America . A lunar eclipse was visible during the game – the first lunar eclipse to take place during a World Series game . The game was also played on the eighteenth anniversary of Game 7 of the 1986 World Series , which the Red Sox had lost at Shea Stadium to the New York Mets despite holding a lead . 
 Damon hit a home run to right field in the first at @-@ bat of the game on a 2 @-@ 1 count to give the Red Sox the lead in the first inning for the fourth straight game ; it proved to be the game @-@ winning run . Ramírez singled in the third inning to give him a hit in 17 consecutive postseason games . Doubles by David Ortiz to right and Trot Nixon to center , who narrowly missed a grand slam after swinging on a 3 @-@ 0 count , scored two more runs for the Red Sox to give them a three @-@ run lead . 
 In the top of the eighth , Mueller led off with a single to right and Nixon followed with his third double of the game . Jason Isringhausen came in to pitch for the Cardinals with the bases loaded and nobody out , and was able the finish the inning without allowing a run to score . Kevin Millar pinch hit for the Red Sox starting pitcher Lowe during this inning . It was the third straight game in which the Red Sox starting pitcher had not allowed an earned run . 
 Red Sox closer Foulke came in to pitch the bottom of the ninth . Pujols led off the inning by hitting a single through Foulke 's legs and into center field . After Foulke induced Rolen into a fly out and struck out Edmonds , Pujols took second base , but no stolen base due to fielder 's indifference . Édgar Rentería then hit a ground ball that bounced back to Foulke on the mound . Foulke threw it underhand to Doug <unk> at first base to end the game , and secure the series . 
 The series win was the Red Sox 's first title in 86 years . They were also the fourth team to win a World Series without trailing in any of the games in the series , and the seventh to win it having previously been three outs away from elimination . With the win , pitcher Lowe became the first pitcher to ever win three series @-@ clinching games in a single postseason having also won Game 3 of the ALDS against the Angels and Game 7 of the ALCS against the Yankees . Although the series was won in St. Louis , 3 @,@ 000 Red Sox fans were present at the game , and many stayed after the final out to celebrate with the team , including going on the field when the team came back out of their dugout with the World Series trophy . Ramírez , who was named the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of the series , said afterwards " I don 't believe in curses , I believe you make your own destination . [ sic ] " Kevin Millar said that it was important to finish off the Cardinals in four and not let it go to a fifth game given the team 's history . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 AL Boston Red Sox ( 4 ) beat NL St. Louis Cardinals ( 0 ) 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 The series was broadcast by Fox , and the announcers were Joe Buck and Tim McCarver . Jeanne <unk> covered the pre @-@ game build up to all four games and the presentation of the World Series trophy . An average of 23 @.@ 1 million people watched Game 1 . This was the highest television ratings for the opening game of a World Series in five years and had the highest average number of viewers since 1996 . It was also the highest rated broadcast on any network in the past ten months . The ratings for the first two games were also the highest average since 1996 , and the average for the first three games was the highest since 1999 . Game 3 had the highest average number of viewers with 24 @.@ 4 million , since 1996 when 28 @.@ 7 million watched the Atlanta Braves and New York Yankees . It was also the Fox network 's highest rating for a Game 3 of a World Series ever . Game 4 posted an 18 @.@ 2 national rating giving the series an overall average of 15 @.@ 8 . This was the highest average in five years , and the average number of viewers of 25 @.@ 4 million , was the highest since 1995 . 
 In terms of local radio , Joe Castiglione and Jerry Trupiano called the series for WEEI in Boston while Mike Shannon announced for <unk> in St. Louis . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the win coming eight months after the New England Patriots victory in Super Bowl XXXVIII , the event made Boston the first city to have a Super Bowl and World Series winner in the same year since Pittsburgh in 1979 . A number of players from both teams won awards for their performances during the season . Manny Ramírez won the Hank Aaron Award and , along with Albert Pujols , a Silver Slugger Award , while Gold Glove awards were won by Mike Matheny , Scott Rolen and Jim Edmonds . The American sports magazine Sports Illustrated honored the Red Sox with their Sportsman of the Year award a month later , making them the first professional team to ever win the award . For pitcher Curt Schilling , it was the second time he had won the award , having shared it with then @-@ Arizona Diamondbacks teammate Randy Johnson in 2001 . 
 This World Series win by the Red Sox continued a trend of Boston teams beating St. Louis teams to win championships . Previously , in Super Bowl XXXVI , the New England Patriots had upset the St. Louis Rams ' " Greatest Show on Turf " , the Boston Bruins had swept the St. Louis Blues in the 1970 Stanley Cup Finals ( with Game 4 being remembered for Bobby Orr 's Cup @-@ winning overtime goal that sent him flying ) , and the Boston Celtics – when Bill Russell was still just a rookie – had beaten the St. Louis Hawks to win their first NBA championship in 1957 . With championship showdowns between teams from Boston and St. Louis seen in Major League Baseball , the NFL , NBA and NHL , it is the only showdown between teams from two specific locations , that has been seen in each of these four leagues . 
 = = = Red Sox = = = 
 The Red Sox 's win in the World Series ended the " Curse of the Bambino " , which supposedly had afflicted the team ever since the Red Sox sold Babe Ruth to the New York Yankees in 1919 . Pitcher Derek Lowe and other players said that the team would no longer hear " 1918 ! " at Yankee Stadium ever again . Kevin Millar said to all Red Sox fans : " We wanted to do it so bad for the city of Boston . To win a World Series with this on our chests , it hasn 't been done since 1918 . So rip up those ' 1918 ! ' posters right now . " Members of previous Red Sox teams who had fallen short immediately acclaimed the 2004 team , including Pesky - who had been the shortstop responsible for a fatal checking error that had allowed the Cardinals ' Enos Slaughter to complete his " Mad Dash " to score the winning run in Game 7 at the old Sportsman 's Park in 1946 . Pesky watched the game from the visiting clubhouse and was immediately embraced by Millar , Wakefield , Schilling and others as a living representative of those previous teams as he joined the celebrations . 
 It also added to the recent success of Boston @-@ area teams , following the Patriots wins in Super Bowls XXXVI and XXXVIII . With the Patriots having won Super Bowl XXXVIII the previous February , the Red Sox winning the World Series marked the first time since 1979 that the same city had a Super Bowl and World Series winner in the same year - the last city to do accomplish the feat had been Pittsburgh , when the Steelers and Pirates had won Super Bowl XIII and the World Series respectively . The city would go on to record a decade of sports success from 2001 to 2011 with seven championships in the four major North American sports leagues ( MLB , the NFL , the NBA and the NHL ) , including one in each league after the Patriots won two more Super Bowls , the Celtics won the 2008 NBA championship and the Bruins won the Stanley Cup in 2011 . Following the Bruins winning the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy ranked all seven championships and chose the Red Sox ' 2004 World Series win as the greatest Boston sports championship during the ten @-@ year span . 
 Red Sox Manager Terry Francona became the third manager in four years to win a World Series in his first year as manager , following Bob Brenly of the 2001 Arizona Diamondbacks and Jack McKeon of the 2003 Florida Marlins . 
 Massachusetts US Senator , Boston resident and future Secretary of State John Kerry , who had been named Democratic presidential nominee in Boston that summer , wore a Red Sox cap the day after the series ended . He also said that the Red Sox had " [ come ] back against all odds and showed America what heart is . " His Republican opponent , incumbent President George W. Bush , made a phone call from the White House to congratulate the team 's owner John W. Henry , president Larry Lucchino and manager Terry Francona . The team also visited Bush at the White House the following March , where he gave a speech honoring their presence , in which he asked " what took [ them ] so long ? " A future Presidential candidate , Mitt Romney , at the time <unk> Governor , ceremonially helped remove the Reverse Curve road sign on Storrow Drive that had been famously spray @-@ painted to read " Reverse the Curse " as a further marking of the end of the Curse . 
 The day after the Red Sox win , the Boston Globe doubled its daily press run , from 500 @,@ 000 to 1 @.@ 2 million copies , with the headline , " YES ! ! ! " right across the front page . 
 The Red Sox held their World Series victory parade on the following Saturday , October 30 . The team was transported around on 17 duck boats equipped with loudspeakers so the players could talk to the spectators . Due to large interest in the parade , it was lengthened by officials the day before to include the Charles River , so that fans could watch from Boston and Cambridge river banks . The parade did not however , include a staged rally . The parade began at 10 a.m. local time at Fenway Park , turned east onto Boylston Street , then west onto Tremont Street and Storrow Drive before entering the river . One of the lanes on Massachusetts Avenue had to be closed to accommodate members of the media filming the parade as it passed under the Harvard Bridge . Ramírez was handed a sign by one of the spectators part of the way through the parade , which read , " Jeter is playing golf today . This is better ! " He held on to this sign for the rest of the parade , in a similar way to what Tug McGraw said after the Philadelphia Phillies won the 1980 World Series , " For once , we take a bite out of the Big Apple " . Over three million people were estimated to have attended the parade , making it the largest gathering ever in the city of Boston . 
 The Red Sox were presented with their World Series rings on April 11 , 2005 , at a ceremony before the team 's first home game of the 2005 season . Former Red Sox players Bobby Doerr , Dom DiMaggio , Johnny Pesky , and Carl Yastrzemski were all present , as were the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the Boston Pops Orchestra . During the ceremony , five red pennants were first unfurled at the top of the Green Monster , showing the years of each of the Red Sox previous World Series wins . A much larger banner was unfurled that covered the entire wall and read " 2004 World Series Champions . " James Taylor , himself a Boston native and a Red Sox fan , performed " America the Beautiful " , and 19 members of the United States Army and Marine Corps who had fought in the Iraq War walked onto the field . Moments of silence were held to honor the deaths of Pope John Paul II , who had died nine days earlier , and former Red Sox relief pitcher , Dick <unk> . The rings were handed out by the team 's owner , John W. Henry . Former Red Sox players Lowe and Dave Roberts , who had joined the Los Angeles Dodgers and San Diego Padres respectively during the off @-@ season , were also present to collect their rings . The ceremony , which lasted around an hour , ended with stars from other Boston sports teams , including the Celtics ' Bill Russell , the Bruins ' Bobby Orr and the Patriots ' <unk> <unk> and Richard Seymour , throwing ceremonial first pitches . The presence of <unk> and Seymour made evident the recent success of Boston @-@ area teams . The day after the Red Sox won the Series , Shaughnessy and the rest of the news media said of the Red Sox home opener : " The team in the third @-@ base dugout ? The New York Yankees , Sweet . " In a sign of respect , the Red Sox rivals came to the top step of the visitors dugout and gave the Red Sox a standing ovation . The Fenway Park crowd burst into cheers when Yankees pitcher Mariano Rivera was introduced , breaking from the tradition of fans booing opposing players , due to him having blown save opportunities in Games 4 and 5 of the 2004 ALCS . Rivera was a good sport about it and laughed while waving his arms in mock appreciation of the fans . 
 The following August , Simon & Schuster published Faithful , a book which chronicled e @-@ mails about the Red Sox , between American writers , and Red Sox fans , Stephen King and Stewart O 'Nan during the 2004 season . In March 2005 , Houghton Mifflin Company published Reversing the Curse , a book by Shaughnessy , author of the bestselling The Curse of the Bambino , chronicling the 2004 Red Sox season . ESPN 's Bill Simmons published Now I Can Die In Peace , a collection of his columns with updated annotations and notes , including columns for each of the last four games of the ALCS and each World Series game – with Game 4 being a running diary . The Farrelly Brothers altered the ending of their 2005 film Fever Pitch to coincide with the actual end of the series . They and their crew , plus stars Drew Barrymore and Jimmy Fallon , flew to St. Louis and Barrymore and Fallon attended Game 4 in character , complete with the two of them running onto the field at Busch Stadium and kissing once the final out was made . 
 = = = Cardinals = = = 
 On the Cardinals ' side , the media expressed disappointment at the team 's failure to win a game in the Series after recording the team 's best regular season in over 60 years . Many reporters believed that the Cardinals had not played up to their usual standard , and much of the blame was directed at Rolen , Edmonds and Reggie Sanders , three of the Cardinals ' best hitters , who had combined for one hit in 39 at bats in the series . 
 It also marked the last time that Busch Memorial Stadium would host a World Series . The Cardinals moved to the new Busch Stadium in their championship season of 2006 , which was their first since 1982 . 
 = = = 2005 season = = = 
 Both the Red Sox and Cardinals made the playoffs the following season . The Red Sox lost to the eventual champions the Chicago White Sox , in the American League Division Series . The Cardinals , in a repeat meeting of the previous season 's National League Championship Series , lost to the Houston Astros . However , the city of Boston would see more success when the New England Patriots won Super Bowl XXXIX , three months after the Red Sox won the World Series , giving the greater Boston area its third championship in 12 months , making it the first time since 1980 that any city had two Super Bowl winners and a World Series winner in a period of the same length . 
 Both teams also won one of the next three World Series in successive years ; the Cardinals , as noted above , in 2006 , beating the Detroit Tigers in five games , becoming the first team since the New York Yankees in 1923 , to win a World Series championship in their first season in a new stadium . Tony La Russa would achieve the distinction that he couldn 't achieve in 2004 of managing World Series winners in both leagues . He would continue to wear number 10 to pay tribute to Sparky Anderson afterwards . 
 The Red Sox won the World Series the following year , sweeping the Colorado Rockies in four games . Tom Werner , chairman of the Red Sox , and team president Larry Lucchino said that the 2004 championship was " for the parents and grandparents who had suffered through the Curse of the Bambino " , while 2007 was " for children , grandchildren , and for Red Sox Nation " . 
 = Wallace G. Wilkinson = 
 Wallace Glenn Wilkinson ( December 12 , 1941 – July 5 , 2002 ) was an American businessman and politician from the Commonwealth of Kentucky . From 1987 to 1991 , he served as the state 's fifty @-@ seventh governor . Wilkinson dropped out of college at the University of Kentucky in 1962 to attend to a book retail business he started . The business rapidly became a national success , and Wilkinson re @-@ invested his profits in real estate , farming , transportation , banking , coal , and construction ventures , becoming extremely wealthy . In 1987 , he joined a crowded field in the Democratic gubernatorial primary . After running behind two former governors and the sitting lieutenant governor for most of the race , Wilkinson began to climb in the polls after hiring then @-@ unknown campaign consultant James Carville . Wilkinson campaigned on a promise of no new taxes and advocated a state lottery as an alternative means of raising money for the state . Wilkinson surprised most political observers by winning the primary and going on to defeat his Republican challenger in the general election . 
 Wilkinson was able to secure passage of a constitutional amendment allowing a state lottery . He also helped craft a significant education reform bill in response to a ruling by the Kentucky Supreme Court that declared the state 's entire public school system unconstitutional . Wilkinson 's term was plagued by political scandal and an uneasy relationship with the state legislature . He advocated an amendment to the state constitution that would allow him to seek a second consecutive term as governor , but the amendment was defeated in the General Assembly . His wife Martha attempted to succeed him , but withdrew from the campaign amid weak support for her candidacy . Following his term as governor , Wilkinson encountered difficult financial times . In 2001 , he was sued by a group of creditors , and during the proceedings , it was revealed that he was operating a Ponzi scheme to keep his businesses afloat . Both he and his wife Martha filed for bankruptcy later that year . In 2002 , Wilkinson was hospitalized with arterial blockages . His condition was complicated by a recurrence of Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma . He suffered a stroke on July 4 , 2002 , and his family withdrew his life support the following day in accordance with his previously @-@ expressed wishes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wallace Wilkinson was born on a farm in Casey County , Kentucky , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) southwest of the city of Liberty , on December 12 , 1941 . The son of Hershel and Cleo ( Lay ) Wilkinson , he had two older brothers and a younger sister . His parents were farmers and also operated a small general store . When Wilkinson was four years old , the family moved to Liberty , and the family opened Wilkinson 's Grocery . During his childhood , he delivered newspapers , sold popcorn from a street stand , and co @-@ owned a shoe shine parlor with a boyhood friend . He also accompanied his father to sell produce from the back of a truck . It was during one such trip that he met Martha Carol Stafford , whose parents owned a grocery store about 10 miles ( 16 km ) away . The two dated throughout high school and were married in 1960 . They had two children : Wallace Glenn Wilkinson , Jr . ( b . 1970 ) and Andrew Stafford Wilkinson ( b . 1972 ) . 
 Wilkinson was a member of the freshman basketball team at Liberty High School . Using profits from his early business ventures , he purchased a business wardrobe that earned him the title of best dressed member of his senior class . He graduated from high school in 1959 , but the poor curriculum there left him without the credits he needed to gain admission to the University of Kentucky 's engineering program . He began selling livestock feed in Scottsville , Kentucky , and also worked at a venetian blind factory while taking classes at <unk> College to earn the credits he needed . In 1962 , he moved to Lexington , Kentucky , and enrolled at the University of Kentucky . While in college , he worked at Kennedy Book Store in Lexington . Later , he and two friends borrowed money to open the Kentucky Paperback Gallery in Lexington ; Wilkinson left school later that year to attend to the business full @-@ time . At the time , Kentucky high school students were required to purchase their own textbooks , but there was no marketplace for buying and selling used books ; Wilkinson 's business catered to this market and was highly successful . 
 = = Business ventures = = 
 Wilkinson opened Wallace 's Book Store in June 1965 after a local stockbroker helped him raise the initial capital needed through a public stock offering . By this time , Kentucky had adopted free textbook legislation at the behest of Governor Julian Carroll , so Wilkinson transitioned to selling college textbooks to students at the University of Kentucky . Throughout the 1960s , Wilkinson refused to pay the state sales tax on his transactions ; he and Joe Kennedy , the owner of Kennedy Book Store , both claimed that paying the tax put them at a competitive disadvantage with the university 's book store , which did not pay state taxes because it was operated by the university , a tax exempt entity . In 1977 , the state Board of Tax Appeals ruled that all three bookstores should have been paying the tax , but by this time , the statute of limitations had expired , and none of the three were required to pay any back taxes . Wallace 's Book Store continued to expand rapidly , opening retail stores in twenty @-@ eight states and becoming one of the country 's largest book firms . In January 1971 , he considered issuing more stock to raise capital to buy Providence , Rhode Island @-@ based Barnes & Noble , but the executive committee of Wallace 's was averse to purchasing a company so far away and blocked the move . In April 1977 , Wilkinson was cited for false and misleading advertisement in conjunction with claims made in radio ads for Wallace 's Book Store claiming they were offering the first discounts in history on new college textbooks . In a court filing , Wilkinson admitted the claims were untrue , promised to stop airing the ads , and agreed to refund any money overpaid by customers . 
 With the success of his chain of bookstores , Wilkinson pursued other business ventures in the fields of real estate development , farming , transportation , banking , coal interests , and construction . He purchased several private aircraft to help him tend to his diverse interests throughout the state , and in 1973 , created Wilkinson Flying Service to keep the planes busy when he wasn 't using them . After investing in the unfinished Bluegrass Commerce Center in Lexington in early 1977 , he purchased one @-@ third interest in the Purcell building on Lexington 's Vine Street later that year . The building was only partially occupied , but had become more valuable because of the opening of nearby Rupp Arena in October 1976 and a new Hyatt hotel in May 1977 . Developers Donald and Dudley Webb developed plans to construct the Vine Center on the block ; by May 1979 , they had options to buy every property on the block except Wilkinson 's interest in the Purcell building . Unwilling to meet Wilkinson 's asking price , they instead formed a partnership with him to co @-@ develop the Vine Center . When Wilkinson eventually sold his interest in the venture at the end of 1981 , he turned a profit of at least $ 1 @.@ 3 million on his investment . Next , he formed a public @-@ private partnership with the city of Lexington to construct the Capital Plaza Hotel in 1983 . The city provided $ 3 million in capital and another $ 8 @.@ 5 million in guaranteed loans to supplement Wilkinson 's $ 1 @.@ 15 million investment . Wallace 's Book Stores was given 95 % ownership in the hotel , allowing the company to shield $ 2 million in assets from federal income taxes and claim over $ 400 @,@ 000 in tax credits . 
 Despite playing a major role in the Lexington real estate market , Wilkinson was fiercely protective of his privacy ; for a time , he even refused to allow newspapers to publish pictures of him . His public profile began to rise when he announced plans to construct the 50 @-@ story World Coal Center on the corner of Main and Limestone streets in Lexington . When completed , it would be the largest office complex between Atlanta and Chicago . Wilkinson hoped that all the major coal companies in the state would relocate their offices to the center , making it a hub for the international coal market . Shortly after Wilkinson demolished the historic Phoenix Hotel to make way for the building , the coal market experienced a pronounced lull , and the empty lot where the proposed coal center would have stood was derided as " Wally 's Folly " and " Lake Wilkinson " . In 1984 , the Lexington @-@ Fayette Urban County Government secured a lease from Wilkinson to develop a temporary municipal park on the site . Wilkinson conceded that he would not be able to develop the proposed World Coal Center in the near @-@ term , and Lexington mayor Scotty Baesler wanted to improve the property before the city hosted the finals of the 1985 NCAA men 's basketball tournament at Rupp Arena . In early 1985 , Wilkinson struck a deal with the state and urban county governments to retain the park and build a public library and parking garage while allowing Wilkinson to construct and operate a 21 @-@ story apartment complex above the garage . Critics claimed that the city @-@ county government bailed Wilkinson out of a bad investment by purchasing the property from him and by giving him a government @-@ subsidized , low interest rate on his $ 12 million mortgage for the apartment building . 
 = = Alleged kidnapping by Jerome Jernigan = = 
 On April 10 , 1984 , Wilkinson was allegedly kidnapped by a man named Jerome Jernigan . In 1977 , Wilkinson had provided Jernigan with start @-@ up money for Jernigan Export Timber , Inc . , a company that manufactured and exported wood veneers internationally . The company went defunct around the time of Jernigan 's divorce from his wife , the secretary @-@ treasurer of the company , in December 1980 . Jernigan 's son , Victor , continued to work for Wilkinson in another capacity until 1982 . 
 According to Wilkinson , in the months leading up to the alleged kidnapping , Jernigan had come to Wilkinson 's office several times demanding money he claimed he was owed from his prior business dealings with Wilkinson . Wilkinson said he had been making the requested payments , but that when he refused Jernigan 's request on April 10 , Jernigan presented him with a four @-@ page suicide note , then produced a pistol and told Wilkinson , " I 'm going to kill you first . " Wilkinson further alleged that Jernigan forced him to drive to the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Frankfort , a hotel Wilkinson owned , at gunpoint . The two spent the night at the hotel , and sometime during the night , Wilkinson contacted James Aldridge , president of New Farmers National Bank in Glasgow , Kentucky . Wilkinson , who owned an interest in New Farmers National Bank , told Aldridge he needed $ 500 @,@ 000 as soon as possible . The next day , Wilkinson and Jernigan flew to Glasgow aboard a plane operated by Wilkinson Flying Service , another company owned by Wilkinson . Wilkinson said Jernigan threatened to kill employees at the company if Wilkinson attempted to alert them . Aldridge met Wilkinson and Jernigan with the money Wilkinson had requested at the Glasgow Municipal Airport . Upon their arrival , Wilkinson paid Jernigan $ 500 @,@ 000 and was released unharmed . 
 After his release , Wilkinson alerted the FBI , and Jernigan was arrested the same day in Lexington . Upon his arrest , he was in possession of two pistols , six sets of handcuffs , and $ 400 @,@ 000 in cash . Jernigan told authorities that he and Wilkinson had spent the previous night at the Crowne Plaza negotiating a settlement to their differences stemming from their earlier business relationship . The terms of the settlement , Jernigan maintained , included a $ 500 @,@ 000 cash payment from Wilkinson , part of which would finance a new business venture similar to Jernigan 's previous veneer export business . Wilkinson would also furnish Jernigan with a car , a furnished apartment in Lexington , and a salary of $ 5 @,@ 000 a month . Jernigan stated that after the $ 500 @,@ 000 was paid , Wilkinson decided to back out of the settlement and portray the encounter as a crime . Wilkinson denied Jernigan 's allegations and maintained that the money – which was later recovered – was demanded by Jernigan as a ransom for his release . 
 Weeks later , Jernigan filed a counter @-@ suit against Wilkinson in Fayette County circuit court . He asked the court to award him $ 50 million in punitive damages and to determine the profits made by his and Wilkinson 's veneer company , of which he would receive half . A judge ordered the case moved to Louisville because the alleged crime was committed in Glasgow , in the state 's western district . State charges against Jernigan , which included kidnapping and carrying a concealed deadly weapon , were dropped so that the federal extortion charges could take precedence . Over the objection of his legal counsel , the court ordered Jernigan to undergo a psychiatric evaluation to determine whether he was insane or mentally incompetent for his own defense . The court @-@ appointed psychiatrist found Jernigan competent to stand trial , and he was released in late May on a $ 25 @,@ 000 bond . 
 After his release on bond , Jernigan returned to the room at the Continental Inn in Lexington where he had been living prior to his arrest . On July 18 , 1984 , Jernigan 's son Randy found him dead in the room . An autopsy showed that Jernigan suffered from coronary atherosclerosis , and heart disease was officially listed as the cause of death . Lexington police determined that there was no evidence to suggest foul play . Jernigan 's ex @-@ wife continued to pursue Jernigan 's case against Wilkinson , but a Fayette County Circuit Court Judge awarded Wilkinson a summary judgment to dismiss the case in 1986 . 
 = = Political life = = 
 After announcing his plans for the World Coal Center , Wilkinson began attending meetings of the Lexington Urban City Council , where he advocated his fiscally conservative political views . He was an admirer of Ronald Reagan , although he said he wished Reagan was a Democrat like himself . In 1979 , Wilkinson became involved with Terry McBrayer 's campaign against John Y. Brown , Jr. in the Democratic gubernatorial primary . He held a critical fundraiser for Scotty Baesler 's 1981 Lexington mayoral campaign , although most of the businessmen in Lexington favored Baesler 's opponent . In the 1983 Democratic gubernatorial primary , he served as finance chairman for Harvey Sloane 's campaign . When Sloane lost a close race to Lieutenant Governor Martha Layne Collins , Republican nominee Jim Bunning tried to enlist the support of Sloane and his supporters , including Wilkinson . After a month of consideration , however , Wilkinson endorsed the entire Democratic ticket . The following year , he managed former governor Brown 's brief senatorial campaign . Already considering running for governor in 1987 , Wilkinson had hoped to remove Brown as a potential competitor for that office by helping him get elected to the Senate , but Brown ended his campaign early for health reasons . Through his work in various the campaigns , Wilkinson found that he enjoyed the challenges of competing in the political arena . He lobbied the General Assembly to pass a multi @-@ bank holding company bill allowing banking companies to own more than one Kentucky bank . The bill passed in 1984 . 
 = = = Democratic primary of 1987 = = = 
 In April 1985 , Wilkinson formed a campaign committee in advance of the 1987 gubernatorial election . Relatively unknown statewide , Wilkinson was the first candidate to enter the race . The Democratic primary field eventually grew to include two previous Kentucky governors , John Y. Brown , Jr. and Julian Carroll ; sitting Lieutenant Governor Steve Beshear , who would later win two terms as governor in 2007 and 2011 ; and Grady Stumbo , cabinet secretary for Governor Martha Layne Collins . Early in the race , Brown was the clear @-@ cut favorite , while Wilkinson was picked to finish fifth . Wilkinson financed his own campaign and campaign manager Danny Briscoe suggested that he hire a campaign consultant to reach out to the state 's large concentration of undecided voters . After a few interviews , Wilkinson hired a then @-@ unknown political consultant named James Carville ; Carville later went on to chair Bill Clinton 's successful presidential campaign in 1992 . 
 Beshear , considered the second strongest candidate in the primary race , spent much of the campaign attacking Brown , and Brown spent time and resources responding to Beshear 's attacks . Meanwhile , Wilkinson attacked all of his opponents in the race as political insiders while touting his own rise from poverty to financial success . He called the incentive package that sitting governor Martha Layne Collins had offered to lure a Toyota manufacturing plant to the state " a massive mistake and terrible deal " that had made Kentucky " an international laughingstock " . He also claimed that both Brown and Beshear would raise taxes and proposed a state lottery , which he claimed would generate $ 70 million annually for the state 's coffers , as an alternative to higher taxes . The proposal proved particularly popular in Northern Kentucky , where residents routinely traveled to neighboring Ohio to play that state 's lottery . Wilkinson also advocated for wholesale education reform , stating that Kentucky 's children " don 't have a learning problem ; they 've got a schooling problem . " Two @-@ time former governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler gave Wilkinson 's campaign further credibility with his endorsement . 
 In late April , Brown still held a 20 percentage point lead in public opinion polling . However , as Beshear began to slip in the polls , Wilkinson moved up . By Memorial Day weekend , he was polling second among the candidates . Brown largely ignored Wilkinson until a week before the election , when he began running ads questioning the amount of money Wilkinson claimed would be generated by a state lottery . Wilkinson won the primary , garnering 36 percent of the vote to 26 percent for Brown , 18 percent for Beshear , 12 percent for Stumbo , and 6 percent for Carroll . In total , Wilkinson spent a record $ 4 million during the primary campaign . Kentucky historian Thomas D. Clark opined that Wilkinson 's lavish spending during the campaign prompted the legislature to adopt campaign finance reform measures . 
 = = = Gubernatorial campaign of 1987 = = = 
 Democrats enjoyed a 3 @-@ to @-@ 1 voter registration advantage in Kentucky , and while he had been the underdog in the primary campaign , Wilkinson became the heavy favorite against the Republican nominee , State Representative John Harper of <unk> . Larry Forgy , who had been groomed for the Republican nomination , unexpectedly dropped out of the race before the primary , leaving the party at a significant disadvantage with a largely unknown and underfunded candidate . While Harper began his general election campaign immediately , Wilkinson made few public appearances – except for fundraisers – until the second week in September . He also refused to endorse the $ 125 million education reform measure that sitting governor Martha Layne Collins had guided through the legislature in 1985 , which cost him the endorsement of the Kentucky Education Association . The association endorsed Harper , marking the first time in its history it had endorsed a Republican gubernatorial candidate , but endorsed Brereton Jones , the Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor . 
 Harper attacked Wilkinson 's lottery proposal as " Alice in Wonderland " economics . In addition , Harper 's campaign raised a number of ethical issues with regard to Wilkinson 's business dealings . Gary Stafford , Wilkinson 's brother @-@ in @-@ law who was serving as president of Wallace 's Book Store , pleaded guilty to illegal wiretapping and rolling back the odometers on company vehicles . The company was also forced to pay $ 44 @,@ 641 in back taxes . Further , Republican state chairman Bob Gable questioned whether Wilkinson had helped Italian businessmen circumvent laws that made it difficult to export Italian currency by disguising real estate ventures as legitimate business transactions with Jernigan Export Timber . Gable also hired a private investigator who determined that there was " substantial reason " to suspect that foul play was involved in the death of Wilkinson 's business partner , Jerome Jernigan . Despite Gable 's allegations and the investigator 's findings , Lexington police officials said they saw no reason to re @-@ open the investigation . Harper was at a substantial fundraising disadvantage , raising only $ 225 @,@ 000 for the entire campaign compared to Wilkinson 's $ 8 million . This left him unable to purchase enough media time to solidify any of the ethical questions about Wilkinson in the voters ' minds . Wilkinson 's campaign also delved into Harper 's personal life , admitting that it tipped off the media about Harper 's son , who had been shot to death in an attempted burglary . 
 In the general election , Wilkinson defeated Harper by a vote of 504 @,@ 674 to 273 @,@ 141 . By capturing 65 % of the vote , he broke Julian Carroll 's record of 62 @.@ 8 % . Low voter turnout prohibited him from setting the record for most votes received by a candidate in a Kentucky gubernatorial election , and he received several thousand fewer votes than Brereton Jones , the victorious Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor . He carried 115 of Kentucky 's 120 counties – besting Carroll 's old record of 99 – but lost in Fayette , his county of residence . A poll conducted by a Louisville television station after the election showed that 76 % of voters wished they had another candidate to vote for . 
 = = = Legislative session of 1988 = = = 
 Even before he officially took office , some of Wilkinson 's public comments set up an adversarial relationship with the General Assembly . Just two days after his election , he told reporters that he would exert the " full power " of his office toward getting his agenda approved by the legislature and that he " conceive of a situation " where he would use his political action committee ( PAC ) , Kentuckians for a Better Future , to help defeat legislators who opposed him . Under governors Brown and Collins , the legislature had become increasingly independent of the governor , and Lexington Herald @-@ Leader reporters opined that House Speaker Don Blandford and Senate President Pro Tem John " Eck " Rose would be reluctant to cede power back to the chief executive . During the 1988 legislative session , Rose introduced a bill setting a limit of $ 4 @,@ 000 on the amount PACs could contribute to an individual 's campaigns during a single election and a limit of $ 2 @,@ 000 on the amount any individual could contribute to a single PAC in a given election . A month later , Wilkinson recanted , saying he " misspoke " and only intended to use his PAC to promote passage of the lottery amendment . Despite the governor 's promise , the legislature passed Rose 's bill . 
 Tensions also developed between Wilkinson and Lieutenant Governor @-@ Elect Jones soon after the election . During the campaign , Jones was quoted as saying that he had talked with Wilkinson about being more open with the press and said that , if elected , he would not be a " yes man " for Wilkinson . At a press conference shortly after the election , Wilkinson said he did not know what role Jones would play in his administration and that much of it would depend on what Jones had meant when he said he did not agree with all of Wilkinson 's positions . In late November 1987 , Wilkinson announced that Jones would spearhead the promotion of the administration 's agricultural agenda . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader reported that this would not be Jones ' primary role in the administration but that no other specifics had been provided . 
 Although amendments removing Kentucky 's constitutional prohibition on a state lottery had been introduced in every legislative session since the mid @-@ 1970s , Wilkinson 's election provided the issue with fresh momentum , and the General Assembly passed the amendment by the required majorities in the 1988 session . Another amendment passed during Wilkinson 's term required landowner approval before strip mining could occur on a piece of property . This amendment essentially overturned a 1956 court ruling and negated the practice of issuing broad form deeds which allowed property owners to sell their mineral rights while retaining ownership of structures and other improvements above @-@ ground . A third amendment for which Wilkinson advocated would have allowed elected state officials to succeed themselves in office . During his gubernatorial campaign , he insisted that he would not seek to have such an amendment apply to himself , but shortly after his election , he reversed course and insisted on an amendment that did not exclude present incumbents . The amendment became one of Wilkinson 's top priorities in the 1988 legislative session , and he threatened to work against legislators who opposed it . Legislators proposed that a succession amendment include provisions to lengthen the terms of state legislators in order to maintain a balance of power between the executive and legislative branches ; Wilkinson insisted that the General Assembly pass a " clean " succession amendment , free from any other provisions that might diminish the amendment 's chances of being approved by the state 's voters . The Kentucky House of Representatives passed such an amendment , but the state Senate continued to press for legislative concessions , proposing annual legislative sessions and mandatory runoffs in gubernatorial primaries when one candidate did not receive a majority of the votes cast . When Wilkinson rejected both proposals , Senate leaders refused to bring the amendment to the floor for a vote . Wilkinson 's reversal on his campaign promise not to seek succession for present incumbents damaged his reputation . 
 Wilkinson 's advocacy for the amendment further damaged his relationship with Lieutenant Governor Jones because Jones had already announced his intention to run for governor in 1991 . After the session , Jones told a crowd in Owensboro that if Wilkinson called a special session to insist that legislators pass his educational agenda , that the General Assembly would probably " throw it back in his face " . In response , Wilkinson said that Jones should " be involved in improving the process , not be so negative about everything " and " pay attention to his own business " . A Lexington Herald @-@ Leader story noted that a promised news conference to elaborate on Jones ' role in the administration had not yet happened and that " [ m ] ost observers expect it never will " . The two men 's relationship continued to be strained throughout their terms ; Jones later described it as " terrible " . 
 = = = Creation of the Kentucky Lottery = = = 
 Leaders of the Southern Baptists and United Methodists led opposition to the amendment during Wilkinson 's administration , activating the Coalition Against a State Lottery . Despite the opposition , Kentucky voters approved the lottery amendment by a vote of 694 @,@ 577 to 446 @,@ 937 in the November 1988 elections . Days after the election , Wilkinson signed a proclamation calling a special legislative session to begin November 28 to pass legislation to implement the lottery . The call instructed the legislature to consider a bill based on the recommendations of Wilkinson 's lottery commission . The recommendations included the establishment of a lottery board whose president and members would be appointed by the governor and could only be removed by the governor , and earmarked the first year 's proceeds to be split evenly between early childhood education programs , programs for the elderly , and a one @-@ time bonus to veterans of the Vietnam War . Legislators insisted on more legislative control of the lottery and did not favor explicit earmarks for the proceeds , preferring to allocate them in the 1990 legislative session . They also objected to the lottery board 's exemption from open records and open meetings laws . 
 Immediately after the session convened , Democratic leadership in both houses of the General Assembly announced they would not support earmarking lottery funds , but would let them accumulate in escrow until the 1990 legislative session . On December 14 , legislators adjourned the session after passing a bill that created an eight @-@ member lottery board , headed by a president appointed by the governor and confirmed by the other seven members . The other seven members of the board would serve staggered terms , would be appointed by the governor , and be confirmed by the Senate . The legislation also <unk> proceeds until the 1990 General Assembly and specified that the first expenditures from those proceeds would fund a one @-@ time bonus to veterans of the Vietnam War . The vote on the legislation was 32 – 5 in the Senate and 92 – 6 in the House . Several Republican amendments , including one by Senator David L. Williams to implement a local option for counties to decide whether or not to sell lottery tickets , were defeated on party @-@ line votes . While the legislation did not implement all of Wilkinson 's proposals for the lottery , he nonetheless praised it as a " very good " bill . 
 = = = Education reform = = = 
 On May 31 , 1988 , Franklin County circuit court judge Ray Corns issued a ruling in the case of Council for Better Education v. Collins , et al. stating that Kentucky 's system of school financing was unconstitutional . The suit was brought against Wilkinson 's predecessor , Martha Layne Collins , and several members of the state government by a group of poor school districts as a means to equalize funding for all the state 's school districts . An advocate for education , Wilkinson dropped the governor 's office 's defense in the suit and joined the plaintiffs when Corns ' decision was appealed to the Kentucky Supreme Court . On appeal , the Supreme Court declared Kentucky 's entire public school system unconstitutional and mandated that the legislature reform it . 
 Although state legislators maintained that reforming the public school system was too large an issue to tackle during the 60 @-@ day legislative session of 1990 and requested that Wilkinson call a special legislative session in June 1990 to consider the issue , the governor insisted that the issue be resolved during the regular session and said that he would not allow consideration of tax increases to fund improvements in the system if he had to call a special session . Wilkinson presented a budget proposal to the General Assembly that contained measures increasing taxes on cigarettes and corporations and eliminating sales tax exemptions on legal , engineering , and advertising services . Legislators favored raising the sales tax to six percent instead . For much of the legislative session , Wilkinson remained steadfastly opposed to an increased sales tax , repeatedly calling it a " dead issue " and threatening to veto it . Then on March 9 , 1990 , Wilkinson announced that he would drop his opposition to the tax in exchange for the Assembly 's approval of a $ 600 million bond issue to finance road improvements he had promised during the campaign . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader called the move " a stunning reversal " and noted that Wilkinson would not comment on why he changed his mind . With the impasse between the legislature and Wilkinson resolved , House Speaker Don Blandford announced that the remainder of the session would focus only on approving the state budget and passing the court @-@ mandated education reforms ; any bills still in committees would not be brought to a vote , he said . On April 11 , 1990 , the Assembly passed the Kentucky Education Reform Act ( KERA ) to comply with the Supreme Court 's decision . Besides increasing funding for schools , it mandated high performance measures and held schools accountable for meeting them . Educators hailed the legislation as being among the nation 's best education reform plans . 
 Even after KERA was passed , disagreements between Wilkinson and the legislature continued . The $ 600 million bond issue for road construction that had been the price for Wilkinson 's support of the sales tax was modified to include language that allowed the legislature to determine where the roads were constructed . Wilkinson threatened to veto the measure , claiming he did not need the General Assembly 's approval to issue the bonds , but ultimately , he chose to allow it to become law without his signature . Wilkinson vetoed 21 bills passed by the legislature , but 13 of those vetoes were overridden ; it was the most gubernatorial vetoes overridden in a single session in modern times . Most of the overridden vetoes were on bills strengthening the legislative branch relative to the executive branch . The General Assembly also voted to send two proposed constitutional amendments that strengthened the legislative branch relative to the executive to voters for ratification . One allowed the legislature to call itself into session – a power constitutionally reserved for the governor – if two @-@ thirds of its members signed a petition to do so . The other allowed a committee of legislators to suspend regulations enacted by the executive branch between legislative sessions until the full legislature re @-@ convened . Through his political action committee , Wilkinson opposed both measures , and both were rejected by the state 's voters in the November 1990 elections . 
 The political debates and posturing leading up to the passing of KERA also permanently breached the relationship between Wilkinson and Lieutenant Governor Jones . During a teachers ' rally in Frankfort , Jones was sympathetic to their demands for more money for education than Wilkinson was supporting . Jones wanted to speak to the crowd that had gathered outside the Capitol . While in the governor 's office , Wilkinson told Jones that if he spoke to the crowd , he should never " step foot in this office again . " Jones defied Wilkinson by speaking to the teachers and , according to Penny Miller , editor of Jones ' public papers , never again entered Wilkinson 's office . 
 = = = Other matters of Wilkinson 's term = = = 
 Wilkinson also advanced economic development in the state . During his tenure , Delta Air Lines nearly doubled the number of people it employed at the Cincinnati / Northern Kentucky International Airport ; Wilkinson secured Delta 's expansion by agreeing to limit the company 's sales tax liability on jet fuel to $ 4 million annually . Additionally , Scott Paper Company opened a plant near Owensboro and North American Stainless , a Spanish @-@ owned steel company , located a plant near Carrollton . During his term in office , Wilkinson served on the Education Commission of the States , the Southern Growth Policies Board , and the Council of the State Governments and the Southern States Energy Board . He was elected chair of the Southern Governors Association in 1990 and served on the Education Commission of the States ' Policy and Priorities Committee . 
 The Wilkinson administration was dogged by ethical questions that eventually resulted in prosecution of some members . Before being elected governor , Wilkinson asked the Kentucky attorney general to rule on his ownership of the Holiday Inn Capital Plaza Hotel in Frankfort . The ruling stated that he should sell the hotel , and in November 1987 , Kentucky Central Life Insurance , a state @-@ regulated company , purchased the property for $ 12 million , which included $ 8 @.@ 2 million of debt . Kentucky Central became insolvent in 1994 and was ordered into liquidation . The following year , Kentucky Insurance Commissioner George Nichols III assumed the liquidation and brought suit against Wilkinson stating that the property was only worth $ 6 million . Franklin County Circuit Judge Earl O 'Bannon dismissed the lawsuit on the grounds that Wilkinson had not knowingly participated in Kentucky Central 's breach of financial responsibility , even though it had , in his words , an " odor of politics . " Further , an investigation of the Kentucky General Assembly by the FBI ( Operation Boptrot ) led to Wilkinson 's nephew , Bruce N. Wilkinson , who served as his appointment secretary . Bruce Wilkinson was convicted of extortion , fined $ 20 @,@ 000 , and sentenced to three years in prison . Wallace Wilkinson was investigated by a grand jury but never indicted . He vehemently denied any wrongdoing . 
 In 1990 , Wilkinson 's wife , Martha , announced that she would seek the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1991 . The move was widely seen as a surrogate candidacy so that her husband could continue his administration for a second consecutive term . Her challengers included Lieutenant Governor Jones , Lexington mayor Scotty Baesler , and Dr. Floyd G. Poore , the former Kentucky highway director . With polls consistently showing little support for her candidacy , Mrs. Wilkinson dropped out of the race in May 1991 . Earlier in the year , Wallace Wilkinson was diagnosed with limited @-@ stage Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma . This diagnosis was also a factor in Ms. Wilkinson 's withdrawal from the race . Wallace underwent surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minnesota , then received radiation therapy at the University of Kentucky . These treatments eliminated all signs of the disease by 1993 , and doctors gave Wilkinson an excellent chance of recovery . 
 As Wilkinson 's term ended , he appointed himself to a six @-@ year term on the University of Kentucky 's board of regents . The move was unprecedented , and was particularly controversial because of Wilkinson 's open feuds with Charles T. Wethington , Jr . , the university president . An incensed legislature passed a law shortly thereafter that dissolved the existing boards of trustees at all Kentucky public colleges and universities and mandated that they be reconstituted by allowing the governor to select each member from a list of three candidates recommended by an independent review board . Jones , who succeeded Wilkinson as governor , used the provisions of the law to remove Wilkinson and several of his appointees from the university boards . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his service as governor , Wilkinson returned to his business pursuits . In the early 1990s , he began borrowing money to keep his bookstore business solvent and to support his lavish lifestyle . His interest in running for another non @-@ consecutive term as governor appeared to be dampened by the system of public financing that Kentucky had in place at that time for gubernatorial elections . In 1995 , he published his memoir entitled You Can 't Do That , Governor ! ; a major theme of the book was his disdain for conventional wisdom and political norms . In 1999 , he launched <unk> , an Internet book retailer . Among the investors in the company were Wendy 's founder Dave Thomas , Long John Silver 's founder James Patterson , and Ohio State University president William English Kirwan . 
 On February 5 , 2001 , a group of Wilkinson 's creditors filed suit to have his companies seized . During the ensuing bankruptcy proceedings , Wilkinson admitted that his liabilities exceeded his assets by $ 300 million . During the proceedings , it was revealed that Wilkinson had been financially insolvent since 1992 and was operating a Ponzi scheme , paying his creditors with money borrowed from others rather than his own profits . He had paid no federal income taxes since 1991 . At his deposition in June 2001 , Wilkinson invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination over 140 times . Wallace 's Bookstore was liquidated for just over $ 31 million , and <unk> was sold for $ 2 @.@ 5 million . Wilkinson 's wife , Martha , also filed for bankruptcy ; his sons were forced to sell their homes to repay loans made to them by their father . During the bankruptcy proceedings , the Wilkinsons moved from Lexington to Naples , Florida . 
 While in Lexington for a deposition on May 26 , 2002 , Wilkinson began to experience chest pains and was admitted to St. Joseph 's Hospital . Doctors diagnosed him with arterial blockages and scheduled him for arterial bypass surgery . Before the surgery could be performed , however , doctors discovered another lymphatic mass . Wilkinson began taking chemotherapy , and doctors removed the mass on June 4 , 2002 . Wilkinson was placed on life support on June 26 , 2002 . He suffered a stroke on July 4 , 2002 . Wilkinson had previously instructed his family not to continue life support after all hope of recovery was gone ; accordingly , they decided to withdraw life support , and Wilkinson died on July 5 , 2002 . He was originally buried at Blue Grass Memorial Gardens in Nicholasville , Kentucky . In August 2002 , his coffin was moved to a locked mausoleum at Sarasota Memorial Park in Sarasota , Florida ; the family chose July 4 , 2002 as the date of death for his marker . The city of Liberty dubbed the stretch of the U.S. 127 bypass that runs through the city Wallace Wilkinson Boulevard in 1987 . 
 = Trevor Tierney = 
 Trevor R. Tierney is a current National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) men 's lacrosse assistant coach , former Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) defensive coordinator and retired lacrosse goaltender who has played professional box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) and professional field lacrosse in MLL . Trevor starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1998 through 2001 , where he was a NCAA goaltender of the year , two @-@ time United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American ( first team once ) , a national goals against average ( GAA ) and save percentage statistical champion and a member of two national champion teams . 
 During his time at Princeton , the team qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship all four years , reached the championship game three times , won the championship game twice and won four Ivy League championships . Trevor was a co @-@ captain of the second national champion team he participated on . For five years , Tierney held the NCAA goaltending all @-@ time records and continues to hold the Princeton University career GAA record . He is the son of Hall of Fame coach Bill Tierney . 
 He was a two @-@ time Team USA goaltender for the World Lacrosse Championships and a former All @-@ World goaltender . He is a three @-@ time MLL All @-@ Star and won a MLL championship . Since retiring he has become a defensive coordinator for MLL 's Denver Outlaws and a defensive assistant for his fathers Denver Pioneers team . 
 = = Background = = 
 Tierney attended the Hun School of Princeton , where he played goaltender . 
 = = College career = = 
 At Princeton Trevor Tierney was awarded the 2001 Ensign C. Markland Kelly , Jr . Award as the best National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) lacrosse goaltender . He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 2001 and honorable mention selection in 2000 . Trevor was also a 2000 honorable mention All @-@ Ivy League selection , 2001 first team All @-@ Ivy selection , 2000 Academic All @-@ Ivy selection , and a 2001 USILA Scholar All @-@ American . He served as co @-@ captain of the 2001 team . Tierney was the 2001 national statistical champion for goals against average ( GAA ) ( 5 @.@ 70 ) and save percentage ( <unk> ) . He held NCAA the career ( 6 @.@ 65 ) and single ( 5 @.@ 70 ) season GAA record from 2001 until they were both <unk> in 2006 by Navy 's Matt Russell . His career GAA continues to be a Princeton record . During his four @-@ year career , Princeton went undefeated in Ivy League Conference play with consecutive 6 – 0 records . Princeton was invited to the 1999 tournament , was a finalist in the 2000 tournament and earned championships in both the 1998 and 2001 tournaments , bringing the schools consecutive tournament invitations streak to twelve . 
 As a freshman playing for his father 's team , Trevor Tierney was able to get playing time during the 1998 regular season because Princeton was winning their games by a large margin . In the 1998 NCAA championship quarterfinals , he came in as a substitute with his team behind by four goals and shut out Duke for 32 minutes as Princeton rallied for an 11 – 9 victory . This led to a minor controversy over who would start for the remaining tournament games . Corey Popham ended up playing and earning NCAA Tournament Most Outstanding Player . In the semifinals of the 2000 NCAA championship , Trevor made 14 saves as his younger brother Brendan Tierney scored two fourth quarter goals to lead Princeton to a 12 – 11 victory over Virginia . In 2001 , Trevor was one of five finalists for the Tewaaraton Trophy as the outstanding male player in college lacrosse . In the 2001 semifinal 12 – 11 victory over Towson State , he made game @-@ saving last @-@ minute point @-@ blank saves to secure the victory . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Tierney was drafted by the New Jersey Pride with the second overall selection in the 2001 MLL Draft . He played with the Pride from 2001 until 2004 when he was traded to the Boston Cannons . He also played in the NLL with the Colorado Mammoth in 2003 . In MLL , he was traded to the Baltimore Bayhawks , where he earned his first Major League Lacrosse All @-@ Star Game selection in 2005 and a MLL Championship . In 2006 , Tierney was part of what is believed to have been the largest trade in professional sports , involving 6 teams and 24 players when he was traded from the Bayhawks to the Denver Outlaws . He earned two more All @-@ Star selections in 2006 and 2007 with the Outlaws , before becoming their defensive coordinator in 2008 . Tierney retired from active play due to a series of concussions . The final career @-@ ending concussion occurred during warm @-@ ups on June 16 , 2007 against the Rochester Rattlers . 
 Trevor Tierney represented Team USA at the 2002 and 2006 World Lacrosse Championships earning a gold and silver medal , respectively . On the 2006 team , he was one of four Princeton athletes . At the 2002 World Championship , he was selected as the tournament 's All @-@ World goaltender . In the semifinal match that year Trevor made seven first half saves as Team USA built a 9 – 2 lead over the Iroquois Nation . He was nominated as a finalist ( one of 5 goaltenders ) for MLL 's first All @-@ decade team in celebration of the first ten years of the league . Trevor is the only goalie to have won a NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship , an International Lacrosse Federation World Lacrosse Championship and a Major League Lacrosse Steinfeld Cup Championship . 
 In 2010 , Trevor Tierney joined his father 's coaching staff for the Denver Pioneers as the defensive assistant coach and yoga instructor . He left his position with the Outlaws to concentrate on his role on his father 's staff . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Trevor Tierney is the son of Helen and Bill Tierney and is the oldest of their four children . He is from an athletic family . In addition to his Hall of Fame father , all of his siblings are athletes and coaches . Brendan was a teammate on the 2001 championship team at Princeton . His sister Courtney Tierney , a former Franklin & Marshall basketball player , is the head girls ' basketball coach at Pennington Prep . Brianne Tierney , who played lacrosse at Colgate University , is the head women 's lacrosse coach at Lebanon Valley College . 
 = Antrodia serialiformis = 
 Antrodia serialiformis is a species of polypore fungus in the family <unk> . The fungus is resupinate , consisting of a fertile spore @-@ bearing pore surface lying flat on the underside of decaying wood , although one or more fan @-@ shaped overlapping caps may also be formed . Although quite common in the eastern United States , it was not recognized as a distinct species until 2009 , owing to its resemblance to the closely related Antrodia serialis . Differences in ecology , spore size , and DNA sequences distinguish the two lookalikes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Antrodia serialiformis was described as a new species by Jiří <unk> and Josef Vlasák in the journal Mycotaxon in 2009 . The publication resulted from research conducted by <unk> for his 2009 work on ecology and taxonomy of polypores , a PhD dissertation conducted under the supervision of Vlasák . The holotype material was collected from Wissahickon Creek Park ( Philadelphia ) in 2008 ; the species description is based on collections made from 2001 – 2008 . Vlasák had first noted the presence of the species and its similarity to the common European species Antrodia serialiformis in a 2004 publication . The degree of variability between the DNA sequences of the internal transcribed spacer regions Antrodia serialiformis and A. serialis confirm that the two species are genetically distinct . The specific epithet serialiformis refers to its resemblance to A. serialis ( the Latin adjective <unk> derives from forma , meaning " having the form of " ) . 
 Molecular analysis shows that Antrodia <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , and A. <unk> are closely related species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The perennial fruit bodies of A. serialiformis are <unk> @-@ reflexed ( that is , on a vertical surface that is partially lying flat on the substrate with the hymenium covering the upper surface , and partially <unk> ) . In its upper part it has small caps that are often elongated along the growing surface , up to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) or more in length , with a tough texture . The individual caps , which reach dimensions of up to 10 by 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 by 0 @.@ 8 in ) by 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) , have roughly horizontal upper surfaces that are velvety , and brownish with a narrow white margin . On the underside of the cap , the pore surface is initially white , but turns dirty brown as it matures . The individual pores are round and small , numbering from 3 to 4 per millimeter . The tubes are the same color as the pore surface , and up to 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) deep . The flesh is white and up to 1 mm thick . Fruit bodies are often infested with microlepidoptera species , which causes the pore surface to be powdery . 
 Antrodia serialiformis has a dimitic hyphal system , meaning that predominantly two types of hyphae comprise the fruit body . The generative hyphae ( relatively undifferentiated hyphae that can develop reproductive structures ) are thin @-@ walled , with clamp connections , and are 2 – 3 µm wide . The skeletal hyphae ( thick @-@ walled and long ) predominate ; they are hyaline ( translucent ) , straight , and 2 – 5 µm in width . Cystidia are absent , and cystidioles ( cells in the hymenium about the same size as the basidia , but remaining sterile ) are inconspicuous . The basidia are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and have a clamp connection at their bases ; they measure 12 – 18 by 4 – 6 µm . The thin @-@ walled spores are ellipsoid to somewhat tapered at both ends , hyaline , inamyloid ( non @-@ staining in Melzer 's reagent ) , and measure 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 by 2 – 2 @.@ 3 µm . 
 = = = Mycelial cultures and compatibility tests = = = 
 Grown on agar plates , the mycelia of A. serialiformis and A. serialis have identical chemical reactivity , and are rather similar in appearance , although the authors note that the former 's was more cottony than the latter 's . The authors mated several combinations of North American collections using vegetative compatibility tests , and confirmed the presence of different mating alleles — indicating that all of the North American collections represented a single species . Similar pairings performed between North American and European collections showed the species to be incompatible , and therefore distinct . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Antrodia serialiformis is similar in appearance to A. serialis , but the latter has larger spores ( 6 @.@ 3 – 8 by 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 µm ) . The two can be distinguished in the field by their substrate preferences : while A. serialis usually fruits on coniferous wood , A. serialiformis grows strictly on old <unk> oak trunks . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fungus grows on lying oak logs in Pennsylvania , Maryland , Virginia , North Carolina , and Tennessee . However , owing to its similarity with Antrodia serialis , it is likely the two have been confused in the past , and so the true limits of its distribution are unclear . The authors suggests that it probably occurs in other southeastern states of the US as well , and consider it " one of the most common polypore species in the eastern USA " . A. serialiformis is sometimes found together with the much rarer Antrodia oleracea , a grayish , strictly resupinate species . 
 = Puck ( moon ) = 
 Puck ( / <unk> / <unk> ) is an inner moon of Uranus . It was discovered in December 1985 by the Voyager 2 spacecraft . The name Puck follows the convention of naming Uranus 's moons after characters from Shakespeare . The orbit of Puck lies between the rings of Uranus and the first of Uranus 's large moons , Miranda . Puck is approximately spherical in shape and has diameter of about 162 km . It has a dark , heavily cratered surface , which shows spectral signs of water ice . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Puck — the largest inner moon of Uranus — was discovered from the images taken by Voyager 2 on 30 December 1985 . It was given the temporary designation S / 1985 U 1 . 
 The moon was later named after the character Puck who appears in Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , a little sprite who travels around the globe at night with the fairies . In Celtic mythology and English folklore , a Puck is a mischievous sprite , imagined as an evil demon by Christians . 
 It is also designated Uranus XV . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Puck is the largest small inner moon of Uranus , which orbits inside the orbit of Miranda . It is intermediate in size between Portia ( the second @-@ largest inner moon ) and Miranda ( the smallest of the five large classical moons ) . Puck 's orbit is located between the rings of Uranus and Miranda . Little is known about Puck aside from its orbit , radius of about 81 km , and geometric albedo in visible light of approximately 0 @.@ 11 . 
 Of the moons discovered by the Voyager 2 imaging team , only Puck was discovered early enough that the probe could be programmed to image it in some detail . Images showed that Puck has a shape of a slightly prolate spheroid ( ratio between axes is 0 @.@ 97 ± 0 @.@ 04 ) . Its surface is heavily cratered and is grey in color . There are three named craters on the surface of Puck , the largest being about 45 km in diameter . Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and large terrestrial telescopes found water @-@ ice absorption features in the spectrum of Puck . 
 Nothing is known about the internal structure of Puck . It is probably made of a mixture of water ice with the dark material similar to that found in the rings . This dark material is probably made of rocks or radiation @-@ processed organics . The absence of craters with bright rays implies that Puck is not differentiated , meaning that ice and non @-@ ice components have not separated from each other into a core and mantle . 
 = The Kindly Ones ( Littell novel ) = 
 The Kindly Ones ( French : Les Bienveillantes ) is a historical fiction novel written in French by American @-@ born author Jonathan Littell . The book is narrated by its fictional protagonist Maximilien Aue , a former SS officer of French and German ancestry who helped to carry out the Holocaust and was present during several major events of World War II . 
 The 983 @-@ page book became a bestseller in France and was widely discussed in newspapers , magazines , academic journals , books and seminars . It was also awarded two of the most prestigious French literary awards , the Grand Prix du roman de l 'Académie française and the Prix Goncourt in 2006 , and has been translated into several languages . 
 = = Background = = 
 The title Les Bienveillantes ( The Kindly Ones ) refers to the trilogy of ancient Greek tragedies The Oresteia written by Aeschylus . The Erinyes or Furies were vengeful goddesses who tracked and tormented those who murdered a parent . In the plays , Orestes , who has killed his mother Clytemnestra to avenge his father Agamemnon , was pursued by these female goddesses . The goddess Athena intervenes , setting up a jury trial to judge the Furies ' case against Orestes . Athena casts the deciding vote which acquits Orestes , then pleads with the Furies to accept the trial 's verdict and to transform themselves into " most loved of gods , with me to show and share fair mercy , gratitude and grace as fair . " The Furies accept and are renamed the Eumenides or Kindly Ones ( in French Les Bienveillantes ) . 
 Andrew Nurnberg , Littell 's literary agent , said that a possible one @-@ line description of the novel would be : " The intimate memoirs of an ex @-@ Nazi mass murderer . " When asked why he wrote such a book , Littell invokes a photo he discovered in 1989 of Zoya <unk> , a female Soviet partisan hanged by the Nazis in 1941 . He adds that a bit later , in 1992 , he watched the movie Shoah by Claude Lanzmann , which left an impression on him , especially the discussion by Raul Hilberg about the bureaucratic aspect of genocide . 
 In 2001 , Littell decided to quit his job at Action Against Hunger and started research which lasted 18 months , during which he went to Germany , Ukraine , Russia and Poland , and read around 200 books , mainly about Nazi Germany , the Eastern Front , the Nuremberg Trials , and the genocide process . In addition , the author studied the literature and film archives of World War II and the post @-@ war trials . Littell worked on this novel for about five years . This book is his first novel written in French and his second novel after the science fiction themed Bad Voltage in 1989 . 
 Littell said he wanted to focus on the thinking of an executioner and of origins of state murder , showing how we can take decisions that lead , or not , to a genocide . Littell claims he set out creating the character Max Aue by imagining what he would have done and how he would have behaved if he had been born into Nazi Germany . One childhood event that kept Littell interested in the question of being a killer was the Vietnam War . According to him , his childhood terror was that he would be drafted , sent to Vietnam " and made to kill women and children who hadn 't done anything to me . " 
 Whereas the influence of Greek tragedies is clear from the choice of title , the absent father , and the roles of incest and parricide , Littell makes it clear that he was influenced by more than the structure of The Oresteia . He found that the idea of morality in Ancient Greece is more relevant for making judgments about responsibility for the Holocaust than the Judeo @-@ Christian approach , wherein the idea of sin can be blurred by the concepts such as intentional sin , unintentional sin , sinning by thought , or sinning by deed . For the Greeks it was the commission of the act itself upon which one is judged : Oedipus is guilty of patricide , even if he did not know that he was killing his father . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The book is a fictional autobiography , describing the life of Maximilien Aue , a former officer in the SS who , decades later , tells the story of a crucial part of his life when he was an active member of the security forces of the Third Reich . Aue begins his narrative as a member of an Einsatzgruppe in 1941 , before being sent to the doomed German forces locked in the Battle of Stalingrad , which he survives . After a convalescence period in Berlin , and a visit to France , he is designated for an advisory role for the concentration camps , and visits the extermination camps . He is ultimately present during the 1945 Battle of Berlin , the Nazi regime 's last stand . By the end of the story , he flees Germany under a false French identity to start a new life in northern France . Throughout the account , Aue meets several famous Nazis , including Adolf Eichmann , Heinrich Himmler and Adolf Hitler . In the book , Aue accepts responsibility for his actions , but most of the time he feels more like an observer than a direct participant . 
 The book is divided into seven chapters , each named after a baroque dance , following the sequence of a Bach Suite . The narrative of each chapter is influenced by the rhythm of each dance . 
 « Toccata » : In this introduction , we are introduced to the narrator , and discover how he has ended up in France after the war . He is the director of a lace factory , has a wife , children , and grandchildren , though he has no real affection for his family and continues his homosexual encounters when he travels on business . He hints of an incestuous love , which we learn later was for his twin sister . He explains that he has decided to write about his experiences during the war for his own benefit and not as an attempt to justify himself . He closes the introduction by saying , " I live , I do what can be done , it 's the same for everyone , I am a man like other men , I am a man like you . I tell you I am just like you ! " 
 « Allemande I & II » : Aue describes his service as an officer in one of the Einsatzgruppen extermination squads operating in the Ukraine , as well as later in the Caucasus ( a major theme is the racial classification , and thus fate , of the region 's Mountain Jews ) . Aue 's group is attached to the 6th Army in Ukraine , where he witnesses the Lviv pogroms and participates in the enormous massacre at Babi Yar . He describes in detail the killing of Soviet Jews , Communists , alleged partisans and other victims of the " special operations " . Although he seems to become increasingly indifferent to the atrocities he is witnessing and sometimes taking part in , he begins to experience daily bouts of vomiting and suffers a mental breakdown . After taking sick leave , he is transferred to Otto Ohlendorf 's Einsatzgruppe D only to encounter much hostility from his new SS colleagues , who openly spread rumours of his homosexuality . Aue is then charged with the assignment of proving to the Wehrmacht that the Mountain Jews were historically Jewish rather than later converts to Judaism . After he fails in this task , due to political pressure from the beleaguered Army , his disappointed commanding officer arranged that he be transferred to the doomed German forces at Stalingrad in late 1942 . 
 « <unk> » : Aue thus takes part in the final phase of the struggle for Stalingrad . As with the massacres , he is mostly an observer , the narrator rather than the combatant . In the midst of the mayhem and starvation , he manages to have a discussion with a captured Soviet political commissar about the similarities between the Nazi and the Bolshevik world views , and once again is able to indicate his intellectual support for Nazi ideas . Aue gets shot in the head and seriously wounded , but is miraculously evacuated just before the German surrender in February 1943 . 
 « Sarabande » : <unk> in Berlin , Aue is awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class , by the SS chief Heinrich Himmler himself , for his duty at Stalingrad . While still on sick leave , he decides to visit his mother and stepfather in Antibes , in Italian @-@ occupied France . Apparently , while he is in a deep sleep , his mother and stepfather are brutally murdered . Max flees from the house without notifying anybody and returns to Berlin . 
 « Menuet en <unk> » : Aue is transferred to Heinrich Himmler 's personal staff , where he is assigned an at @-@ large supervisory role for the concentration camps . He struggles to improve the living conditions of those prisoners selected to work in the factories as slave laborers , in order to improve their productivity . Aue meets Nazi bureaucrats organizing the <unk> of the Final Solution ( i.e. , Eichmann , Oswald Pohl , and Rudolf Höß ) and is given a glimpse of extermination camps ( i.e. , Auschwitz and Belzec ) ; he also spends some time in Budapest , just when preparations are being made for transporting Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz . Aue witnesses the tug @-@ of @-@ war between those who are concerned with war production ( Albert Speer ) and those who are doggedly trying to implement the Final Solution . It is during this period that two police detectives from the Kripo , who are investigating the murders of his mother and stepfather , begin to visit him regularly . Like the Furies , they hound and torment him with their questions , which indicate their suspicions about his role in the crime . 
 « Air » : Max visits his sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law 's empty house in Pomerania . There , he engages in a veritable autoerotic orgy particularly fueled by fantasy images of his twin sister . The two police officers follow his trail to the house , but he manages to hide from them . However , Aue soon finds himself trapped when the Red Army rapidly invades and occupies Pomerania . 
 « Gigue » : Accompanied by his friend Thomas , who has come to rescue him , and escorted by a violent band of fanatical and half @-@ feral orphaned German children , Max makes his way through the Soviet @-@ occupied territory and across the front line . Arriving in Berlin , Max , Thomas , and many of their colleagues prepare for escape in the chaos of the last days of the Third Reich ; Thomas ' own plan is to impersonate a French laborer . Aue meets and is personally decorated by Hitler in the Führerbunker . During the decoration ceremony , Aue inexplicably bites the Führer 's nose and is immediately arrested . When he is transported to his execution , the car is hit by an artillery shell , enabling him to escape . Aue flees through the Berlin U @-@ Bahn subway tunnels , where he encounters his police pursuers again . Though their case has been repeatedly thrown out of court , the two detectives , unwilling to accept defeat , decided to track Aue down and execute him extrajudicially . Barely escaping when the Soviets storm the tunnels and kill one of the policemen , Aue wanders aimlessly in the ruined streets of war @-@ torn Berlin before deciding to make a break for it . Making his way through the wasteland of the destroyed Berlin Zoo , he is yet again faced by the surviving policeman . Thomas shows up to kill the policeman , only to himself be killed by Aue , who steals from him the papers and uniform of a French STO conscripted worker . 
 The readers know from the beginning of the book that Aue 's perfect mastery of the French language will allow him to slip away back to France with a new identity as a returning Frenchman . In the last paragraph of the novel , the narrator , after he ruthlessly killed his friend and protector , suddenly finds himself " alone with time and sadness " : " The Kindly Ones were on to me . " But in the end , all is not explicitly laid out for the reader ; for Littell , in the words of one reviewer , " excels in the unsaid . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Maximilien Aue = = = 
 Maximilien Aue is a former officer of the SD , security and intelligence service of the SS ; the book is written in the form of his memoirs . His mother was French ( from Alsace ) , while his father , who left his mother and disappeared from their life in 1921 , was German . Aue 's mother remarried a Frenchman , Aristide Moreau , which Maximilien highly disapproved of . After a childhood in Germany and an adolescence in France , where he attends Sciences @-@ Po , he later returns to Germany to study at the University of Berlin and the Kiel Institute for the World Economy . It is also during this period when he joins the SS , eventually rising to the rank of Obersturmbannführer . Aue is a cultured , highly educated , classical music @-@ loving intellectual . He speaks many languages fluently – German , French , Ancient Greek and Latin – and holds a doctorate in law . Despite his French heritage and upbringing , he is , like his father , an ardent German nationalist . Even after the war , he is unrepentant of the crimes he committed in the name of National Socialism , " believing that it was my duty and that it had to be done , disagreeable or unpleasant as it may have been . " He is extremely attracted to his twin sister Una , which led to an incestuous relationship with her when they were children , but ended when they entered puberty . Refusing to truly love any woman other than Una , he becomes a homosexual but continues to fantasize about having sex with Una . 
 The character appears to be in part inspired by Léon Degrelle , a Belgian fascist leader , Nazi collaborator and Waffen @-@ SS officer who was the subject of Littell 's short book Le sec et l ’ <unk> : Une <unk> incursion en <unk> <unk> ( " The dry and wet : A brief foray into fascist territory " ) . A number of critics compared Aue 's omnipresence in the world of the novel to that of Winston Groom 's character Forrest Gump . 
 = = = Aue 's family = = = 
 Una Aue / Frau Von Üxküll – Una Aue is Maximilien 's twin sister . She is married to the aristocrat Berndt von Üxküll , and although she appears only briefly in person , she dominates Aue 's imagination , particularly his sexual fantasies and hallucinations . She lived with her husband on his estate in Pomerania , but apparently moved to Switzerland with him towards the end of the war . Like her husband , she is critical of Germany 's National Socialist regime which , along with his hatred of their mother and stepfather , and his attraction to her , led to her being estranged from Aue following the war . 
 Berndt Von Üxküll – Von <unk> is a paraplegic junker from Pomerania and a composer who is married to Una . A World War I veteran , he fought alongside Aue 's father in the Freikorps , whom he describes as a sadist . Despite essentially agreeing with their nationalist and antisemitic ideology , he distances himself from the Nazis . His name is possibly a reference to Nikolaus Graf von Üxküll @-@ <unk> , an anti @-@ Nazi resistant and uncle of Claus von Stauffenberg , a central figure in the failed plot to assassinate Hitler . 
 Héloïse Aue ( Héloïse Moreau ) – Max 's mother , who , believing her first husband to be dead , remarried Aristide Moreau . Max does not accept that his father is dead and never forgives his mother for remarrying . Héloïse also disapproves of Max 's joining the Nazis , which further strains their relationship . 
 Aristide Moreau – Max 's stepfather , who is apparently connected to the French Resistance . Moreau is also the name of the " hero " from Gustave Flaubert 's Sentimental Education , a book that Aue reads later in the novel . Aristide is reminiscent in French of <unk> , the name given to the descendants of Atreus , among whom figure Agamemnon , Orestes and Electra . 
 The twins , Tristan and Orlando – Mysterious twin children who live with the <unk> , but are most likely the offspring of the incestuous relationship between Aue and his sister . The epic poem Orlando Furioso is marked by the themes of love and madness , while the legend of Tristan and Iseult tells the story of an impossible love , two themes that can be found in The Kindly Ones . 
 = = = Other fictional main characters = = = 
 Thomas Hauser – Thomas is Max 's closest friend and the only person who appears in one capacity or another wherever he is posted . A highly educated , multilingual SS officer like Max , he is Aue 's main source of information about bureaucratic Nazi politics . He helps Max in a number of ways , both in advancing his career as well as rescuing him from his sister 's house in Pomerania . He saves Max 's life at the end of the novel . 
 Hélène Anders née Winnefeld – A young widow whom Aue meets through Thomas , while working in Berlin . When Max becomes seriously ill , she voluntarily comes to his apartment and nurses him back to health . While she is attracted to him , as he initially expresses interest in her , due to his feelings for his sister , as well as his homosexual tendencies , he coldly turns her down and away . She leaves Berlin for her parents ' house and writes , asking if he intends to marry her . She does not appear again in the novel . In the Greek mythology , Helen marries Menelaus , brother of Agamemnon . 
 Dr. <unk> – The mysterious Dr. <unk> plays an important role behind the scenes as Aue 's protector and promoter with high @-@ level NSDAP connections , particularly with Himmler . He was an admirer of Max 's father and grandfather . At the end of the book he is seen packing his bags to join the enemy , offering his services to the Soviet Union . 
