 <unk> Weser and Clemens – A pair of Kriminalpolizei detectives who are in charge of the investigation into the murders of Aue 's mother and her husband . They question and pursue Aue throughout the war , as if he were a prime murder suspect , despite the cases being repeatedly thrown out . They play the role of the Erinyes in the novel . 
 Dr. <unk> – Aue 's friend , a doctor interested in nutrition as well as the condition of soldiers and prisoners in concentration camps . Aue meets him in Ukraine during the German offensive against the Soviet Union . They both take part in battle of Stalingrad and successfully escape before the German surrender . They reunite in Berlin , with <unk> revealing to Max how he saved his life by convincing doctors at Stalingrad to operate on him and transport him back to Germany , rather than leaving him for dead . He is depicted at different points in the book . 
 Dr. Voss – A lieutenant sent in to the Eastern Front ( where he befriends Aue ) by the Abwehr and actually a university investigator and specialist in Indo @-@ Germanic , Indo @-@ Iranian and Caucasian languages . 
 = = = Historical characters = = = 
 Littell also includes many historical figures that Max encounters throughout the novel . Amongst them are : 
 Top @-@ ranking Nazis : Werner Best , Martin Bormann , Hermann Fegelein , Hans Frank , Reinhard Heydrich , Heinrich Himmler , Adolf Hitler , Ernst Kaltenbrunner , Heinrich Müller , Arthur Nebe , Walter Schellenberg and Albert Speer . 
 Other Nazis : Richard Baer , Walter <unk> , Paul Blobel , Rudolf Brandt , Adolf Eichmann , Otto <unk> , Odilo Globocnik , Rudolf Höß , Hans Kammler , Arthur <unk> , Josef Mengele , Theodor <unk> , Otto Ohlendorf , Otto Rasch , Walther von Reichenau . Franz Six , Eduard <unk> and Dieter Wisliceny . 
 French collaborators : Robert <unk> and Lucien <unk> . 
 Contemporary writers that have no interaction with Aue are Ernst Jünger , Charles Maurras , Louis @-@ Ferdinand Céline and Paul Carell . Historians cited by Aue are Alan Bullock , Raul Hilberg and Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = The original French edition = = = 
 Besides winning two of the most prestigious literary prizes in France ( Grand Prix du roman de l 'Académie française and Prix Goncourt ) , Les Bienveillantes was generally very favourably reviewed in the French literary press . Le Figaro proclaimed Littell " man of the year " . The editor of the Nouvel Observateur 's literary section called it " a great book " and the weekly Le Point stated that the novel has " exploded onto the dreary plain of the literary autumn like a meteor . " Even though French filmmaker and professor Claude Lanzmann had mixed feelings about the book , he said : " I am familiar with his subject , and above all I was astounded by the absolute accuracy of the novel . Everything is correct . " French historian Pierre Nora called it " an extraordinary literary and historical phenomenon . " The book has been compared to War and Peace for its similar scope and ambition . 
 The Spectator 's literary reviewer , Anita <unk> , based on her reading of the novel in the original French , described the book as a " masterly novel ... diabolically ( and I use the word <unk> ) clever . It is also impressive , not merely as an act of impersonation but perhaps above all for the fiendish diligence with which it is carried out ... presuppose ( s ) formidable research on the part of the author , who is American , educated in France and writing fluent , idiomatic and purposeful French . This tour de force , which not everyone will welcome , outclasses all other fictions and will continue to do so for some time to come . No summary can do it justice . " The Observer ' s Paris correspondent , Jason Burke , praised the book as an " extraordinary Holocaust novel asks what it is that turns normal people into mass killers , " adding that " notwithstanding the controversial subject matter , this is an extraordinarily powerful novel . " 
 Initially , Littell thought that his book would sell around three to five thousand copies . Éditions Gallimard , his publishing house , was more optimistic and decided to print 12 @,@ 000 copies . Word of mouth and the enthusiastic reviews soon catapulted sales to such an extent that Gallimard had to stop publishing the latest Harry Potter novel in order to meet the demand for The Kindly Ones , which ended up selling more than 700 @,@ 000 copies in France by the end of 2007 . Littell was finally given French citizenship . 
 = = = Other language editions = = = 
 After the book was translated into German , there was widespread debate in Germany , during which Littell was accused of being " a pornographer of violence . " Some criticised it from an historical perspective , calling the novel a " strange , monstrous book " and alleging it is " full of errors and anachronisms over wartime German culture . " 
 Upon its publication in English in early 2009 , The Kindly Ones received mixed reviews . The New Republic 's literary critic Ruth Franklin called it " one of the most repugnant books I have ever read [ ... ] if getting under the skin of a murderer were sufficient to produce a masterpiece , then Thomas Harris would be Tolstoy . " Michiko Kakutani , the principal book critic of The New York Times , called the novel " [ w ] <unk> sensationalistic and deliberately repellent " and went on to question the " perversity " of the French literary establishment for praising the novel . In a reply to Kakutani , writer and novelist Michael Korda wrote , " You want to read about Hell , here it is . If you don ’ t have the strength to read it , tough shit . It ’ s a dreadful , compelling , brilliantly researched , and imagined masterpiece , a terrifying literary achievement , and perhaps the first work of fiction to come out of the Holocaust that places us in its very heart , and keeps us there . " Writing for Time , American writer and journalist Lev Grossman compared it to Roberto Bolaño 's <unk> , similar in " their seriousness of purpose , their wild overestimation of the reader 's attention span and their interest in physical violence that makes Saw look like Dora the Explorer , " but added that while far from perfect , The Kindly Ones " is unmistakably the work of a profoundly gifted writer , if not an especially disciplined one . " In her review for Los Angeles Times , novelist and essayist Laila <unk> wrote : " Jonathan Littell has undertaken a very ambitious project in The Kindly Ones , and I think his boldness deserves to be commended . In the end , however , his highly problematic characterization and awkward handling of point of view make this book far more successful as a dramatized historical document than as a novel . " British historian Antony Beevor , author of Stalingrad and The Fall of Berlin 1945 , reviewing The Kindly Ones in The Times , called it " a great work of literary fiction , to which readers and scholars will turn for decades to come , " and listed it as one of the top five books of World War II fiction . 
 Jonathan Derbyshire , culture editor of the New Statesman called it " a remarkable novel " and its protagonist " a convincing witness to the defining moral catastrophe of the 20th century . " Tim Martin of The Telegraph praised the novel for not being just another story about banality of evil : " it is a magnificently artificial project in character construction , a highly literary and provocative attempt to create a character various enough to match the many discontinuous realities of the apocalyptic Nazi world @-@ view . The result is a sprawling , daring , loose @-@ ended monster of a book , one that justifies its towering subject matter by its persistent and troubling refusal to offer easy answers and to make satisfying sense . " Writing for The Guardian , British author James Lasdun criticized the novel for " some large flaws " such as its main character , " a ghoul belonging more to the fictional universe of , say , Bret Easton Ellis 's American Psycho " , and provocative use of anachronisms , but called it a " monumental inquiry into evil . To say that it falls short of Melville 's visionary originality ( and lacks , also , the breadth and vitality of Tolstoy , despite the claims of some reviewers ) is hardly a criticism . It 's a rare book that even invites such comparisons , and for all its faults , for all its problematic use of history , The Kindly Ones does just that . " In The Spectator , British journalist and biographer Patrick <unk> wrote : " Dr Aue cannot be brought to trial because he does not exist ; on the other hand , he can give us something even more valuable than vengeance , something that no real war criminal can manage , and that is total honesty . " Harvard University 's English studies ' Professor Leland de la Durantaye wrote that The Kindly Ones " is indeed about cruelty and evil in the way that morality plays are , but it is also about evil in history , the weaving together of hundreds of objectives , millions of people , into an ensemble so vast , diverse , and ever @-@ changing that even a well @-@ placed and sharp @-@ sighted observer cannot fully grasp it . " 
 Sales in the United States were considered extremely low . The book was bought by HarperCollins for a rumored $ 1 million , and the first printing consisted of 150 @,@ 000 copies . According to Nielsen BookScan – which captures around 70 percent of total sales – by the end of July 2009 only 17 @,@ 000 copies had been sold . 
 = Elaine Marley = 
 Elaine Marley – Threepwood is a fictional character in the Monkey Island series of graphic adventure video games . Created by Ron Gilbert for LucasArts , the character first appears in The Secret of Monkey Island and is one of the core characters in the franchise . Originally conceived as a ruthless island governor , the character evolved during development into the protagonist 's love interest . While the first two games in the series did not feature voice acting , Elaine was voiced by Alexandra Boyd in The Curse of Monkey Island and by Charity James in Escape from Monkey Island ; Boyd would reprise the role for later entries in the franchise . 
 Elaine is the governor of the Tri @-@ Island Area , a fictional group of pirate islands in the Caribbean . She is loved by the undead pirate LeChuck , who never ceases to pursue her affections and attempts to turn her into his undead bride , but Elaine instead falls in love with hapless protagonist Guybrush Threepwood . Elaine is consistently kidnapped by LeChuck , prompting Guybrush to attempt a rescue , although Elaine is usually more than capable of escaping predicaments by herself . She eventually marries Guybrush and relinquishes her gubernatorial responsibilities to her grandfather , travelling with Guybrush to the fictional Gulf of Melange to cure the outbreak of a voodoo @-@ empowered pox . 
 The character has enjoyed positive critical reception . Several sources commended Elaine 's aberration of the damsel in distress stereotype . Elaine has been ranked on a number of lists regarding the best female characters in the video game industry , and has received praise for her visual design and resilient personality . Critics have also complimented Boyd 's and James ' voice acting for the character in the later installments of the series , though some expressed disappointment at the character 's reduced lines in The Curse of Monkey Island . 
 = = Character design = = 
 The original script for The Secret of Monkey Island called for a character simply named " the Governor " ; Monkey Island creator Ron Gilbert had envisioned her as a far more ruthless character . The name " Elaine " was created later in development by Dave Grossman , who wrote the final scenes of the game in which protagonist Guybrush Threepwood disrupts the wedding of antagonist LeChuck and the governor . One of Grossman 's options for <unk> the wedding is having Guybrush scream " Elaine ! " in a parody of a similar scene in the 1967 film The Graduate ; Gilbert appreciated the reference , so Elaine was adopted as the governor 's name . As development on the game further progressed , the character evolved from being a ruthless governor to the player character 's love interest . 
 When the player talks to a number of characters in The Secret of Monkey Island , a close @-@ up portrait of the character is shown . Elaine 's appearance in this portrait was based on Avril Harrison , an artist working at LucasArts . Gilbert always felt bothered by these close @-@ up portraits , stating that " while they were great art , I never felt they matched the style of the rest of the game " . In the 2009 Special Edition , these close @-@ ups were redone in the same stylized artwork featured in the rest of the game . 
 In The Curse of Monkey Island , Elaine realises that Guybrush is her true love , and marries him . However , Ron Gilbert did not intend for the relationship between the characters to develop in this way , stating that Elaine " never really liked Guybrush and thought of him as more of a little brother " . Gilbert was not involved in the production of The Curse of Monkey Island ; while thinking that the new development team " did a pretty good job of capturing what Monkey Island was about " , the relationship between Elaine and Guybrush " was the thing that bugged [ Gilbert ] the most about The Curse of Monkey Island " . 
 The Curse of Monkey Island was the first Monkey Island game to feature voice acting ; in it , the part of Elaine Marley was given to British actress Alexandra Boyd . Boyd explains that she got the part of Elaine as she had worked with voice director Darragh O 'Farrell previously ; O 'Farrell brought Boyd in to read for the part . Boyd joked that " I figured I got the part because I have red hair like her " . Boyd was not contacted to return as the character for Escape from Monkey Island ; Elaine was instead voiced by American actress Charity James . Nevertheless , Boyd reprised the role for Telltale Games ' Tales of Monkey Island and the later enhanced remakes of the first two games . Boyd was glad to return , stating that the character " is very well written and it ’ s fun doing all that shouting at LeChuck and Guybrush ! <unk> but fun " . Rather than travelling to Telltale 's studio in San Rafael , Boyd instead recorded her lines for Tales of Monkey Island in London , communicating with the director remotely with Skype . The development of Elaine 's character was one of Gilbert 's aims for Tales of Monkey Island ; Gilbert wanted Elaine to " be better informed and more capable than most of the other characters " . 
 = = = Attributes and depiction = = = 
 Intelligent and highly resourceful , Elaine is depicted as a caring and kind person . She is usually more than capable of taking care of herself ; on the multiple occasions that she is kidnapped by LeChuck , she is usually able to escape at her own volition and formulate plans to defeat her adversaries . In addition , Elaine is proficient in personal combat and displays an understanding of strategy in battle , reinforced by calm personality that allows Elaine to use common sense and stay composed despite dire situations . While attracted to piracy , Elaine is initially wary of pursuing a relationship with pirates due to a bad liaison with LeChuck while the pirate captain was still alive . Nevertheless , Elaine falls in love with Guybrush , seeing past his faults in favor of his kind personality and sharp wit . While Elaine is the dominant partner in their relationship , she still has faith in his abilities regardless of Guybrush 's hapless disposition . 
 Elaine is usually depicted as a beautiful woman with long red hair and with green eyes . She wears a variety of pirate clothing consistent with the game 's Golden Age of Piracy setting ; her outfit usually consists of pantaloons , a blouse worn under a lightweight tunic , a sash , boots and a headscarf . Elaine usually wears gold earrings , though by Tales of Monkey Island , she wears her diamond engagement ring as an earring until Chapter 2 . Her appearances in The Secret of Monkey Island and Monkey Island 2 : LeChuck 's Revenge are in the form of pixel art , with appearances slightly differing between the EGA , Amiga and VGA versions of the games . By The Curse of Monkey Island , Elaine is rendered in a cartoon art style by LucasArts artists Larry Ahern and Bill Tiller , although the character 's choice of clothing remains consistent . Escape from Monkey Island translated Ahern and Tiller 's depiction into 3D graphics , while the later special editions and Tales of Monkey Island produced a more stylized art form for the character . While under LeChuck 's influence as his demon bride in Tales of Monkey Island , Elaine is dressed in a Gothic wedding dress and a tiara , her eyes are <unk> and her skin is given a green hue . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Elaine Marley debuts in the The Secret of Monkey Island as the governor of Mêlée Island , on which hapless protagonist Guybrush Threepwood is striving to become a pirate . As governor , she attracts many suitors , one of these being the pirate captain LeChuck . Although Elaine rebukes LeChuck 's advances , he nevertheless pursues her love and aims to impress her by discovering the secret of Monkey Island . The exhibition ultimately costs LeChuck his life , but he returns as a ghost still intent on marrying Elaine . LeChuck 's ambitions for Elaine 's hand in marriage — whether given willingly or not — form a major part of the franchise 's plot . Elaine first encounters Guybrush when he breaks into the governor 's mansion on Mêlée Island in an attempt to steal a valuable idol . Elaine has been fascinated to meet Guybrush since hearing of his arrival on the island and his strange name , however , their first meeting is stunted by Guybrush being too awestruck by Elaine 's beauty to say anything intelligible . When the local sheriff tries to drown Guybrush after a fight , Elaine nevertheless rushes to his aid , confessing that she feels deeply attracted to Guybrush , which he reciprocates . She implores Guybrush to finish his pirate trials before they act on their new @-@ found love , but is kidnapped by LeChuck and taken to his hideout on Monkey Island when the ghost pirate 's crew suddenly raids the island . Guybrush mounts a rescue attempt , but fails to reach Elaine before LeChuck 's ship returns to Mêlée Island for LeChuck 's wedding to Elaine . The well @-@ intentioned Threepwood gatecrashes the wedding , but in actuality ruins Elaine 's own plan to defeat LeChuck with an anti @-@ ghost concoction . Guybrush still manages to destroy LeChuck , and the game closes with the happy couple watching the fireworks as the evil pirate 's ghost form explodes . 
 Elaine 's role is significantly reduced for the sequel Monkey Island 2 : LeChuck 's Revenge , though the majority of the story is conveyed by Guybrush to Elaine in the form of a flashback . Between the games , the two have broken off their relationship and Elaine has moved to her governor 's mansion on Booty Island . When Guybrush appears at the mansion , she presumes he has come to apologize ; instead he is looking for a map that belonged to Elaine 's grandfather , which leads to fabled treasure Big Whoop . After discovering Guybrush 's intentions , Elaine is infuriated and refuses to speak to him . Guybrush eventually becomes trapped at the site of Big Whoop , with Elaine arriving to rescue him . Guybrush falls into a chasm , where he is confronted by LeChuck , recently resurrected as a zombie . As the game ends with Guybrush thinking he is a child in a theme park , Elaine is seen worrying that LeChuck has placed a curse on Guybrush . 
 In The Curse of Monkey Island , with Guybrush indisposed at the end of LeChuck 's Revenge , LeChuck attacks Plunder Island , the third island covered by Elaine 's gubernatorial powers . LeChuck 's efforts to buy Elaine 's love are again rebuked by Elaine during an exchange of cannon fire ; Elaine is angry at LeChuck for having apparently killed Guybrush , who she realises is the true love of her life . The battle is interrupted by Guybrush , who has escaped from LeChuck 's curse and helps defeat the zombie pirate . Afterwards , Guybrush proposes to Elaine , giving her a diamond ring found in LeChuck 's hold . Unknown to Guybrush , the ring is cursed and turns Elaine into solid gold . Guybrush manages to remove the curse , but both are captured by a reincarnated demon LeChuck . LeChuck plans to turn Elaine into a fellow undead creature , forcing her to accept him as he will be the only other person in a similar condition . Both Elaine and Guybrush escape , with Elaine eluding LeChuck until he is trapped under an avalanche of ice by Guybrush . Elaine and Guybrush marry , and leave on their honeymoon . 
 Elaine and Guybrush return to Mêlée Island in Escape from Monkey Island from their lengthy honeymoon to find that she has been declared legally dead ; as a result the governorship of the Tri @-@ Island Area is up for election . While Elaine and Guybrush work on reversing her legal demise , they discover that the other candidate in the election is actually LeChuck in disguise , but the townspeople , feeling neglected by Elaine 's long absence , do not believe her . Guybrush leaves to prevent the Ultimate Insult , a powerful voodoo talisman , from falling into the hands of LeChuck 's co @-@ conspirator Ozzie Mandrill . Elaine is defeated in the election and LeChuck becomes governor , while Guybrush is captured and marooned on Monkey Island . On Monkey Island , Guybrush discovers that resident castaway Herman <unk> is actually Horatio Marley , Elaine 's long thought dead grandfather . The two escape Monkey Island and defeat LeChuck and Mandrill . Elaine asks Horatio to take over her position as governor of the Tri @-@ Island Area , and Guybrush and Elaine depart . 
 In Tales of Monkey Island , set several years after Escape from Monkey Island , Elaine has once again been kidnapped by LeChuck . In his rescue attempt , Guybrush inadvertently releases a voodoo pox over Gulf of Melange , which turns LeChuck into a human . While events separate Guybrush and Elaine , she befriends the now seemingly <unk> LeChuck , and helps him return monkeys used for his voodoo spells to their homes . Elaine also attempts , without success , to arbitrate between merpeople with access to a cure for the pox and infected pirates . When negotiations break down , Elaine participates in a battle around the Jerkbait Islands to drive off the pirates . However , Elaine becomes infected with the pox and loses control , travelling to Flotsam Island to sack the town and kill Morgan LeFlay , a bounty hunter who she sees as a rival for Guybrush 's love . Guybrush cures the pox , but LeChuck turns on him and fatally stabs him ; Elaine cradles her husband as he dies . LeChuck takes Elaine captive and appears to convince her to join him as his demon bride ; however , Elaine only submits to LeChuck to acquire a voodoo cutlass capable of destroying LeChuck . Guybrush returns as a ghost and maneuvers LeChuck into a position where Elaine can attack him with the cutlass . With LeChuck defeated , Guybrush restores himself to life by using a spell with Elaine 's wedding ring , and returns to his wife . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Elaine Marley has garnered a positive reception from critics within the video game industry . Described by GameSpot as the impetus for the whole series , critics lauded Elaine 's non @-@ conformity to the damsel in distress stereotype . GameSpot noted that Elaine is usually much more proficient at escaping trouble " than the so @-@ called hero who comes to save her " , while the video game culture journal <unk> approved of the character for allowing a level of " feminine expression which did not necessary always conform to passive ideals of the damsel in distress " . The website That Guy with the Glasses put Elaine as the eighth best female character in gaming , describing her as possibly the only staple character in the series to have " a shred of sanity and smarts " , praising the character 's independence and resilience as well as noting that as a woman in the Golden Age of Piracy , Elaine has risen to a position of power far above what would be historically considered normal for the time . 
 Eurogamer commended Elaine 's design as " worthy of acclaim " , naming her the " Best Female Supporting Character " in their 2001 annual Gaming Globes awards , while IGN described her alongside Guybrush and LeChuck as one of " the most beloved adventure characters of all time " . Alexandra Boyd and Charity James have also been praised for their voicing of Elaine ; Computer Games Magazine described Boyd 's work for The Curse of Monkey Island as " wonderful " , though lamented that she did not speak more in the game , while Macworld admired the character 's depiction in Escape from Monkey Island as " beautiful and plucky " . 
 = SheiKra = 
 SheiKra ( / <unk> / , <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a steel Dive Coaster roller coaster at the Busch Gardens Tampa Bay amusement park in Tampa , Florida , United States . The roller coaster was proposed by Mark Rose , vice @-@ president of design and engineering for the park , and designed by Bolliger & Mabillard . The ride was planned to be 160 feet ( 49 m ) high , but the park 's executives rejected this and the height was changed to 200 feet ( 61 m ) . SheiKra reaches a maximum speed of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) and has a total track length of 3 @,@ 188 feet ( 972 m ) . It first opened on May 21 , 2005 , and was converted to a floorless roller coaster on June 16 , 2007 , following the opening of its sister Dive Coaster Griffon at Busch Gardens Williamsburg that year . 
 SheiKra was the first Dive Coaster to be constructed in North America ; its track includes a splashdown and an Immelmann loop , both a first for its kind . It broke the records for the world 's longest , tallest , and fastest Dive Coaster , but lost these records when Griffon in Williamsburg , Virginia , United States and Dive Coaster at Chime @-@ Long Paradise in Guangzhou , China opened . The name SheiKra is derived from the word " <unk> " , an Asian @-@ African hawk that is known to dive vertically for its prey . In 2005 , Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards voted it the fourth @-@ best new steel roller coaster of that year in a three @-@ way tie and the 28th @-@ best steel roller coaster . It was voted the 38th @-@ best steel roller coaster in 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original attraction = = = 
 Mark Rose , vice @-@ president of design and engineering at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay , proposed a roller coaster that would be 160 feet ( 49 m ) tall ; the experience would be " like riding a barrel over Niagara Falls ... straight down into water . " Busch Gardens executives rejected the proposal , saying it was not interesting enough . Rose changed his concept , adding another 40 feet ( 12 m ) in height to the roller coaster and adding more features to the ride , which led to the executives ' approval of the plans . Peckham Guyton Albers & Viets Inc ( <unk> ) also helped plan and design the roller coaster . 
 Rumors of a new roller coaster being built at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay began to circulate after a roller coaster enthusiast emailed the park and received a response saying that a roller coaster would be built . These rumors stated that the roller coaster would include a splashdown and an inversion on Bolliger & Mabillard 's Dive Coaster , both a first for its kind . Later in the season , the park began to remove part of the track of Serengeti Express . On April 26 , 2004 , construction permits were discovered which confirmed that a roller coaster , restaurant , and gift shop would be constructed . 
 In May 2004 , further details were leaked including the height , speed and trains . A month later , Tiki masks with quotes relating to the project were placed on the construction walls , including : " I 'm a bird with no feathers , a beast with no equal , a fall that never hits the ground . What am I ? " , " What is taller than 10 giraffes and faster than a charging rhino ? " , and " What is too fast to see , but has a bird 's eye view ? " . Track and support pieces were later seen in a large field , which further confirmed the new attraction would be a roller coaster . 
 On October 20 , 2004 , SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment ( owner of Busch Gardens Tampa Bay ) filed a trademark for the name " SheiKra " . A week later , Busch Gardens Tampa Bay announced SheiKra , North America 's first Dive Coaster , as part of a deal with Bolliger & Mabillard . At the time of the announcement , about half of the ride 's foundations were complete . Superior Rigging & Erection constructed the supports and track of SheiKra and by January 28 , 2005 , the roller coaster 's highest track piece was placed along with an evergreen tree . Testing began in late April 2005 after the track had been constructed . After testing was completed , a media day was held on May 19 , 2005 , for international media outlets to promote the ride . Two days later , the roller coaster opened to the public on May 21 , 2005 . During SheiKra 's first year of operation , its computer systems experienced problems as it would halt operations when it sensed that pumps and compressors were not working as they should . This caused riders to get stranded on the roller coaster and be forced to evacuate . 
 Bolliger & Mabillard took approximately six months to design SheiKra and four years to complete the entire project . After Busch Gardens Tampa Bay announced SheiKra , the park contracted with Bolliger & Mabillard so that the layout of the roller coaster could not be reproduced for several years . In 2009 , after the deal expired , Happy Valley Shanghai built an identical copy of SheiKra called Diving Coaster . 
 = = = Modified attraction = = = 
 In 2006 , speculation began that Busch Gardens Tampa Bay would be removing the floors from SheiKra 's trains . On January 31 , 2007 , the park confirmed the rumors at a press conference that was also broadcast on the internet . In late April 2007 , a month before the temporary closure of the ride , Busch Gardens Tampa Bay placed billboards along Interstate 275 and advertisements in newspapers announcing that SheiKra 's floors would soon be removed . One of the billboards said , " <unk> , One last fling while I 've still got it . <unk> ( w / floor ) ... " <unk> to a telephone number on the billboards would hear a recorded female voice saying , " Hi , doll face " , " it 's been a fun ride " , and " one last fling @-@ a @-@ ding " . 
 On April 24 , 2007 , during the park 's High School Journalism Day , Busch Gardens Tampa Bay unveiled the first floorless train for the roller coaster . SheiKra closed for the conversion on May 28 , 2007 . The station was modified because retractable floors needed to be installed so riders could board and disembark the trains . Just under two weeks before the scheduled reopening , the new trains were tested . On June 16 , 2007 , the modified roller coaster soft @-@ opened to 100 roller coaster enthusiasts , news reporters from 40 media outlets , and 37 radio broadcasters before opening to the public later that day . On January 7 , 2013 , the roller coaster temporarily closed so it could be completely repainted in its original colors ; it reopened on February 16 , 2013 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 SheiKra has two queues ; the standby queue is for guests without passes and the Quick Queue is for guests who have a pass that allows them to bypass the queues for most of the major attractions at the park . 
 After the floors retract and the front gate opens , the train leaves the station and makes a downward right turn , immediately followed by an upward right turn , which leads to the 45 @-@ degree inclined chain lift hill . Once the train reaches the top of the 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) lift , it turns right into a holding brake where it slowly moves over the first drop , stops for about four seconds , and then descends the 90 @-@ degree drop . As the train reaches the bottom of the first drop it reaches its maximum speed of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . Then , the train enters a 145 @-@ foot ( 44 m ) Immelmann loop before making a banked , upward , <unk> left turn into the mid course brake run . The train slows down and descends a 138 @-@ foot ( 42 m ) , near 90 @-@ degree drop into an underground tunnel . Next , the train makes a right overbanked turn leading into a splashdown which sprays two 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) lines of water in the air and takes approximately 1 @.@ 9 seconds to pass through . The train rises , makes a downward right turn , then enters the final brake run which leads directly back to the station . One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes and 20 seconds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel , box track of SheiKra is 3 @,@ 188 feet ( 972 m ) long and the lift is approximately 200 feet ( 61 m ) high . The track is red and the supports are blue . The ride is equipped with an eight @-@ passenger elevator that can return riders to ground level if a train must be evacuated while on the lift hill . The track and rails were shaped in Italy and fabricated by Clermont Steel Fabricators in Batavia , Ohio , which manufactures Bolliger & Mabillard 's roller coasters . SheiKra 's track spine is wider than those of Bolliger & Mabillard 's traditional roller coasters because of the extra weight of the trains compared to Bolliger & Mabillard 's four @-@ abreast cars . During the night , SheiKra 's track is illuminated with white lights . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 SheiKra operates with several identical trains made from steel and fiberglass which are three times wider than the track . They were manufactured in Switzerland and shipped to Florida . Each seat has an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraint . SheiKra 's trains are fitted with nylon and polyurethane wheels to reduce the amount of friction created on the track . Underneath the trains are a pair of anti @-@ rollback devices that prevent the train from rolling down the lift hill should the chain break . There is also a " drop chain dog " that allows the trains to slowly enter the first drop . Each train has three eight @-@ passenger cars , allowing for a maximum capacity of 24 riders per train . 
 = = Records = = 
 When SheiKra opened in 2005 , it introduced two new roller coaster elements to the Dive Coaster . The splashdown causes the train to come into contact with water through " scoops " located on the last car of each train . The Immelmann loop is an element in which the train enters a half @-@ loop followed by a half @-@ twist and curve out in the direction opposite from which the train came . The loop was the first inversion used on a Dive Coaster . Since SheiKra , all Dive Coasters and other Bolliger & Mabillard roller coaster models have also had a splashdown and at least one Immelmann loop . 
 SheiKra was also the first Dive Coaster to feature a 90 @-@ degree drop . In 2005 , only two other Dive Coasters in the world had either an <unk> or 87 @.@ 5 @-@ degree drop . When SheiKra first opened , it was the tallest , fastest , and longest Dive Coaster ever built , and was the first Dive Coaster in North America . However , in 2007 when Griffon opened at Busch Gardens Williamsburg , SheiKra lost the height and speed records . When Dive Coaster opened at Chime @-@ Long Paradise in 2008 , it took the length record . 
 = = Reception = = 
 SheiKra was mostly well @-@ received from the public and critics . Arthur Levine from About.com rated the roller coaster four and a half stars out of five , and awarded it a thrill rating of eight and half out of ten , writing , " It 's an unapologetic thrill ride that coaster lovers will adore and coaster wimps will avoid . " Joel Bullock from Coaster Critic rated SheiKra seven and a half out of ten and awarded it a thrill rating of four out of five . He wrote that the attraction was " underwhelming " and " didn 't live up to the hype " due to the ride 's short length and the lack of special elements . Bullock also said , " Overall , SheiKra 's no masterpiece , but is still an experience . " He praised the ride 's Immelmann loop , writing that the delay between the rise , inversion and finish of the maneuver was the highlight of the ride . " Jeremy Thompson from Roller Coaster Philosophy awarded the coaster a " B " , and wrote that , " riding the coaster is all about the visual experience " , and that , " Despite the <unk> top speed it 's quite gentle on the human body , although from the last row it easily wins the award for Most <unk> on a Roller Coaster in the State of Florida " . 
 Jay Cridlin from the Tampa Bay Times wrote that guests should expect long waiting times to ride , although the length of the ride is " probably a fair tradeoff . " Cridlin called SheiKra , " a majestic , one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind roller coaster experience " , and mentions that the attraction , " may be the world 's finest dive coaster " . In a 2005 article , Cridlin mostly praised the 90 @-@ degree drop and wrote that , " Despite its sheer size and dominance of the Busch Gardens landscape ... the coaster likely will still inspire debate among park visitors . " Eric Michael from Orlando Sentinel wrote , " The 200 @-@ foot monster , Florida 's tallest , wins my vote for best drop , straight down at 90 @-@ degrees , and most shameless tease ( riders hang at the top for a few seconds ) " . In 2007 , SheiKra was featured on Discovery Channel 's television series Build It Bigger . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Grand Central Station ( Chicago ) = 
 Grand Central Station was a passenger railroad terminal in downtown Chicago , Illinois , from 1890 to 1969 . It was located at 201 West Harrison Street on a block bounded by Harrison , Wells and Polk Streets and the Chicago River in the southwestern portion of the Chicago Loop . Grand Central Station was designed by architect Solon Spencer Beman for the Wisconsin Central Railroad ( WC ) , and was completed by the Chicago and Northern Pacific Railroad . 
 The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad purchased the station in 1910 and used it as the Chicago terminus for its passenger rail service , including its Capitol Limited service to Washington , D.C. Major tenant railroads included the Soo Line Railroad , successor to the Wisconsin Central , the Chicago Great Western Railway , and the Pere Marquette Railway . The station opened December 8 , 1890 , closed November 8 , 1969 , and was demolished in 1971 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In October 1889 , a subsidiary of the Wisconsin Central Railroad began constructing a new passenger terminal at the southwest corner of Harrison and Wells Streets ( then called Fifth Avenue ) in Chicago , to replace a nearby temporary facility . The location of this new depot , along the south branch of the Chicago River , was selected to take advantage of the bustling passenger and freight market traveling on nearby Lake Michigan . 
 Architect Solon S. Beman , who had gained notoriety as the designer of the Pullman company neighborhood , designed the station in the Norman <unk> and chose brick , brownstone and granite for construction . The structure measured 228 ft ( 69 m ) along Harrison Street and 482 ft ( 147 m ) along Wells . Imposing arches , crenellations , a spacious arched carriage @-@ court facing Harrison Street , and a multitude of towers dominated the walls . Its most famous feature , however , was an impressive 247 ft ( 75 m ) tower at the northeast corner of the structure . Beman , an early advocate of the Floating raft system to solve Chicago 's unique swampy soil problems , designed the tower to sit within a floating foundation supported by 55 ft ( 17 m ) deep piles . Early on , an 11 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 000 kg ) bell in the tower rang on the hour . At some point , however , the bell was removed , but the tower ( and its huge clock , 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter — at one time among the largest in the United States , remained . 
 The interior of the Grand Central Station was decorated as extravagantly as the exterior . The waiting room , for example , had marble floors , Corinthian @-@ style columns , stained @-@ glass windows and a marble fireplace , and a restaurant . The station also had a 100 @-@ room hotel , but accommodations ended late in 1901 . 
 Not as famous as the clocktower but equally architecturally unique was Grand Central Station 's self @-@ supporting glass and steel train shed , 555 ft × 156 ft × 79 ft ( 169 m × 48 m × 24 m ) , among the largest in the world at the time it was constructed . The <unk> , considered an architectural gem and a marvel of engineering long after it was built , housed six tracks and had platforms long enough to accommodate fifteen @-@ car passenger trains . The final construction cost totaled over one million dollars . 
 The Chicago and Northern Pacific Railroad , a subsidiary of the Northern Pacific Railway , formally opened Grand Central Station December 8 , 1890 . Seeking access to the Chicago railway market , the Northern Pacific had purchased Grand Central and the trackage leading to it from the Wisconsin Central with the intention of making the station its eastern terminus . When it opened , Grand Central hosted trains from the WC ( which connected with its former trackage in Forest Park , Illinois ) , and the Minnesota and Northwestern Railroad ( M & NW ) , which made also a connection at Forest Park . By December 1891 , the tenants also included the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad , and in 1903 , the Pere Marquette Railway also started using the station . 
 Weakened by the prolonged economic downturn of the Panic of 1893 , the Northern Pacific went bankrupt in October 1893 , and was forced to end its ownership of the Chicago and Northern Pacific , including Grand Central Station . Ultimately , tenant railroad Baltimore and Ohio purchased the station at foreclosure in 1910 along with all the terminal trackage to form the Baltimore and Ohio Chicago Terminal Railroad ( B & OCT ) . 
 = = Services = = 
 The smallest of Chicago 's passenger rail terminals , Grand Central Station was a relatively quiet place , even during its heyday . Grand Central never became a prominent destination for large numbers of cross @-@ country travelers , nor for the daily waves of commuters from the suburbs , that other Chicago terminals were . In 1912 , for example , Grand Central served 3 @,@ 175 passengers per day — representing only 4 @.@ 5 percent of the total number for the city of Chicago — and serviced an average of 38 trains per day ( including 4 B & O suburban trains ) . This number paled in comparison to the 146 trains served by Dearborn Station , the 191 by LaSalle Street Station , the 281 at Union Station , the 310 by the Chicago and North Western Terminal and the 373 trains per day at Central Station . 
 The station did host some of Baltimore and Ohio 's most famous passenger trains , including the Capitol Limited to Washington , D.C. Unfortunately , however , the circuitous trackage leading to the station from the east forced these trains miles out of their way through the industrial southwest and west side of the city ( See map to the left ) . Other tenants such as the Soo Line Railroad ( which purchased the WC in 1909 ) , the M & NW ( which became known as the Chicago Great Western Railway in 1893 ) , and the Pere Marquette Railway ( which merged into the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway in 1947 ) , were nowhere near the scale of B & O 's operations in the intercity passenger rail market . 
 = = = Intercity Passenger Trains = = = 
 Grand Central Station served as a terminal for the following lines and intercity trains : 
 Baltimore and Ohio Railroad : Capitol Limited , Columbian , and Shenandoah to New York City and the Chicago - Washington Express to Washington , D.C. , along with other trains to Cumberland , Maryland and Wheeling , West Virginia . 
 Chicago Great Western Railway ( until 1956 ) : Legionnaire , later Minnesotan , both to Minneapolis , Minnesota . Other trains to Kansas City , Missouri and Omaha , Nebraska . All passenger services ceased in 1956 . 
 Minneapolis , St. Paul and Sault Ste . Marie Railway ( Soo Line ) ( until 1899 , and from 1912 to 1965 ; used Central Station in between and after ) : Laker to Duluth , Minnesota . 
 Pere Marquette Railway : Grand Rapids Flyer and Grand Rapids Express to Grand Rapids and Muskegon , Michigan and , ultimately to Buffalo , New York . Upon the 1947 merger with the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway , PM trains were renamed Pere Marquette . 
 From December 1900 to July 1903 , the New York Central Railroad and Chicago , Rock Island and Pacific Railroad used Grand Central , as their LaSalle Street Station was being rebuilt . 
 = = = Suburban Commuter Trains = = = 
 In addition to intercity passenger rail service , Grand Central Station hosted several short @-@ lived <unk> passenger rail operations . To coincide with the World 's Columbian Exposition in 1893 , the Baltimore and Ohio operated a special passenger train between Grand Central Station and Jackson Park , with intermediate stops at Halsted Street , Blue Island Avenue , Ashland Avenue and Ogden Avenue . Grand Central Station also served as a terminal for at least two suburban commuter lines . One , operated by the Wisconsin Central , operated trains west of Grand Central Station to <unk> . The second began service in 1900 by the Chicago Terminal Transfer Railroad , and continued when B & O purchased the line in 1910 . It operated six trains a day between Grand Central and Chicago Heights , stopping in Blue Island , Harvey , Thornton and Glenwood . The line was unsuccessful and ended as early as 1915 . None of the other tenant railroads operated commuter trains from Grand Central Station . 
 = = The end = = 
 The lightly used terminal became even quieter in the years following World War II , with Grand Central serving 26 intercity passenger trains , down from nearly 40 at its busiest . Passenger trains were dropped and service was curtailed , and by 1956 the Chicago Great Western , which as late as 1940 had run six trains per day in and out of Grand Central ceased operating passenger service into Chicago . As a result , by 1963 only ten intercity trains remained , of which six were operated by the Baltimore and Ohio . The number of passengers that used the remaining service shrank proportionately : by 1969 , the year the station closed , the station only served an average of 210 passengers per day . 
 Due to its small size , its age and perceived obsolescence , Grand Central was the target of a long @-@ term political effort by the city government to encourage consolidation of passenger terminals in the south Loop . It was ultimately this political effort that sealed the fate of Grand Central , described in 1969 as " decaying , dreary , and sadly out of date " . 
 Faced with decreasing passenger numbers and intense political pressure to consolidate , the railroads operating into Grand Central Station re @-@ routed their trains into other Chicago terminals , beginning with the Soo Line into Central Station in 1963 . The remaining six Baltimore and Ohio and ex @-@ Pere Marquette trains last used Grand Central Station on November 8 , 1969 and were routed into their new terminus at the Chicago and North Western Terminal the following day . 
 Sitting unused , Grand Central Station 's value as an architectural and engineering masterpiece was discounted by its railroad owner , who believed the value of the land for urban redevelopment to be quite substantial . As a result , the trackage was scrapped and the entire terminal was razed by the railroad in 1971 . 
 = = Present @-@ day = = 
 Approximately 6 @.@ 5 acres remain vacant between Harrison and Polk ; the site currently serves as a de facto dog park in the South Loop . In 1984 , developers began construction of River City , just south of the site . River City was intended to be a complex of four 85 @-@ story office and residential towers stretching along the Chicago River from Harrison to Roosevelt Road designed by Bertrand Goldberg , designer of the landmark " Marina City " along the main branch of the Chicago River ) . Only a 17 @-@ story apartment building was completed in 1986 , however it can accommodate additional floors as part of an <unk> . Several other plans for office towers , condominiums , or retail development on the Grand Central Station terminal site have all been proposed over the past several years , and all have been shelved . 
 The land at the corner of Harrison and Wells , the lot on which the station itself stood , remains vacant . In March 2008 , CSX Transportation — the successor company to the B & O — sold the property to a Skokie , Illinois @-@ based capital group with the intent of redeveloping the site with mixed @-@ use high @-@ rise buildings . 
 <unk> Architects proposed constructing a new rail station on the site in February 2012 to accommodate high @-@ speed trains between the city core and O 'Hare Airport . The firm feels that this location would be preferable to adding additional capacity at the already crowded Union Station . 
 As of October 2013 , a proposal to build two towers containing 700 units ( rental & possibly condo apartments ) has resurfaced for 1 @.@ 5 acres of the 6 @.@ 5 acre site . The development known as " Franklin Point " is being backed by Jay @-@ Z business partners Arnold " Alex " <unk> and Naum <unk> . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 More than thirty years after its destruction , Grand Central Station has only relatively recently been identified by local historians , railroad enthusiasts and architecture critics as " the queen of the city 's old train stations " . Author Carl W. Condit remarked that the station was " an important Chicago building even if it never received much recognition " . Architect Harry Weese bemoaned its " wanton destruction " . Ira J. Bach noted that when the terminal was demolished : " Chicago lost its greatest monument to the institution which had created it : the railroad . " 
 = = = The B & OCT Bascule Bridge = = = 
 At the time Grand Central was completed , passenger trains approached the terminal by crossing the Chicago River to the southwest over a bridge between Taylor Street and Roosevelt Road , constructed in 1885 . This first bridge was replaced by a taller structure in 1901 to accommodate larger boats and ships on the south branch of the river . 
 When the Chicago River was straightened and widened in the 1930s , the United States Department of War insisted the Baltimore and Ohio build a new bridge adjacent to that of the St. Charles Air Line Railroad which crossed the river between 15th and 16th Streets . The new bridge 's location ( 41 ° 51 ′ 40 ″ N 87 ° 38 ′ 06 ″ W ) , about seven blocks south of its previous crossing , exacerbated the circuitous route of the B & OCT trackage leading to Grand Central Station . Both the B & OCT bascule bridge , and that of the St. Charles Air Line Bridge immediately adjacent to it , were built in 1930 , and both are bascule bridges . 
 As of 2013 the B & OCT bridge sits unused . An uncertain future awaits the old B & OCT bridge : the trackage it once served may never be rebuilt ; or the bridge may find new life if Chicago continues its railroad heritage and becomes the hub of a planned national high @-@ speed rail network , thus possibly making use of the railway bridge once again . 
 = Telethon ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Telethon " is the 22nd episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 28th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 6 , 2010 . In the episode , Leslie volunteers to host a charity telethon and is given the unappealing 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. shift . 
 The episode was directed by Troy Miller and written by Amy Poehler , who stars as the protagonist Leslie Knope , her first script for the series . " Telethon " featured a guest appearance by retired basketball player Detlef Schrempf , as well as several actors who had previously appeared in Parks and Recreation , including Mo Collins and Jay Jackson . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews and , according to Nielsen Media Research , was seen by 4 @.@ 03 million household viewers , roughly the same as the previous week 's episode , " 94 Meetings " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) has volunteered to work on the 24 @-@ hour " Pawnee Cares " diabetes telethon and orders everyone in the office to work the phones for multiple shifts . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) is assigned to pick up retired basketball player Detlef Schrempf from the airport , the special guest for the telethon . Leslie is excited because she has been allowed to program her own four @-@ hour block , but her co @-@ workers are upset to learn it runs from 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. Additionally , she has already been up for 24 hours creating T @-@ shirts for her staff to wear for the telethon . 
 During lunch , Mark ( Paul Schneider ) tells Leslie that he is going to propose to Ann ( Rashida Jones ) . Ann suggests that Leslie get some sleep , but she plans on consuming Sweetums bars to stay awake for another 24 hours . As the telethon begins , Leslie is already exhausted and is falling asleep . With time to kill , Tom brings Detlef to the Snakehole Lounge , but the owner , Freddy ( Andy Milder ) , refuses to let him go because Detlef is bringing a lot of business , delaying Leslie 's big headliner . Andy 's ( Chris Pratt ) band , Mouse Rat , is asked to replace Detlef , but when they complete all of their songs , Leslie has nothing else to put on the air . Ron ( Nick Offerman ) volunteers to demonstrate how to cane a chair , but his presentation is so boring that the telethon actually starts to lose money . 
 Desperate for something to put on , Leslie tells Mark that he should propose to Ann in front of the camera and he agrees . Not long after , however , Ann confides in Leslie that she wants to break up with Mark , citing that he is simply not the one . Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) tries to make Andy jealous by flirting with someone over the phone , but it backfires when it turns out to be Joe ( Kirk Fox ) from the Pawnee sewer department . Andy is forced to kick Joe out of the studio when he actually arrives to bring April to his van . 
 The telethon 's talent pool becomes so low that Leslie is forced to flip a coin in front of the camera and talk about her favorite episodes of Friends . Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) is allowed to play the piano , but everyone dismisses his skilled playing as a racket . Mark finally returns to propose and walks on the set with the ring , but Leslie stops him by mooning the camera . Detlef Schrempf and Tom finally arrive at the end of Leslie 's programming block . Detlef presents a check for $ 5 @,@ 000 , allowing the telethon to bypass its $ 20 @,@ 000 mark . Despite being awake for two days straight , Leslie goes to Ann 's house so they could talk about Mark . She then promptly falls asleep on Ann 's couch for 22 hours . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Telethon " was directed by Troy Miller and written by Amy Poehler , who stars as Parks and Recreation protagonist Leslie Knope . It was the first episode she had written for the show . Early in the series , Poehler had expressed to Parks co @-@ creator Michael Schur that she wanted to write an episode , but they agreed she would wait for a filming hiatus before doing so . Poehler said the scenes in which Leslie uses sugar rushes to re @-@ energize herself at night , only to crash later , was reminiscent of some of her own all @-@ night experiences working on the sketch comedy series Saturday Night Live . 
 " Telethon " featured a guest appearance by Detlef Schrempf , a retired basketball player who played for the Indiana Pacers ; Parks and Recreation is set in Indiana . Prior to filming the episode , Schrempf 's acting skills had been limited to appearances on the American comedy series Married ... with Children and the German soap opera Gute Zeiten , <unk> Zeiten . Schur said of his performance , " For a guy who literally never acted before in his life , he was really funny . " Aziz Ansari joked about the performance , " We 're going to write a spin @-@ off for him called That 's So Detlef , so look forward to that . " " Telethon " also featured guest appearances by several actors who had appeared in previous episodes , including Mo Collins as Pawnee Today television host Joan Callamezzo and Jay Jackson as Pawnee television news reporter Perd Hapley . John <unk> also made a guest appearance as Barney , a local teacher who gave the audience an extremely boring accounting presentation , just as he did in " Leslie 's House " . 
 In addition to the performances , " Telethon " included several references to previous episodes . During the telethon , Andy and his band perform a song called " Sex Hair " . This is a reference to " Galentine 's Day " , in which he claims to have written a song about how one can tell whether someone had sex because their hair is matted . A music video for the song was made available on the official NBC.com Parks and Recreation website shortly after the episode was broadcast . Also in " Telethon , " the television event is sponsored by the candy manufacturer Sweetums , and Leslie constantly eats their <unk> @-@ Yum bars in order to stay awake . Both the company and candy bars were prominently featured by " Sweetums " , where Leslie and Ann fought to prevent the unhealthy snacks from being sold in Pawnee parks . In other scenes , Tom takes Detlef Schrempf to the Snakehole Lounge , a nightclub where Tom previously purchased shares in the episode " Woman of the Year " . 
 On July 8 , 2010 , Amy Poehler was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her overall work in the second season , and her performance in " Telethon " was the episode submitted for consideration . The award ultimately went to Edie Falco for her performance in the Showtime comedy series Nurse Jackie . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Tom describes his clothing as " Brooks Brothers Boys " , the children @-@ size line from the men 's clothier chain Brooks Brothers . While intoxicated , Tom starts to sing music by rapper Soulja Boy Tell ' Em . In order to stall for time during the telethon , Leslie starts talking about her favorite episodes of Friends , a sitcom that previously aired on NBC . She specifically refers to the fourth season episode " The One with Chandler in a Box " , in which Monica Geller prepares a Thanksgiving dinner , and Chandler Bing agrees to spend the holiday in a box as punishment for kissing Joey Tribbiani 's girlfriend . Donna mentions that her brother is in Liberia ; in real life , Retta 's aunt is the president of Liberia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Telethon " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 03 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . It received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share among overall viewers , and a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . This rating was about even from the previous episode , " 94 Meetings " . " Telethon " was outperformed in the 8 : 30 p.m. timeslot by the CBS reality series Survivor : Heroes vs. Villains and the Fox crime drama Bones , but Parks and Recreation outperformed the CW Network supernatural fantasy series The Vampire Diaries and the ABC science @-@ fiction drama FlashForward . 
 " Telethon " received generally positive reviews . Matt Fowler of IGN praised the many inside jokes and character quirks featured in the episode . He said although The Office ( another comedy series by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Greg Daniels ) is limited mainly to one setting , " Telethon " demonstrates how the Parks characters can be placed into a myriad of settings and situations . Entertainment Weekly writer Margaret Lyons said , " If that wasn ’ t the best episode of Parks and Recreation yet , it ’ s at least top five . " Lyons said every character and subplot was in strong form except for Ann and Mark , which she said has consistently been the show 's " Achilles ' heel " , and that this episode demonstrated how poorly it fit with the other elements of the series . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called the episode " one of the greats " , claiming it served as a spotlight of the strong characters and subplot developed throughout the second season . Heisler also said the episode contained some of the season 's strongest one @-@ liners . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said although " Telethon " advanced the eventual break @-@ up of Mark and Ann , the episode basically served as an excuse " to showcase Amy Poehler in varying stages of exhaustion @-@ related delirium " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Telethon " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Copano Bay = 
 Copano Bay is a northwestern extension of Aransas Bay , west of Rockport , Texas in Refugio and Aransas counties . It is supplied with seawater from the Gulf of Mexico via Aransas Bay , and fed freshwater from the Aransas River , Mission River and Copano Creek . As an estuary , the bay is home to a diverse ecosystem consisting of various birds including the endangered whooping crane , and numerous finfish including the redfish as well as shellfish such as oysters . It is classified as a nursery for shrimp , which prohibits production from the bay . Copano Bay is also a historic location for human usage and settlement that dates back to the 18th century , beginning with the historic port of El Copano and the 19th century settlements of St. Mary 's of Aransas and Copano . The present @-@ day towns of Bayside , Copano Village and Holiday Beach were all founded in the 20th century . Oil and natural gas are pumped from below the bay 's surface , and contribute to the livelihood of the local economies . 
 = = History = = 
 Copano Bay was inhabited by the nomadic Aransas Indians , who constructed camps along the shore , 4 @,@ 000 years ago . The Aransas people left the area approximately 700 years ago , and were replaced around 1400 CE by the <unk> Indians , for whom the bay is named . The <unk> were one of five groups making up the Karankawas , hunter @-@ gatherers who occupied the mid @-@ Texas coast . 
 Cabeza de Vaca is thought to have been the first European to sight the bay in the early 16th century , evidenced by the descriptions in his logs that match the detail of the area . In 1766 , Spaniard Diego Ortiz Parrilla is believed to be the first European to explore the bay . He named it Santo Domingo ( Saint Dominic ) , but it was later changed to Copano , after the port of Copano was officially opened in 1785 on the northwestern shore . The port later served as a strategically important locale during the Texas Revolution and the American Civil War , and was the site of a settlement that is now completely abandoned . The town of St. Mary 's of Aransas was founded southwest of Copano and thrived as a port and wood mart , until numerous shipwrecks caused by the bay 's hidden reefs concluded its use in 1875 . Like Copano , it is now abandoned . 
 Further to the southwest , at the mouth of the Aransas River , the town of Black Point was established in the 1840s . The site was attacked by Indians several times before the settlement was abandoned . However , it was reestablished in the early 20th century as the present @-@ day city of Bayside . Bayside developers aimed to attract fruit and vegetable growers to the plots made available and advertised nationwide , but large amounts of land were purchased by speculators , raising demand and forcing further annexation . The 2000 census reported that 360 people lived in the city . The cities of Fulton and Rockport were established on Aransas Bay in the late 19th century , and later expanded development along most of the eastern shore of Copano Bay . Such developments include Copano Village , which registered 210 residents in 2000 , and the 1 @,@ 000 resident Holiday Beach community just west of Goose Island State Park on Lamar Peninsula . 
 = = Features = = 
 Copano Bay is approximately twelve @-@ by @-@ six @-@ miles , oriented from the southwest to the northeast . It is found mainly on undeveloped land , though ranches are located on parts of the west , south and north shores . The main extensions include Mission Bay , which stretches to the north to the mouth of the Mission River , and Port Bay to the west , which forms the southern boundary of the Live Oak peninsula . The peninsula is located on the eastern shore of Copano Bay and is lined with beach homes and residences , which begin just west of the inlet Salt Lake to the head of Live Oak peninsula at the confluence of Copano and Aransas Bay . This opening is spanned by the Copano Bay Causeway and the Copano Bay Fishing Pier , which once served as the main crossing to the Lamar peninsula . Holiday Beach is found on the northeastern shore of Copano Bay on the Lamar Peninsula . Just north of the community is the mouth of Copano Creek , which marks the bay 's northernmost point . From here , the shoreline turns to the southwest past the Copano Bay Oil and Gas Field and four sloughs before reaching the ruins of the ghost town Copano at Copano Point , marked by white cliffs . At the point , the Copano Reef juts out almost halfway across the bay . Further southwest , past the mouth of Mission Bay , Bayside stretches along the coast to the mouth of the Aransas River . The shoreline turns to the southeast from this point , past the Egery Flats and Egery Island through Swan Lake and to the mouth of Port Bay . 
 The bay 's maximum <unk> is 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , and in contrast to the Laguna Madre ( <unk> . 80 miles <unk> to the south ) , is not hypersaline . The Mission and Aransas Rivers are the main freshwater sources : small rivers with deep banks that carve through a landscape lined with hardwood trees . Their inflows increase during significant rainfall and reach their seasonal highs during the autumn . These rivers have not been dammed and thus flow free . At both mouths , marshes covering several square miles stretch from the confluences with Copano Bay and forming several saline lakes . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 Copano Bay serves as a nursery for shrimp , which attracts a large number of redfish . Abundant collections of black drum , flounder and trout , can also be found in the bay . Oysters grow in large numbers to form elongated reefs " oriented perpendicular to tidal flow " in the estuary . The reefs provide habitat for fish and sustenance for a wide variety of birds including the black @-@ bellied whistling @-@ duck , black @-@ necked stilt , brown pelican , gull @-@ billed tern , reddish egret , roseate spoonbill , seaside sparrow , white @-@ faced ibis and the whooping crane . The dominant species of gastropod in the bay is <unk> <unk> . 
 In 2003 , the United States Department of the Interior granted $ 574 @,@ 000 to Texas Parks and Wildlife to purchase over 900 acres ( 3 @.@ 6 km2 ) of prime birding habitat at Egery Flats and the mouth of the Aransas River , to prevent further development . 
 = = Industry = = 
 Oil and natural gas wells are located both onshore and offshore of Copano Bay . Three oil and natural gas fields are found on the bay , including the Copano Bay Oil and Gas Field , just west of Holiday Beach , the South Copano Bay Oil Field , just offshore from Bayside , and the West Fulton Beach Gas and Oil Field to the west of the Live Oak peninsula . In 1997 , a pipeline owned by Koch Industries burst in the marsh in Refugio County , two miles ( 3 km ) west of Copano Bay near the Aransas River , spilling 1 @,@ 000 gallons of oil over a 10 @-@ acre ( 40 @,@ 000 m2 ) area . The oil did not seep into Copano Bay , preventing a minor environmental disaster . Copano Bay is off limits to shrimping due to its designation as a nursery bay . 
 = Tim Frazier = 
 Tim Frazier ( born November 1 , 1990 ) is an American professional basketball player for the New Orleans Pelicans of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . The 6 ft 1 in ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) point guard played high school basketball for Strake Jesuit College Preparatory and competed at the collegiate level with Penn State . He earned various accolades with Penn State , including first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten and All @-@ Big Ten Defensive team honors , both as a junior in 2012 . Frazier suffered an injury in his fourth year with the team , forcing him to redshirt the season . In his final season , he was named a Senior CLASS Award finalist and to the Bob Cousy Award watch list . Through his time attending Pennsylvania State University , Frazier also went to the <unk> College of Business . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frazier was born on November 1 , 1990 in Houston , Texas , to Billy and Janice . He started playing basketball when he was five years old . He would knock down trophies of his sister and challenge his sister Krystal to games . His sister later said , " Most people learn basketball early on with a one @-@ on @-@ one kind of mentality ... Tim at an early age didn 't have that . He always wanted to make the team better and do whatever it takes to help team out . He is such a true point guard . " In his childhood , he was considered too small for contact sports , but was noted for his quickness , which helped him thrive as a guard on the court . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Frazier attended Strake Jesuit College Preparatory in Houston , Texas . He completed his junior year with 11 @.@ 5 points , 5 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 0 steals per game . Frazier was named District 17 @-@ 5A Defensive Player of the Year . In his senior season , he averaged 15 @.@ 5 points , 7 @.@ 7 rebounds , 5 @.@ 5 assists , and 3 @.@ 6 steals per game , leading the team to a 37 – 1 record . He helped them become the first private school to reach the state tournament 's semifinals . Frazier commented on his final year with Strake Jesuit in an interview with <unk> " My game , I don 't know , it just hit that next level , " he said . 
 After completing his senior year with Strake Jesuit , Frazier was ranked the 20th best point guard of his class , the 110th most valuable player overall , and a three @-@ star recruit by Rivals.com. According to <unk> , he was the best recruit in the state , and the Houston Chronicle labeled him the Boys Basketball Player of the Year . Frazier played with the Houston Elite Amateur Athletic Union team , which had produced players such as Anthony Thompson , <unk> McCain and Chris Roberts , all of whom attended Bradley University . He graduated high school cum laude . 
 On October 23 , 2008 , Frazier verbally committed to the Penn State Nittany Lions basketball team . He said to Scout.com , " I decided to be a Nittany Lion because I felt it was a great fit for me . Penn State has great academics as well as a great basketball team and that 's what I was looking for . " Frazier also said that he had a " great time " on his official visit and all his relatives supported the decision . He received offers from various other schools across the country , including Bradley , Colorado State , New Mexico State , Santa Clara , Stanford , Stephen F. Austin , and UTEP . Frazier was also visited by San Diego , TCU , and Penn State , spanning from September to October 2008 . After the move was made official , head coach Ed DeChellis said , " We are very excited to have Tim join our program . He is a very fast , quick player with tremendous speed in the backcourt and a good shooter . He possesses the kind of athleticism that Stanley Pringle does . He can get in the lane and find open guys and is a great drive and kick passer and he can score . He is a very good on @-@ the @-@ ball defender and a tremendous athlete and we think he really solidifies our backcourt for the future . " 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Prior to the start of his freshman year , Frazier recorded a team @-@ high 34 @-@ inch vertical in Penn State 's preseason workouts . He also matched the 2009 NBA Draft Combine record , and surpassed the event 's best lane agility time . Frazier did not participate in Penn State 's exhibition opener against Slippery Rock . Coach DeChellis said , " Billy Oliver , Sasa [ <unk> ] , Tim Frazier , Jermaine Marshall , they haven 't played in this yet , so it was important just to get out there . " In his first official appearance against Pennsylvania , Frazier added 2 points and 1 rebound in a scoreless performance . He was only allowed 8 minutes of play time . He scored his first points against Robert Morris the following contest , with a game @-@ high 19 points off the bench . He shot 6 @-@ of @-@ 11 from the field , and 4 @-@ of @-@ 5 on three @-@ pointers . Frazier also contributed 3 assists , 2 rebounds , and 1 steal in 30 minutes on the court . DeChellis said , " ( Tim ) is a hard guy to contain . If he starts making perimeter shots , then we 're that much better . We 've seen him where he can make shots in practice and do pretty well . We just needed to get him some confidence and get him into the flow . " The game would remain a season @-@ high for him under the scoring category . Frazier was awarded his first start as a shooting guard on November 22 , 2009 against Davidson ; he registered 7 points , 5 rebounds , 3 assists , and 3 steals . He recorded a season @-@ high 34 minutes . He finished the 2009 – 10 season averaging 5 @.@ 0 points , 2 @.@ 3 rebounds , 2 @.@ 4 assists , 0 @.@ 7 steals , and 1 @.@ 7 turnovers . He played in all 31 regular season games . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 Frazier made his sophomore debut on November 7 , 2010 , in an exhibition game against East Stroudsburg . He added 10 points , 6 assists , and two steals . Frazier also recorded a team @-@ high 4 turnovers . DeChellis commented , " Offensively we were poor tonight and we had too many turnovers ... something we 've struggled with in practice . " On November 12 , 2010 , Frazier made his second appearance as a sophomore with 6 points , 7 rebounds , 6 assists , and 1 steal . He shot 1 @-@ of @-@ 5 on field goals , while going a perfect 4 @-@ of @-@ 4 from the free @-@ throw line . Frazier was named the game 's starting shooting guard and was allowed 30 minutes of playing time . He made his first @-@ ever appearance as Penn State 's starting point guard on November 19 vs. Fairfield , and contributed 3 points , 4 rebounds , 7 assists , and 1 steal . The team 's coach commented on Frazier 's powerful defensive performance , " thought Tim Frazier did a very nice job defensively on the point guard for Fairfield who is a really good player . He bothered him all night . " Frazier made his first impression above the 10 @-@ points barrier on January 15 , 2011 vs. Ohio State , with 11 points , 6 rebounds , and 5 assists . He shot 4 @-@ of @-@ 4 from the field and made three of four free throws . On March 12 , 2011 , Frazier scored 22 points against Michigan State , his season @-@ high as a sophomore , helping the team pull off the upset victory in the semifinals of the 2011 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament . He played in his first NCAA Tournament game against Temple , contributing 15 points , 7 assists , 5 rebounds , and 2 steals . He made a late miscue guarding Juan Fernández , allowing the opposing guard to close out the game with under one second remaining in regulation . Frazier recalled the moment , " I closed out high end so he wouldn 't be able to shoot over me . ( He ) made a great move , pivoted a couple of times and then stepped through . " Fernández said , " I was thinking about shooting a jump shot but I killed my dribble and ( Tim ) Frazier was right there . For some reason he jumped over to my right and that gave me the space to go left . " By the end of the season , Frazier averaged 6 @.@ 3 points , 5 @.@ 1 assists , 3 @.@ 9 rebounds , 1 @.@ 0 steals , and 0 @.@ 1 blocks per game . He was named to the Academic All @-@ Big Ten following 2010 – 11 . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Frazier opened his junior season , and his first year under coach Pat Chambers , on November 5 , 2011 in an exhibition game against Slippery Rock . He led the team in scoring with 19 points . Frazier also posted 7 assists and 6 rebounds , helping Penn State win the game 64 – 47 . He took part in the Nittany Lions ' first regular season contest on November 12 against Hartford , with 12 points , 6 assists , and 5 steals in spite of being given 28 minutes on the court . When asked on his communication with Frazier , Chambers said , " I 'm telling him to make plays ... he has to be one of our leading scorers . He 's got to look to score . " In the following game , Frazier made his second career display with 20 or more points . He also matched his career @-@ high total on assists , with 10 . This was his second double @-@ double with Penn State . Frazier also finished with 6 rebounds , 3 steals , and 1 block . Chambers said in a post @-@ game interview , " I 'm very greedy . I 'm an old point guard , so I want more out of Tim Frazier , if you can imagine ... what more means is even more leadership , even better habits . We 're always trying to create the best habits we can for the most difficult situation . " . Frazier helped power the 62 – 46 victory over Radford , the team 's second consecutive win in the regular season . It was also Penn State 's first round game in the Hall of Fame Tip Off tournament . In his next game against LIU @-@ Brooklyn , Frazier scored a career @-@ high 26 points and matched his assists record for the second straight game , with 10 . It was his second @-@ straight double @-@ double and the third in his stint with Penn State . Chambers commented after the game , " Tim was terrific . He was a great leader tonight . He did everything you ask your point guard to do tonight . " He helped the program reach a 3 – 0 record for the third time in 12 seasons . Following up on a loss to Kentucky , Frazier recorded 27 points on November 20 , 2011 against South Florida . The next game , Frazier recorded a career @-@ high 11 assists en route to his 4th double @-@ double in 2011 . On January 11 , 2012 , Frazier scored a career @-@ high 30 points against Nebraska , with his team losing the game , 70 – 58 . He led the Big Ten with eight 20 @-@ point games through the course of the year . By the end of the season , Frazier averaged 18 @.@ 8 points , 6 @.@ 2 assists , 4 @.@ 7 rebounds , 2 @.@ 4 steals , and 0 @.@ 2 blocks . It was his highest scoring average with Penn State . He was named the John Lawther Team MVP , Second Team NABC All @-@ District , All @-@ Big Ten First Team , Academic All @-@ Big Ten , Basketball Times ' All @-@ District , and Big Ten All @-@ Defensive Team . 
 = = = Redshirt = = = 
 Frazier began his fourth season representing Penn State with 17 points , 8 assists , and 5 rebounds in an exhibition game against Philadelphia on November 3 , 2012 . He sat out for much of the second half , giving his duties to D. J. <unk> . After the game , Frazier said that the team " just played Penn State basketball . " On November 9 , 2012 , the first regular season for Frazier as a senior , he logged his 19th career 20 @-@ point game against Saint Francis ( PA ) . On November 18 , Frazier left six minutes into a game against Akron due to a ruptured left Achilles tendon . It was announced that he had a recovery period of about 12 months and would be out for the season . The injury was described as a " devastating blow " to the program by ESPN.com writer Eamonn Brennan . Chambers addressed the situation , saying , " I have no doubt he will meet this challenge and will again be one of the top players in the nation , " in accordance to his potential fifth year of NCAA eligibility . Frazier redshirted the season shortly after it was announced by the school that he would undergo surgery . He said , " I will never forget that game , that injury , never forget that camera . I 'm sitting there on the sideline with the ( television ) camera just zooming in on my foot . I 'll never forget the look on my sister 's face , my mom and dad 's face . " During his rehabilitation , Frazier began using the elliptical machine , doing work in the swimming pool , and taking part in weight training . He was guided by Penn State 's athletic trainer , Jon <unk> , throughout the process . Frazier 's sister Krystal had torn her right Achilles tendon when playing college basketball nearly seven years prior , and had gone through a similar rehabilitation before resuming her playing career . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 In late April , it was made official that Frazier would return to Penn State for his final year of eligibility . After the Big Ten granted him permission to partake his fifth season , Chambers said , " We are thrilled for him that he will have the opportunity to finish his career strong and again place himself among the top players in the nation . " It was also announced that Frazier would pursue a second major over the summer . 
 On November 3 , 2013 , Frazier posted 11 points , 6 assists , 1 steal , and 1 block in a winning effort in an exhibition game against Northwood . In his first regular season game , he recorded a double @-@ double against the Wagner Seahawks . It was the seventh incident in Frazier 's collegiate career . He was 12 @-@ for @-@ 17 on free @-@ throws and added 4 assists . On November 16 , 2013 , he scored a season @-@ high 29 points against Pennsylvania , also recording 7 assists , 3 rebounds , and 2 steals . The duo of Frazier and D. J. <unk> was regarded as one of the nation 's best <unk> , combining for 48 points through the contest . He matched his season record against St. John 's on November 29 , 2013 , posting 29 points . Over a week later , against Duquesne , Frazier recorded a career @-@ high 13 assists , powering a 9 @-@ point victory for Penn State . His performance tied Dan Earl for the third @-@ most assists in one game representing the Nittany Lions . Frazier completed his final season with Penn State by averaging 14 @.@ 9 points , 4 @.@ 5 rebounds , 5 @.@ 4 assists , 1 @.@ 6 steals , and 0 @.@ 2 blocks per game . He started in all 34 games , averaging 35 @.@ 2 minutes . Frazier was named to the Bob Cousy Award watch list , Third Team All @-@ Big Ten , and the Barclays Center Classic all @-@ tourney team . He was also a Senior CLASS Award finalist , and won the Big Ten Sportsmanship Award . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Red Claws , 76ers and Trail Blazers ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 Prior to the 2014 NBA draft , Frazier worked out for several NBA teams , including the Phoenix Suns , New York Knicks , Boston Celtics , Minnesota Timberwolves , Philadelphia 76ers and Washington Wizards . Philadelphia worked him out two times , and head coach Brett Brown invited him to play for them at the 2014 Las Vegas Summer League within an hour after he was not selected in the draft . The situation was compared to that of Khalif Wyatt , who played for the 76ers through the 2013 edition of the summer league , and attended Temple University in the Philadelphia area . Frazier said , " When [ the coaches ] reached out to me and said they wanted me for the summer league , I was ready to go for it . I just want to go out , have fun , play my hardest and show Philly and other teams what they can get from me . " . According to the 76ers assistant coach , Chad <unk> , he impressed the team 's staff by his " poise " and experience at the higher level . At Las Vegas , Frazier averaged 3 @.@ 4 points , 4 @.@ 0 rebounds , 2 @.@ 0 assists and 1 @.@ 2 steals in five games . On September 29 , 2014 , the Boston Celtics signed Frazier to a non @-@ guaranteed training camp deal with the likely notion of auditioning with the Maine Red Claws in the future . On October 27 , 2014 , he was waived by the Celtics after appearing in four preseason games where he went 1 @-@ for @-@ 2 from the field and recorded two rebounds , four assists and four steals . As expected , four days later , he was acquired by the Maine Red Claws as an affiliate player . Frazier opened his season in the D @-@ League by contributing 18 points , 9 assists , and 4 rebounds against the Oklahoma City Blue . He also shot 12 @-@ of @-@ 12 on free throws , helping the team win their first game . 
 On January 30 , 2015 , Frazier recorded his second triple @-@ double of the season with 13 points , 10 rebounds and 11 assists as he helped the Red Claws snap a three @-@ game losing streak with a 104 @-@ 92 win over the Canton Charge . On February 4 , 2015 , he was named to the Futures All @-@ Star team for the 2015 NBA D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game . 
 On February 5 , 2015 , Frazier signed a 10 @-@ day contract with the Philadelphia 76ers . The following day , he made his NBA debut in the 76ers ' 96 @-@ 107 loss to the Boston Celtics . In just under 35 minutes of action off the bench , he recorded a game @-@ high 11 assists to go with 5 points , 5 rebounds and 2 steals . Following the expiration of his 10 @-@ day contract , he was not retained by the 76ers , and on February 16 , he was reacquired by the Red Claws . On February 20 , he signed a second 10 @-@ day contract with the 76ers . However , he was waived by the 76ers on February 24 after the team acquired Thomas Robinson , and returned once again to Maine four days later . On March 5 , he recorded his fourth triple @-@ double of the season with 22 points , 13 rebounds , 14 assists in the Red Claws ' 121 @-@ 110 win over the Austin Spurs . 
 On March 30 , 2015 , Frazier signed a multi @-@ year deal with the Portland Trail Blazers . On April 21 , he was selected as both the 2015 NBA Development League 's Most Valuable Player and Rookie of the Year after averaging 16 @.@ 1 points , 7 @.@ 1 rebounds and 9 @.@ 5 assists in 41 games . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 In July 2015 , Frazier joined the Portland Trail Blazers for the 2015 NBA Summer League and attended training camp with the team . He made the final roster for the 2015 – 16 season , and played in 15 of the team 's first 29 games of the season . On December 21 , he started in his first game for the Trail Blazers in place of the injured Damian Lillard . He subsequently played in all but 25 seconds of the team 's 106 – 97 loss to the Atlanta Hawks , recording 12 points , 7 rebounds , 7 assists , 2 steals and 1 block . On February 18 , 2016 , he was waived by the Trail Blazers . 
 On February 27 , Frazier was reacquired by the Maine Red Claws . The following day , in just his second game back for the Red Claws , Frazier recorded just the 10th triple @-@ double in Red Claws history in a 132 – 111 win over the Sioux Falls Skyforce . In 32 minutes of action , he recorded 24 points , 12 rebounds and 12 assists . 
 = = = New Orleans Pelicans ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On March 16 , 2016 , Frazier signed a 10 @-@ day contract with the New Orleans Pelicans to help the team deal with numerous injuries . New Orleans had to use an NBA hardship exemption in order to sign him as he made their roster stand at 17 , two over the allowed limited of 15 . He made his debut for the Pelicans later that night , recording 14 points and 9 assists in 27 minutes off the bench in a 123 – 108 win over the Sacramento Kings . On March 20 , he scored a season @-@ high 17 points in a 109 – 105 win over the Los Angeles Clippers . He topped that mark four days later , scoring 18 points in a loss to the Indiana Pacers . On March 26 , he signed with the Pelicans for the remainder of the season . On April 3 , he had career highs with 19 points and 13 assists off the bench in a 106 – 87 win over the Brooklyn Nets . On April 11 , he set a new career high with 20 points , along with 11 assists , in a 121 – 116 loss to the Chicago Bulls . In the Pelicans ' season finale on April 13 , Frazier had a 15 @-@ assist game off the bench in a 144 – 109 loss to the Minnesota Timberwolves . 
 On June 22 , 2016 , Frazier re @-@ signed with the Pelicans . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Frazier is the younger brother of Krystal Frazier , a former Rice basketball guard . She was an All @-@ Conference USA selection after averaging over 10 points per game in her final seasons . Frazier graduated in May 2013 with a 3 @.@ 1 grade point average in supply chain and information systems at <unk> College of Business . Frazier added a second bachelor 's degree in communication arts and sciences the following year . He later served as the basketball team 's representative to the Penn State Student Athlete Advisory Board and was a member of the secret society <unk> Nous while at Penn State . 
 = Karnataka = 
 Karnataka ( Kannada : <unk> ್ <unk> , IPA : / <unk> , <unk> / ) is a state in south western region of India . It was formed on 1 November 1956 , with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act . Originally known as the State of Mysore , it was renamed Karnataka in 1973 . The capital and largest city is Bangalore ( Bengaluru ) . Karnataka is bordered by the Arabian Sea and the Laccadive Sea to the west , Goa to the northwest , Maharashtra to the north , Telangana to the northeast , Andhra Pradesh to the east , Tamil Nadu to the southeast , and Kerala to the southwest . The state covers an area of 191 @,@ 976 square kilometres ( 74 @,@ 122 sq mi ) , or 5 @.@ 83 percent of the total geographical area of India . It is the seventh largest Indian state by area . With 61 @,@ 130 @,@ 704 inhabitants at the 2011 census , Karnataka is the eighth largest state by population , comprising 30 districts . Kannada , one of the classical languages of India , is the most widely spoken and official language of the state . 
 The two main river systems of the state are the Krishna and its tributaries , the Bhima , <unk> , <unk> , Malaprabha , and Tungabhadra , in the north , and the Kaveri and its tributaries , the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Lakshmana <unk> and Kabini , in the south . Most of these rivers flow out of Karnataka eastward into the Bay of Bengal . 
 Though several etymologies have been suggested for the name Karnataka , the generally accepted one is that Karnataka is derived from the Kannada words <unk> and <unk> , meaning " elevated land " . Karu nadu may also be read as <unk> , meaning " black " , and nadu , meaning " region " , as a reference to the black cotton soil found in the <unk> <unk> region of the state . The British used the word Carnatic , sometimes Karnatak , to describe both sides of peninsular India , south of the Krishna . 
 With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic , Karnataka has been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India . The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio @-@ religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day . Karnataka has contributed significantly to both forms of Indian classical music , the Carnatic and Hindustani traditions . 
 = = History = = 
 Karnataka 's pre @-@ history goes back to a paleolithic hand @-@ axe culture evidenced by discoveries of , among other things , hand axes and <unk> in the region . Evidence of neolithic and megalithic cultures have also been found in the state . Gold discovered in Harappa was found to be imported from mines in Karnataka , prompting scholars to hypothesise about contacts between ancient Karnataka and the Indus Valley Civilisation ca . 3300 BCE . 
 Prior to the third century BCE , most of Karnataka formed part of the Nanda Empire before coming under the Mauryan empire of Emperor Ashoka . Four centuries of Satavahana rule followed , allowing them to control large areas of Karnataka . The decline of Satavahana power led to the rise of the earliest native kingdoms , the Kadambas and the Western Gangas , marking the region 's emergence as an independent political entity . The Kadamba Dynasty , founded by Mayurasharma , had its capital at Banavasi ; the Western Ganga Dynasty was formed with Talakad as its capital . 
 These were also the first kingdoms to use Kannada in administration , as evidenced by the Halmidi inscription and a fifth @-@ century copper coin discovered at Banavasi . These dynasties were followed by imperial Kannada empires such as the Badami Chalukyas , the Rashtrakuta Empire of Manyakheta and the Western Chalukya Empire , which ruled over large parts of the Deccan and had their capitals in what is now Karnataka . The Western Chalukyas patronised a unique style of architecture and Kannada literature which became a precursor to the Hoysala art of 12th century . Parts of modern @-@ day Southern Karnataka ( Gangavadi ) were occupied by the Chola Empire at the turn of 11th century . The Cholas and the Hoysalas fought over the region in the early 12th century before it eventually came under Hoysala rule . 
 At the turn of the first millennium , the Hoysalas gained power in the region . Literature flourished during this time , which led to the emergence of distinctive Kannada literary metres , and the construction of temples and sculptures adhering to the Vesara style of architecture . The expansion of the Hoysala Empire brought minor parts of modern Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu under its rule . In the early 14th century , Harihara and Bukka Raya established the Vijayanagara empire with its capital , <unk> ( later named Vijayanagara ) , on the banks of the Tungabhadra River in the modern Bellary district . The empire rose as a bulwark against Muslim advances into South India , which it completely controlled for over two centuries . 
 In 1565 , Karnataka and the rest of South India experienced a major geopolitical shift when the Vijayanagara empire fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates in the Battle of Talikota . The Bijapur Sultanate , which had risen after the demise of the Bahmani Sultanate of Bidar , soon took control of the Deccan ; it was defeated by the <unk> in the late 17th century . The Bahamani and Bijapur rulers encouraged Urdu and Persian literature and Indo @-@ Saracenic architecture , the Gol Gumbaz being one of the high points of this style . During the sixteenth century , Konkani Hindus migrated to Karnataka , mostly from <unk> , Goa , while during the seventeenth and eighteenth century , Goan Catholics migrated to South Canara , especially from <unk> , Goa , as a result of food shortages , epidemics and heavy taxation imposed by the Portuguese . 
 In the period that followed , parts of northern Karnataka were ruled by the Nizam of Hyderabad , the Maratha Empire , the British , and other powers . In the south , the Mysore Kingdom , a former vassal of the Vijayanagara Empire , was briefly independent . With the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II , Haidar Ali , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Mysore army , gained control of the region . After his death , the kingdom was inherited by his son Tippu Sultan . To contain European expansion in South India , Haidar Ali and later Tippu Sultan fought four significant Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars , the last of which resulted in Tippu Sultan 's death and the incorporation of Mysore into the British Raj in 1799 . The Kingdom of Mysore was restored to the Wodeyars and Mysore remained a princely state under the British Raj . 
 As the " doctrine of lapse " gave way to dissent and resistance from princely states across the country , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and others spearheaded rebellions in Karnataka in 1830 , nearly three decades before the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . Other uprisings followed , such as the ones at Supa , Bagalkot , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . These rebellions — which coincided with the Indian Rebellion of 1857 - were led by <unk> <unk> , Bhaskar Rao Bhave , the <unk> <unk> , Raja Venkatappa Nayaka and others . By the late 19th century , the independence movement had gained momentum ; Karnad Sadashiva Rao , <unk> Venkata Raya , S. <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Srinivasa Rau and others carried on the struggle into the early 20th century . 
 After India 's independence , the Maharaja , <unk> Wodeyar , allowed his kingdom 's accession to India . In 1950 , Mysore became an Indian state of the same name ; the former Maharaja served as its Rajpramukh ( head of state ) until 1975 . Following the long @-@ standing demand of the <unk> Movement , <unk> and Kannada @-@ speaking regions from the adjoining states of Madras , Hyderabad and Bombay were incorporated into the Mysore state , under the States Reorganisation Act of 1956 . The thus expanded state was renamed Karnataka , seventeen years later , in 1973 . In the early 1900s through the post @-@ independence era , industrial visionaries such as Sir <unk> <unk> born in <unk> , <unk> District played an important role in the development of Karnataka 's strong manufacturing and industrial base . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The state has three principal geographical zones : 
 The coastal region of Karavali 
 The hilly <unk> region comprising the Western Ghats 
 The <unk> region comprising the plains of the Deccan plateau 
 The bulk of the state is in the <unk> region , the northern part of which is the second @-@ largest arid region in India . The highest point in Karnataka is the <unk> hills in <unk> district which has an altitude of 1 @,@ 929 metres ( 6 @,@ 329 ft ) . Some of the important rivers in Karnataka are Kaveri , Tungabhadra , Krishna , Malaprabha and the <unk> . 
 Karnataka consists of four main types of geological formations — the Archean complex made up of Dharwad schists and granitic gneisses , the Proterozoic non @-@ fossiliferous sedimentary formations of the <unk> and Bhima series , the Deccan <unk> and <unk> deposits and the tertiary and recent laterites and alluvial deposits . Significantly , about 60 % of the state is composed of the Archean complex which consist of gneisses , granites and <unk> rocks . <unk> <unk> that are found in many districts over the Deccan Traps were formed after the cessation of volcanic activity in the early tertiary period . Eleven groups of soil orders are found in Karnataka , viz . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Depending on the agricultural capability of the soil , the soil types are divided into six types , viz. red , lateritic , black , <unk> @-@ <unk> , forest and coastal soils . 
 Karnataka experiences four seasons . The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May , the monsoon season between June and September and the post @-@ monsoon season from October till December . <unk> , Karnataka is divided into three zones — coastal , north interior and south interior . Of these , the coastal zone receives the heaviest rainfall with an average rainfall of about 3 @,@ 638 @.@ 5 mm ( 143 in ) per annum , far in excess of the state average of 1 @,@ 139 mm ( 45 in ) . Agumbe in the Shivamogga district receives the second highest annual rainfall in India . The highest recorded temperature was 45 @.@ 6 ° C ( 114 ° F ) at Raichur and the lowest recorded temperature was 2 @.@ 8 ° C ( 37 ° F ) at Bidar . 
 About 38 @,@ 724 km2 ( 14 @,@ 951 sq mi ) of Karnataka ( i.e. 20 % of the state 's geographic area ) is covered by forests . The forests are classified as reserved , protected , <unk> , village and private forests . The percentage of forested area is slightly less than the all @-@ India average of about 23 % , and significantly less than the 33 % prescribed in the National Forest Policy . 
 = = Sub @-@ divisions = = 
 There are 30 districts in Karnataka : 
 Each district is governed by a district commissioner or district magistrate . The districts are further divided into sub @-@ divisions , which are governed by sub @-@ divisional magistrates ; sub @-@ divisions comprise blocks containing panchayats ( village councils ) and town municipalities . 
 At the 2011 census , Karnataka 's ten largest cities , sorted in order of decreasing population , were Bangalore , <unk> @-@ Dharwad , Mysuru , Gulbarga , Mangaluru , Belagavi , Davangere , <unk> , <unk> and Shivamogga . Bangalore Urban , Belagavi and Mysore were the most populous districts , each of them having a population of more than three million . Bangalore Rural and Kodagu districts had a population of less than one million . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 census of India , the total population of Karnataka was 61 @,@ 095 @,@ 297 of which 30 @,@ 966 @,@ 657 ( 50 @.@ 7 % ) were male and 30 @,@ 128 @,@ 640 ( 49 @.@ 3 % ) were female , or 1000 males for every 973 females . This represents a 15 @.@ 60 % increase over the population in 2001 . The population density was 319 per km2 and 38 @.@ 67 % of the people lived in urban areas . The literacy rate was 75 @.@ 36 % with 82 @.@ 47 % of males and 68 @.@ 08 % of females being literate . 84 @.@ 00 % of the population were Hindu , 12 @.@ 92 % were Muslim , 1 @.@ 87 % were Christian , 0 @.@ 72 % were Jains , 0 @.@ 16 % were Buddhist , 0 @.@ 05 % were Sikh and 0 @.@ 02 % were belonging to other religions and 0 @.@ 27 % of the population did not state their religion . 
 Kannada is the official language of Karnataka and spoken as a native language by about 66 @.@ 26 % of the people as of 2001 . Other linguistic minorities in the state were Urdu ( 10 @.@ 54 % ) , Telugu ( 7 @.@ 03 % ) , Tamil ( 3 @.@ 57 % ) , Marathi ( 3 @.@ 6 % ) , Tulu ( 3 @.@ 0 % ) , Hindi ( 2 @.@ 56 % ) , Konkani ( 1 @.@ 46 % ) , Malayalam ( 1 @.@ 33 % ) and Kodava Takk ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) . In 2007 the state had a birth rate of 2 @.@ 2 % , a death rate of 0 @.@ 7 % , an infant mortality rate of 5 @.@ 5 % and a maternal mortality rate of 0 @.@ 2 % . The total fertility rate was 2 @.@ 2 . 
 In the field of speciality health care , Karnataka 's private sector competes with the best in the world . Karnataka has also established a modicum of public health services having a better record of health care and child care than most other states of India . In spite of these advances , some parts of the state still leave much to be desired when it comes to primary health care . 
 = = Government and administration = = 
 Karnataka has a parliamentary system of government with two democratically elected houses , the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council . The Legislative Assembly consists of 224 members who are elected for five @-@ year terms . The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 75 members with one @-@ third ( 25 members ) retiring every two years . 
 The government of Karnataka is headed by the Chief Minister who is chosen by the ruling party members of the Legislative Assembly . The Chief Minister , along with the council of ministers , drives the legislative agenda and exercises most of the executive powers . However , the constitutional and formal head of the state is the Governor who is appointed for a five @-@ year term by the President of India on the advice of the Union government . The people of Karnataka also elect 28 members to the Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian Parliament . The members of the state Legislative Assembly elect 12 members to the Rajya Sabha , the upper house of the Indian Parliament . 
 For administrative purposes , Karnataka has been divided into four revenue divisions , 49 sub @-@ divisions , 30 districts , 175 taluks and 745 <unk> / revenue circles . The administration in each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner who belongs to the Indian Administrative Service and is assisted by a number of officers belonging to Karnataka state services . The Deputy Commissioner of Police , an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service and assisted by the officers of the Karnataka Police Service , is entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining law and order and related issues in each district . The Deputy Conservator of Forests , an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service , is entrusted with the responsibility of managing forests , environment and wildlife of the district , he will be assisted by the officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Service and officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Subordinate Service . <unk> development in the districts is looked after by the district head of each development department such as Public Works Department , Health , Education , Agriculture , Animal Husbandry , etc . The judiciary in the state consists of the Karnataka High Court ( <unk> <unk> ) in Bangalore , district and session courts in each district and lower courts and judges at the taluk level . 
 Politics in Karnataka has been dominated by three political parties , the Indian National Congress , the Janata Dal ( Secular ) and the Bharatiya Janata Party . Politicians from Karnataka have played prominent roles in federal government of India with some of them having held the high positions of Prime Minister and Vice @-@ President . Border disputes involving Karnataka 's claim on the Kasaragod and Solapur districts and Maharashtra 's claim on Belgaum are ongoing since the states reorganisation . The official emblem of Karnataka has a <unk> <unk> in the centre . <unk> this are four lions facing the four directions , taken from the Lion Capital of Ashoka at Sarnath . The emblem also carries two <unk> with the head of an elephant and the body of a lion . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Karnataka had an estimated GSDP ( Gross State Domestic Product ) of about US $ 58 @.@ 23 billion in the 2008 @-@ 09 fiscal year . The state registered a GSDP growth rate of 7 % for the year 2007 @-@ 2008 . Karnataka 's contribution to India 's GDP in the year 2004 @-@ 05 was 5 @.@ 2 % . With GDP growth of 56 @.@ 2 % and per capita GDP growth of 43 @.@ 9 % , Karnataka is now on the 15th position among all states . At the end of 2004 , the unemployment rate in Karnataka was 4 @.@ 94 % compared to the national rate of 5 @.@ 99 % . For the fiscal year 2006 @-@ 07 , the inflation rate in Karnataka was 4 @.@ 4 % , compared to the national average of 4 @.@ 7 % . In 2004 – 05 , Karnataka had an estimated poverty ratio of 17 % , less than the national ratio of 27 @.@ 5 % . 
 Nearly 56 % of the workforce in Karnataka is engaged in agriculture and related activities . A total of 12 @.@ 31 million hectares of land , or 64 @.@ 6 % of the state 's total area , is cultivated . Much of the agricultural output is dependent on the southwest monsoon as only 26 @.@ 5 % of the sown area is irrigated . 
 Karnataka is the manufacturing hub for some of the largest public sector industries in India , including Hindustan Aeronautics Limited , National Aerospace Laboratories , Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited , Indian Telephone Industries , Bharat Earth Movers Limited and HMT ( formerly Hindustan Machine Tools ) , which are based in Bangalore . Many of India 's premier science and technology research centres , such as Indian Space Research Organisation , Central Power Research Institute , Bharat Electronics Limited and the Central Food Technological Research Institute , are also headquartered in Karnataka . Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited is an oil refinery located in Mangalore . 
 Since the 1980s , Karnataka has emerged as the pan @-@ Indian leader in the field of IT ( information technology ) . In 2007 , there were nearly 2 @,@ 000 firms operating in Karnataka . Many of them , including two of India 's biggest software firms , Infosys and Wipro , are also headquartered in the state . Exports from these firms exceeded ₹ 50 @,@ 000 crores ( $ 12 @.@ 5 billion ) in 2006 @-@ 07 , accounting for nearly 38 % of all IT exports from India . The Nandi Hills area in the outskirts of Devanahalli is the site of the upcoming $ 22 billion , 50 square kilometre BIAL IT Investment Region , one of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of Karnataka . All this has earned the state capital , Bangalore , the sobriquet Silicon Valley of India . 
 Karnataka also leads the nation in biotechnology . It is home to India 's largest <unk> , with 158 of the country 's 320 biotechnology firms being based here . The state accounts for 75 % of India 's floriculture , an upcoming industry which supplies flowers and ornamental plants worldwide . 
 Seven of India 's banks , Canara Bank , Syndicate Bank , Corporation Bank , Vijaya Bank , Karnataka Bank , Vysya Bank and the State Bank of Mysore originated in this state . The coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada have a branch for every 500 persons — the best distribution of banks in India . In March 2002 , Karnataka had 4767 branches of different banks with each branch serving 11 @,@ 000 persons , which is lower than the national average of 16 @,@ 000 . 
 A majority of the silk industry in India is headquartered in Karnataka State , much of it in <unk> , and the state government intends to invest ₹ 70 crore in a " Silk City " at <unk> , near Bangalore International Airport . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Air transport in Karnataka , as in the rest of the country , is still a fledgling but fast expanding sector . Karnataka has Airports at Bangalore , Mangalore , Belgaum , Hubli , Hampi , Bellary and Mysore with international operations from Bangalore and Mangalore airports . Major airlines such as Kingfisher Airlines and Kingfisher Red were based in Bangalore . 
 Karnataka has a railway network with a total length of approximately 3 @,@ 089 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 919 mi ) . Until the creation of the South Western Zone headquartered at Hubli in 2003 , the railway network in the state was in the Southern and Western railway zones . Several parts of the state now come under the South Western Zone , with the remainder under the Southern Railways . Coastal Karnataka is covered under the Konkan railway network which was considered India 's biggest railway project of the century . Bangalore and Hubli are extensively connected with inter @-@ state destinations while other important cities and towns in the state are not so well @-@ connected . 
 Karnataka has 11 ports , including the New Mangalore Port , a major port and ten minor ports , of which three were operational in 2012 . The New Mangalore port was incorporated as the ninth major port in India on 4 May 1974 . This port handled 32 @.@ 04 million tonnes of traffic in the fiscal year 2006 @-@ 07 with 17 @.@ 92 million tonnes of imports and 14 @.@ 12 million tonnes of exports . The port also handled 1015 vessels including 18 cruise vessels during the year 2006 @-@ 07 . The inland water transport within the state is not well developed . 
 The total lengths of National Highways and state highways in Karnataka are 3 @,@ 973 and 9 @,@ 829 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 469 and 6 @,@ 107 mi ) , respectively . The KSRTC , the state public transport corporation , transports an average of 2 @.@ 2 million passengers daily and employs about 25 @,@ 000 people . In the late nineties , KSRTC was split into three corporations , viz . , The Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation , The North @-@ East Karnataka Road Transport Corporation and The North @-@ West Karnataka Road Transport Corporation with their headquarters in Bangalore , Gulbarga and Hubli respectively . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The diverse linguistic and religious ethnicities that are native to Karnataka , combined with their long histories , have contributed immensely to the varied cultural heritage of the state . Apart from Kannadigas , Karnataka is home to <unk> , Kodavas and <unk> . Minor populations of Tibetan Buddhists and tribes like the <unk> , <unk> , Todas and Siddhis also live in Karnataka . The traditional folk arts cover the entire gamut of music , dance , drama , storytelling by itinerant troupes , etc . Yakshagana of Malnad and coastal Karnataka , a classical dance drama , is one of the major theatrical forms of Karnataka . Contemporary theatre culture in Karnataka remains vibrant with organisations like <unk> , Ranga Shankara , <unk> and Prabhat <unk> continuing to build on the foundations laid by Gubbi <unk> , T. P. <unk> , B. V. <unk> , K V Subbanna , Prasanna and others . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> are popular dance forms . The Mysore style of <unk> , nurtured and popularised by the likes of the legendary <unk> <unk> , continues to hold sway in Karnataka , and Bangalore also enjoys an eminent place as one of the foremost centres of <unk> . 
 Karnataka also has a special place in the world of Indian classical music , with both Karnataka ( Carnatic ) and Hindustani styles finding place in the state , and Karnataka has produced a number of stalwarts in both styles . The Haridasa movement of the sixteenth century contributed significantly to the development of Karnataka ( Carnatic ) music as a performing art form . Purandara Dasa , one of the most revered Haridasas , is known as the Karnataka Sangeeta Pitamaha ( ' Father of Karnataka a.k.a. Carnatic music ' ) . Celebrated Hindustani musicians like <unk> Hangal , Mallikarjun Mansur , <unk> Joshi , Basavaraja <unk> , Sawai Gandharva and several others hail from Karnataka , and some of them have been recipients of the Kalidas Samman , Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan awards . Noted Carnatic musicians include Violin T. Chowdiah , Veena <unk> , Mysore <unk> , <unk> Iyengar and <unk> Krishna Iyengar . 
 <unk> is another classical music genre based on Carnatic music that is practised in Karnataka . Kannada <unk> is a genre of popular music that draws inspiration from the expressionist poetry of modern poets . The Mysore school of painting has produced painters like Sundarayya , Tanjavur <unk> , B. Venkatappa and <unk> . <unk> Parishat is an organisation in Karnataka dedicated to promoting painting , mainly in the Mysore painting style . 
 <unk> is the traditional dress of women in Karnataka . Women in Kodagu have a distinct style of wearing the saree , different from the rest of Karnataka . Dhoti , known as <unk> in Karnataka , is the traditional attire of men . Shirt , Trousers and <unk> kameez are widely worn in Urban areas . Mysore Peta is the traditional headgear of southern Karnataka , while the <unk> or <unk> ( similar to the Rajasthani turban ) is preferred in the northern areas of the state . 
 Rice and <unk> form the staple food in South Karnataka , whereas <unk> rotti , Sorghum is staple to North Karnataka . Bisi bele bath , <unk> rotti , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Dose , Masala Dose and <unk> Vade are some of the popular food items in Karnataka . Among sweets , Mysore Pak , <unk> of Gokak and <unk> , <unk> Kunda and Dharwad <unk> are popular . Apart from this , coastal Karnataka and Kodagu have distinctive cuisines of their own . Udupi cuisine of coastal Karnataka is popular all over India . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Adi Shankaracharya ( 788 – 820 ) chose Sringeri in Karnataka to establish the first of his four mathas ( monastery ) . Madhvacharya ( 1238 – 1317 ) was the chief proponent of <unk> ( Philosophy of Reality ) , popularly known as Dvaita or <unk> school of Hindu philosophy — one of the three most influential Vedānta philosophies . Madhva was one of the important philosophers during the Bhakti movement . He was a pioneer in many ways , going against standard conventions and norms . According to tradition , <unk> is believed to be the third incarnation of <unk> ( <unk> ) , after <unk> and <unk> . The Haridasa ( Kannada : <unk> ) devotional movement is considered as one of the turning points in the cultural history of India . Over a span of nearly six centuries , several saints and mystics helped shape the culture , philosophy and art of South India and Karnataka in particular by exerting considerable spiritual influence over the masses and kingdoms that ruled South India . 
 This movement was ushered in by the Haridasas ( literally " servants of Lord Hari " ) and took shape in the 13th century - 14th century CE , period , prior to and during the early rule of the Vijayanagara empire . The main objective of this movement was to propagate the Dvaita philosophy of Madhvacharya ( Madhva Siddhanta ) to the masses through a literary medium known as Dasa Sahitya literature of the servants of the Lord . Purandaradasa is widely recognised as the " <unk> " of Carnatic Music for his immense contribution . Ramanujacharya , the leading expounder of <unk> , spent many years in Melkote . He came to Karnataka in 1098 AD and lived here until 1122 AD . He first lived in <unk> and then moved to Melkote where the <unk> Temple and a well @-@ organised Matha were built . He was patronised by the Hoysala king , Vishnuvardhana . 
 In the twelfth century , Lingayatism emerged in northern Karnataka as a protest against the rigidity of the prevailing social and caste system . Leading figures of this movement were Basava , Akka Mahadevi and Allama Prabhu , who established the Anubhava Mantapa which was the centre of all religious and philosophical thoughts and discussions pertaining to <unk> . These three social reformers did so by the literary means of ' Vachana Sahitya ' which is very famous for its simple , straight forward and easily understandable Kannada language . Lingayatism preached women equality by letting women wear <unk> i.e. Symbol of god around their neck . Basava shunned the sharp hierarchical divisions that existed and sought to remove all distinctions between the hierarchically superior master class and the subordinate , servile class . He also supported inter @-@ caste marriages and <unk> <unk> of Basavanna . This was the basis of the Lingayat faith which today counts millions among its followers . 
 The Jain philosophy and literature have contributed immensely to the religious and cultural landscape of Karnataka . Islam , which had an early presence on the west coast of India as early as the tenth century , gained a foothold in Karnataka with the rise of the Bahamani and Bijapur sultanates that ruled parts of Karnataka . Christianity reached Karnataka in the sixteenth century with the arrival of the Portuguese and St. Francis Xavier in 1545 . 
 Buddhism was popular in Karnataka during the first millennium in places such as Gulbarga and Banavasi . A chance discovery of edicts and several Mauryan relics at <unk> in Gulbarga district in 1986 has proven that the Krishna River basin was once home to both Mahayana and Hinayana Buddhism . There are Tibetan refugee camps in Karnataka . 
 Mysore Dasara is celebrated as the Nada <unk> ( state festival ) and this is marked by major festivities at Mysore . Ugadi ( Kannada New Year ) , Makara Sankranti ( the harvest festival ) , Ganesh Chaturthi , <unk> , Basava Jayanthi , Deepavali , and Ramzan are the other major festivals of Karnataka . 
 = = Language = = 
 The Kannada language serves as the official language of the state of Karnataka , as the native language of approximately 65 % of its population and as one of the classical languages of India . Kannada played a crucial role in the creation of Karnataka : linguistic demographics played a major role in defining the new state in 1956 . Tulu , Konkani and Kodava are other minor native languages that share a long history in the state . Urdu is spoken widely by the Muslim population . Less widely spoken languages include Beary <unk> and certain dialects such as <unk> , Dharwad Kannada , Mangaluru Kannada or Malnad Kannada , and Bengaluru Kannada . 
 Kannada features a rich and ancient body of literature including religious and secular genre , covering topics as diverse as Jainism ( such as Puranas ) , Veerashaivism ( such as Vachanas ) , Vaishnavism ( such as Haridasa Sahitya ) and modern literature . Evidence from edicts during the time of Ashoka the Great ( reigned 274 – 232 BCE ) suggest that Buddhist literature influenced the Kannada script and its literature . The Halmidi inscription , the earliest attested full @-@ length inscription in the Kannada language and script , dates from 450 CE , while the earliest available literary work , the Kavirajamarga , has been dated to 850 CE . References made in the Kavirajamarga , however , prove that Kannada literature flourished in the native composition meters such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> during earlier centuries . The classic refers to several earlier greats ( <unk> ) of Kannada poetry and prose . 
 Kuvempu , the renowned Kannada poet and writer who wrote Jaya Bharata <unk> <unk> , the state anthem of Karnataka was the first recipient of the " Karnataka Ratna " award , the highest civilian award bestowed by the Government of Karnataka . Contemporary Kannada literature has received considerable acknowledgement in the arena of Indian literature , with eight Kannada writers winning India 's highest literary honour , the Jnanpith award . 
 Tulu is spoken mainly in the coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada . Tulu <unk> , written by <unk> in the Tigalari script , is the oldest surviving Tulu text . Tigalari script was used by Brahmins to write Sanskrit language . The use of the Kannada script for writing Tulu and non @-@ availability of print in Tigalari script contributed to the marginalisation of Tigalari script . Konkani is mostly spoken in the Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts and in parts of Udupi . The Kodavas who mainly reside in the Kodagu district , speak Kodava Takk . Two regional variations of the language exist , the northern <unk> Takka and the southern <unk> Takka . Kodava Takk use the Kannada script for writing and Konkani use the Kannada as well as Devanagari script for writing . English is the medium of education in many schools and widely used for business communication in most private companies . 
 All of the state 's languages are patronised and promoted by governmental and quasi @-@ governmental bodies . The Kannada Sahitya Parishat and the Kannada Sahitya Akademi are responsible for the promotion of Kannada while the Karnataka Konkani Sahitya Akademi , The Tulu Sahitya Akademi and the Kodava Sahitya Akademi promote their respective languages . 
 = = Education = = 
 As per the 2011 census , Karnataka had a literacy rate of 75 @.@ 60 % , with 82 @.@ 85 % of males and 68 @.@ 13 % of females in the state being literate . In 2001 the literacy rate of the state were 67 @.@ 04 % , with 76 @.@ 29 % of males and 57 @.@ 45 % of females being literate . The state is home to some of the premier educational and research institutions of India such as the Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad , the Indian Institute of Science , the Indian Institute of Management , the National Institute of Technology Karnataka and the National Law School of India University . 
 In March 2006 , Karnataka had 54 @,@ 529 primary schools with 252 @,@ 875 teachers and 8 @.@ 495 million students , and <unk> secondary schools with 92 @,@ 287 teachers and 1 @.@ 384 million students . There are three kinds of schools in the state , viz . , government @-@ run , private aided ( financial aid is provided by the government ) and private unaided ( no financial aid is provided ) . The primary languages of instruction in most schools are Kannada and English . The syllabus taught in the schools is either of the CBSE , the ICSE or the state syllabus ( <unk> ) defined by the Department of Public Instruction of the Government of Karnataka . However , some schools follows NIOS syllabus . The State has two Sainik Schools in Coorg Sainik School in Kodagu and in Bijapur Sainik School in Bijapur . 
 To maximise attendance in schools , the Karnataka Government has launched a midday meal scheme in government and aided schools in which free lunch is provided to the students . Statewide board examinations are conducted at the end of the period of secondary education and students who qualify are allowed to pursue a two @-@ year pre @-@ university course ; after which students become eligible to pursue under @-@ graduate degrees . 
 There are 481 degree colleges affiliated with one of the universities in the state , viz . Bangalore University , Gulbarga University , Karnatak University , Kuvempu University , Mangalore University and Mysore University . In 1998 , the engineering colleges in the state were brought under the newly formed Visvesvaraya Technological University headquartered at Belgaum , whereas the medical colleges are run under the jurisdiction of the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences . Some of these baccalaureate colleges are accredited with the status of a deemed university . There are 186 engineering , 39 medical and 41 dental colleges in the state . Udupi , Sringeri , Gokarna and Melkote are well @-@ known places of Sanskrit and Vedic learning . In 2015 the Central Government decided to establish the first Indian Institute of Technology in Karnataka at Dharwad . Tulu and Konkani languages are taught as an optional subject in the twin districts of South Canara and Udupi . 
 = = = High Literacy Districts = = = 
 = = Media = = 
 The era of Kannada newspapers started in the year 1843 when Hermann <unk> , a missionary from Basel Mission , published the first Kannada newspaper called <unk> Samachara in Mangalore . The first Kannada periodical , Mysuru <unk> <unk> was started by <unk> <unk> in Mysore . Shortly after Indian independence in 1948 , K. N. <unk> founded The Printers ( Mysore ) Private Limited and began publishing two newspapers , Deccan Herald and Prajavani . Presently the Times of India and Vijaya Karnataka are the largest @-@ selling English and Kannada newspapers respectively . A vast number of weekly , biweekly and monthly magazines are under publication in both Kannada and English . <unk> , <unk> , Samyukta Karnataka , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Hosa <unk> , Karavali Ale are also some popular dailies published from Karnataka . 
 Doordarshan is the broadcaster of the Government of India and its channel DD <unk> is dedicated to Kannada . Prominent Kannada channels include <unk> News , Colors Kannada , Zee Kannada , Udaya TV , TV 9 , Asianet Suvarna and Kasturi TV . 
 Karnataka occupies a special place in the history of Indian radio . In 1935 , <unk> , the first private radio station in India , was started by Prof. M.V. Gopalaswamy in Mysore . The popular radio station was taken over by the local municipality and later by All India Radio ( AIR ) and moved to Bangalore in 1955 . Later in 1957 , AIR adopted the original name of the radio station , <unk> as its own . Some of the popular programs aired by AIR Bangalore included <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> which were programs that taught science through songs , plays and stories . These two programs became so popular that they were translated and broadcast in 18 different languages and the entire series was recorded on cassettes by the Government of Karnataka and distributed to thousands of schools across the state . Karnataka has witnessed a growth in FM radio channels , mainly in the cities of Bangalore , Mangalore and Mysore , which has become hugely popular . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Karnataka 's smallest district , Kodagu , is a major contributor to Indian field hockey , producing numerous players who have represented India at the international level . The annual Kodava Hockey Festival is the largest hockey tournament in the world . Bangalore has hosted a WTA tennis event and , in 1997 , it hosted the fourth National Games of India . The Sports Authority of India , the premier sports institute in the country , and the Nike Tennis Academy are also situated in Bangalore . Karnataka has been referred to as the cradle of Indian swimming because of its high standards in comparison to other states . 
 One of the most popular sports in Karnataka is cricket . The state cricket team has won the Ranji Trophy seven times , second only to Mumbai in terms of success . <unk> Stadium in Bangalore regularly hosts international matches and is also the home of the National Cricket Academy , which was opened in 2000 to nurture potential international players . Many cricketers have represented India and in one international match held in the 1990s ; players from Karnataka composed the majority of the national team . The Royal Challengers Bangalore , an Indian Premier League franchise , The Bengaluru Football Club , an Indian Football League : I @-@ League franchise , The Bengaluru <unk> , a Pro Wrestling League franchise , The Bengaluru Top Guns , a Premier Badminton League franchise and The Bengaluru Bulls , a Pro <unk> League franchise are based in Bangalore . The Karnataka Premier League is an inter @-@ regional Twenty20 cricket tournament played in the state . 
 Notable sportsmen from Karnataka include B.S. Chandrasekhar , Ravi Shastri , Sanjay Manjrekar , Anil Kumble , Javagal Srinath , Rahul Dravid , Venkatesh Prasad , Robin <unk> , Vinay Kumar , <unk> Vishwanath , Syed Kirmani , Stuart Binny , <unk> <unk> , Mahesh Bhupathi , Rohan Bopanna , Prakash Padukone who won the All England Badminton Championships in 1980 and Pankaj Advani who has won three world titles in cue sports by the age of 20 including the amateur World Snooker Championship in 2003 and the World Billiards Championship in 2005 . 
 Cycling talent of Karnataka needs a special mention . Off late Bijapur district has produced some of the best known Road Cyclists in the national circuit . <unk> <unk> was part of the Indian contingent at the Perlis Open ' 99 in Malaysia . In recognition of the talent of cyclists in the district , the State Government has already laid a cycling track at the B.R. Ambedkar Stadium here , spending ₹ . 40 lakh . 
 Sports like kho kho , kabaddi , <unk> <unk> and goli ( marbles ) are played mostly in Karnataka 's rural areas . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Karnataka has a rich diversity of flora and fauna . It has a recorded forest area of 38 @,@ 720 km2 ( 14 @,@ 950 sq mi ) which constitutes 20 @.@ 19 % of the total geographical area of the state . These forests support 25 % of the elephant and 10 % of the tiger population of India . Many regions of Karnataka are as yet unexplored , so new species of flora and fauna are found periodically . The Western Ghats , a biodiversity hotspot , includes the western region of Karnataka . Two sub @-@ clusters in the Western Ghats , viz . <unk> and Kudremukh , both in Karnataka , are on the tentative list of World Heritage Sites of UNESCO . The Bandipur and <unk> National Parks , which fall outside these <unk> , were included in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve in 1986 , a UNESCO designation . The Indian roller and the Indian elephant are recognised as the state bird and animal while sandalwood and the lotus are recognised as the state tree and flower respectively . Karnataka has five national parks : Anshi , Bandipur , <unk> , Kudremukh and Nagarhole . It also has 27 wildlife sanctuaries of which seven are bird sanctuaries . 
 Wild animals that are found in Karnataka include the elephant , the tiger , the leopard , the gaur , the sambar deer , the chital or spotted deer , the muntjac , the bonnet macaque , the slender loris , the common palm civet , the small Indian civet , the sloth bear , the dhole , the striped hyena and the golden jackal . Some of the birds found here are the great hornbill , the Malabar pied hornbill , the Ceylon frogmouth , herons , ducks , kites , eagles , falcons , quails , partridges , lapwings , sandpipers , pigeons , doves , parakeets , cuckoos , owls , nightjars , swifts , kingfishers , bee @-@ eaters and munias . Some species of trees found in Karnataka are <unk> tomentosa , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> montana , Artocarpus hirsutus , Artocarpus <unk> , Cinnamomum zeylanicum , Grewia <unk> , <unk> album , Shorea <unk> , <unk> officinalis , <unk> altissima and <unk> tinctoria . Wildlife in Karnataka is threatened by poaching , habitat destruction , human @-@ wildlife conflict and pollution . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 By virtue of its varied geography and long history , Karnataka hosts numerous spots of interest for tourists . There is an array of ancient sculptured temples , modern cities , scenic hill ranges , unexplored forests and endless beaches . Karnataka has been ranked as the fourth most popular destination for tourism among the states of India . Karnataka has the second highest number of nationally protected monuments in India , second only to Uttar Pradesh , in addition to 752 monuments protected by the State Directorate of Archaeology and Museums . Another 25 @,@ 000 monuments are yet to receive protection . 
 The districts of the Western Ghats and the southern districts of the state have popular eco @-@ tourism locations including Kudremukh , Madikeri and Agumbe . Karnataka has 25 wildlife sanctuaries and five national parks . Popular among them are Bandipur National Park , <unk> National Park and Nagarhole National Park . The ruins of the Vijayanagara Empire at Hampi and the monuments of Pattadakal are on the list of UNESCO 's World Heritage Sites . The cave temples at Badami and the rock @-@ cut temples at Aihole representing the Badami Chalukyan style of architecture are also popular tourist destinations . The Hoysala temples at Belur and Halebidu , which were built with Chloritic schist ( soapstone ) are proposed UNESCO World Heritage sites . The Gol Gumbaz and Ibrahim Rauza are famous examples of the Deccan Sultanate style of architecture . The monolith of Gomateshwara Bahubali at Shravanabelagola is the tallest sculpted monolith in the world , attracting tens of thousands of pilgrims during the <unk> festival . 
 The waterfalls of Karnataka and Kudremukh are listed as must @-@ see places and among the " 1001 Natural Wonders of the World " . Jog Falls is India 's tallest single @-@ tiered waterfall with Gokak Falls , <unk> Falls , <unk> Falls , Abbey Falls and Shivanasamudra Falls among other popular waterfalls . 
 Several popular beaches dot the coastline , including <unk> , Gokarna , <unk> and Karwar . In addition , Karnataka is home to several places of religious importance . Several Hindu temples including the famous Udupi Sri Krishna Matha , the <unk> Temple at <unk> , the Sri <unk> Temple at <unk> , <unk> Subramanya Temple and <unk> Temple at <unk> attract pilgrims from all over India . Most of the holy sites of Lingayatism , like Kudalasangama and Basavana <unk> , are found in northern parts of the state . Shravanabelagola , <unk> and Karkala are famous for Jain history and monuments . Jainism had a stronghold in Karnataka in the early medieval period with Shravanabelagola as its most important centre . 
 Recently Karnataka has emerged as a hot spot for health care tourism . Karnataka has the highest number of approved health systems and alternative therapies in India . Along with some ISO certified government @-@ owned hospitals , private institutions which provide international @-@ quality services have caused the health care industry to grow by 30 % during 2004 @-@ 05 . Hospitals in Karnataka treat around 8 @,@ 000 health tourists every year . 
 = Russian ironclad Kniaz Pozharsky = 
 The Russian ironclad Kniaz Pozharsky ( Russian : Князь <unk> ) was an iron @-@ hulled armored frigate built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the 1860s . She was the first Russian armored ship to leave European waters when she cruised the Pacific Ocean in 1873 – 75 . The ship did not participate in the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 78 , and remained in the Baltic Sea until 1879 – 80 , when she made another cruiser to the Pacific . Kniaz Pozharsky was assigned to the Baltic Fleet for the rest of her career . She mainly served as a training ship after her refit in 1885 until she was hulked in 1909 and probably scrapped in 1911 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Originally classified as an armored corvette , Kniaz Pozharsky was redesignated as an armored frigate on 20 November 1866 . She was laid out as a central battery ironclad with the armament concentrated amidships . The ship was fitted with a ram and her crew numbered approximately 495 officers and enlisted men . 
 Kniaz Pozharsky was 272 feet 8 inches ( 83 @.@ 1 m ) long at the waterline . She had a beam of 49 feet ( 14 @.@ 9 m ) and a draft of 24 feet 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) . The ship was designed to displace 4 @,@ 506 long tons ( 4 @,@ 578 t ) , but displaced 5 @,@ 138 long tons ( 5 @,@ 220 t ) as built , an increase of over 600 long tons ( 610 t ) . Kniaz Pozharsky was fitted with a double bottom and was considered to be a steady gun platform and a good sea boat . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a simple horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine driving a single two @-@ bladed propeller . Steam was provided by eight cylindrical boilers . The engine produced 2 @,@ 835 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 114 kW ) during sea trials which gave the ship a maximum speed around 11 @.@ 7 knots ( 21 @.@ 7 km / h ; 13 @.@ 5 mph ) . Kniaz Pozharsky carried a maximum of 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of coal which gave her an economical range of 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) . She was ship @-@ rigged with three masts and a maximum sail area of 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 508 m2 ) . To reduce drag while under sail her funnel was retractable and her propeller could be hoisted into the hull . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Kniaz Pozharsky was armed with eight Obukhov 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns . In an attempt to provide axial fire , the sides of the hull at the upper deck level were cut away in front of and behind the battery . While providing better coverage than the traditional broadside layout , this still left a considerable area on which no gun could bear . 
 The solid shot of the 20 @-@ caliber gun weighed approximately 300 pounds ( 136 kg ) , while the gun itself weighed 14 @,@ 908 pounds ( 6 @,@ 762 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 276 ft / s ( 389 m / s ) and was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 9 @.@ 3 inches ( 236 mm ) of wrought iron armor at the muzzle . 
 Watts and Gardiner credit the ship with three spar torpedoes as well as three towed torpedoes , but these are not mentioned by Wright or Silverstone . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Figures for Kniaz Pozharsky 's armor protection vary between sources . They agree that she had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that had a total height of 11 feet ( 3 m ) with 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) below the waterline . <unk> for the belt are quoted from 100 to 114 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 5 in ) thick . The guns were protected by a section of 114 @-@ millimeter armor , 80 feet ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) long ; no information on any armored transverse bulkheads is available . The armor was backed by 17 or 18 inches ( 432 or 457 mm ) of teak . 
 = = Service = = 
 Kniaz Pozharsky was laid down on 30 November 1864 at the Mitchell Shipyard in Saint Petersburg with the name of Pozharsky , but it was changed before she was launched on 12 September 1867 . Sources differ on when the ship entered service ; they give either 1870 or 1873 . About 1873 Kniaz Pozharsky became the first Russian armored ship to deploy to the Pacific , but returned to the Baltic Fleet in 1875 . She remained in the Baltic Sea during the Russo @-@ Turkish War and the ensuing war scare with Great Britain . The ship made another cruise to the Pacific in 1879 – 80 . Kniaz Pozharsky served as the flagship during the fleet maneuvers of 1884 and she was reviewed by Tsar Alexander III of Russia . The ship was extensively refitted the following year and received new boilers , her propeller was fixed in place and her retractable funnel was replaced by two fixed funnels . 
 Kniaz Pozharsky was rearmed during the refit , but sources differ on the light guns fitted . Her 9 @-@ inch guns were replaced by new , more powerful 35 @-@ caliber 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns , likely the 12 @.@ 74 long tons ( 12 @.@ 94 t ) model with a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 796 ft / s ( 547 m / s ) . Two 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , 23 @-@ caliber guns were also fitted , possibly as chase guns . Wright and Watts agree that eight 4 @-@ pounder guns and four quick @-@ firing guns of unspecified size were added ; Silverstone does not mention the four quick @-@ firers , but Gardiner says that four 83 @.@ 4 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) guns were fitted . The ship was reclassified as a " cruiser of the 1st rank " in 1892 and her light armament was modified by the substitution of four 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns for four of the 4 @-@ pounders and the addition of six 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns . Two above @-@ water 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes were also added at this time . 
 After her refit , Kniaz Pozharsky served mostly as a training ship with the Naval School Division , although she was not formally reclassified as a school ship until 24 March 1906 . After she was reclassified her armament was reduced to a single 6 @-@ inch gun , four 4 @-@ pounders , two 47 @-@ millimeter and six 37 @-@ millimeter Hotchkiss guns . The ship was hulked on 27 October 1909 and renamed Blokshiv No. 1 . She was struck from the Navy List on 14 April 1911 and probably scrapped shortly afterward because the elderly monitor Lava was renamed as Blokshiv No. 1 that same day . 
 = Mike Quinn = 
 Michael Patrick Quinn ( born April 15 , 1974 ) is a former professional gridiron football quarterback . He was signed by the Pittsburgh Steelers as an undrafted free agent in 1997 and was also a member of the Rhein Fire , Indianapolis Colts , Dallas Cowboys , Miami Dolphins , Houston Texans , Denver Broncos , Montreal Alouettes and Winnipeg Blue Bombers . He played college football at Stephen F. Austin State University . 
 Quinn attended Lee High School in Houston , Texas and Stephen F. Austin State University . He started playing football in high school and played at university , where he started for one season , his senior season . After he went undrafted in the 1997 NFL Draft he signed with the Pittsburgh Steelers . With Pittsburgh , he ended up making the roster as the third – string quarterback . Following the season , he was allocated to the Rhein Fire , whom he led to the championship game . He spent 1998 and 1999 as a backup for the Indianapolis Colts and Dallas Cowboys before signing with the Miami Dolphins . Quinn spent two seasons backing up for the Dolphins . In 2002 , he was one of the first group of players signed by the National Football League ( NFL ) expansion franchise , the Houston Texans . As he had done for the previous years in his career , Quinn spent two seasons as a backup for the new franchise . The final year of his NFL career was spent with the Denver Broncos in training camp and with the Steelers ' practice squad . After going unsigned , Quinn signed with the Montreal Alouettes joining their practice squad in August 2005 , leaving the team after the season . Quinn joined another Canadian team , the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in March 2006 but after receiving playing time in a backup role he was released later that year , in August . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Quinn attended Robert E. Lee High School in Houston , Texas . He was named to the state All @-@ Star team during his tenure . Currently , he and his wife , Jennifer , live in Houston , Texas . At Stephen F. Austin State University , he majored in accounting . 
 = = College career = = 
 On November 12 , 1995 in a game against Southwest Texas State , Quinn came into the game for starting quarterback James Ritchey and threw three touchdown passes . 
 In the game against Samford on October 27 , 1996 , Quinn led Stephen F. Austin to a 43 – 14 win after throwing a touchdown pass to Chris Jefferson at the end of the first half . SFA held the lead for the rest of the game . Against McNeese State on November 3 , Quinn led a come from behind win for SFA by throwing two touchdowns to <unk> Ricks in the fourth quarter . The next week , Quinn threw for 283 yards and threw four touchdown passes to lead Stephen F. Austin to another win making them 7 – 2 . However , against Southwest Texas State on November 17 , Quinn threw 23 incomplete passes . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2003 = = = 
 Quinn signed with the Pittsburgh Steelers as an undrafted free agent following the 1997 NFL Draft . Quinn entered training camp behind Kordell Stewart , Mike Tomczak and Jim Miller on the depth chart , but after training camp Quinn had beaten out Miller and became the team 's third @-@ string quarterback . He saw his only game action on November 9 against the Baltimore Ravens , throwing for 10 yards on one completion . Following the 1997 season , the Steelers allocated Quinn to play in NFL Europe , he later agreed to play for the Rhein Fire . In his second game with the Fire on April 12 , Quinn completed 13 of 21 passes for 194 yards . He also completed two touchdown passes . With Quinn as the starting quarterback , the Fire played in the World Bowl . However , Quinn was hampered by a sprained ankle and could not play in the game . He returned to the Steelers after the NFL Europe season but was waived on August 31 . 
 After being waived by Pittsburgh , Quinn was claimed off waivers by the Indianapolis Colts on September 1 . To make room for Quinn the Colts had to release Jim Miller , who had lost a roster spot on the Steelers to Quinn a year earlier . However , after signing Doug Nussmeier , the Colts waived Quinn . 
 The Dallas Cowboys , who were unsuccessful claiming Quinn 10 days earlier , claimed him after he was waived by the Colts . In Dallas , Quinn became the Cowboys second @-@ string quarterback after Troy Aikman was injured and Jason Garrett became the starter . He played in three games for the Cowboys in 1998 , completing one pass for 10 yards . In 1999 , Quinn did not play in a game for Dallas . During the 2000 off – season , Garrett signed as a free agent with the New York Giants and quarterback Paul Justin was signed by Dallas to compete for the backup spot with Quinn . He was released on May 5 , 2000 . 
 Quinn signed with the Miami Dolphins on May 23 , 2000 . On November 6 , Quinn threw a touchdown pass to Deon Dyer but was waived by the Dolphins on November 10 , only to be re @-@ signed four days later . In the 2001 preseason , Quinn sprained a joint in his shoulder and was waived / injured . He was released from injured reserve with an injury settlement on September 6 . 
 The Houston Texans , the newest franchise in the NFL , signed Quinn to a reserve / future contract on December 30 , 2001 . Following the 2002 NFL Draft in which the Texans drafted quarterback David Carr with their first ever pick , Quinn became the backup . Quinn and Tony Banks ended up winning the backup jobs to Carr over Kent Graham and Ben Sankey . Banks was second – string with Quinn being the third – string quarterback . The Texans waived Quinn during final cuts on August 25 , 2003 . He was the final member of the Texans first signings still on the team . He was re @-@ signed to the practice squad on November 17 after David Carr suffered a sprained right shoulder . However , when Banks also became injured , Quinn was signed from the practice squad to back up the now healthy Carr and rookie Dave <unk> . 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 = = = 
 The Denver Broncos signed Quinn as an unrestricted free agent in March 2004 . At the end of training camp , Quinn was released by the Broncos . 
 Quinn was re @-@ signed by the Steelers on September 22 and assigned to their practice squad . He was released from the practice squad on November 10 . 
 Quinn was signed to the Montreal Alouettes practice roster on August 29 , 2005 . 
 The Winnipeg Blue Bombers signed Quinn on March 22 , 2006 joining quarterbacks Tee Martin , Russ <unk> and Kevin Glenn on Winnipeg 's roster . In his CFL preseason debut against the Montreal Alouettes on June 2 , Quinn threw a 24 yard touchdown pass to Quentin McCord however the Blue Bombers lost 25 – 24 . After making the team out of training camp , Quinn injured his sternum and shoulder which caused him to miss three weeks . In his first week back with Winnipeg , Quinn was forced into the starting role after Kevin Glenn suffered a knee injury . However , a string of poor performances which included an interception in the end zone while Winnipeg was in field goal position led to his release on August 28 . 
 = Music of the Mana series = 
 The Mana series , known in Japan as Seiken Densetsu ( 聖剣伝説 , lit . " Holy Sword Legend " ) , is a role @-@ playing video game series from Square Enix , created by Koichi Ishii . The series began as a handheld side story to Square 's flagship franchise Final Fantasy , although most Final Fantasy @-@ inspired elements were subsequently dropped , starting with the second installment , Secret of Mana . It has since grown to include games of various genres within the fictional world of Mana . The music of the Mana series includes soundtracks and arranged albums of music from the series , which is currently composed of Final Fantasy Adventure and its remake Sword of Mana , Secret of Mana , Seiken Densetsu 3 , Legend of Mana , Dawn of Mana , Children of Mana , Friends of Mana , Heroes of Mana , Circle of Mana , and Rise of Mana . Each game except for Friends and Circle has produced a soundtrack album , while Adventure has sparked an arranged album as well as a combined soundtrack and arranged album , Legend of Mana has an additional promotional EP , and music from Secret and Seiken Densetsu 3 were combined together into an arranged album . For the series ' 20th anniversary , a 20 @-@ disc box set of previously @-@ released albums was produced , as well as an album of arrangements by Kenji Ito , composer for several games in the series . 
 The music of Final Fantasy Adventure was composed by Kenji Ito , while Hiroki Kikuta composed Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 and Yoko Shimomura wrote the score to Legend of Mana . The music of the World of Mana subseries , composed of Children , Dawn , Friends , and Heroes of Mana , was composed by many different composers , with Ito , Kikuta , Shimomura , Tsuyoshi Sekito , Masayoshi Soken , and Ryuichi Sakamoto composing Dawn , Ito , Masaharu Iwata , and Takayuki Aihara writing Children , and Shimomura composing the music of Friends and Heroes . Rise of Mana was composed by an ensemble group including Ito , Kikuta , Shimomura , Sekito , Yasuhiro Yamanaka , and Kokia . Music from the series has been performed in live concerts such as the Orchestral Game Concerts and the Symphonic Game Music Concerts , and made up one fourth of the Symphonic Fantasies concert in Cologne , Germany . Music from the Mana series has also been arranged for the piano and published as sheet music books . 
 = = Final Fantasy Adventure = = 
 Final Fantasy Adventure , released as Seiken Densetsu : Final Fantasy Gaiden in Japan and Mystic Quest in Europe and marketed as a Final Fantasy spin @-@ off , was composed by Kenji Ito ; it was his second original score after that of SaGa 2 and his first solo work . The game was released in 1991 on the original Game Boy . It was remade in 2003 for the Game Boy Advance as Sword of Mana , wherein features of the original game were reworked to be brought more in line with the direction the Mana series had taken with the later games . It also severed the game from the Final Fantasy series . Ito was also the composer for the 2003 Sword of Mana , for which he remixed some pieces from Final Fantasy Adventure as well as composing new ones . Ito 's music is mainly inspired by images from the game rather than outside influences ; however , he never played the games themselves . Final Fantasy Adventure received a soundtrack album and an arranged album , which were later released again as a single album . Sword of Mana also sparked a soundtrack album . 
 = = = Original Sound Version = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy Adventure . It was composed by Kenji Ito , with the exception of " Theme of Chocobo " , which was composed by Nobuo Uematsu for the Final Fantasy series . The album covers 27 tracks and has a duration of 34 : 40 . It was published by NTT Publishing / Square on July 15 , 1991 with the catalog number N23D @-@ 003 . 
 The album was well received by critics such as Ryan Mattich of RPGFan , who termed it full of " quality compositions and timeless melodies " that created a " nostalgic listening experience " . Another reviewer , in their review of the combined album , claimed that the sound hardware limitations of the Game Boy " forces composers to create strong melodies " and that the Final Fantasy Adventure soundtrack was " a perfect example of what quality Gameboy music should sound like " . 
 = = = Let Thoughts Ride on Knowledge = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu : Let Thoughts Ride on Knowledge is a soundtrack album of music arranged from the Final Fantasy Adventure soundtrack . The original music was composed by Kenji Ito , while the versions on the album were arranged by Takayuki Hattori . The album covers 7 tracks and has a duration of 35 : 11 . Each track covers several different songs from the original soundtrack . The pieces are arranged in an orchestral style , with moods ranging from " soft " to " powerful " . It was published by NTT Publishing / Square on September 30 , 1991 with the catalog number N30D @-@ 005 . 
 The album was well received by critics such as Ryan Mattich of RPGFan , who called it " an album of epic ambition " and said that it let " these timeless melodies live on , " " freed from the shackles of sound hardware limitations " . Kero Hazel of Square Enix Music Online agreed , saying that " those 35 minutes of arranged music are worth every penny " in their review of the combined album . Another reviewer of the combined album called the tracks a " combination of great compositions and excellent arranging " and said that the tracks " flow smoothly between each other " creating " a superb thirty @-@ five minutes of music " . 
 = = = Sound Collections = = = 
 Final Fantasy Gaiden : Seiken Densetsu Sound Collections is a soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy Adventure combining its soundtrack album and arranged album . The music was composed by Kenji Ito , while the arranged tracks , which comprise the first seven tracks of this album , were arranged by Takayuki Hattori . The album covers 34 tracks and has a duration of 69 : 51 . It was published by NTT Publishing on August 25 , 1995 with the catalog number PSCN @-@ 5029 , and republished on October 1 , 2004 with the catalog number NTCP @-@ 5029 . 
 The combined album was as well received as the individual albums that make it up , with RPGFan calling it " one fantastic CD " that combined the " superb " arranged tracks with the " expressive " original tracks . Kero Hazel said that the album was worth buying for either component CD alone , if one did not already have them , but that the combination together made it a " fantastic album " of " great music " . 
 = = = Sword of Mana = = = 
 Sword of Mana Premium Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Sword of Mana , the enhanced remake of Final Fantasy Adventure . It was composed by Kenji Ito , and included reworked tracks from the original game as well as new material . The second disc of the album contains piano arrangements of songs from the soundtrack , while a bonus disc included in the first edition of the album contains an orchestra arrangement of " Rising Sun ~ Endless Battlefield " . The album covers 48 tracks and has a duration of 1 : 42 : 51 , including the bonus disc . It was published by DigiCube on August 27 , 2003 with the catalog numbers SSCX @-@ <unk> ~ 8 , and republished by Square Enix on October 20 , 2004 with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 9 . 
 The album reached # 118 on the Japan Oricon charts . Patrick Gann of RPGFan enjoyed it , calling it a " truly a gem " . Estimating that around twenty percent of the original tracks had received " significant changes " , he applauded the increase in sound quality and said that he " enjoy [ ed ] the OST tracks a great deal " . The addition of the piano tracks and the orchestral track made the album a " fine soundtrack " and he said that acquiring the soundtrack would be a " very , very good idea " . RPGamer , in their review of the game , said that the arrangements by Ito were " quite pleasing to the ear " , though they noted that the quality of the music was diminished by the " terrible speakers " of the Game Boy Advance . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 = = 
 The scores for 1993 's Secret of Mana , originally released as Seiken Densetsu 2 in Japan , and 1995 's Seiken Densetsu 3 were both composed by Hiroki Kikuta . Kikuta was originally chosen for Secret of Mana after Kenji Ito , who was originally slated for the project , was forced to drop it due to other demands on his time such as the soundtrack to Romancing SaGa . It was Kikuta 's first video game score . Both games were produced for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Despite difficulties in dealing with the hardware limitations , Kikuta tried to express in the music of Secret of Mana two " contrasting styles " , namely himself and the game . The purpose of this was to create an original score which would be neither pop music nor standard game music . Kikuta worked on the music for the two games mostly by himself , spending nearly 24 hours a day in his office , alternating between composing and editing to create an immersive three @-@ dimensional sound . Rather than create MIDI versions of his compositions and rely on the sound engineers to create the sampled instruments ( like most game music composers of the time ) , Kikuta made his own samples that matched the hardware capabilities of the Super NES so that he would know exactly how the pieces would sound on the system 's hardware instead of having to deal with audio hardware differences between the original composition and the Super NES . Kikuta considers the score for Secret of Mana his favorite creation . His compositions for Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 were partly inspired by natural landscapes , as well as music from Bali . In addition to the soundtrack albums for the two games , 1995 , Kikuta released an experimental album of arranged music from the two installments , titled Secret of Mana + , which features one 50 @-@ minute long track . 
 = = = Secret of Mana = = = 
 Secret of Mana Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Secret of Mana , released as Seiken Densetsu 2 Original Sound Version in Japan ; the releases are identical aside from the packaging and localized English song titles . Secret of Mana was one of the first soundtrack releases in North America for the North American version of a game . The soundtrack was composed by Hiroki Kikuta . The soundtrack 's music covers both " ominous " and " light @-@ hearted " tracks , and is noted for its use of bells and " dark , solemn pianos " . The title track to the game , " Fear of the Heavens " , was designed by Kikuta to sync up with the title screen as it slowly faded in due to hardware limitations ; at the time trying to match the audio and visual effects in a game was rare . Kikuta also started the track off with a " whale noise " , rather than a traditional " ping " , in order to try to " more deeply connect " the player with the game from the moment it started up ; getting the sound to work with the memory limitations of the Super NES system was a difficult technical challenge . The album covers 44 tracks and has a duration of 1 : 06 : 01 . It was published by NTT Publishing / Square on August 6 , 1993 with the catalog number N25D @-@ 019 , and reprinted by NTT Publishing on August 25 , 1995 and October 1 , 2004 with the catalog numbers PSCN @-@ <unk> and NTCP @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was well received by reviewers such as Eve C. of RPGFan , who called it " a beautifully composed CD " and said that it was one of the best soundtracks of any Super NES game . She said that the largest complaint with the album was the synthetic quality of the music necessitated by the Super NES 's sound hardware , though she noted that the music pushed the limits of the system 's hardware further than any other Super NES game . Jason Walton of RPGFan agreed , saying that " the music is composed extremely well , full of variety " , though he did not like that the tracks were kept short instead of looping in order to fit all of the songs on one disc . Damian Thomas , in his review of the North American version of the album , also noted that the music was impressive for a Super NES game , and recommended the album as worth hunting for . Gamasutra , in an interview with Kikuta , described the music of Secret of Mana as leaving " a lasting impression on international audiences " . IGN named the title track as the seventh best RPG title track in a 2006 feature , calling it " soft " and " magical " , and saying that Kikuta " uses a mix of upbeat pipes and tinkering piano keys to bring the world of Mana to life " . 
 = = = Seiken Densetsu 3 = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu 3 Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album of music from Seiken Densetsu 3 . The soundtrack was composed by Hiroki Kikuta . Kikuta completed it with little assistance , having performed the sound selection , editing , effect design , and data encoding himself . The music has been described as ranging from " bouncy " and " energetic " to " flowing " and " serene " . The soundtrack features 60 tracks on 3 discs and spans a duration of 3 : 19 : 21 . The album was published by NTT Publishing on August 25 , 1995 with the catalog numbers PSCN @-@ <unk> ~ 8 and republished by Square Enix on October 1 , 2004 with the catalog numbers NTCP @-@ <unk> ~ 8 . The main theme from Secret of Mana , " Where Angels Fear to Tread " , called " Fear of the Heavens " there , makes a return in this installment . 
 Freddie W. of RPGFan , in his review of the album , named it as " one of the high points of Hiroki Kikuta ’ s work on the series " . He described it as having a very cohesive " feel " , and as being a " more refined and matured " version of the " feeling " of the Secret of Mana soundtrack . Square Enix Music Online 's review agreed with the quality of the music , calling it " among the finest ever heard on the Super Nintendo " . They also termed it " in many ways superior to the score of Seiken Densetsu 2 " , which they described as having been an " instant winner " due to the work of Kikuta . 
 Tracklist 
 = = = Secret of Mana + = = = 
 Secret of Mana + is an arranged album of music from Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 . The music was composed and arranged by Hiroki Kikuta . The album is composed of a single track titled " Secret of Mana " that has a duration of 49 : 28 . This track incorporates themes from the music of Secret of Mana as well as a few themes from Seiken Densetsu 3 , which was still under development at the time . The style of the album is described as " experimental " , using " strange sounds " such as waterfalls , bird calls , cell phone sounds , and " typing " sounds . The music has also been described as covering many different musical styles , such as " Debussian impressionist styles , his own heavy electronic and synth ideas , and even ideas of popular musicians " . It was published by NTT Publishing / Square on October 29 , 1993 with the catalog number N30D @-@ 021 , and reprinted by NTT Publishing on August 25 , 1995 and October 1 , 2004 with the catalog numbers PSCN @-@ <unk> and NTCP @-@ <unk> . 
 Daniel Kalabakov , in his review for RPGFan , said that while popular opinion of the album was split between those who liked and extremely disliked the album , he personally " loved " it . He praised it for being an " unorthodox arrangement " and trying something new rather than being merely a piano or orchestral arranged album , the most common types . Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online had similar feelings about the album , praising the wide range of styles and sounds and calling it an " unparalleled achievement " . Simon of Square Enix Music Online added that it was " refreshing to see there is no compromise " between Kikuta 's artistic vision and more traditional commercial styles . 
 = = Legend of Mana = = 
 Legend of Mana , released for the PlayStation in 1999 , features music composed by Yoko Shimomura . She had previously composed for several Square games including Live A Live and Parasite Eve and had originally joined Square for the purpose of composing music for fantasy role @-@ playing games . She was initially hesitant to compose for the Mana series , as she felt that it was so associated with the music of Ito and Kikuta . In 2002 , Shimomura said that of all her compositions to date , she considered the soundtrack to Legend the one that best expresses herself . Shimomura claims that she prefers " passionate music that comes from the heart " , and that she has to " feel the emotions of a piece in the extreme before I am able to write " the music by putting herself in the same mood as the piece is supposed to be in . Legend of Mana featured the first vocal track of any Mana game , " Song of Mana " , which also serves as the game 's opening theme . It was sung by Swedish vocalist Annika Ljungberg , who was chosen by Shimomura because she " wanted to stay away from working with someone popular that everyone already knows " . After hearing a sample of Annika 's music , she flew to Sweden " straight away " to do an analog recording of the song . Four of the game 's tracks were released as part of Drammatica : The Very Best Works of Yoko Shimomura , an arranged album highlighting the composer 's work : " Legend of <unk> ~ Title Theme ~ " , " Hometown Domina " , " Colored Earth " , and " Bejeweled City Ruined " . Shimomura carefully chose the songs to be included on the album based on their apparent popularity among fans and how suitable they are for orchestra . In addition to the soundtrack album , a promotional album of music from Legend of Mana was produced and was included with preorders of the game in North America . 
 = = = Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu / Legend of Mana Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Legend of Mana , composed by Yoko Shimomura . The soundtrack features 55 tracks on 2 discs and spans a duration of 2 : 10 : 37 . It includes " Song of Mana " , sung by Swedish vocalist Annika Ljungberg . The song was later made available on the Square Vocal Collection album in 2001 . The music covers many styles including piano , hard rock , and techno . The soundtrack was published by DigiCube on July 23 , 1999 with the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> , and reprinted by Square Enix on October 20 , 2004 with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 7 . 
 The album reached # 65 on the Japan Oricon charts and stayed there for two weeks . Patrick Gann of RPGFan heavily praised it , saying , " It is simply amazing . The synth quality , the composition quality ... Everything about it , quality . " He cited the " town " themes as Shimomura 's weakest , but said that the more " emotional " pieces were much better . Gann also noted Ljungberg as an " amazing " vocalist . RPGamer 's review of the album was also praising , calling the composition " excellent " , the sound quality " superb " , and that it kept the " atmosphere " of previous Mana game soundtracks . 
 Tracklist 
 = = = Music Selection = = = 
 Legend of Mana Music Selection is a promotional album of music from Legend of Mana included in preorders of the game in North America . The music was composed by Yoko Shimomura . The soundtrack features five tracks and spans a duration of 18 : 34 . It was published by Square on June 1 , 2000 with the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = = World of Mana = = 
 In 2005 , Square Enix announced plans for World of Mana , a new series of titles in the Mana franchise , whose titles would span more video game genres than the original series . Koichi Ishii , the creator of the Mana series , decided even before he worked on 2002 's Final Fantasy XI about creating new Mana games , but first wanted to create a goal for the new series , and eventually decided to make it about exploring how to add " the feeling of touch " to a game . After he saw the game Half @-@ Life 2 at E3 in 2003 , he felt that its physics engine was the one he needed . World of Mana went on to comprise four new games in addition to the remake of Final Fantasy Adventure ; Koichi Ishii served as director or producer for all of them as he had for the previous games in the series . In 2006 , a Mana installment for the Wii was considered but did not enter development . In April 2007 , a month after the release of the final game of the World of Mana , Ishii left Square Enix to lead his own development company , named Grezzo ; no further games in the series have been announced since . Three of the new games of World of Mana sparked soundtrack releases , with each composed by a different artist or group of artists : Children of Mana , released in 2006 for the Nintendo DS , Dawn of Mana , released in 2006 for the PlayStation 2 , and Heroes of Mana , released for the Nintendo DS in 2007 . The music of Dawn of Mana also formed the basis of a promotional album included with preorders of the game in Japan , while the music of Yoko Shimomura for Seiken Densetsu : Friends of Mana , a 2006 multiplayer role @-@ playing game for Japanese mobile phones never saw any album releases . 
 = = = Children of Mana = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu DS : Children of Mana Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Children of Mana , known as Seiken Densetsu DS : Children of Mana in Japan . The soundtrack was composed by Kenji Ito , Masaharu Iwata , and Takayuki Aihara , and covers a range of musical styles including rock and roll , jazz , and classical orchestra . Ito served as the lead composer . The instruments themselves , however , due to the limitations of the Nintendo DS hardware , have been described as not being " especially aesthetic or realistic " . The soundtrack features 33 tracks on 2 discs and spans a duration of 1 : 24 : 13 . It was published by Square Enix on May 9 , 2006 on the Japanese iTunes Store , but has not been released as a physical album . 
 Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online , in his review of the album , reacted positively to the score , calling it a " colourful , diverse , and rich experience overall " . He called the tracks by Iwata and <unk> the " core " of the album , saying that the tracks by Ito felt " banal " and " formulaic " which he attributed to Ito being too overworked to focus on the album . RPGamer , in their review of the game , called the music " pretty nice " . They noted that the music did not stand out as much as the visuals of the game , though they still " conveyed the theme " , and that the " town " tracks were in their opinion weaker than the rest of the soundtrack . 
 Tracklist 
 = = = Dawn of Mana = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu 4 Original Soundtrack <unk> is a soundtrack album of music from Dawn of Mana , known as Seiken Densetsu 4 in Japan . The soundtrack was composed by Kenji Ito , Tsuyoshi Sekito , Masayoshi Soken , Hiroki Kikuta , Yoko Shimomura , and Ryuichi Sakamoto , with many of the tracks composed by one artist arranged by another . The styles portrayed on the soundtrack cover " soft , heartwarming tunes " , fast @-@ paced " rock and roll style " tracks , and " dark and dramatic tunes " , while the arranged songs that appear on the fourth disc of the soundtrack album are split between orchestral and rock and roll styles . The theme song to the game , " Dawn of Mana " , was composed by Grammy @-@ winning composer Ryuichi Sakamoto , and was inspired by the image of the Mana tree shown at the title screen . The composition of the soundtrack was done under a great deal of time pressure ; Soken has said that he composed 32 tracks in 52 days at a breakneck pace , and Sekito has said that Ito conducted the orchestral recordings while ill to make the deadline . The soundtrack features 106 tracks on 4 discs and spans a duration of 4 : 19 : 41 . It was published by Square Enix on January 24 , 2007 with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 6 . 
 Dennis Rubinshteyn of RPGFan was pleased by the soundtrack , saying that the music met his high expectations for what he called the " only redeeming quality left " to the series since Legend of Mana . Summing the album up as a " solid soundtrack with great songs and a lot of variety " , he named Sekito 's tracks as the least appealing on the soundtrack , causing some parts of the album as a whole to be " hit or miss " . Bryan Matheny of Square Enix Music Online held the opposite opinion , calling Sekito 's pieces what " made this work bearable " and saying that he " just can 't get into this soundtrack " , especially the first three discs , which were full of " boring and underdeveloped " tracks . Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online 's review , however , was more in line with RPGFan 's , wherein he praised the " diversity " and " glorious spectrum of emotion " found in the soundtrack . He cited the synthesizer operation as a weak point as well as the order of the tracks , and singled out Sekito 's tracks as " forgettable " and " repetitive " . 
 Tracklist 
 = = = Breath of Mana = = = 
 Breath of Mana is a promotional album of music from Dawn of Mana included with preorders of the game in Japan . Despite the many composers of the full soundtrack , the five songs on Breath were all composed and arranged by Kenji Ito . Three of the songs , " Breath of <unk> " , " <unk> Memories " , and " Rising Sun ( piano solo ver . ) " , did not appear on the full soundtrack album . The songs on the disc are " gentle melodies " using orchestra and piano . The five songs cover a duration of 13 : 41 . The disc was published by Square Enix on December 21 , 2006 . A review of the album by Dennis Rubinshteyn of RPGFan called it a " good showcase " of the strengths of the full album , which were in his opinion the tracks by Ito . He felt that the tracks on the single were " superb " , and said that it was a shame that two of the tracks were not found on the soundtrack album . 
 = = = Heroes of Mana = = = 
 Seiken Densetsu : Heroes of Mana Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Heroes of Mana , known as Seiken Densetsu : Heroes of Mana in Japan . The soundtrack was composed by Yoko Shimomura . The musical style of the tracks is primarily orchestral , with the addition of a strong piano and drums that sometimes verge on a more tribal rhythm . The soundtrack features 49 tracks on 2 discs and spans a duration of 2 : 24 : 28 . Three of the game 's tracks were released as part of Drammatica : The Very Best Works of Yoko Shimomura , an arranged album highlighting the composer 's work : " To the Heroes of Old ~ Opening Theme from Heroes of Mana ~ " , " The Way the Heart Is " ( as " Tango Appassionata " ) , and " The Tale Told by the Wind ~ Ending Theme from Heroes of Mana ~ " . Shimomura carefully chose the songs to be included on the album based on their apparent popularity among fans and how suitable they are for orchestra . The Heroes of Mana soundtrack was published by Square Enix on April 18 , 2007 with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 6 . 
 Denis Rubinshteyn , in his review of the album , said that while the game itself was poor , " the music is a treat " . Calling the music " solid " and " enjoyable " , he highlighted Shimomura 's use of drums and variations on themes as particularly worthy of praise . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online agreed , saying that Square Enix " made the right decision " in asking Shimomura to compose the soundtrack , as she was able to " capture the spirit of the Mana series extremely well " . He singled out the " battle tracks and event themes " as the weakest tracks and " ' The Tale Told by the Wind ' and the final battle " as some of the best . 
 Tracklist 
 = = 20th Anniversary = = 
 For the 20th anniversary of the Mana series in 2011 , Square Enix released a number of albums . These included several arranged albums , as well as a box set of every soundtrack album from the series plus Let Thoughts Ride on Knowledge and Secret of Mana + . The twenty @-@ disc set , entitled Seiken Densetsu Music Complete Book , was released on September 14 , 2011 . It includes music composed by Kenji Ito , Nobuo Uematsu , Hiroki Kikuta , Yoko Shimomura , Masaharu Iwata , Takayuki Aihara , Tsuyoshi Sekito , Masayoshi Soken , and Ryuichi Sakamoto . The album has a total length of 19 : 35 : 19 . 
 = = = Re : Birth = = = 
 As a part of the anniversary celebration , Square Enix released an album of arrangements of music from the series , Re : Birth / Seiken Densetsu Kenji Ito Arrange Album . The album features ten arrangements by Kenji Ito of music he composed for Final Fantasy Adventure , Sword of Mana , Children of Mana , and Dawn of Mana . Six tracks are from the original game , two from Dawn , and one each from the other two games . The album was published by Square Enix on October 19 , 2011 , with a duration of 45 : 06 . The arrangements cover a wide variety of genres , from vocal and chamber music to techno and dubstep . The album was originally planned to be followed soon after by two more similar albums , one each from Hiroki Kikuta and Yoko Shimamura , but those albums were never released . 
 Patrick Gann of RPGFan felt that the album 's tracks were " hit @-@ or @-@ miss " , containing some stellar arrangements mixed in with lackluster ones . He recommended it to any collector of Mana music . Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version was more complimentary towards the album , enjoying many of the tracks that Gann did not , though he too was not as impressed by the Dawn of Mana arrangements . 
 = = Rise of Mana = = 
 In 2014 , Square Enix released Rise of Mana , a free @-@ to @-@ play action role @-@ playing game for iOS and Android . The music of Rise of Mana was composed by a group of different composers : the majority of the music was handled by Tsuyoshi Sekito . In addition to Sekito , the soundtrack was also contributed to by three previous Mana composers : Kenji Ito ( Final Fantasy Adventure , Children of Mana , Dawn of Mana ) , Hiroki Kikuta ( Secret of Mana , Seiken Densetsu 3 ) and Yoko Shimomura ( Legend of Mana , Heroes of Mana ) . Also joining the team was sound engineer Yasuhiro Yamanaka . In all , 21 out of the 28 composed pieces were done by Sekito . Ito , Kikuta , Shimomura and Yamanaka each contributed one track . The soundtrack featured an arrangement for piano of " Rising Sun " , the series ' main theme . Yamanaka acted as sound director , while <unk> @ <unk> created the piano arrangements for both " Rising Sun " and the game 's theme song . 
 The game 's theme song , " Believe in the Spirit " , was composed , written and sung by Japanese singer @-@ songwriter Kokia . Prior to coming on board , she had little knowledge of the Mana series . As with her previous compositions for video games , Kokia tried to get a feel for the game 's atmosphere before starting , either through playing the game directly or looking at behind @-@ the @-@ scenes material related to the game 's world . With " Believe in the Spirit " , she worked to create a song that would appeal to both players and the production team . The track was performed using strings , a tin whistle , an acoustic guitar and percussion . The arrangement was done by Mina Kubota . 
 Seiken Densetsu : Rise of Mana Original Soundtrack was released on April 23 , 2014 through Square Enix 's music label . Andrew Barker of RPGFan was cautiously positive about the album : he described " Believe in the Spirit " as being " hit @-@ or @-@ miss " for different listeners while evoking memories of earlier Mana games . The rest of the soundtrack was generally praised : the first half 's restful melodies were the stand @-@ out tracks and said to be the strongest , while the later upbeat tracks were praised for their various energizing qualities . Some tracks , such as " The Drip Drip Drip of Memory " , being fairly weak and <unk> generally compared the music to that of Final Fantasy XII , recommending it for fans of the latter and finishing that the album was generally good despite some unmemorable pieces . Chris Greening of Video Game Music Online gave the album a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ star rating : he was most positive about the tracks from the guest composers like Ito and Shimomura . While he praised Sekito for moving away from his traditional musical style , he felt that the result was fairly mixed , with some tracks lacking the proper emotional drive and others " falling flat " . " Believe in the Spirit " was praised for avoiding J @-@ pop elements and sticking with its Celtic style , being favorably compared to the theme songs of Xenogears . Overall , Green felt that , while it had good production value and was substantially better than other mobile game soundtracks , but lacked the emotional impact of previous Mana titles in the majority of its tracks . Many reviewers of the game also praised the soundtrack . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The track " Fear of the Heavens " from Secret of Mana was performed by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra for the third Orchestral Game Concert in 1993 , while " Meridian Child " from Seiken Densetsu 3 was performed for the fifth Orchestral Game Concert in 1996 . " Fear of the Heavens " was also performed at the fifth Symphonic Game Music Concert in 2007 in Leipzig , Germany . Legend of Mana 's title theme was also performed by the Australian Eminence Symphony Orchestra for its classical gaming music concert A Night in Fantasia 2007 . Kenji Ito , along with other players , performed " Fool 's Dance " from Dawn of Mana at the Extra : Hyper Game Music Event 2007 concert in Tokyo on July 7 , 2007 . Sinfonia Drammatica , an August 4 , 2009 concert performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra in Stockholm , Sweden , featured several Mana songs as part of a combination of Yoko Shimomura 's album Drammatica and the previous Stockholm Symphonic Shades concert . These tracks , all from Drammatica , were " Colored Earth " , " Sparkling City " , " Title Theme " , and " Hometown Domina " from Legends of Mana ; none of the Heroes of Mana tracks on the album were played at the concert . 
 Music from the series made up one @-@ fourth of the music in the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in Cologne and Oberhausen in September 2009 which were produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series and conducted by Arnie Roth . The concerts featured a suite comprising Secret of Mana songs " Fear of the Heavens " , " Flight into the Unknown " , " Eternal Recurrence " , " Premonition " , " The Sorcerer " , and " Rose and Spirit " , as well as a boss battle encore suite which included " Meridian Festival " . On February 6 , 2011 the Eminence Symphony Orchestra played a concert in Tokyo as part of the Game Music Laboratory concert series as a tribute to the music of Kenji Ito and Hiroki Kikuta . The concert included " <unk> " , " Mana Temple " , and " Rising Sun " from Final Fantasy Adventure ; " Kind Memories " , " Crisis " , and " Meridian Dance " from Secret of Mana ; and " Meridian Child " from Seiken Densetsu 3 . The Final Fantasy Adventure pieces were played on the piano by Ito . A concert composed of music from the Re : Birth album and the Re : Birth II SaGa series album was performed in Tokyo on May 9 , 2015 and in Osaka on May 10 . The concert was produced by Ito , and featured him on piano . 
 Music from the original soundtracks of the Mana games has been arranged for the piano and published by DOREMI Music Publishing . Books are available for the soundtracks to Dawn of Mana , Legend of Mana , and Sword of Mana . Two companion books have also been published as Seiken Densetsu Best Collection Piano Solo Sheet Music first and second editions , with the first edition covering tracks from Final Fantasy Adventure , Secret of Mana , and Seiken Densetsu 3 , while the second adds tracks from Legend of Mana and Dawn of Mana . All songs in each book have been rewritten by Asako Niwa as beginning to intermediate level piano solos , though they are meant to sound as much like the originals as possible . Additionally , KMP Music Publishing has published a book of the piano album included in the Sword of Mana soundtrack album , which was arranged by Kenji Ito . 
 = Yamato @-@ class battleship = 
 The Yamato @-@ class battleships ( <unk> , Yamato @-@ gata senkan ) were battleships of the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) constructed and operated during World War II . Displacing 72 @,@ 000 long tons ( 73 @,@ 000 t ) at full load , the vessels were the heaviest battleships ever constructed . The class carried the largest naval artillery ever fitted to a warship , nine 460 @-@ millimetre ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) naval guns , each capable of firing 1 @,@ 460 kg ( 3 @,@ 220 lb ) shells over 42 km ( 26 mi ) . Two battleships of the class ( Yamato and Musashi ) were completed , while a third ( Shinano ) was converted to an aircraft carrier during construction . 
 Due to the threat of American submarines and aircraft carriers , both Yamato and Musashi spent the majority of their careers in naval bases at Brunei , Truk , and Kure — deploying on several occasions in response to American raids on Japanese bases — before participating in the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 , as part of Admiral Kurita 's Centre Force . Musashi was sunk during the battle by American carrier airplanes . Shinano was sunk ten days after her commissioning in November 1944 by the submarine USS Archerfish , while Yamato was sunk in April 1945 during Operation Ten @-@ Go . 
 = = Background = = 
 The design of the Yamato @-@ class battleships was shaped by expansionist movements within the Japanese government , Japanese industrial power , and the need for a fleet powerful enough to intimidate likely adversaries . 
 After the end of the First World War , many navies — including those of the United States , the United Kingdom , and Imperial Japan — continued and expanded construction programs that had begun during the conflict . The enormous costs associated with these programs pressured their government leaders to begin a disarmament conference . On 8 July 1921 , the United States ' Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes invited delegations from the other major maritime powers — France , Italy , Japan , and the United Kingdom — to come to Washington , D.C. and discuss a possible end to the naval arms race . The subsequent Washington Naval Conference resulted in the Washington Naval Treaty . Along with many other provisions , it limited all future battleships to a standard displacement of 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ; 39 @,@ 000 short tons ) and a maximum gun caliber of 16 inches ( 406 mm ) . It also agreed that the five countries would not construct more capital ships for ten years and would not replace any ship that survived the treaty until it was at least twenty years old . 
 In the 1930s , the Japanese government began a shift towards ultranationalist militancy . This movement called for the expansion of the Japanese Empire to include much of the Pacific Ocean and Southeast Asia . The maintenance of such an empire — spanning 3 @,@ 000 miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ) from China to Midway Island — required a sizable fleet capable of sustained control of territory . Although all of Japan 's battleships built prior to the Yamato class had been completed before 1921 — as the Washington Treaty had prevented any more from being completed — all had been either reconstructed or significantly modernized , or both , in the 1930s . This modernization included , among other things , additional speed and firepower , which the Japanese intended to use to conquer and defend their aspired @-@ to empire . When Japan withdrew from the League of Nations in 1934 over the Mukden Incident , it also renounced all treaty obligations . Japan would no longer design battleships within the treaty limitations and was free to build warships larger than those of the other major maritime powers . 
 Japan 's intention to acquire resource @-@ producing colonies in the Pacific and Southeast Asia would likely lead to confrontation with the United States , thus the U.S. became Japan 's primary potential enemy . The U.S. possessed significantly greater industrial power than Japan , with 32 @.@ 2 % of worldwide industrial production compared to Japan 's 3 @.@ 5 % . Furthermore , several leading members of the United States Congress had pledged " to outbuild Japan three to one in a naval race . " Consequently , as Japanese industrial output could not compete with American industrial power , Japanese ship designers developed plans for new battleships individually superior to their counterparts in the United States Navy . Each of these battleships would be capable of engaging multiple enemy capital ships simultaneously , eliminating the need to expend as much industrial effort as the U.S. on battleship construction . 
 = = Design = = 
 Preliminary studies for a new class of battleships began after Japan 's departure from the League of Nations and its renunciation of the Washington and London naval treaties ; from 1934 to 1936 , 24 initial designs were put forth . These early plans varied greatly in armament , propulsion , endurance , and armor . Main batteries fluctuated between 460 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) and 406 mm ( 16 @.@ 0 in ) guns , while the secondary armaments were composed of differing numbers of 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) , 127 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) , and 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) guns . Propulsion in most of the designs was a hybrid diesel @-@ turbine combination , though one relied solely on diesel and another planned for only turbines . Endurance in the designs had , at 18 kn ( 21 mph ; 33 km / h ) , a low of 6 @,@ 000 nmi ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) in design A @-@ 140 @-@ J2 to a high of 9 @,@ 200 nmi ( 17 @,@ 000 km ) in designs A @-@ 140A and A @-@ 140 @-@ B2 . Armor varied between providing protection from the fire of 406 mm guns to enough protection against 460 mm guns . 
 After these had been reviewed , two of the original twenty @-@ four were finalized as possibilities , A @-@ 140 @-@ F3 and A @-@ 140 @-@ F4 . Differing primarily in their range ( 4 @,@ 900 nmi ( 9 @,@ 100 km ) versus 7 @,@ 200 nmi ( 13 @,@ 300 km ) at 16 kn ( 18 mph ; 30 km / h ) ) , they were used in the formation of the final preliminary study , which was finished on 20 July 1936 . <unk> to that design resulted in the definitive design of March 1937 , which was put forth by Rear @-@ Admiral Fukuda Keiji ; an endurance of 7 @,@ 200 nm was finally decided upon , and the hybrid diesel @-@ turbine propulsion was abandoned in favor of just turbines . The diesels were removed from the design because of problems with the engines aboard the submarine tender <unk> . Their engines , which were similar to the ones that were going to be mounted in the new battleships , required a " major repair and maintenance effort " to keep them running due to a " fundamental design defect " . In addition , if the engines failed entirely , the 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) armor that protected that area would severely hamper any attempt to replace them . 
 The final design called for a standard displacement of 64 @,@ 000 long tons ( 65 @,@ 000 t ) and a full @-@ load displacement of 69 @,@ 988 long tons ( 71 @,@ 111 t ) , making the ships of the class the largest battleships yet designed , and the largest battleships ever constructed . The design called for a main armament of nine 460 @-@ millimetre ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) naval guns , mounted in three , three @-@ gun turrets — each of which weighed more than a 1930s @-@ era destroyer . The designs were quickly approved by Japanese Naval high command , over the objections of naval aviators , who argued for the construction of aircraft carriers rather than battleships . In all , five Yamato @-@ class battleships were planned . 
 = = Ships = = 
 Although five Yamato @-@ class vessels had been planned in 1937 , only three — two battleships and a converted aircraft carrier — were ever completed . All three vessels were built in extreme secrecy , to prevent American intelligence officials from learning of their existence and specifications ; indeed , the United States ' Office of Naval Intelligence only became aware of Yamato and Musashi by name in late 1942 . At this early time , their assumptions on the class 's specifications were quite far off ; while they were correct on their length , the class was given as having a beam of 110 feet ( 34 m ) ( in actuality , it was about 127 feet ( 39 m ) ) and a displacement of 40 @,@ 000 – 57 @,@ 000 tons ( in actuality , 69 @,@ 000 tons ) . In addition , the main armament of Yamato class was given as nine 16 @-@ inch ( 41 cm ) guns as late as July 1945 , four months after Yamato was sunk . Both Jane 's Fighting Ships and the Western media also misreported the specifications of the ships . In September 1944 , Jane 's Fighting Ships listed the displacement of both Yamato and Musashi as 45 @,@ 000 tons . Similarly , both the New York Times and the Associated Press reported that the two ships displaced 45 @,@ 000 tons with a speed of 30 knots , and even after the sinking of Yamato in April 1945 , The Times of London continued to give 45 @,@ 000 tons as the ship 's displacement . Nevertheless , the existence of the ships — and their supposed specifications — heavily influenced American naval engineers in the design of the Montana @-@ class battleships , all five of which were to be built to counter the firepower of the Yamato class . 
 = = = Yamato = = = 
 Yamato was ordered in March 1937 , laid down 4 November 1937 , launched 8 August 1940 , and commissioned 16 December 1941 . She underwent training exercises until 27 May 1942 , when the vessel was deemed " operable " by Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto . Joining the 1st Battleship Division , Yamato served as the flagship of the Japanese Combined Fleet during the Battle of Midway in June 1942 , yet did not engage enemy forces during the battle . The next two years were spent intermittently between Truk and Kure naval bases , with her sister ship Musashi replacing Yamato as flagship of the Combined Fleet . During this time period , Yamato , as part of the 1st Battleship Division , deployed on multiple occasions to counteract American carrier @-@ raids on Japanese island bases . On 25 December 1943 , she suffered major torpedo damage at the hands of USS Skate , and was forced to return to Kure for repairs and structural upgrades . 
 In 1944 — following extensive antiaircraft and secondary battery upgrades — Yamato joined the Second Fleet in the Battle of the Philippine Sea , serving as an escort to a Japanese Carrier Division . In October 1944 , as part of Vice Admiral Takeo Kurita 's Center Force for the Battle of Leyte Gulf , she used her naval artillery against an enemy vessel for the only time , helping sink the American escort carrier Gambier Bay and the destroyer Johnston before she was forced away by torpedoes from Heermann , which put her out of combat . Lightly damaged at Kure in March 1945 , the ship was then rearmed in preparation for operations . Yamato was sunk 7 April 1945 by 386 American carrier aircraft during Operation Ten @-@ Go , receiving 10 torpedo and 7 bomb hits before capsizing ; 2 @,@ 498 of the 2 @,@ 700 crew @-@ members were lost , including Vice @-@ Admiral Seiichi Itō . The sinking of Yamato was seen as a major American victory , and Hanson W. Baldwin , the military editor of The New York Times , wrote that " the sinking of the new Japanese battleship Yamato ... is striking proof — if any were needed — of the fatal weakness of Japan in the air and at sea " . 
 = = = Musashi = = = 
 Musashi was ordered in March 1937 , laid down 29 March 1938 , launched 1 November 1940 , and commissioned 5 August 1942 . From September to December 1942 , she was involved in surface and air @-@ combat training exercises at Hashirajima . On 11 February 1943 , Musashi relieved her sister ship Yamato as flagship of the Combined Fleet . Until July 1944 , Musashi shifted between the naval bases of Truk , Yokosuka , Brunei , and Kure . On 29 March 1944 , she sustained moderate damage near the bow from one torpedo fired by the American submarine Tunny . After repairs and refitting throughout April 1944 , Musashi joined the 1st Battleship Division in Okinawa . 
 In June 1944 , as part of the Second Fleet , the ship escorted Japanese aircraft carriers during the Battle of the Philippine Sea . In October 1944 , she left Brunei as part of Admiral Takeo Kurita 's Centre Force during the Battle of Leyte Gulf . Musashi was sunk 24 October during the Battle of the Sibuyan Sea , taking 17 bomb and 19 torpedo hits , with the loss of 1 @,@ 023 of her 2 @,@ 399 @-@ man crew . 
 = = = Shinano = = = 
 Shinano , originally Warship Number 110 , was laid down as the third member of the Yamato class , albeit with a slightly modified design . Most of the original armor values were slightly reduced , including the belt , deck , and turrets . The savings in weight this entailed meant that improvements could be made in other areas , including added protection for fire @-@ control and lookout positions . In addition , the 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) secondary armament on the first two Yamatos was to have been replaced by the 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) / 65 caliber Type 98 gun . Although smaller , this gun was superior to the 127 mm , possessing a significantly greater muzzle velocity , maximum range , anti @-@ aircraft ceiling and rate of fire . 
 In June 1942 , following the Japanese defeat at Midway , construction of Shinano was suspended , and the hull was gradually rebuilt as an aircraft carrier . She was designed as a 64 @,@ 800 @-@ ton support vessel that would be capable of ferrying , repairing and replenishing the <unk> of other carriers . Although she was originally scheduled for commissioning in early 1945 , the construction of the ship was accelerated after the Battle of the Philippine Sea ; this resulted in Shinano being launched on 5 October 1944 and commissioned a little more than a month later on 19 November . Shinano departed Yokosuka for Kure nine days later . In the early morning on 29 November , Shinano was hit by four torpedoes from USS Archerfish . Although the damage seemed manageable , poor flooding control caused the vessel to list to starboard . Shortly before midday , she capsized and sank , taking 1 @,@ 435 of her 2 @,@ 400 @-@ man crew with her . To this day , Shinano is the largest naval vessel to have been sunk by a submarine . 
 = = = Warships Number 111 and 797 = = = 
 Warship Number 111 , never named , was planned as the fourth member of the Yamato class and the second ship to incorporate the improvements of Shinano . The ship 's keel was laid after Yamato 's launch in August 1940 and construction continued until December 1941 , when the Japanese began to question their ambitious capital ship building program — with the coming of war , the resources essential in constructing the ship would become much harder to obtain . As a result , the hull of the fourth vessel , only about 30 % complete , was taken apart and scrapped in 1942 ; materials from this were used in the conversions of Ise and Hyūga to hybrid battleship / aircraft carriers . 
 The fifth vessel , Warship Number 797 , was planned as an improved Shinano but was never laid down . In addition to the modifications made to that ship , 797 would have removed the two 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) wing turrets in favor of additional 100 mm guns ; authors William Garzke and Robert Dulin estimate that this would have allowed for 24 of these weapons . Yamato was eventually modified in 1944 to something akin to this . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Although the primary armament of the Yamato class was officially designated as the 40 cm / 45 caliber ( 15 @.@ 9 in ) Type 94 , it actually took the form of nine 46 cm / 45 caliber ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) guns — the largest guns ever fitted to a warship — mounted in three 3 @-@ gun turrets , each of which weighed 2 @,@ 774 metric tons . Each gun was 21 @.@ 13 metres ( 69 @.@ 3 ft ) long and weighed 147 @.@ 3 metric tons ( 145 @.@ 0 long tons ) . High @-@ explosive armour @-@ piercing shells were used which were capable of being fired 42 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 26 @.@ 1 mi ) at a rate of 1 ½ to 2 per minute . The main guns were also capable of firing 1 @,@ 360 kg ( 3 @,@ 000 lb ) 3 Shiki tsûjôdan ( " Common Type 3 " ) anti @-@ aircraft shells . A time fuze was used to set how far away the shells would explode ( although they were commonly set to go off 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) away ) . Upon detonation , each of these shells would release 900 incendiary @-@ filled tubes in a 20 ° cone facing towards incoming aircraft ; a bursting charge was then used to explode the shell itself so that more steel splinters were created , and then the tubes would ignite . The tubes would burn for five seconds at about 3 @,@ 000 ° C ( 5 @,@ 430 ° F ) and would start a flame that was around 5 metres ( 16 ft ) long . Even though they comprised 40 % of the total main ammunition load by 1944 , 3 Shiki tsûjôdan were rarely used in combat against enemy aircraft due to the severe damage the firing of these shells inflicted on the barrels of the main guns ; indeed , one of the shells may have exploded early and disabled one of Musashi 's guns during the Battle of the Sibuyan Sea . The shells were intended to put up a barrage of flame that any aircraft attempting to attack would have to navigate through . However , U.S. pilots considered these shells to be more of a pyrotechnics display than a competent anti @-@ aircraft weapon . 
 In the original design , the Yamato class ' secondary armament comprised twelve 15 @.@ 5 cm / 60 Type 3 guns mounted in four triple turrets ( one forward , one aft , two midships ) , and twelve 12 @.@ 7 cm / 40 Type 89 guns in six double @-@ turrets ( three on each side amidships ) . These had become available once the Mogami @-@ class cruisers were rearmed with 20 @.@ 3 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns . With a 55 @.@ 87 @-@ kilogram ( 123 @.@ 2 lb ) AP shell , the guns had a maximum range of 27 @,@ 400 metres ( 30 @,@ 000 yd ) at an elevation of 45 degrees . Their rate of fire was five rounds per minute . The two midships turrets were removed in 1944 in favor of additional 25 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) light anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 Heavy anti @-@ aircraft defence was provided by a dozen 40 @-@ calibre 127 @-@ millimetre Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns in six twin turrets , three on each side of the superstructure . When firing at surface targets , the guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 metres ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) ; they had a maximum ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 metres ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at their maximum elevation of 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was 14 rounds a minute ; their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . 
 In addition , the Yamato class originally carried twenty @-@ four 25 mm Type 96 anti @-@ aircraft guns , primarily mounted amidships . In 1944 , both Yamato and Musashi underwent significant anti @-@ aircraft upgrades in preparation for operations in Leyte Gulf using the space freed up by the removal of both midships 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) secondary battery turrets , and ended up with a complement of twenty @-@ four 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) guns , and one hundred and sixty @-@ two 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) antiaircraft guns , The 25 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns could tilt at 90 @-@ degree angles to aim at planes directly overhead , but their mountings ' lack of protection made their gunnery crews extremely vulnerable to direct enemy fire . These 25 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 metres ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the fifteen @-@ round magazines . This was the standard Japanese light AA gun during World War II ; it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it a largely ineffective weapon . According to historian Mark Stille , the twin and triple mounts " lacked sufficient speed in train or elevation ; the gun sights were unable to handle fast targets ; the gun exhibited excessive vibration ; the magazine was too small , and ... the gun produced excessive muzzle blast " . The ship was also provided with two twin mounts for the licence @-@ built 13 @.@ 2 mm Type 93 anti @-@ aircraft machine guns , one on each side of the bridge . The maximum range of these guns was 6 @,@ 500 metres ( 7 @,@ 100 yd ) , but the effective range against aircraft was only 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) . The cyclic rate was adjustable between 425 and 475 rounds per minute ; the need to change 30 @-@ round magazines reduced the effective rate to 250 rounds per minute . 
 The armament on Shinano was quite different from that of her sister vessels due to her conversion . As the carrier was designed for a support role , significant anti @-@ aircraft weaponry was installed on the vessel : sixteen 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) guns , one hundred and twenty @-@ five 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , and three hundred and thirty @-@ six 5 @-@ inch ( 13 cm ) anti @-@ aircraft rocket launchers in twelve twenty @-@ eight barrel turrets . None of these guns were ever used against an enemy vessel or aircraft . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Designed to engage multiple enemy battleships simultaneously , the Yamatos were fitted with heavy armour plating described by naval historian Mark Stille as providing " an unparalleled degree of protection in surface combat " . The main belt of armour along the side of the vessel was 410 millimetres ( 16 in ) thick , with additional bulkheads 355 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) thick beyond the main @-@ belt . Furthermore , the top hull shape was very advanced , the peculiar sideways curving effectively maximizing armor protection and structural rigidity while optimizing weight . The armour on the main @-@ turrets surpassed even that of the main @-@ belt , with plating 650 millimetres ( 26 in ) thick . Armor plates in both the main belt and main turrets was made of Vickers Hardened , which was a face @-@ hardened steel armor . Deck armour — 75 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) thick — was composed of a nickel @-@ chromium @-@ molybdenum alloy . Ballistics tests at the proving ground at <unk> demonstrated the deck alloy to be superior to the homogeneous Vickers plates by 10 – 15 % . Additional plating was designed by manipulating the chromium and nickel composition of the alloy . Higher contents of nickel allowed the plate to be rolled and bent without developing fracture properties . 
 The relatively new procedure of arc welding was used extensively throughout the ship , strengthening the durability of the armour plating . Through this technique , the lower @-@ side belt armour , included in the ships as a response to gunnery experiments upon Tosa and the new Japanese Type 91 shell which could travel great lengths underwater , was used to strengthen the hull structure of the entire vessel . In total , the vessels of the Yamato class contained 1 @,@ 147 watertight compartments , of which 1 @,@ 065 were beneath the armoured deck . 
 However , the armour of the Yamato class still suffered from several shortcomings , many of which would prove fatal in 1944 – 45 . In particular , poor jointing between the upper @-@ belt and lower @-@ belt armour created a weak @-@ point just below the waterline , causing the class to be susceptible to air @-@ dropped torpedoes . Other structural weaknesses existed near the bow of the vessels , where the armour plating was generally thinner . The hull of the Shinano was subject to even greater structural weaknesses , having been equipped with minimal armour and no watertight compartments at the time of her sinking . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Yamato class was fitted with 12 Kanpon Boilers , which powered quadruple steam turbines . These , in turn , drove four 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) propellers . This powerplant enabled the Yamato class to achieve a top speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ) . With an indicated horsepower of 147 @,@ 948 ( 110 @,@ 325 kW ) , the Yamato class ' ability to function alongside fast carriers was limited . In addition , the fuel consumption rate of both battleships was very high . As a result , neither battleship was used in combat during the Solomon Islands Campaign or the minor battles during the " island hopping " period of 1943 and early 1944 . The propulsion system of Shinano was slightly improved , allowing the carrier to achieve a top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ) . 
 = = " Super Yamato " -class battleships = = 
 Two battleships of an entirely new , and larger , design were planned as a part of the 1942 fleet replenishment program . Designated as Design A @-@ 150 and initially named Warship Number 178 and Warship Number 179 , plans for the ships began soon after the design of the Yamato class was finished , probably in 1938 – 39 . Everything was " essentially completed " sometime in 1941 , but with war on the horizon , work on the battleships was halted to fill a need for additional warships , such as aircraft carriers and cruisers , to replace war losses of those vital ships . The Japanese loss in the Battle of Midway , where four carriers were sunk ( out of ten , to date , in the entire navy ) , made it certain that work on the ships would never begin . In the third volume of their Battleships series , Axis and Neutral Battleships in World War II , the authors William H. Garzke and Robert O. Dulin asserted that these ships would have been the " most powerful battleships in history " because of their massive 51 cm ( 20 in ) main battery and extensive anti @-@ aircraft weaponry . 
 Similar to the fate of papers relating to the Yamato class , most papers and all plans relating to the class were destroyed to prevent capture at the end of the war . It is known that the final design of the ships would have had an even greater firepower and size than the Yamato class — a main battery of six 51 cm ( 20 in ) guns in three twin turrets and secondary dual purpose armament consisting of twenty @-@ four 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) dual mounted guns ( similar to the Akizuki @-@ class destroyers ) . The displacement was to be bigger than the Yamato 's , and a side armor belt of 46 cm ( 18 in ) was planned . 
 = = Destruction of records = = 
 On the eve of the Allies ' occupation of Japan , special @-@ service officers of the Imperial Japanese Navy destroyed virtually all records , drawings , and photographs of or relating to the Yamato @-@ class battleships , leaving only fragmentary records of the design characteristics and other technical matters . The destruction of these documents was so efficient that until 1948 the only known images of Yamato and Musashi were those taken by United States Navy aircraft involved in the attacks on the two battleships . Although some additional photographs and information , from documents that were not destroyed , have come to light over the years , the loss of the majority of written records for the class has made extensive research into the Yamato class somewhat difficult . Because of the lack of written records , information on the class largely came from interviews of Japanese officers following Japan 's surrender . 
 However , in October 1942 , based upon a special request from Adolf Hitler , German Admiral Paul Wenneker , attached to the German Naval Attache in Japan , was allowed to inspect a Yamato @-@ class battleship while it was undergoing maintenance in a dockyard , at which time Admiral Wenneker cabled a detailed description of the warship to Berlin . On 22 August 1943 , Erich Groner , a German naval historian , and author of the book Die Deutschen <unk> , 1815 – 1945 , was shown the report while at the " Führer Headquarters " , and was directed to make an " interpretation " and then prepare a " design sketch drawing " of the Japanese battleship . The material was preserved by Erich Groner 's wife , Mrs. H. Groner , and submitted to publishers in the 1950s . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 From the time of their construction until the present day , Yamato and Musashi have carried a notable presence in Japanese culture , Yamato in particular . Upon completion , the battleships represented the epitome of Imperial Japanese naval engineering . In addition , the two ships , due to their size , speed , and power , visibly embodied Japan 's determination and readiness to defend its interests against the western powers , especially the United States . Shigeru Fukudome , chief of the Operations Section of the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff , described the two ships as " symbols of naval power that provided to officers and men alike a profound sense of confidence in their navy . " 
 Yamato , and especially the story of her sinking , has appeared often in Japanese popular culture , such as the anime Space Battleship Yamato and the 2005 film Yamato . The appearances in popular culture usually portray the ship 's last mission as a brave , selfless , but futile , symbolic effort by the participating Japanese sailors to defend their homeland . One of the reasons that the warship may have such significance in Japanese culture is that the word " Yamato " was often used as a poetic name for Japan . Thus , the end of battleship Yamato could serve as a metaphor for the end of the Japanese empire . 
 = Kate Winslet = 
 Kate Elizabeth Winslet , CBE ( born 5 October 1975 ) , is an English actress and singer . She is the recipient of an Academy Award , an Emmy Award , four Golden Globe Awards , a Grammy Award , an AACTA Award , and three BAFTA Awards . She is the youngest person to receive six Academy Award nominations with seven nominations in total , and is one of the few actresses to win three of the four major American entertainment awards ( EGOT ) . In addition , she has won awards from the Screen Actors Guild , British Academy of Film and Television Arts , and the Hollywood Foreign Press Association among others , and an Honorary César Award in 2012 . 
 Brought up in Berkshire , Winslet studied drama from childhood , and began her career in British television in 1991 . She made her film debut in Heavenly Creatures ( 1994 ) , for which she received praise . She garnered recognition for her supporting role in Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) before achieving global stardom with the epic romance Titanic ( 1997 ) , which was the highest @-@ grossing film of all time at that point . Winslet 's performances in Iris ( 2001 ) , Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind ( 2004 ) , Finding Neverland ( 2004 ) , Little Children ( 2006 ) , Revolutionary Road ( 2008 ) , The <unk> ( 2015 ) , and Steve Jobs ( 2015 ) continued to draw praise from film critics . In 2008 , the critic David Edelstein described her as " the best English @-@ speaking film actress of her generation " . 
 Winslet won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in The Reader ( 2008 ) and the Emmy Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries for playing the title role in Mildred Pierce ( 2011 ) . Winslet 's greatest commercial successes since Titanic include the romantic comedy The Holiday ( 2006 ) , the animated film Flushed Away ( 2006 ) , and the first two films of the Divergent series . 
 In addition to acting , Winslet has narrated documentaries and children 's books . She was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children in 2000 for narrating Listen To the Storyteller . She has also provided her vocals to soundtracks of her films , including the single " What If " from Christmas Carol : The Movie ( 2001 ) . Divorced from film directors Jim Threapleton and Sam Mendes , Winslet is married to businessman Ned Rocknroll . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kate Elizabeth Winslet was born in Reading , Berkshire , England , to Sally Anne ( née Bridges ) , a barmaid , and Roger John Winslet , a swimming pool contractor . She has two sisters , Beth and Anna , and one brother , Joss Winslet . 
 Winslet began studying drama at the age of 11 at the <unk> Theatre School , a co @-@ educational independent school in Maidenhead , Berkshire , where she was head girl . At the age of 12 , Winslet appeared in a television advertisement directed by filmmaker Tim Pope for Sugar Puffs cereal . Pope said her naturalism was " there from the start " . During her teenage years , Winslet appeared in more than 20 stage productions of Reading @-@ based <unk> Theatre Company including lead parts such as Miss Hannigan in Annie , Mother Wolf in The Jungle Book and Lena Marelli in Bugsy Malone . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1991 – 1997 = = = 
 Winslet made her television debut , with a co @-@ starring role in the BBC children 's science fiction serial Dark Season . This role was followed by appearances in the made @-@ for @-@ TV film Anglo @-@ Saxon Attitudes in 1992 , the sitcom Get Back , and an episode of the medical drama Casualty in 1993 . 
 In 1992 , Winslet attended a casting call for Peter Jackson 's Heavenly Creatures in London . Winslet auditioned for the role of Juliet Hulme , a teenager who assists in the murder of the mother of her best friend , Pauline Parker ( played by Melanie Lynskey ) . The film included Winslet 's singing debut , and her a cappella version of " Sono <unk> " , an aria from La <unk> , was featured on the film 's soundtrack . The film was released to favourable reviews in 1994 and won Jackson and partner Fran Walsh a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay . Winslet was awarded an Empire Award and a London Film Critics ' Circle Award for British Actress of the Year for her performance . The Washington Post writer Desson Thomson commented : " As Juliet , Winslet is a bright @-@ eyed ball of fire , lighting up every scene she ’ s in . She 's offset perfectly by Lynskey , whose quietly smoldering Pauline completes the delicate , dangerous partnership . " The same year , from 7 April to 7 May , she appeared as Geraldine Barclay in What the Butler Saw for The Royal Exchange Theatre . For her performance in the play , she was nominated for Best Supporting Actress by Manchester Evening News Theatre Awards . 
 The following year , Winslet auditioned for the role of Lucy Steele in the adaptation of Jane Austen 's Sense and Sensibility , featuring Emma Thompson , Hugh Grant and Alan Rickman . She was instead cast in the second leading role of Marianne Dashwood . Director Ang Lee admitted he was initially worried about the way Winslet had attacked her role in Heavenly Creatures and thus required her to exercise t 'ai chi , read Austen @-@ era Gothic novels and poetry , and work with a piano teacher to fit the grace of the role . Budgeted at US $ 16 @.@ 5 million ( $ 25 @.@ 6 million in current year dollars ) the film became a financial and critical success , resulting in a worldwide box office total of $ 135 million ( $ 209 @.@ 6 million ) and various awards for Winslet , winning her both a BAFTA and a Screen Actors ' Guild Award , and nominations for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe . 
 In 1996 , Winslet starred in both Jude and Hamlet . In Michael Winterbottom 's Jude , based on the Victorian novel Jude the Obscure by Thomas Hardy , she played Sue <unk> , a young woman with suffragette leanings who falls in love with her cousin , played by Christopher Eccleston . Acclaimed among critics , it grossed $ 2 @.@ 3 million ( $ 3 @.@ 5 million ) worldwide . Richard Corliss of Time magazine said " Winslet is worthy of [ ... ] the camera 's scrupulous adoration . She 's perfect , a modernist ahead of her time [ ... ] and Jude is a handsome showcase for her gifts . " Winslet played Ophelia , Hamlet 's drowned lover , in Kenneth Branagh 's all star @-@ cast film version of William Shakespeare 's Hamlet . The film garnered largely positive reviews and earned Winslet her second Empire Award . 
 = = = Titanic = = = 
 In September 1996 , Winslet began filming James Cameron 's Titanic ( 1997 ) , alongside Leonardo DiCaprio . Gwyneth Paltrow , Claire Danes , and Gabrielle Anwar had been considered for the role ; when they turned it down , Winslet campaigned heavily for it . She sent Cameron daily notes from England , and thanks to assistance from her agent <unk> Queally , Cameron eventually invited her to Hollywood for auditions . Cameron described the character as " an Audrey Hepburn type " and was initially uncertain about casting Winslet even after her screen test impressed him . After she screen tested with DiCaprio , Winslet was so thoroughly impressed with him , that she whispered to Cameron , " He 's great . Even if you don 't pick me , pick him . " Winslet sent Cameron a single rose with a card signed " From Your Rose " and lobbied him by phone . " You don 't understand ! " she pleaded one day when she reached him by mobile phone in his Humvee . " I am Rose ! I don 't know why you 're even seeing anyone else ! " Her persistence , as well as her talent , eventually convinced him to cast her in the role . 
 Cast as the sensitive seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Rose DeWitt Bukater , a fictional first @-@ class socialite who survives the 1912 sinking of the RMS Titanic , Winslet 's experience was emotionally demanding . " Titanic was totally different and nothing could have prepared me for it . ... We were really scared about the whole adventure . ... Jim [ Cameron ] is a perfectionist , a real genius at making movies . But there was all this bad press before it came out , and that was really upsetting . " Against expectations , the film went on to become the highest @-@ grossing film of all time , grossing more than $ 2 @,@ 186 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 in box @-@ office receipts worldwide , and transformed Winslet into a commercial movie star . Subsequently , she was nominated for most of the high @-@ profile awards , winning a European Film Award . 
 = = = 1998 – 2003 = = = 
 Hideous Kinky , a low @-@ budget romance film shot before the release of Titanic , was Winslet 's only film of 1998 . Winslet had rejected offers to play the leading roles in Shakespeare in Love ( 1998 ) and Anna and the King ( 1999 ) in favour of the role of a young English mother named Julia who moves with her daughters from London to Morocco hoping to start a new life . The film garnered generally mixed reviews and received only limited distribution , resulting in a worldwide gross of $ 5 million ( $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) . The next film Winslet starred in was Holy Smoke ! ( 1999 ) , featuring Harvey Keitel . Feeling pressured , Winslet has said she " never saw Titanic as a springboard for bigger films or bigger pay cheques " , knowing that " it could have been that , but would have destroyed [ her ] . " That same year she voiced Brigid in the computer animated film <unk> . 
 Winslet appeared in the period piece Quills with Geoffrey Rush and Joaquin Phoenix , released in 2000 and inspired by the life and work of the Marquis de Sade . The actress served as somewhat of a " patron saint " of the film for being the first big name to back it , accepting the role of a chambermaid in the asylum and the courier of the Marquis ' manuscripts to the underground publishers . Well received by critics , the film garnered numerous accolades for Winslet , including nominations for SAG and Satellite Awards . The film was a modest arthouse success , averaging $ 27 @,@ 709 ( $ 38 @,@ 075 ) per screen its debut weekend , and eventually grossing $ 18 million ( $ 24 @.@ 7 million ) internationally . 
 In 2001 's Enigma , Winslet played a young woman who finds herself falling for a brilliant young World War II code breaker , played by Dougray Scott . It was her first war film , and Winslet regarded " making Enigma a brilliant experience " as she was five months pregnant at the time of the shoot , forcing some tricky camera work from the director Michael Apted . Generally well @-@ received , Winslet was awarded a British Independent Film Award for her performance , and A. O. Scott of The New York Times described Winslet as " more crush @-@ worthy than ever . " In the same year she appeared in Richard Eyre 's critically acclaimed film Iris , portraying novelist Iris Murdoch . Winslet shared her role with Judi Dench , with both actresses portraying Murdoch at different phases of her life . Subsequently , each of them was nominated for an Academy Award the following year , earning Winslet her third nomination . Also in 2001 , she voiced the character Belle in the animated motion picture Christmas Carol : The Movie , based on the Charles Dickens classic novel . For the film , Winslet recorded the song " What If " , which was released in November 2001 as a single with proceeds donated to two of Winslet 's favourite charities , the <unk> and the Sargeant Cancer Foundation for Children . A Europe @-@ wide top ten hit , it reached number one in Austria , Belgium and Ireland , number six on the UK Singles Chart , and won the 2002 OGAE Song Contest . 
 Her next film role was in the 2003 drama The Life of David Gale , in which she played an ambitious journalist who interviews a death @-@ sentenced professor , played by Kevin Spacey , in his final weeks before execution . The film underperformed at international box offices , garnering only half of its $ 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 budget , and generating mostly critical reviews , with Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times calling it a " silly movie . " 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 = = = 
 Following The Life of David Gale , Winslet appeared with Jim Carrey in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind ( 2004 ) , a <unk> indie @-@ drama by French director Michel Gondry . In the film , she played the role of Clementine <unk> , a chatty , spontaneous and somewhat neurotic woman , who decides to have all memories of her ex @-@ boyfriend erased from her mind . The role was a departure from her previous roles , with Winslet revealing in an interview with Variety that she was initially upended about her casting in the film : " This was not the type of thing I was being offered [ ... ] I was just thrilled that there was something he had seen in me , in spite of the corsets , that he thought was going to work for Clementine . " The film was a critical and financial success . Winslet received rave reviews for her Academy Award @-@ nominated performance , which Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described as " electrifying and bruisingly vulnerable . " 
 Her final film in 2004 was Finding Neverland . The story of the production focused on Scottish writer J.M. Barrie ( Johnny Depp ) and his platonic relationship with Sylvia Llewelyn Davies ( Winslet ) , whose sons inspired him to pen the classic play Peter Pan , or The Boy Who Wouldn 't Grow Up . During promotion of the film , Winslet noted of her portrayal " It was very important for me in playing Sylvia that I was already a mother myself , because I don ’ t think I could have played that part if I didn ’ t know what it felt like to be a parent and have those responsibilities and that amount of love that you give to a child [ ... ] and I 've always got a baby somewhere , or both of them , all over my face . " The film received favourable reviews and proved to be an international success , becoming Winslet 's highest @-@ grossing film since Titanic with a total of $ 118 million worldwide . 
 In 2005 , Winslet appeared in an episode of the BBC / HBO comedy series Extras by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant as a satirical version of herself . While dressed as a nun , she was portrayed giving phone sex tips to the romantically challenged character of Maggie . Her performance in the episode led to her first nomination for an Emmy Award . In Romance & Cigarettes ( 2005 ) , a musical romantic comedy written and directed by John Turturro , she played the character Tula , described by Winslet as " a slut , someone who ’ s essentially foulmouthed and has bad manners and really doesn ’ t know how to dress . " Hand @-@ picked by Turturro , who was impressed with her display of dancing ability in Holy Smoke ! , Winslet was praised for her performance , which included her interpretation of Connie Francis 's " <unk> ( Do You Love Me Like You Kiss Me ) " . Derek Elley of Variety wrote : " <unk> less , but blessed with the showiest role , filthiest one @-@ liners , [ and ] a perfect Lancashire accent that 's comical enough in the Gotham setting Winslet throws herself into the role with an infectious gusto . " 
 After declining an invitation to appear in Woody Allen 's film Match Point ( 2005 ) , Winslet stated that she wanted to be able to spend more time with her children . She began 2006 with All the King 's Men , featuring Sean Penn and Jude Law . Winslet played the role of Anne Stanton , the childhood sweetheart of Jack Burden ( Law ) . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . Todd McCarthy of Variety summed it up as " overstuffed and fatally miscast [ ... ] Absent any point of engagement to become involved in the characters , the film feels stillborn and is unlikely to stir public excitement , even in an election year . " 
 Winslet fared far better when she co @-@ starred in Todd Field 's Little Children , playing Sarah Pierce , a bored housewife who has a torrid affair with a married neighbour , played by Patrick Wilson . Both her performance and the film received rave reviews ; A.O. Scott of The New York Times wrote : " In too many recent movies intelligence is woefully undervalued , and it is this quality — even more than its considerable beauty — that distinguishes Little Children from its peers . The result is a film that is challenging , accessible and hard to stop thinking about . Ms. Winslet , as fine an actress as any working in movies today , registers every flicker of Sarah ’ s pride , self @-@ doubt and desire , inspiring a mixture of recognition , pity and concern that amounts , by the end of the movie , to something like love . That Ms. Winslet is so lovable makes the deficit of love in Sarah ’ s life all the more painful . " For her work in the film , she was honoured with a Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year from BAFTA / LA , a Los Angeles @-@ based offshoot of the BAFTA Awards , was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress , and at 31 , became the youngest actress to ever garner five Oscar nominations . 
 She followed Little Children with a role in Nancy Meyers ' romantic comedy The Holiday , also starring Cameron Diaz , Jude Law and Jack Black . In it she played Iris , a British woman who temporarily exchanges homes with an American woman ( Diaz ) . Released to a mixed reception by critics , the film became Winslet 's biggest commercial success in nine years , grossing more than $ 205 million worldwide . Also in 2006 , Winslet provided her voice for several smaller projects . In the CG @-@ animated Flushed Away , she voiced Rita , a scavenging sewer rat who helps Roddy ( Hugh Jackman ) escape from the city of <unk> and return to his luxurious Kensington origins . A critical and commercial success , the film collected $ 177 @,@ 665 @,@ 672 at international box offices . 
 = = = 2007 – 2011 = = = 
 In 2007 , Winslet reunited with Leonardo DiCaprio to film Revolutionary Road ( 2008 ) , directed by her husband at the time , Sam Mendes . Winslet had suggested that both should work with her on a film adaptation of the 1961 novel of the same name by Richard Yates after reading the script by Justin <unk> . Resulting in both " a blessing and an added pressure " on @-@ set , the reunion was her first experience working with Mendes . Portraying a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s , DiCaprio and Winslet watched period videos promoting life in the suburbs to prepare themselves for the film , which earned them favourable reviews . In his review of the film , David Edelstein of New York magazine stated that " [ t ] here isn ’ t a banal moment in Winslet ’ s performance — not a gesture , not a word . Is Winslet now the best English @-@ speaking film actress of her generation ? I think so . " Winslet was awarded a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for her performance , her seventh nomination from the Golden Globes . 
 Also released in late 2008 , the film competed against Winslet 's other project , a film adaptation of Bernhard <unk> 's 1995 novel The Reader , directed by Stephen Daldry and featuring Ralph Fiennes and David Kross in supporting roles . Originally the first choice for her role , she was initially not able to take on the role due to a scheduling conflict with Revolutionary Road , and Nicole Kidman replaced her . A month after filming began , Kidman left the film due to her pregnancy enabling Winslet to rejoin the film . Employing a German accent , Winslet portrayed a former Nazi concentration camp guard who has an affair with a teenager ( Kross ) who , as an adult , witnesses her war crimes trial . She later said the role was difficult for her , as she was naturally unable " to sympathise with an SS guard . " Because the film required full frontal nudity , a <unk> was made for her . In an interview for Allure she related how she refused to use it : " Guys , I am going to have to draw the line at a pubic wig , ... " While the film garnered mixed reviews in general , Winslet received favourable reviews for her performance . The following year , she earned her sixth Academy Award nomination and went on to win the Best Actress award , the BAFTA Award for Best Actress , a Screen Actors ' Guild Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress , and a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress . 
 In 2011 , Winslet headlined in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce , a small screen adaptation of James M. Cain 's 1941 novel of the same name , directed by Todd Haynes . Co @-@ starring Guy Pearce and Evan Rachel Wood , she portrayed a self @-@ sacrificing mother during the Great Depression who finds herself separated from her husband and falling in love with a new man , all the while trying to earn her narcissistic daughter 's love and respect . Broadcast to moderate ratings , the five @-@ part series earned generally favourable reviews , with Salon.com calling it a " quiet , heartbreaking masterpiece " . Winslet won an Emmy Award , a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film , and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie for her performance . 
 Also in 2011 , Winslet appeared in Steven Soderbergh 's film Contagion , featuring an ensemble cast consisting of Marion Cotillard , Matt Damon , Gwyneth Paltrow and Jude Law . The thriller follows the rapid progress of a lethal indirect contact transmission virus that kills within days . Winslet portrayed an Epidemic Intelligence Service officer who becomes infected with the disease over the course of her investigation . Winslet 's other 2011 film project , Roman Polanski 's Carnage , premiered at the 68th Venice Film Festival . An adaptation of the play God of Carnage by French playwright Yasmina Reza , the black comedy follows two sets of parents who meet up to talk after their children have been in a fight . Jodie Foster , John C. Reilly and Christoph Waltz co @-@ starred in the film , which critics felt was not as " compelling on the screen as it was on the stage " , but made " up for its flaws with Polanski 's smooth direction and assured performances from Winslet and Foster . " For her performance Winslet received a second nomination by the Hollywood Foreign Press that year . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 In 2012 , Winslet 's audiobook performance of Émile Zola 's Thérèse <unk> was released at <unk> AudioFile 's review said , " Kate Winslet reads as though she is relishing every morsel of the drama [ ... ] She clearly loves the book , and her pleasure in the text is infectious . She grabs listeners and doesn ’ t let go . " Her first 2013 release was Movie 43 , an independent anthology black comedy film that featured 14 different storylines , with each segment having a different director . Winslet 's segment , titled The Catch , was directed by Peter Farrelly and revolves around a single businesswoman who goes on a blind date with the city 's most eligible bachelor , played by Hugh Jackman , only to be shocked when he removes his scarf , revealing a pair of testicles dangling from his neck . This marked Winslet 's second collaboration with Jackman , following the 2006 animated film Flushed Away . The compilation film was universally panned by critics , with the Chicago Sun @-@ Times calling it " the Citizen Kane of awful " . 
 In 2013 , Winslet appeared in Jason Reitman 's big screen adaptation of Joyce Maynard 's 2009 novel Labor Day , also starring Josh Brolin , which she declared as " a very romantic movie , though a bizarre one . " While the film was met with a generally mixed reception from critics , Winslet received favorable reviews for her portrayal of Adele , a mentally fragile , repressed single mom of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old son who gives shelter to an escaped prisoner during a long summer week @-@ end . For her performance , Winslet earned her tenth Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama . Winslet then appeared in Divergent ( 2014 ) , Neil Burger 's film adaptation of the 2011 young adult novel by Veronica Roth . She appeared as erudite leader Jeanine Matthews , whom she compared to " Hitler " and on playing the antagonist first time , Winslet said , " The idea went through my head that I have never played a baddie before , I was almost kind of surprised . " Her performance met with positive response from critics ; <unk> thought that her performance was " understated " , and Indiewire noted that she was " pure poison as Jeanine Matthews . " The film grossed US $ 288 @.@ 7 million worldwide . 
 In late 2014 , Winslet appeared alongside Matthias Schoenaerts in Alan Rickman 's period drama A Little Chaos about rival landscape gardeners commissioned by Louis XIV to create a fountain at Versailles . Despite receiving little praise from critics , Winslet 's performance of assistant designer Sabine de Barra earned positive reviews . The Guardian noted that " Winslet manages emotional honesty within anachronistic confines , " and Vanity Fair said , " She glows with ambition and ache , playing a woman with a tragic past seeking refuge in the meticulousness and inventiveness of her work . " The same year , she also narrated Roald Dahl 's children 's novel Matilda , for which AudioFile in its review said , " She ( Winslet ) saves her panache for her characterizations . While Winslet ’ s Matilda is modestly soft @-@ spoken , she scales her vocal register as the ranting Wormwood parents , booms as Miss <unk> , and breathily voices the adored Miss Honey . " She won the Odyssey Award for her performance . 
 Winslet started 2015 by reprising her role of Jeanine Matthews in the second installment of the Divergent trilogy , entitled The Divergent Series : Insurgent , making it the first sequel she has ever appeared in . Forbes described her performance as a " murderous tyrant " while TheWrap said the film " Perks up " during her scenes . The film grossed US $ 297 million worldwide . 
 She next appeared in Danny Boyle 's Steve Jobs ( 2015 ) , alongside Michael Fassbender , about backstage events before three different computer product launches . Winslet received critical acclaim for her portrayal of Joanna Hoffman , Macintosh marketing chief , Jobs ' right @-@ hand woman and work wife . Indiewire noted , " buried under makeup and a distinctive Polish accent , Winslet 's <unk> transformation " , Time Out called it " steady and brilliant " , and HitFix said " Winslet gives one of the best performances of her career providing Hoffman with a gravitas that isn ’ t always in the script . " She received her seventh Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress along with a nomination from the Screen Actors Guild and went on to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her role in the film . 
 Winslet 's final film of 2015 was Jocelyn Moorhouse 's The <unk> based on the novel of same name , in which she stars as a femme fatale in the title role . Justin Chang of Variety called her performance " crucial , stabilizing anchor " of the film , as he wrote that " Winslet , a difficult actress to root against under any circumstances , has us in her palm from the moment she steps into frame , looking like an avenging dark angel bathed in ’ 50s noir shadows " and The Star called her " smashing as Tilly <unk> " . Winslet won an AACTA Award for Best Actress , for her performance in the film . 
 Winslet 's only release of 2016 was John Hillcoat 's crime @-@ thriller Triple 9 , in which she appears as a Russian @-@ Israeli mafia moll , described by Hillcoat as " a really glamorous , nasty piece of work " . She received strong notices for her performance by the critics as Tom Huddleston of The Wrap said that " Kate Winslet practically rips the screen in two as the mad @-@ eyed Russian mob boss " and Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter described her performance as " <unk> and wittily , in a way that makes you instantly want to see her as Lady Macbeth . " 
 As of June 2016 , Winslet has various film projects in different states of production . She has completed filming for David Frankel 's ensemble drama Collateral Beauty . In addition , she is set to appear alongside Idris Elba in Hany Abu @-@ Assad 's disaster film The Mountain Between Us , in a biopic based on American fashion model , artist and war correspondent Elizabeth " Lee " Miller during World War II and in Woody Allen 's next film . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships and children = = = 
 While on the set of the 1991 TV series Dark Season , Winslet met actor and writer Stephen <unk> , with whom she had a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year relationship . Winslet and <unk> remained close after their separation in 1995 . He died of bone cancer during the opening week of Titanic , causing her to miss the film 's Los Angeles premiere to attend his funeral in London . 
 On 22 November 1998 , Winslet married film director Jim Threapleton , whom she met while on the set of Hideous Kinky in 1997 . They have a daughter , Mia Honey Threapleton , who was born on 12 October 2000 in London . Winslet and Threapleton divorced on 13 December 2001 . 
 Following her separation from Threapleton , Winslet began a relationship with director Sam Mendes in 2001 , and she married him on 24 May 2003 on the island of Anguilla . Their son , Joe Alfie Winslet Mendes , was born on 22 December 2003 in New York City . Winslet and Mendes announced their separation in March 2010 , and divorced in 2011 . 
 In August 2011 , a fire broke out at a residence in which Winslet , her children , and her then @-@ boyfriend , model Louis Dowler , were staying on Necker Island , the private resort island of Virgin Group founder Richard Branson . The fire caused significant damage to the home , but no injuries . 
 During the same August 2011 holiday on Necker Island , Winslet met fellow guest Ned Rocknroll , and they soon began dating . Rocknroll was born Ned Abel Smith , but later legally changed his name . He is a nephew of Richard Branson and works for Virgin Galactic , the space @-@ travel division of his uncle 's business . Rocknroll was previously married to Eliza Pearson , daughter of Viscount Cowdray . Winslet and Rocknroll became engaged in the summer of 2012 . It was announced in September 2012 that the couple had relocated from New York to live in the UK permanently , moving into a heritage home in South Downs National Park in West Wittering , West Sussex . Winslet and Rocknroll married in a private ceremony in New York in December 2012 . The couple 's son , Bear Blaze Winslet , was born in the County of Sussex , England , on 7 December 2013 . 
 = = = Philanthropic work , experiences and interests = = = 
 Winslet 's weight fluctuations over the years have been well documented by the media . She has been outspoken about her refusal to allow Hollywood to dictate her weight . In February 2003 , the British edition of GQ magazine published photographs of Winslet that had been digitally altered to make her look dramatically thinner . Winslet issued a statement that the alterations were made without her consent , saying , " I just didn 't want people to think I was a hypocrite and that I 'd suddenly lost 30 lbs or whatever " . GQ subsequently issued an apology . In 2007 , she won a libel suit against Grazia magazine after it claimed that she had visited a diet doctor . She won another libel suit in 2009 against the British tabloid The Daily Mail after it printed that she had lied about her exercise regimen . Winslet stated that she had requested an apology to demonstrate her commitment to the views that she has always expressed regarding women 's body issues , namely that women should accept their appearance with pride . 
 In 2010 , Winslet narrated a video for PETA , encouraging chefs to remove foie gras from their menus and asking consumers to boycott restaurants that serve it . Winslet is a vegetarian . 
 Winslet narrated the documentary A Mother 's Courage : Talking Back to Autism , which focused on Keli <unk> , who has autism , and his mother , Margret <unk> . The documentary was generally released on 24 September 2010 , after airing on HBO in April of the same year . Her involvement in the documentary led to her founding the non @-@ profit organisation , the Golden Hat Foundation , whose mission is to eliminate barriers for people living with autism . She also wrote a book titled " The Golden Hat : Talking Back to Autism " , which contains personal statements and self @-@ portraits from number of celebrities including Leonardo DiCaprio , Marion Cotillard and Michael Caine . In 2011 , Winslet received the Yo Dona award for Best Humanitarian Work for her work with the Golden Hat . 
 Winslet is the face of cosmetic and perfume house Lancôme and in 2010 , she joined Longines as their " Ambassador of Elegance " . In 2011 , Lancôme collaborated with Winslet 's Golden Hat Foundation to raise funds for the organization to help people with autism . 
 Winslet supports ageing naturally and has always spoken against plastic surgery and botox . In 2015 , Winslet appeared in Running Wild with Bear Grylls and talked about being bullied at school by her classmates , saying that " I was chubby , always had big feet , the wrong shoes , bad hair " . The same year , she narrated anti @-@ bullying animated short film Daisy Chain , about a victim of cyber @-@ bullying . 
 In November 2015 , Winslet stated that speaking publicly about the Hollywood wage gap was " vulgar . ... I 'm quite surprised by these conversations to be honest , simply because it seems quite a strange thing to be discussing out in the open like that . I am a very lucky woman and I 'm quite happy with how things are ticking along . " Later next month , she clarified more about her stance on the issue that " Jennifer Lawrence is amazing for speaking up and I think that anyone in this industry , particularly women , if there ’ s something strongly that they feel isn ’ t working for them or if they ’ re being discriminated against in any way , shape or form , it ’ s very , very important to speak up and so I fully applaud that . What I have a problem with is that there ’ s a separate thing that has started happening is that the lid has been somewhat lifted for journalists , and so journalists on red carpets will now say , ‘ So how do you feel about the gender pay gap ? ’ . ‘ What ? What ’ s the specific question ? ’ . ‘ Well , do you know that you got paid less or more than Michael Fassbender ? ’ . That question ? That to me is not very nice . I ’ m not going to have that conversation with a friend or even a family member , let alone in public . And so what ’ s happened as a result of these big very important discussions is that we ’ re then subjected to a particular line of questioning that being a Brit strikes me as being a little bit vulgar . Why would I stand on a red carpet and talk about how much I get paid ? " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Winslet in her career of over two decades has appeared in different genres of films , ranging from crime drama Heavenly Creatures ( 1994 ) to period drama Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) and Titanic ( 1997 ) , to sci @-@ fi dramedy Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind ( 2004 ) , and to young @-@ adult action Divergent ( 2014 ) . As of July 2015 , Winslet 's films have grossed US $ 3 @.@ 9 billion worldwide . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Winslet won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in The Reader ( 2008 ) . She won two Golden Globe Awards in the same year ; Best Actress ( Drama ) for Revolutionary Road and Best Supporting Actress for The Reader , becoming the third actress to achieve the feat , after Joan Plowright and Sigourney Weaver . She has won three BAFTA Awards : Best Actress for The Reader , and Best Supporting Actress for Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) and Steve Jobs ( 2016 ) . She has earned a total of seven Academy Award nominations , eleven Golden Globe nominations , and eight BAFTA nominations . 
 She has received numerous awards from other organizations , including the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress for Iris ( 2001 ) and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role for Sense and Sensibility and The Reader . Premiere magazine named her portrayal of Clementine <unk> in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind ( 2004 ) as the 81st greatest film performance of all time . 
 = = = Academy Award nomination milestones = = = 
 Winslet set the mark as the youngest actor to receive five nominations , at age 31 , for Little Children ( 2006 ) . She surpassed Bette Davis , who was 33 when she received her fifth nomination for her performance in The Little Foxes ( 1941 ) . With her Best Actress nomination for The Reader , Winslet became the youngest actress to receive six Oscar nominations . At age 33 , Winslet passed the mark Davis , one year older , set with Now , Voyager ( 1942 ) . 
 Winslet received Academy Award nominations as the younger versions of the characters played by fellow nominees Gloria Stuart , as Rose , in Titanic ( 1997 ) and Judi Dench , as Iris Murdoch , in Iris . These are the only instances of the younger and older versions of a character in the same film both yielding Academy Award nominations , thus making Winslet the only actor to twice share an Oscar nomination with another for portraying the same character . 
 When she was not nominated for her work in Revolutionary Road , Winslet became only the second actress to win a Golden Globe for Best Actress Drama without getting an Oscar nomination for the same performance ( Shirley MacLaine was the first for 1988 's Madame <unk> ) . Academy rules allow an actor to receive no more than one nomination in a given category ; as the Academy nominating process determined that Winslet 's work in The Reader would be considered a lead performance — unlike the Golden Globes , which considered it a supporting performance — she could not also receive a Best Actress nomination for Revolutionary Road . 
 = = = Awards for other work = = = 
 In 2000 , Winslet won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for Listen To the Storyteller . She was nominated for an Emmy Award Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for playing herself in a 2005 episode of Extras . At the 2011 Primetime Emmy Awards , Winslet won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for her role as the title character in Mildred Pierce . In 2014 , American Library Association presented her with Odyssey Award for her audiobook performance of Roald Dahl 's children 's novel Matilda . 
 = = Honours = = 
 In 2007 , British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) honoured Winslet with Britannia Award . She received the 2009 Santa Barbara International Film Festival Modern Master ( Montecito ) Award in recognition of her accomplishments in the film industry . In 2011 , Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax statue of her draped in the Elie Saab dress she wore at Primetime Emmy Awards of the same year . 
 Winslet was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) for the 2012 Birthday Honours for services to drama . The same year she was honoured with an Honorary César Award . In 2015 , Film Society of Lincoln Center honoured her at 53rd New York Film Festival for her contributions to arts and BAFTA with a special career tribute titled BAFTA A Life in Pictures . 
 Winslet was selected for a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2012 . She received the star at <unk> Hollywood Blvd , which was unveiled on 17 March 2014 on Saint Patrick 's Day by Winslet with Kathy Bates and James Cameron as guest speakers at the unveiling ceremony . 
 = 90377 Sedna = 
 90377 Sedna is a large minor planet in the outer reaches of the Solar System that was , as of 2015 , at a distance of about 86 astronomical units ( AU ) from the Sun , about three times as far as Neptune . Spectroscopy has revealed that Sedna 's surface composition is similar to that of some other trans @-@ Neptunian objects , being largely a mixture of water , methane , and nitrogen ices with tholins . Its surface is one of the reddest among Solar System objects . It is most likely a dwarf planet . 
 For most of its orbit , it is even farther from the Sun than at present , with its aphelion estimated at 937 AU ( 31 times Neptune 's distance ) , making it one of the most distant known objects in the Solar System other than long @-@ period comets . 
 Sedna has an exceptionally long and elongated orbit , taking approximately 11 @,@ 400 years to complete and a distant point of closest approach to the Sun at 76 AU . These facts have led to much speculation about its origin . The Minor Planet Center currently places Sedna in the scattered disc , a group of objects sent into highly elongated orbits by the gravitational influence of Neptune . However , this classification has been contested , because Sedna never comes close enough to Neptune to have been scattered by it , leading some astronomers to conclude that it is in fact the first known member of the inner Oort cloud . Others speculate that it might have been tugged into its current orbit by a passing star , perhaps one within the Sun 's birth cluster ( an open cluster ) , or even that it was captured from another star system . Another hypothesis suggests that its orbit may be evidence for a large planet beyond the orbit of Neptune . 
 Astronomer Michael E. Brown , co @-@ discoverer of Sedna and the dwarf planets Eris , Haumea , and Makemake , thinks that it is the most scientifically important trans @-@ Neptunian object found to date , because understanding its unusual orbit is likely to yield valuable information about the origin and early evolution of the Solar System . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Sedna ( provisionally designated 2003 <unk> ) was discovered by Michael Brown ( Caltech ) , Chad Trujillo ( Gemini Observatory ) , and David Rabinowitz ( Yale University ) on 14 November 2003 . The discovery formed part of a survey begun in 2001 with the Samuel Oschin telescope at Palomar Observatory near San Diego , California using Yale 's 160 megapixel Palomar Quest camera . On that day , an object was observed to move by 4 @.@ 6 arcseconds over 3 @.@ 1 hours relative to stars , which indicated that its distance was about 100 AU . Follow @-@ up observations in November – December 2003 with the SMARTS telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory in Chile as well as with the <unk> IV telescope at the Keck Observatory on Mauna Kea in Hawaii revealed that the object was moving along a distant highly eccentric orbit . Later , the object was <unk> on older images made by the Samuel Oschin telescope as well as on images from the Near @-@ Earth Asteroid Tracking consortium . These previous positions expanded its known orbital arc and allowed a more precise calculation of its orbit . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 " Our newly discovered object is the coldest most distant place known in the Solar System " , said Mike Brown on his website , " so we feel it is appropriate to name it in honor of Sedna , the Inuit goddess of the sea , who is thought to live at the bottom of the frigid Arctic Ocean . " Brown also suggested to the International Astronomical Union 's ( IAU ) Minor Planet Center that any future objects discovered in Sedna 's orbital region should also be named after entities in arctic mythologies . The team made the name " Sedna " public before the object had been officially numbered . Brian Marsden , the head of the Minor Planet Center , said that such an action was a violation of protocol , and that some members of the IAU might vote against it . However , no objection was raised to the name , and no competing names were suggested . The IAU 's Committee on Small Body Nomenclature formally accepted the name in September 2004 , and also considered that , in similar cases of extraordinary interest , it might in the future allow names to be announced before they were officially numbered . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Sedna has the longest orbital period of any known large object in the Solar System , calculated at around 11 @,@ 400 years . Its orbit is extremely eccentric , with an aphelion estimated at 937 AU and a perihelion at about 76 AU . This perihelion was the largest of that of any known Solar System object until the discovery of 2012 VP113 . When Sedna was discovered it was 89 @.@ 6 AU from the Sun approaching perihelion , and was the most distant object in the Solar System observed . Eris was later detected by the same survey near aphelion at 97 AU . Only the orbits of some long @-@ period comets extend farther than that of Sedna ; they are too dim to be discovered except when approaching perihelion in the inner Solar System . Even as Sedna nears its perihelion in mid 2076 , the Sun would appear merely as an extremely bright star @-@ like pinpoint in its sky , 100 times brighter than a full moon on Earth ( for comparison , the Sun appears from Earth to be roughly 400 @,@ 000 times brighter than the full Moon ) , and too far away to be visible as a disc to the naked eye . 
 When first discovered , Sedna was thought to have an unusually long rotational period ( 20 to 50 days ) . It was initially speculated that Sedna 's rotation was slowed by the gravitational pull of a large binary companion , similar to Pluto 's moon Charon . A search for such a satellite by the Hubble Space Telescope in March 2004 found nothing , and subsequent measurements from the MMT telescope suggest a much shorter rotation period of about 10 hours , rather typical for a body of its size . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Sedna has a V @-@ band absolute magnitude ( H ) of about 1 @.@ 8 , and it is estimated to have an albedo of about 0 @.@ 32 , thus giving it a diameter of approximately 1 @,@ 000 km . At the time of its discovery it was the intrinsically brightest object found in the Solar System since Pluto in 1930 . In 2004 , the discoverers placed an upper limit of 1 @,@ 800 km on its diameter , but by 2007 this was revised downward to less than 1 @,@ 600 km after observation by the Spitzer Space Telescope . In 2012 , measurements from the Herschel Space Observatory suggested that Sedna 's diameter was 995 ± 80 km , which would make it smaller than Pluto 's moon Charon . Because Sedna has no known moons , determining its mass is currently impossible without sending a space probe . 
 Observations from the SMARTS telescope show that in visible light Sedna is one of the reddest objects in the Solar System , nearly as red as Mars . Chad Trujillo and his colleagues suggest that Sedna 's dark red colour is caused by a surface coating of hydrocarbon sludge , or tholin , formed from simpler organic compounds after long exposure to ultraviolet radiation . Its surface is homogeneous in colour and spectrum ; this may be because Sedna , unlike objects nearer the Sun , is rarely impacted by other bodies , which would expose bright patches of fresh icy material like that on <unk> <unk> . Sedna and two other very distant objects – 2006 <unk> and ( <unk> ) 2000 <unk> – share their color with outer classical Kuiper belt objects and the centaur <unk> <unk> , suggesting a similar region of origin . 
 Trujillo and colleagues have placed upper limits in Sedna 's surface composition of 60 % for methane ice and 70 % for water ice . The presence of methane further supports the existence of tholins on Sedna 's surface , because they are produced by irradiation of methane . <unk> and colleagues compared Sedna 's spectrum with that of Triton and detected weak absorption bands belonging to methane and nitrogen ices . From these observations , they suggested the following model of the surface : 24 % Triton @-@ type tholins , 7 % amorphous carbon , 10 % nitrogen , 26 % methanol , and 33 % methane . The detection of methane and water ices was confirmed in 2006 by the Spitzer Space Telescope mid @-@ infrared photometry . The presence of nitrogen on the surface suggests the possibility that , at least for a short time , Sedna may have a tenuous atmosphere . During a 200 @-@ year period near perihelion , the maximum temperature on Sedna should exceed 35 @.@ 6 K ( − 237 @.@ 6 ° C ) , the transition temperature between alpha @-@ phase solid N2 and the beta phase seen on Triton . At 38 K , the N2 vapor pressure would be 14 <unk> ( 1 @.@ 4 Pa or 0 @.@ <unk> atm ) . However , its deep red spectral slope is indicative of high concentrations of organic material on its surface , and its weak methane absorption bands indicate that methane on Sedna 's surface is ancient , rather than freshly deposited . This means that Sedna is too cold for methane to evaporate from its surface and then fall back as snow , which happens on Triton and probably on Pluto . 
 Models of internal heating via radioactive decay suggest that Sedna might be capable of supporting a subsurface ocean of liquid water . 
 = = Origin = = 
 In their paper announcing the discovery of Sedna , Mike Brown and his colleagues described it as the first observed body belonging to the Oort cloud , the hypothetical cloud of comets thought to exist nearly a light @-@ year from the Sun . They observed that , unlike scattered disc objects such as Eris , Sedna 's perihelion ( 76 AU ) is too distant for it to have been scattered by the gravitational influence of Neptune . Because it is a great deal closer to the Sun than was expected for an Oort cloud object , and has an inclination roughly in line with the planets and the Kuiper belt , they described the planetoid as being an " inner Oort cloud object " , situated in the disc reaching from the Kuiper belt to the spherical part of the cloud . 
 If Sedna formed in its current location , the Sun 's original protoplanetary disc must have extended as far as 75 AU into space . Also , Sedna 's initial orbit must have been approximately circular , otherwise its formation by the accretion of smaller bodies into a whole would not have been possible , because the large relative velocities between planetesimals would have been too disruptive . Therefore , it must have been tugged into its current eccentric orbit by a gravitational interaction with another body . In their initial paper , Brown , Rabinowitz and colleagues suggested three possible candidates for the perturbing body : an unseen planet beyond the Kuiper belt , a single passing star , or one of the young stars embedded with the Sun in the stellar cluster in which it formed . 
 Mike Brown and his team favored the hypothesis that Sedna was lifted into its current orbit by a star from the Sun 's birth cluster , arguing that Sedna 's aphelion of about 1 @,@ 000 AU , which is relatively close compared to those of long @-@ period comets , is not distant enough to be affected by passing stars at their current distances from the Sun . They propose that Sedna 's orbit is best explained by the Sun having formed in an open cluster of several stars that gradually disassociated over time . That hypothesis has also been advanced by both Alessandro Morbidelli and Scott Jay Kenyon . Computer simulations by Julio A. Fernandez and Adrian <unk> suggest that multiple close passes by young stars in such a cluster would pull many objects into Sedna @-@ like orbits . A study by Morbidelli and Levison suggested that the most likely explanation for Sedna 's orbit was that it had been perturbed by a close ( approximately 800 AU ) pass by another star in the first 100 million years or so of the Solar System 's existence . 
 The trans @-@ Neptunian planet hypothesis has been advanced in several forms by a number of astronomers , including Rodney Gomes and Patryk Lykawka . One scenario involves perturbations of Sedna 's orbit by a hypothetical planetary @-@ sized body in the Hills cloud . Recent simulations show that Sedna 's orbital traits could be explained by perturbations by a Neptune @-@ mass object at 2 @,@ 000 AU ( or less ) , a Jupiter @-@ mass ( MJ ) at 5 @,@ 000 AU , or even an Earth @-@ mass object at 1 @,@ 000 AU . Computer simulations by Patryk Lykawka have suggested that Sedna 's orbit may have been caused by a body roughly the size of Earth , ejected outward by Neptune early in the Solar System 's formation and currently in an elongated orbit between 80 and 170 AU from the Sun . Mike Brown 's various sky surveys have not detected any Earth @-@ sized objects out to a distance of about 100 AU . However , it is possible that such an object may have been scattered out of the Solar System after the formation of the inner Oort cloud . 
 Caltech researchers Konstantin Batygin and Mike Brown have found evidence of a giant planet with a highly eccentric orbit in the outer Solar System . The object , which the researchers have nicknamed Planet Nine , has a mass about 10 times that of Earth and orbits about 20 times farther from the Sun on average than does Neptune ( which orbits the Sun at an average distance of 30 @.@ 1 astronomical units ( 4 @.@ 50 × 109 km ) ) . In fact , it would take this new planet between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years to make just one full orbit around the Sun . The researchers hypothesised the planet 's existence through mathematical modeling and computer simulations , but have not yet observed the object directly . 
 It has been suggested that Sedna 's orbit is the result of influence by a large binary companion to the Sun , thousands of AU distant . One such hypothetical companion is Nemesis , a dim companion to the Sun that has been proposed to be responsible for the supposed periodicity of mass extinctions on Earth from cometary impacts , the lunar impact record , and the common orbital elements of a number of long @-@ period comets . However , to date no direct evidence of Nemesis has been found , and many lines of evidence ( such as crater counts ) , have thrown its existence into doubt . John J. Matese and Daniel P. Whitmire , longtime proponents of the possibility of a wide binary companion to the Sun , have suggested that an object of 5 MJ lying at roughly 7 @,@ 850 AU from the Sun could produce a body in Sedna 's orbit . 
 Morbidelli and Kenyon have also suggested that Sedna did not originate in the Solar System , but was captured by the Sun from a passing extrasolar planetary system , specifically that of a brown dwarf about 1 / 20th the mass of the Sun ( M ☉ ) . 
 = = Population = = 
 Sedna 's highly elliptical orbit means that the probability of its detection was roughly 1 in 80 , which suggests that , unless its discovery was a fluke , another 40 – 120 Sedna @-@ sized objects would exist within the same region . Another object , 2000 CR105 , has a similar but less extreme orbit : it has a perihelion of 44 @.@ 3 AU , an aphelion of 394 AU , and an orbital period of 3 @,@ 240 years . It may have been affected by the same processes as Sedna . 
 Each of the proposed mechanisms for Sedna 's extreme orbit would leave a distinct mark on the structure and dynamics of any wider population . If a trans @-@ Neptunian planet was responsible , all such objects would share roughly the same perihelion ( about 80 AU ) . If Sedna were captured from another planetary system that rotated in the same direction as the Solar System , then all of its population would have orbits on relatively low inclinations and have semi @-@ major axes ranging from 100 – 500 AU . If it rotated in the opposite direction , then two populations would form , one with low and one with high inclinations . The perturbations from passing stars would produce a wide variety of perihelia and inclinations , each dependent on the number and angle of such encounters . 
 Acquiring a larger sample of such objects would help in determining which scenario is most likely . " I call Sedna a fossil record of the earliest Solar System " , said Brown in 2006 . " Eventually , when other fossil records are found , Sedna will help tell us how the Sun formed and the number of stars that were close to the Sun when it formed . " A 2007 – 2008 survey by Brown , Rabinowitz and Megan <unk> attempted to locate another member of Sedna 's hypothetical population . Although the survey was sensitive to movement out to 1 @,@ 000 AU and discovered the likely dwarf planet 2007 OR10 , it detected no new <unk> . Subsequent simulations incorporating the new data suggested about 40 Sedna @-@ sized objects probably exist in this region , with the brightest being about Eris 's magnitude ( − 1 @.@ 0 ) . 
 In 2014 , astronomers announced the discovery of 2012 VP113 , an object half the size of Sedna in a 4200 @-@ year orbit similar to Sedna 's and a perihelion within Sedna 's range of roughly 80 AU , which led some to speculate that it offered evidence of a trans @-@ Neptunian planet . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The Minor Planet Center , which officially catalogs the objects in the Solar System , classifies Sedna as a scattered object . However , this grouping is heavily questioned , and many astronomers have suggested that it , together with a few other objects ( e.g. 2000 CR105 ) , be placed in a new category of distant objects named extended scattered disc objects ( E @-@ SDO ) , detached objects , distant detached objects ( DDO ) , or scattered @-@ extended in the formal classification by the Deep Ecliptic Survey . 
 The discovery of Sedna resurrected the question of which astronomical objects should be considered planets and which should not . On 15 March 2004 , articles on Sedna in the popular press reported that a tenth planet had been discovered . This question was answered under the International Astronomical Union definition of a planet , adopted on 24 August 2006 , which mandated that a planet must have cleared the neighborhood around its orbit . Sedna has a Stern – Levison parameter estimated to be much less than 1 , and therefore cannot be considered to have cleared the neighborhood , even though no other objects have yet been discovered in its vicinity . To be a dwarf planet , Sedna must be in hydrostatic equilibrium . It is bright enough , and therefore large enough , that this is expected to be the case , and several astronomers have called it one . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 Sedna will come to perihelion around 2075 – 2076 . This close approach to the Sun provides an opportunity for study that will not occur again for 12 @,@ 000 years . Although Sedna is listed on NASA 's Solar System exploration website , NASA is not known to be considering any type of mission at this time . It was calculated that a flyby mission to Sedna could take 24 @.@ 48 years using a Jupiter gravity assist , based on launch dates of 6 May 2033 and 23 June 2046 . Sedna would be 77 @.@ 27 or 76 @.@ 43 AU from the Sun when the spacecraft arrives . 
 = Rings of Jupiter = 
 The planet Jupiter has a system of rings known as the rings of Jupiter or the Jovian ring system . It was the third ring system to be discovered in the Solar System , after those of Saturn and Uranus . It was first observed in 1979 by the Voyager 1 space probe and thoroughly investigated in the 1990s by the Galileo orbiter . It has also been observed by the Hubble Space Telescope and from Earth for the past 23 years . Ground @-@ based observations of the rings require the largest available telescopes . 
 The Jovian ring system is faint and consists mainly of dust . It has four main components : a thick inner torus of particles known as the " halo ring " ; a relatively bright , exceptionally thin " main ring " ; and two wide , thick and faint outer " gossamer rings " , named for the moons of whose material they are composed : Amalthea and Thebe . 
 The main and halo rings consist of dust ejected from the moons Metis , Adrastea , and other unobserved parent bodies as the result of high @-@ velocity impacts . High @-@ resolution images obtained in February and March 2007 by the New Horizons spacecraft revealed a rich fine structure in the main ring . 
 In visible and near @-@ infrared light , the rings have a reddish color , except the halo ring , which is neutral or blue in color . The size of the dust in the rings varies , but the cross @-@ sectional area is greatest for <unk> particles of radius about 15 μm in all rings except the halo . The halo ring is probably dominated by <unk> dust . The total mass of the ring system ( including unresolved parent bodies ) is poorly known , but is probably in the range of 1011 to 1016 kg . The age of the ring system is not known , but it may have existed since the formation of Jupiter . 
 A ring could possibly exist in Himalia 's orbit . One possible explanation is that a small moon had crashed into Himalia and the force of the impact caused material to blast off Himalia . 
 = = Discovery and structure = = 
 Jupiter 's ring system was the third to be discovered in the Solar System , after those of Saturn and Uranus . It was first observed in 1979 by the Voyager 1 space probe . It comprises four main components : a thick inner torus of particles known as the " halo ring " ; a relatively bright , exceptionally thin " main ring " ; and two wide , thick and faint outer " gossamer rings " , named after the moons of whose material they are composed : Amalthea and Thebe . The principal attributes of the known Jovian Rings are listed in the table . 
 = = Main ring = = 
 = = = Appearance and structure = = = 
 The narrow and relatively thin main ring is the brightest part of Jupiter 's ring system . Its outer edge is located at a radius of about 129000 km ( 1 @.@ 806 RJ ; RJ = equatorial radius of Jupiter or <unk> km ) and coincides with the orbit of Jupiter 's smallest inner satellite , Adrastea . Its inner edge is not marked by any satellite and is located at about 122500 km ( 1 @.@ 72 RJ ) . 
 Thus the width of the main ring is around 6500 km . The appearance of the main ring depends on the viewing geometry . In forward @-@ scattered light the brightness of the main ring begins to decrease steeply at <unk> km ( just inward of the Adrastean orbit ) and reaches the background level at <unk> km — just outward of the Adrastean orbit . Therefore , Adrastea at 129000 km clearly shepherds the ring . The brightness continues to increase in the direction of Jupiter and has a maximum near the ring ’ s center at <unk> km , although there is a pronounced gap ( notch ) near the Metidian orbit at 128000 km . The inner boundary of the main ring , in contrast , appears to fade off slowly from <unk> to <unk> km , merging into the halo ring . In forward @-@ scattered light all Jovian rings are especially bright . 
 In back @-@ scattered light the situation is different . The outer boundary of the main ring , located at <unk> km , or slightly beyond the orbit of Adrastea , is very steep . The orbit of the moon is marked by a gap in the ring so there is a thin ringlet just outside its orbit . There is another ringlet just inside Adrastean orbit followed by a gap of unknown origin located at about <unk> km . The third ringlet is found inward of the central gap , outside the orbit of Metis . The ring ’ s brightness drops sharply just outward of the Metidian orbit , forming the Metis notch . Inward of the orbit of Metis , the brightness of the ring rises much less than in forward @-@ scattered light . So in the back @-@ scattered geometry the main ring appears to consist of two different parts : a narrow outer part extending from 128000 to 129000 km , which itself includes three narrow ringlets separated by notches , and a fainter inner part from 122500 to 128000 km , which lacks any visible structure like in the forward @-@ scattering geometry . The Metis notch serves as their boundary . The fine structure of the main ring was discovered in data from the Galileo orbiter and is clearly visible in back @-@ scattered images obtained from New Horizons in February – March 2007 . The early observations by Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) , Keck and the Cassini spacecraft failed to detect it , probably due to insufficient spatial resolution . However the fine structure was observed by the Keck telescope using adaptive optics in 2002 – 2003 . 
 Observed in back @-@ scattered light the main ring appears to be razor thin , extending in the vertical direction no more than 30 km . In the side scatter geometry the ring thickness is 80 – 160 km , increasing somewhat in the direction of Jupiter . The ring appears to be much thicker in the forward @-@ scattered light — about 300 km . One of the discoveries of the Galileo orbiter was the bloom of the main ring — a faint , relatively thick ( about 600 km ) cloud of material which surrounds its inner part . The bloom grows in thickness towards the inner boundary of the main ring , where it transitions into the halo . 
 Detailed analysis of the Galileo images revealed longitudinal variations of the main ring ’ s brightness unconnected with the viewing geometry . The Galileo images also showed some patchiness in the ring on the scales 500 – 1000 km . 
 In February – March 2007 New Horizons spacecraft conducted a deep search for new small moons inside the main ring . While no satellites larger than 0 @.@ 5 km were found , the cameras of the spacecraft detected seven small clumps of ring particles . They orbit just inside the orbit of Adrastea inside a dense ringlet . The conclusion , that they are clumps and not small moons , is based on their <unk> extended appearance . They <unk> 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 ° along the ring , which correspond to 1000 – 3000 km . The clumps are divided into two groups of five and two members , respectively . The nature of the clumps is not clear , but their orbits are close to 115 : 116 and 114 : 115 resonances with Metis . They may be wavelike structures excited by this interaction . 
 = = = Spectra and particle size distribution = = = 
 Spectra of the main ring obtained by the HST , Keck , Galileo and Cassini have shown that particles forming it are red , i.e. their albedo is higher at longer wavelengths . The existing spectra span the range 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 μm . No spectral features have been found so far which can be attributed to particular chemical compounds , although the Cassini observations yielded evidence for absorption bands near 0 @.@ 8 μm and 2 @.@ 2 μm . The spectra of the main ring are very similar to Adrastea and Amalthea . 
 The properties of the main ring can be explained by the hypothesis that it contains significant amounts of dust with 0 @.@ 1 – 10 μm particle sizes . This explains the stronger forward @-@ scattering of light as compared to back @-@ scattering . However , larger bodies are required to explain the strong back @-@ scattering and fine structure in the bright outer part of the main ring . 
 Analysis of available phase and spectral data leads to a conclusion that the size distribution of small particles in the main ring obeys a power law 
 <formula> 
 where n ( r ) dr is a number of particles with radii between r and r + dr and <formula> is a normalizing parameter chosen to match the known total light flux from the ring . The parameter q is 2 @.@ 0 ± 0 @.@ 2 for particles with r < 15 ± 0 @.@ 3 μm and q = 5 ± 1 for those with r > 15 ± 0 @.@ 3 μm . The distribution of large bodies in the mm – km size range is undetermined presently . The light scattering in this model is dominated by particles with r around 15 μm . 
 The power law mentioned above allows estimation of the optical depth <formula> of the main ring : <formula> for the large bodies and <formula> for the dust . This optical depth means that the total cross section of all particles inside the ring is about 5000 km ² . The particles in the main ring are expected to have <unk> shapes . The total mass of the dust is estimated to be 107 − 109 kg . The mass of large bodies , excluding Metis and Adrastea , is 1011 − 1016 kg . It depends on their maximum size — the upper value corresponds to about 1 km maximum diameter . These masses can be compared with masses of Adrastea , which is about 2 × 1015 kg , Amalthea , about 2 × 1018 kg , and Earth 's Moon , 7 @.@ 4 × 1022 kg . 
 The presence of two populations of particles in the main ring explains why its appearance depends on the viewing geometry . The dust scatters light preferably in the forward direction and forms a relatively thick homogenous ring bounded by the orbit of Adrastea . In contrast , large particles , which scatter in the back direction , are confined in a number of ringlets between the Metidian and Adrastean orbits . 
 = = = Origin and age = = = 
 The dust is constantly being removed from the main ring by a combination of Poynting – Robertson drag and electromagnetic forces from the Jovian magnetosphere . Volatile materials , for example ices , evaporate quickly . The lifetime of dust particles in the ring is from 100 to 1000 years , so the dust must be continuously replenished in the collisions between large bodies with sizes from 1 cm to 0 @.@ 5 km and between the same large bodies and high velocity particles coming from outside the Jovian system . This parent body population is confined to the narrow — about 1000 km — and bright outer part of the main ring , and includes Metis and Adrastea . The largest parent bodies must be less than 0 @.@ 5 km in size . The upper limit on their size was obtained by New Horizons spacecraft . The previous upper limit , obtained from HST and Cassini observations , was near 4 km . The dust produced in collisions retains approximately the same orbital elements as the parent bodies and slowly spirals in the direction of Jupiter forming the faint ( in back @-@ scattered light ) innermost part of the main ring and halo ring . The age of the main ring is currently unknown , but it may be the last remnant of a past population of small bodies near Jupiter . 
 = = = Vertical corrugations = = = 
 Images from the Galileo and New Horizons space probes show the presence of two sets of spiraling vertical corrugations in the main ring . These waves became more tightly wound over time at the rate expected for differential nodal regression in Jupiter 's gravity field . Extrapolating backwards , the more prominent of the two sets of waves appears to have been excited in 1995 , around the time of the impact of Comet Shoemaker @-@ Levy 9 with Jupiter , while the smaller set appears to date to the first half of 1990 . Galileo 's November 1996 observations are consistent with wavelengths of 1920 ± 150 and 630 ± 20 km , and vertical amplitudes of 2 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 7 and 0 @.@ 6 ± 0 @.@ 2 km , for the larger and smaller sets of waves , respectively . The formation of the larger set of waves can be explained if the ring was impacted by a cloud of particles released by the comet with a total mass on the order of 2 – 5 × 1012 kg , which would have tilted the ring out of the equatorial plane by 2 km . A similar spiraling wave pattern that tightens over time has been observed by Cassini in Saturns 's C and D rings . 
 = = Halo ring = = 
 = = = Appearance and structure = = = 
 The halo ring is the innermost and the vertically thickest Jovian ring . Its outer edge coincides with the inner boundary of the main ring approximately at the radius 122500 km ( 1 @.@ 72 RJ ) . From this radius the ring becomes rapidly thicker towards Jupiter . The true vertical extent of the halo is not known but the presence of its material was detected as high as 10000 km over the ring plane . The inner boundary of the halo is relatively sharp and located at the radius 100000 km ( 1 @.@ 4 RJ ) , but some material is present further inward to approximately <unk> km . Thus the width of the halo ring is about 30000 km . Its shape resembles a thick torus without clear internal structure . In contrast to the main ring , the halo 's appearance depends only slightly on the viewing geometry . 
 The halo ring appears brightest in forward @-@ scattered light , in which it was extensively imaged by Galileo . While its surface brightness is much less than that of the main ring , its vertically ( perpendicular to the ring plane ) integrated photon flux is comparable due to its much larger thickness . Despite a claimed vertical extent of more than 20000 km , the halo ’ s brightness is strongly concentrated towards the ring plane and follows a power law of the form z − 0 @.@ 6 to z − 1 @.@ 5 , where z is altitude over the ring plane . The halo ’ s appearance in the back @-@ scattered light , as observed by Keck and HST , is the same . However its total photon flux is several times lower than that of the main ring and is more strongly concentrated near the ring plane than in the forward @-@ scattered light . 
 The spectral properties of the halo ring are different from the main ring . The flux distribution in the range 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 μm is flatter than in the main ring ; the halo is not red and may even be blue . 
 = = = Origin of the halo ring = = = 
 The optical properties of the halo ring can be explained by the hypothesis that it comprises only dust with particle sizes less than 15 μm . Parts of the halo located far from the ring plane may consist of <unk> dust . This dusty composition explains the much stronger forward @-@ scattering , bluer colors and lack of visible structure in the halo . The dust probably originates in the main ring , a claim supported by the fact that the halo ’ s optical depth <formula> is comparable with that of the dust in the main ring . The large thickness of the halo can be attributed to the excitation of orbital inclinations and eccentricities of dust particles by the electromagnetic forces in the Jovian magnetosphere . The outer boundary of the halo ring coincides with location of a strong 3 : 2 Lorentz resonance . As Poynting – Robertson drag causes particles to slowly drift towards Jupiter , their orbital inclinations are excited while passing through it . The bloom of the main ring may be a beginning of the halo . The halo ring ’ s inner boundary is not far from the strongest 2 : 1 Lorentz resonance . In this resonance the excitation is probably very significant , forcing particles to plunge into the Jovian atmosphere thus defining a sharp inner boundary . Being derived from the main ring , the halo has the same age . 
 = = Gossamer rings = = 
 = = = Amalthea gossamer ring = = = 
 The Amalthea gossamer ring is a very faint structure with a rectangular cross section , stretching from the orbit of Amalthea at <unk> km ( 2 @.@ 54 RJ ) to about 129000 km ( 1 @.@ 80 RJ ) . Its inner boundary is not clearly defined because of the presence of the much brighter main ring and halo . The thickness of the ring is approximately 2300 km near the orbit of Amalthea and slightly decreases in the direction of Jupiter . The Amalthea gossamer ring is actually the brightest near its top and bottom edges and becomes gradually brighter towards Jupiter ; one of the edges is often brighter than another . The outer boundary of the ring is relatively steep ; the ring 's brightness drops abruptly just inward of the orbit of Amalthea , although it may have a small extension beyond the orbit of the satellite ending near 4 : 3 resonance with Thebe . In forward @-@ scattered light the ring appears to be about 30 times fainter than the main ring . In back @-@ scattered light it has been detected only by the Keck telescope and the ACS ( Advanced Camera for Surveys ) on HST . Back @-@ scattering images show additional structure in the ring : a peak in the brightness just inside the <unk> orbit and confined to the top or bottom edge of the ring . 
 In 2002 – 2003 Galileo spacecraft had two passes through the gossamer rings . During them its dust counter detected dust particles in the size range 0 @.@ 2 – 5 μm . In addition , the Galileo spacecraft 's star scanner detected small , discrete bodies ( < 1 km ) near Amalthea . These may represent collisional debris generated from impacts with this satellite . 
 The detection of the Amalthea gossamer ring from the ground , in Galileo images and the direct dust measurements have allowed the determination of the particle size distribution , which appears to follow the same power law as the dust in the main ring with q = 2 ± 0 @.@ 5 . The optical depth of this ring is about 10 − 7 , which is an order of magnitude lower than that of the main ring , but the total mass of the dust ( 107 – 109 kg ) is comparable . 
 = = = Thebe gossamer ring = = = 
 The Thebe gossamer ring is the faintest Jovian ring . It appears as a very faint structure with a rectangular cross section , stretching from the <unk> orbit at <unk> km ( 3 @.@ 11 RJ ) to about 129000 km ( 1 @.@ 80 RJ ; ) . Its inner boundary is not clearly defined because of the presence of the much brighter main ring and halo . The thickness of the ring is approximately 8400 km near the orbit of Thebe and slightly decreases in the direction of the planet . The Thebe gossamer ring is brightest near its top and bottom edges and gradually becomes brighter towards Jupiter — much like the Amalthea ring . The outer boundary of the ring is not especially steep , stretching over <unk> km . There is a barely visible continuation of the ring beyond the orbit of Thebe , extending up to <unk> km ( 3 @.@ 75 RJ ) and called the Thebe Extension . In forward @-@ scattered light the ring appears to be about 3 times fainter than the Amalthea gossamer ring . In back @-@ scattered light it has been detected only by the Keck telescope . Back @-@ scattering images show a peak of brightness just inside the orbit of Thebe . In 2002 – 2003 the dust counter of the Galileo spacecraft detected dust particles in the size range 0 @.@ 2 – 5 μm — similar to those in the Amalthea ring — and confirmed the results obtained from imaging . 
 The optical depth of the Thebe gossamer ring is about 3 × 10 − 8 , which is three times lower than the Amalthea gossamer ring , but the total mass of the dust is the same — about 107 – 109 kg . However the particle size distribution of the dust is somewhat shallower than in the Amalthea ring . It follows a power law with q < 2 . In the Thebe extension the parameter q may be even smaller . 
 = = = Origin of the gossamer rings = = = 
 The dust in the gossamer rings originates in essentially the same way as that in the main ring and halo . Its sources are the inner Jovian moons Amalthea and Thebe respectively . High velocity impacts by projectiles coming from outside the Jovian system eject dust particles from their surfaces . These particles initially retain the same orbits as their moons but then gradually spiral inward by Poynting – Robertson drag . The thickness of the gossamer rings is determined by vertical excursions of the moons due to their nonzero orbital inclinations . This hypothesis naturally explains almost all observable properties of the rings : rectangular cross @-@ section , decrease of thickness in the direction of Jupiter and brightening of the top and bottom edges of the rings . 
 However some properties have so far gone unexplained , like the Thebe Extension , which may be due to unseen bodies outside Thebe 's orbit , and structures visible in the back @-@ scattered light . One possible explanation of the Thebe Extension is influence of the electromagnetic forces from the Jovian magnetosphere . When the dust enters the shadow behind Jupiter , it loses its electrical charge fairly quickly . Since the small dust particles partially <unk> with the planet , they will move outward during the shadow pass creating an outward extension of the Thebe gossamer ring . The same forces can explain a dip in the particle distribution and ring 's brightness , which occurs between the orbits of Amalthea and Thebe . 
 The peak in the brightness just inside of the Amalthea 's orbit and , therefore , the vertical asymmetry the Amalthea gossamer ring may be due to the dust particles trapped at the leading ( L4 ) and trailing ( L5 ) Lagrange points of this moon . The particles may also follow horseshoe orbits between the Lagrangian points . The dust may be present at the leading and trailing Lagrange points of Thebe as well . This discovery implies that there are two particle populations in the gossamer rings : one slowly drifts in the direction of Jupiter as described above , while another remains near a source moon trapped in 1 : 1 resonance with it . 
 = = Himalia ring = = 
 The small moon Dia , 4 kilometres in diameter , had gone missing since its discovery in 2000 . One theory is that it has crashed into the much larger moon Himalia , 170 kilometres in diameter , creating a faint ring . This possible ring appears as a faint streak near Himalia in images from NASA 's New Horizons mission to Pluto . This suggests that Jupiter sometimes gains and loses small moons through collisions . However , the recovery of Dia in 2010 and 2011 disproves the link between Dia and the Himalia ring , although it is still possible that a different moon may have been involved . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 The existence of the Jovian rings was inferred from observations of the planetary radiation belts by Pioneer 11 spacecraft in 1975 . In 1979 the Voyager 1 spacecraft obtained a single overexposed image of the ring system . More extensive imaging was conducted by Voyager 2 in the same year , which allowed rough determination of the ring ’ s structure . The superior quality of the images obtained by the Galileo orbiter between 1995 and 2003 greatly extended the existing knowledge about the Jovian rings . Ground @-@ based observation of the rings by the Keck telescope in 1997 and 2002 and the HST in 1999 revealed the rich structure visible in back @-@ scattered light . Images transmitted by the New Horizons spacecraft in February – March 2007 allowed observation of the fine structure in the main ring for the first time . In 2000 , the Cassini spacecraft en route to Saturn conducted extensive observations of the Jovian ring system . Future missions to the Jovian system will provide additional information about the rings . 
 = Australian contribution to UNTAG = 
 The Australian Services Contingent was the Australian Army contribution to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group ( UNTAG ) peacekeeping mission to Namibia in 1989 and 1990 . Australia sent two contingents of over 300 engineers each to assist the Special Representative of the Secretary General , Martti Ahtisaari , in overseeing free and fair elections in Namibia for a Constituent Assembly in what was the largest deployment of Australian troops since the Vietnam War . 
 The Australian mission was widely reported as successful . Colonel John Crocker , commander of the second Australian contingent ( 2ASC ) , wrote that the November 1989 election was UNTAG 's raison d 'être and observed that " the Australian contingent 's complete and wide @-@ ranging support was critical to the success of that election and hence the mission – a fact that has been acknowledged at the highest level in UNTAG " . Javier Pérez de Cuéllar , Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , wrote to Gareth Evans ( Australia 's Foreign Minister ) about the " remarkable contribution made by the Australian military and electoral personnel " , saying that their " dedication and professionalism had been widely and deservedly praised " . Although a total of 19 UN personnel lost their lives in Namibia , the two Australian contingents achieved their mission without sustaining any fatalities – one of the few military units in UNTAG to do so . 
 Overall , the UNTAG mission assisted Namibia in transitioning to a democratic government after the racial segregation of the apartheid system . The military forces did not fire a shot during the operation , and Mays called it " possibly the most successful UN peacekeeping operation ever fielded " ; Hearn called it " one of the major successes of the United Nations " . Almost 20 years later , in a message to the annual session of the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization on 28 February 2008 , UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon noted that " facilitating this process " constituted " one of the proudest chapters of our Organization 's history " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History of conflict = = = 
 Southwest Africa has a rich history encompassing colonisation , war and genocide . The first European to set foot on Namibian soil was the Portuguese explorer Diogo Cão in 1485 . Over the next 500 years , the country was colonised by the Dutch , English and Germans . Namibia was a German colony ( German South @-@ West Africa ) from 1884 until its annexation by South Africa during World War I. After the war , it was mandated to South Africa by the League of Nations . After World War II the United Nations ( UN ) asked South Africa to place Namibia under UN trusteeship , but South Africa refused . Legal arguments continued until 1966 when the UN General Assembly resolved to end the mandate , declaring that henceforth South @-@ West Africa was the direct responsibility of the UN . 
 At the height of the Cold War in 1965 , conflict escalated across the border with the Cuban intervention in Angola . Cuba formed an alliance with the People 's Movement for the Liberation of Angola ( MPLA ) ( Portuguese : <unk> Popular de Libertação de Angola – Partido do <unk> ) , which led to the deployment of more than 25 @,@ 000 Cuban soldiers to the region in the Angolan War of Independence . 
 The next year the Namibian War of Independence began when the South @-@ West Africa People 's Organisation 's ( SWAPO ) military wing – the People 's Liberation Army of Namibia ( PLAN ) – began guerrilla attacks on South African forces , infiltrating from bases in Zambia . The first attack was the battle at <unk> on 26 August , and the war was a classic insurgent @-@ <unk> operation . PLAN initially established bases in northern Namibia ; they were later forced out of the country by the South African Defence Force ( SADF ) , subsequently operating from bases in southern Angola and Zambia . The intensity of cross @-@ border conflict escalated , becoming known as the South African Border War and the Angolan Bush War . 
 The principal protagonists were the SADF and the PLAN . Other groups involved included the South West African Territorial Force ( <unk> ) and National Union for Total Independence of Angola ( UNITA ) ( both aligned with the SADF ) and the People 's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola ( FAPLA ) and Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces ( both aligned with SWAPO ) . The South African @-@ aligned forces consisted of regular army ( SADF ) , South West African Police forces and the South West Africa Police Counter @-@ Insurgency Unit ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , including the paramilitary @-@ trained <unk> police counter @-@ insurgency unit known as Koevoet . 
 From a Namibian perspective , the nature of the closely intertwined Angolan War of Independence , Namibian War of Independence and South African Border War was typically cross @-@ border conflict . This was overshadowed by two large @-@ scale Cuban military interventions in the Angolan War of Independence . The first was in November 1975 ( on the eve of Angola 's independence ) , which further intensified with the escalation of the Angolan Civil War in 1985 . In that conflict , South Africa provided support across the northern border to UNITA . In opposition , the Soviet Union financially backed an estimated two motorised infantry divisions of Cuban troops in a Soviet @-@ led the People 's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola ( FAPLA ) offensive against UNITA in what became known as the second Cuban intervention in Angola . In September 1987 , Cuban forces came to the defence of the besieged Angolan Army ( FAPLA ) and stopped the advance of the SADF at the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale ( the largest battle in Africa since World War II ) . General Magnus Malan wrote in his memoirs that this campaign marked a great victory for the SADF . Nelson Mandela disagreed ; Cuito Cuanavale , he asserted , " was the turning point for the liberation of our continent — and of my people — from the scourge of apartheid " . This battle led to UN Security Council Resolution 602 of 25 November 1987 , demanding the SADF 's unconditional withdrawal from Angola by 10 December . When the UN force deployed to Namibia in April 1989 , there were 50 @,@ 000 Cuban troops in Angola . 
 During the 20 @-@ year war the SADF mounted many cross @-@ border operations against PLAN bases , some of which extended 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) into Angola . SADF units frequently remained in southern Angola to intercept PLAN combatants on their way south , forcing PLAN to move to bases far from the Namibian border . Most PLAN insurgency operations took the form of small raids on political activists , armed propaganda activity , recruitment , raids on white settlements and disruption of essential services . 
 = = = United Nations Transition Assistance Group = = = 
 The process leading to Namibia 's independence began with UN General Assembly Resolution 2145 ( XXI ) of 27 October 1966 . This was followed by the passage of UN Security Council Resolution 264 , adopted on 20 March 1969 . In that resolution the UN assumed direct responsibility for the territory and declared the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia illegal , calling upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately . International negotiations for a peaceful solution to the Namibian problem increased . In December 1978 , in what was known as the Brazzaville Protocol , South Africa , Cuba and Angola formally accepted UN Security Council Resolution 435 outlining a blueprint for Namibian independence . The protocol envisioned a phased withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola over a two @-@ year period , set 1 April 1989 as the date for the resolution 's implementation and planned to reduce South African forces in Namibia to 1 @,@ 500 by June 1989 . The resolution established UNTAG , approving a report by the Secretary @-@ General and outlining its objective : " the withdrawal of South Africa 's illegal administration from Namibia and the transfer of power to the people of Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations " . Resolution 435 authorised a total of 7 @,@ 500 military personnel as UNTAG 's upper limit . 
 It was not until 1988 that South Africa agreed to implement the resolution , signing the Tripartite Accord ( an agreement between Angola , Cuba and South Africa ) at UN headquarters in New York City . The accord recommended that 1 April 1989 be set as the date for implementation of Resolution 435 , and was affirmed by the Security Council on 16 January 1989 . As Hearn noted , " The first characteristic of peacekeeping is that the consent of the disputants must be secured before a force is deployed " . With the accord in place ( principally with South Africa ) , UNTAG was then formally established in accordance with Resolution 632 on 16 February 1989 . 
 The key participants in the UN process were the South African government ( represented in Namibia by the Administrator General ) and the UN . Hearn wrote that South Africa had a " desire for a smooth transition " ; this resulted in negotiations occurring locally ( between the Special Representative and the Administrator General ) , directly with the South African government in Pretoria and at the UN ( via the Secretary General and Security Council ) . The outcome of these negotiations with South Africa included draft electoral laws ( enabling free and fair elections ) and the disbanding of the Koevoet force . The elections were carried out by the South African Administrator General , under UN supervision . The UNTAG operation ultimately involved over 100 countries , the highest ever for a UN operation . The UN had a high level of credibility , and were recognised as the legitimate body to bring independence to Namibia . 
 = = Australian political context = = 
 In the Official History of Australian Peacekeeping , Humanitarian and Post @-@ Cold War Operations , author David Horner stated that the Australian government led by Robert Menzies was loath to criticise South Africa during the 1950s . At that time Australia generally opposed anti @-@ colonial movements ( which were often supported by the Soviets or China ) , believing them part of a world @-@ wide communist offensive . Indeed , as late as 1961 Australia ( and Britain ) abstained from a vote to condemn South Africa in the UN . 
 It was not until 1962 that Australia voted for a UN resolution condemning South Africa for its actions in South @-@ West Africa , a change in policy led by External Affairs Minister Garfield Barwick . Initially in opposition , until he was Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was a vocal advocate of independence for Namibia . Over the following two decades , Australia played a small ( but significant ) role in supporting Namibian independence . Political leaders from both benches of Parliament , including Prime Ministers Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser , were active internationally in their support of independence for Namibia while in office . As a result , Australia was involved in the UN process almost from the start . In 1972 Australia voted in favour of a UN trust fund , and two years later it was elected to the UN Council for Namibia . Australia pledged support for UNTAG at the inception of the UN plan for Namibia with Resolution 435 in September 1978 , and made an important contribution to UN deliberations about Namibia while a non @-@ permanent member of the UN Security Council in 1985 – 1986 . 
 Behind the scenes , the composition of the force Australia would contribute was not agreed in principle until late 1978 ; options discussed at the time were a logistic force and an infantry battalion group . By October 1978 Prime Minister Fraser had publicly stated that he wanted to send a peacekeeping force to Namibia ; however , this was not broadly supported . A November 1978 article in The Bulletin claimed that the Defence Department was " dead against " a commitment , and in January 1979 The Daily Telegraph and The Canberra Times reported that Fraser , Andrew Peacock ( Foreign Affairs ) and Jim Killen ( Defence ) were " involved in a row " over the plan . The following month , a Cabinet submission stated that the UN proposal had a " reasonable prospect " of success , and Cabinet approved the commitment of an engineer force of 250 officers and men and a national headquarters and support element of 50 on 19 February . Horner noted that there was very little criticism of this decision in the press at the time , and the decision was accepted without question . 
 After leaving government , Fraser continued to play an important role in international relations with respect to independence for Namibia . In 1985 , he chaired UN hearings in New York on the role of multinationals in South Africa and Namibia . Fraser also co @-@ chaired the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group from 1985 to 1986 , campaigning for an end to apartheid in South Africa . 
 Bob Hawke 's government continued the policy of the Fraser and Whitlam governments to support independence for Namibia . In the Official History , Horner stated that Australian peacekeeping " blossomed " after Gareth Evans was appointed Foreign Minister in September 1988 ; Evans reconfirmed Australia 's willingness to participate in UNTAG in October 1988 , a month after his appointment . Horner also said that the commitment was " unusual " because it occurred a decade after the government 's initial decision to participate in February 1979 . After more than 10 years of consideration , the government reconfirmed its commitment of a force of 300 engineers to Namibia on 2 March 1989 . 
 There were many concerns about the size of the commitment and its risks . Before the deployment , Prime Minister Hawke said in Parliament that Namibia was a " very large and important commitment " comprising " almost half of the Army 's construction engineering capability " . He went on to say , " our effort in Namibia will be the largest peacekeeping commitment in which this country has ever participated . It may also be the most difficult " . Unlike the commitment of soldiers to Vietnam over 20 years earlier , the deployment to Namibia had bipartisan support . 
 Prior to the deployment , South African authorities threatened to veto the involvement of Australian peacekeeping troops because of doubts about their impartiality . This followed the establishment by the Australian Government of a Special Assistance Program for South Africans and Namibians ( SAPSAN ) in 1986 to assist South Africans and Namibians disadvantaged by apartheid . The focus of SAPSAN was on education and training for the people of South Africa and Namibia , and some humanitarian assistance had also been provided . A total of $ 11 @.@ 9 million was spent under SAPSAN from 1986 to 1990 . 
 In the Official History , Horner described the Australian deployment to Namibia as a " vital mission " : the first major deployment of troops to a war zone since the Vietnam War . In 1988 Australia had only 13 military personnel deployed on multinational peacekeeping operations , and with few exceptions the number of Australians committed to such activities had changed little in over 40 years ( since the Korean War ) . The successful deployment of over 600 engineers to Namibia in 1989 and 1990 was pivotal in changing Australia 's approach to peacekeeping , paving the way for much @-@ larger contingents sent to Cambodia , Rwanda , Somalia and East Timor . The deployment of a significant force to Namibia profoundly affected Australia 's defence and foreign policies . 
 = = The Australian contingent and UNTAG = = 
 = = = Command = = = 
 UNTAG was a large operation , with nearly 8 @,@ 000 men and women deployed to Namibia from more than 120 countries to assist the process . The military force numbered approximately 4 @,@ 500 , and was commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Dewan Prem Chand of India ; the main military UNTAG Headquarters was based in Windhoek , Namibia 's capital and largest city . The commanders of the Australian contingents were Colonels Richard D. Warren ( 1ASC ) and John A. Crocker ( 2ASC ) . Other senior appointments included the contingent seconds @-@ in @-@ command , Lieutenant colonels Kevin Pippard ( 1ASC ) and Ken Gillespie ( 2ASC ) , and the officers commanding the 17th Construction Squadron , Majors David <unk> ( 1ASC ) and Brendan Sowry ( 2ASC ) . 
 = = = Mission and role of UNTAG = = = 
 UNTAG 's mission was to monitor the ceasefire and troop withdrawals , to preserve law and order in Namibia and to supervise elections for the new government . In the Official History , Horner described it as " an extremely complex mission " . 
 The role of UNTAG was to assist the Special Representative of the Secretary General ( SRSG ) , Martti Ahtisaari , in overseeing free and fair elections in Namibia for a Constituent Assembly . The elections were to be carried out by the South African Administrator General , under UN supervision and control , and this Assembly would then draw up a constitution for an independent Namibia . UNTAG was tasked with assisting the SRSG in ensuring that all hostile acts ceased ; South African troops were confined to base , and ultimately withdrawn ; discriminatory laws were repealed , and political prisoners released ; Namibian refugees were permitted to return ( when they were known as returnees ) ; intimidation was prevented , and law and order maintained . 
 UNTAG was the first instance of a large @-@ scale , multidimensional operation where the military element supported the work of other components concerned with border surveillance : monitoring the reduction and removal of the South African military presence ; organising the return of Namibian exiles ; supervising voter registration and preparing , observing , and certifying the results of national elections . 
 = = = Role of Australian contingent = = = 
 The role of the Australian force was broad for an Army engineering unit , requiring the unit to " provide combat and logistic engineer support to UNTAG " ; this included the UN civilian and military components . Its role included construction , field engineering and ( initially ) deployment as infantry . 
 Prime Minister Hawke said in Parliament at the time that " the settlement of the long and complex issue of Namibian independence is an important international event . It is an event in which Australia has played , and will continue to play , a substantial part .... Namibia is a large , arid , sparsely populated and underdeveloped country which has been a war zone for many years . Our engineers will build roads , bridges , airstrips and camps for UNTAG . They will have the very serious task of clearing mines which have been laid by the various contending forces along the border between Angola and Namibia " . 
 = = = Organisation and composition of contingents = = = 
 The Australian force was structured as follows : 
 A Headquarters ( Chief Engineer ASC UNTAG ) with operations , works , accommodations , communications , finance , logistics and personnel cells 
 A Construction Squadron group based on the 17th Construction Squadron ( Royal Australian Engineers ) with two construction troops ( the 8th and 9th Troops ) , the 14th Field Troop , a Resources Troop , a Plant Troop and the attached Royal Australian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Workshop 
 There were two contingents , each of which contained over three hundred soldiers and deployed for about six months : 
 1ASC consisted of 304 members , and was principally drawn from the 17th Construction Squadron , the Workshop and the 14th Field Troop from the 7th Field Squadron in Brisbane . The contingents also included soldiers from the Royal Australian Corps of Signals , Royal Australian Army Pay Corps , Australian Army Legal Corps , Royal Australian Corps of Military Police , Royal Australian Corps of Transport , Royal Australian Army Ordnance Corps , Australian Army Catering Corps and the Royal Australian Army Medical Corps . 
 2ASC consisted of 309 personnel , with members of 78 different units . The second contingent included the 15th Field Troop from the 18th Field Squadron in Townsville , fourteen members of the Corps of Royal New Zealand Engineers ( <unk> ) , five Australian Army Reserve ( <unk> ) members and one Royal Australian Air Force officer ( Flight Lieutenant Craig Forster ) . The New Zealand engineers ( under Lieutenant Jed Shirley ) were spread throughout the squadron . The second contingent also included a detachment from the Royal Australian Corps of Military Police , led by Sergeant Tim Dewar . 
 In addition to the military force , a number of other Australians served with UNTAG ( including 25 observers from the Australian Electoral Commission ) . For the duration of the deployment , the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Defence had agreed to jointly fund a temporary Australian Liaison Office in Windhoek manned by two <unk> personnel and headed by Nick Warner . 
 = = Force preparation and deployment = = 
