 = = = Holster = = = 
 The Type 26 revolver was issued with a clamshell holster similar to the French Modèle 1892 revolver . The earliest Type 26 holsters were black , and the cotton <unk> issued with them were a dark blue color known in Japan as kon . A leather pocket for the cleaning rod was provided , sewn onto the forward edge of the holster body . Most examples of holsters are stamped on the inside of the clamshell flap with the maker 's identification and arsenal inspection markings with the year of manufacture . Very early holsters , issued in the late 1890s and early 1900s , were of a slightly different size and shape and without a pocket for the cleaning rod . A few holsters developed in 1943 have been noted to be all black lacquered hardware , missing the brass and galvanized steel fittings . Holsters produced towards the end of World War II have a last ditch fabric similar to late production Type 94 Nambu pistol holsters , with no shoulder straps or pouches for cleaning rods and ammunition . 
 = = = Grenade launcher = = = 
 The Type 90 tear gas grenade launcher was developed to be fired with the Type 26 revolver . Gas grenades could be fired by a special <unk> mm cartridge in place of the regular ball ammunition . 
 = Magnus Barefoot = 
 Magnus Olafsson ( Old Norse : Magnús Óláfsson , Norwegian : Magnus <unk> ; 1073 – 24 August 1103 ) , better known as Magnus Barefoot ( Old Norse : Magnús <unk> , Norwegian : Magnus <unk> ) , was King of Norway ( as Magnus III ) from 1093 until his death in 1103 . His reign was marked by aggressive military campaigns and conquest , particularly in the Norse @-@ dominated parts of the British Isles , and he extended his rule to the Kingdom of the Isles and Dublin . 
 As the only son of King Olaf Kyrre , Magnus was proclaimed king in southeastern Norway shortly after his father 's death in 1093 . In the north his claim was contested by his cousin , Haakon Magnusson ( son of King Magnus Haraldsson ) , and the two co @-@ ruled uneasily until Haakon 's death in 1095 . Disgruntled members of the nobility refused to recognise Magnus after his cousin 's death , but the insurrection was short @-@ lived . After securing his position domestically , Magnus campaigned around the Irish Sea from 1098 to 1099 . He raided through Orkney , the Hebrides and Mann ( the Northern and Southern Isles ) , and ensured Norwegian control by a treaty with the Scottish king . Based on Mann during his time in the west , Magnus had a number of forts and houses built on the island and probably also obtained suzerainty of Galloway . He sailed to Wales later in his expedition , winning control of Anglesey ( and possibly Gwynedd 's submission ) after repelling the invading Norman forces from the island . 
 Following his return to Norway Magnus led campaigns into Dalsland and Västergötland in Sweden , claiming an ancient border with the country . After two unsuccessful invasions and a number of skirmishes Danish king Eric Evergood initiated peace talks among the three Scandinavian monarchs , fearing that the conflict would get out of hand . Magnus concluded peace with the Swedes in 1101 by agreeing to marry Margaret , daughter of the Swedish king Inge Stenkilsson . In return , Magnus gained Dalsland as part of her dowry . He set out on his final western campaign in 1102 , and may have sought to conquer Ireland . Magnus entered into an alliance with Irish king Muirchertach Ua Briain of Munster , who recognised Magnus ' control of Dublin . Under unclear circumstances , while obtaining food supplies for his return to Norway , Magnus was killed in an ambush by the Ulaid the next year ; territorial advances characterising his reign ended with his death . 
 Into modern times , his legacy has remained more pronounced in Ireland and Scotland than in his native Norway . Among the few domestic developments known during his reign , Norway developed a more @-@ centralised rule and moved closer to the European model of church organisation . Popularly portrayed as a Viking warrior rather than a medieval monarch , Magnus was the last Norwegian king to fall in battle abroad , and he may in some respects be considered the final Viking king . 
 = = Background = = 
 Most information about Magnus is gleaned from Norse sagas and chronicles , which began appearing during the 12th century . The most important sources still available are the Norwegian chronicles Historia de Antiquitate Regum <unk> by Theodoric the Monk and the anonymous Ágrip af Nóregskonungasögum ( or simply Ágrip ) from the 1180s and the Icelandic sagas Heimskringla ( by Snorri Sturluson ) , Morkinskinna and Fagrskinna , which date to about the 1220s . While the later sagas are the most detailed accounts , they are also generally considered the least reliable . Additional information about Magnus , in particular his campaigns , is found in sources from the British Isles , which included contemporary accounts . 
 Magnus was born around the end of 1073 as the only son of King Olaf Kyrre . His mother 's identity is uncertain ; she is identified as Tora <unk> ( daughter of otherwise @-@ unknown Arne <unk> ) in Morkinskinna and Fagrskinna , as Tora <unk> in Heimskringla , <unk> and <unk> and an unnamed daughter of " Ragnvald jarl " from <unk> , <unk> in the genealogical text Af en <unk> <unk> ( commonly known as <unk> ) . The historical consensus ( including P. A. Munch and Claus Krag ) has favoured Tora <unk> , but the other claims have also gained support . Anders <unk> has argued that she was a daughter of Ragnvald jarl ( who has been identified as Rognvald <unk> , Earl of Orkney by Ola Kvalsund ) , while historian Randi Helene Førsund has considered Tora <unk> more likely . 
 Magnus grew up among the hird ( royal retinue ) of his father in Nidaros ( modern Trondheim ) , de facto capital of Norway at the time . His father 's cousin , the chieftain Tore <unk> , was foster @-@ father to Magnus . In his youth , he was apparently more similar to his warlike grandfather , King Harald Hardrada , than to his father ( who bore the byname Kyrre : " the Peaceful " ) . According to Snorri Sturluson , Magnus was considered handsome and gifted in learning ; although he was shorter in stature than his grandfather Harald , he was reportedly known as " Magnus the Tall " . Magnus ' more @-@ common byname , " Barefoot " or " Barelegs " , was — according to Snorri — due to his adopting the Gaelic dress of the Irish and Scots : a short tunic , which left the lower legs bare . Another version ( by Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus ) maintains that he acquired the nickname because he was forced to flee from a Swedish attack in his bare feet , while a third explains that he rode barefoot ( like the Irish ) . Due to Magnus ' aggressive nature and his campaigns abroad , he also had the nickname <unk> @-@ Magnús ( " Warrior Magnus " or " Magnus the Strife @-@ lover " ) . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Establishing authority = = = 
 Norway had experienced a long period of peace during the reign of Magnus ' father , Olaf . Magnus may have been present when Olaf died in <unk> , <unk> ( southeastern Norway ) in September 1093 and was probably proclaimed king at the Borgarting , the thing ( assembly ) of the adjacent region of Viken later that month . When Magnus became king , he already had a network of support among the Norwegian aristocracy . Although sources are unclear about the first year of his reign , it is apparent that Magnus ' focus was on the west ( towards the British Isles ) . Since conditions were chaotic in Norse @-@ dominated parts of the British Isles since the death of Thorfinn the Mighty , this provided Magnus an opportunity to intervene in local power struggles . According to some accounts , he made his first expedition west in 1093 – 94 ( or 1091 – 92 ) , helping Scottish king Donald Bane to conquer Edinburgh and the Scottish throne and possibly gaining control of the Southern Isles ( Suðreyjar ) in return . It is unclear if this early expedition took place , since it is not directly referenced in early reliable sources or the sagas . 
 Magnus was opposed by his cousin Haakon Magnusson , son of King Olaf 's brother and short @-@ lived co @-@ ruler King Magnus Haraldsson , who claimed half the kingdom . Haakon was proclaimed king in the Uplands and at the Øyrating , the thing of Trøndelag ( in central Norway ) . According to Førsund , Haakon took control of the entire portion of the kingdom once held by his father ( also including the <unk> — the thing of Hålogaland in northern Norway — and the Gulating — the thing of western Norway ) . Haakon secured support by relieving farmers of taxes and duties ( including taxes dating back to the Danish rule of Sweyn <unk> during the early 1030s ) , while Magnus pursued costly policies and demanded lengthy military service . After Magnus settled at the new royal estate in Nidaros for the winter of 1094 – 95 , Haakon also travelled to the city and took up residence at the old royal estate . Their relationship became increasingly tense , culminating when Haakon saw Magnus ' longships fully rigged at sea . Haakon summoned the Øyrating in response , leading Magnus to sail southwards . Haakon attempted to intercept Magnus by travelling south to Viken by land ( over the mountains of <unk> ) , but he died unexpectedly while hunting in February 1095 . 
 The strongman behind Haakon 's monarchy had been his foster @-@ father Tore Tordsson ( " <unk> @-@ Tore " ) , who refused to recognise Magnus as king after Haakon 's death . With Egil <unk> and other noblemen , he had the otherwise @-@ unknown Sweyn Haraldsson set up as a pretender . Although later sagas maintain that Sweyn was Danish , some modern historians have speculated that he may have been a son of Harald Hardrada . The revolt was based in the Uplands , but also gained support from noblemen elsewhere in the country . After several weeks of fighting , Magnus captured Tore and his supporters and had them hanged on the island of <unk> ( outside <unk> , Lofoten , in northern Norway ) . Magnus was reportedly furious because he could not pardon Egil , a potentially useful , young and resourceful nobleman . As king , his honour would only allow a pardon if other noblemen pleaded for Egil 's life ; this did not happen . 
 Magnus ' final domestic dispute was with the noble Sveinke <unk> , who refused to recognise him as king . Although Sveinke reduced piracy in Viken , he was forced into exile for three years after negotiating with Magnus ' men . Since piracy increased soon after Sveinke 's departure ( possibly encouraged by Sveinke himself ) , Magnus met him in the Danish province of Halland to request his return to Norway . They reconciled ; Sveinke became a loyal supporter of Magnus , now the undisputed king of Norway . 
 = = = Other developments = = = 
 Since the Norse sources ( including the skaldic verses which were the sagas ' main sources ) chiefly describe war @-@ related matters , less is known about other events during the reigns of the early Norwegian kings . Snorri , for instance , wrote fifteen pages about Magnus and only two pages about Magnus ' peaceful father Olaf Kyrre ( despite Olaf 's reign lasting almost three times longer than Magnus ' ) . Modern historians have noted that this probably has made the image of kings like Magnus Barefoot one @-@ sided ( in Magnus ' case , skewed towards his deeds as a warrior ) . 
 Magnus ' rule was generally marked by Norway 's increasing similarity to other European kingdoms . Royal rule became established , and he consolidated power through a network of powerful noblemen ( some of whom were relatives ) ; church organisation also developed . The Nordic bishops belonged to the Archdiocese of Hamburg @-@ Bremen until a year after Magnus ' death ( when the Archdiocese of Lund was formed ) ; priests and bishops were largely foreigners from England and Germany . In reality , however , Magnus ruled the church in Norway . 
 Through numismatics , it is known that minting reform began during Magnus ' reign . The reform restored silver content in coins to around 90 percent , the level at Harald Hardrada 's 1055 reform ( <unk> ) which reduced silver content to about 30 percent ( the remainder of the coin was copper ) . Coin size in Magnus ' reform was reduced to .45 gram , half the previous weight . Although the silver value of a coin remained about the same , copper was not needed in coins . 
 = = = First Irish Sea campaign = = = 
 Magnus sought to re @-@ establish Norwegian influence around the Irish Sea . He attempted to install vassal king Ingemund in the Southern Isles in 1097 , but the latter was killed in a revolt . It is unclear what Magnus ' ultimate ambitions were , and the significance of his campaign has been downplayed by modern English historians . English chronicler William of Malmesbury believed that Magnus sought to capture the throne from William II of England ( in common with the ambitions of his grandfather , Harald Hardrada ) . Historians have speculated that he wanted to establish an empire which included Scotland and Ireland , although most modern Norwegian and Scottish historians believe his chief aim was simply to control the Norse communities around the Irish Sea . While he may have been influenced by Ingemund 's murder , the Orkneyinga saga claims that Magnus was persuaded by a son of an Orkney earl , Haakon Paulsson , who wanted an earldom for himself . It is also possible that Magnus wished to provide a realm outside Norway for his eight @-@ year @-@ old son Sigurd , who accompanied him . Magnus sailed into the Western Sea in 1098 , arriving in Orkney with a large fleet . The Chronicles of the Kings of Mann and the Isles claim that he had 160 ships , but English chronicler Orderic Vitalis states that his fleet consisted of 60 ships . Based on this , P. A. Munch suggests an initial fleet of 160 ships , of which 100 were from the leidang ( public levy ) and returned shortly after arrival ; the fleet accompanying Magnus southward in the campaigns consisted of 60 royal and baronial ships . According to Førsund , the low estimate of 120 men per ship means 8 @,@ 000 men in the royal and baronial ships and 12 @,@ 000 from the leidang ships . However , many historians believe that ship numbers in old naval campaign accounts are exaggerated . 
 After his arrival , Magnus began negotiations with Scottish and Irish kings about the hird and control of land in Scotland , Ireland and the surrounding islands . Upon arriving in Orkney , he sent the earls Paul and Erlend Thorfinnsson away to Norway as prisoners on a leidang ship , took their sons Haakon Paulsson , Magnus Erlendsson and Erling Erlendsson as hostages and installed his own son Sigurd as earl . Magnus then raided Scotland , the Southern Isles and Lewis . Meeting no significant opposition , he continued pillaging the Hebridean islands of Uist , Skye , Tiree , Mull and Islay , and the peninsula of Kintyre ; Iona was visited , but not pillaged . Magnus is also recorded as warring in Sanday , although the exact location is unclear ( there are three islands with that name in the region ) . Entered the Irish Sea , he lost three leidang ships and 120 men in Ulster . Magnus then continued to Mann , where the earl Óttar fell in a violent battle ; he also chased ( or captured ) <unk> Godredsson , King of the Isles . Mann came under Norwegian control , and Magnus and his men stayed on the island for a time . During his time there , he organised Norwegian immigration to the island and had several forts and houses built ( or rebuilt ) using timber from Galloway on the Scottish mainland . This implied he had subdued part of that region too , reducing its chieftains to tributaries . 
 Magnus may have intended to invade Ireland next , only to find he had overextended himself . He may have been approached by Gruffudd ap Cynan , King of Gwynedd , who had been driven to Ireland by the Norman earls Hugh of Montgomery and Hugh d 'Avranches . With six ships ( according to Orderic Vitalis ) , Magnus steered towards Anglesey in Gwynedd , Wales . Appearing off the coast at Puffin Island , he interrupted a Norman victory celebration after their defeat of the Gwynedd king — for the Welsh , " so <unk> it was ascribed to divine providence " according to historian Rosemary Power ( although Magnus had not necessarily intended to side with them ) . In the ensuing battle ( known as the Battle of Anglesey Sound , according to Power " the most widely reported event in the history of Magnus " ) , Magnus shot Hugh of Montgomery dead with an arrow through his eye and defeated the Norman forces . The sources indicate that Magnus regretted killing Montgomery , suggesting that he may have been interested in an alliance with the Normans . He abruptly returned to Mann with his men , leaving the Norman army weak and demoralized . After this battle , Anglesey was considered the southern border of Norway . Gruffudd ap Cynan soon returned to the island , awarding Magnus gifts and honour ( which may indicate that Gwynedd had capitulated ) . The extension of Magnus ' kingdom probably began to concern the English , who remembered the invasion of Magnus ' grandfather Harald Hardrada in 1066 , war with Danish king Sweyn <unk> in 1069 – 70 and the threat of invasion by Cnut IV in 1085 . 
 In Scotland internal fighting continued between rival kings , although King Edgar had gained a slight advantage . Perhaps fearing to meet Magnus in battle after the internecine strife , according to the sagas Edgar — mistakenly called Malcolm — told Magnus he would renounce all Scottish claims to islands west of Scotland in exchange for peace . Magnus accepted the offer , which reportedly gave him every island a ship could reach with its rudder set . He gained recognition of his rule in the Southern Isles , including Kintyre after demonstrating that it should be included by sitting at the rudder of his ship as it was dragged across the narrow isthmus at Tarbert . Historian Richard Oram has claimed that references to a formal agreement with the Scottish king is a " post @-@ Norwegian civil war confection " designed to legitimise the agenda of Haakon IV Haakonsson . Rosemary Power agrees with the Norse sources that a formal agreement with the Scots was probably concluded , and Seán Duffy notes that Edgar " happily ceded " the isles to Magnus since he had " little or no authority there in any case " . Magnus spent the winter in the Hebrides ( continuing to fortify the islands ) , while many of his men returned to Norway . There may have been talks at this time of Magnus marrying Matilda , daughter of late Scottish king Malcolm Canmore , but no marriage took place . Magnus returned to Norway a year later during the summer of 1099 , although many of the islands he had conquered ( such as Anglesey ) were only nominally under Norwegian control . 
 = = = Campaign in Sweden = = = 
 After returning to Norway , Magnus turned east . By claiming an ancient border between Norway and Sweden , he set his course for the Swedish provinces of Dalsland and Västergötland in late 1099 . In Magnus ' view , the border with Sweden should be set further east : at the Göta älv river , through the Vänern lake and north to the province of Värmland . He claimed all land west of Vänern ( chiefly Dalsland ) . Swedish king Inge Stenkilsson refuted the claim , and Magnus began a campaign in response . He raided his way through the forest villages , and Inge began amassing an army . When advised by his men to retreat , Magnus became more aggressive ; he believed that once begun , a campaign should never be aborted . In a surprise nighttime attack , Magnus assaulted Swedish forces east of Göta älv at <unk> ( near Lilla Edet ) . After defeating the Swedes at <unk> , he conquered part of Västergötland . According to a skald , Magnus conquered " fifteen hundreds from the Geats " . He had a wooden fort , surrounded by a moat , built on the island of <unk> in the southern portion of Vänern . Before returning to Norway , Magnus left 300 men on the island for the winter ( led by Finn <unk> and Sigurd <unk> ) . 
 According to Randi Helene Førsund , the Norwegians in <unk> appear to have been characterized by arrogance ( perhaps due to their successes under Magnus ) and taunted the Swedish king for taking so long to arrive . After newly formed ice connected the island to the mainland , Inge arrived with about 3 @,@ 000 men . Although he offered several times to allow the Norwegians to return home in peace ( with their plunder and possessions ) , Inge 's offers were rejected . The Swedes finally attacked , burning the fort . The Norwegians were spared and allowed to return home , after being beaten with sticks and surrendering all their possessions . Angry at the humiliating defeat , Magnus planned revenge . He entered Sweden the following year , reconquering the same areas . During the hasty campaign Magnus and his men were ambushed by Swedish forces and forced to flee back to their ships , suffering heavy losses . The war continued until 1100 or 1101 . 
 Danish king Eric Evergood , concerned that the conflict would escalate , began peace talks between the two kings . Relations had been strained between Denmark and Norway after Magnus ' 1096 raids into Halland , and Eric feared that the conflict might spill over into his own country . The three Scandinavian kings eventually agreed to negotiate peace in the border area near Göta älv . After a constructive meeting , they agreed to preserve ancestral borders ; by marrying Inge 's daughter Margaret ( who acquired the byname <unk> : " Colleen @-@ of @-@ Peace " ) , Magnus acquired the lands he claimed on behalf of his ancestors . Since the marriage was childless , Dalsland never became established as a Norwegian province and was returned to Sweden after his death . 
 = = = Second Irish Sea campaign and death = = = 
 Magnus again set his course for Ireland in 1101 or 1102 , this time probably with a greater army than he had in his previous campaign . One of his biggest challenges was the number of petty kings and alliances on the island . Irish sources maintain that Magnus came to " take Ireland , " " invade Ireland " or " besiege Ireland . " He received reinforcements from Orkney on his way to Mann , where he set up a base to survey conditions . Tensions ran high between Magnus and the king of Munster and High King of Ireland , Muirchertach Ua Briain ( <unk> ) , who was struggling with his rival Domnall Ua Lochlainn . Magnus may have tested the situation in 1101 , when unnamed sailors are said to have raided <unk> Island ( near Muirchertach 's base ) . After his arrival at Mann , Irish sources describe Magnus as agreeing to " a year 's peace " with the Irish ( suggesting enmity ; such agreements were diplomatic devices , usually negotiated between two sides in war ) . The marriage agreement described in other sources was part of the treaty ; Magnus ' son , Sigurd , married Muirchertach 's daughter Bjaðmunjo . On their wedding day , Magnus named Sigurd his co @-@ king and put him in charge of the western lands . Muirchertach also recognised Magnus ' control over Dublin and Fingal . 
 Around the same time Muirchertach married a daughter of Arnulf of Montgomery , brother of Hugh ( who was killed by Magnus in 1098 ) . The account in Morkinskinna concerning a " foreign knight " named " <unk> " , who appeared at the court of Magnus before his Swedish campaign , is suggested by Rosemary Power as evidence that Magnus may have conspired with the Norman Walter Giffard , Earl of Buckingham ( or a family member ) in the revolt against Henry I of England . According to Orderic Vitalis , Magnus left treasure with a wealthy citizen in Lincoln which was confiscated by King Henry after Magnus ' death . This treasure could have been paid by Norman earls for Magnus ' support , and possibly arranged by the <unk> who is said to have visited Magnus ' court in the sagas . This could have provided Magnus with a lucrative return for his costly western campaigns , which were unpopular in Norway at the time . 
 Muirchertach was skilled in diplomacy , and negotiation with the dowries of his daughters may have been part of a political game . While he may not have intended to honour his agreements with Magnus ( or others ) , he needed the latter 's assistance to crush Domnall . Magnus and Muirchertach went on joint raiding expeditions after the peace agreement , only interrupted by the winter of 1102 – 03 . The sagas claim that Magnus wintered in Connacht , but since Connacht is incorrectly claimed to be Muirchertach 's kingdom the location was corrected to <unk> , Munster by modern historians . Rosemary Power considered it more likely that Magnus would have kept his fleet near Dublin . Magnus was probably allied with Muirchertach during his campaigns against Domnall and the Cenél nEógain in 1103 , but ( in contrast to the Norse sources ) Irish sources ( the Annals of Ulster and Annals of the Four Masters ) do not describe their campaigns as successful . On 5 August 1103 , Muirchertach unsuccessfully tried to subdue Domnall in the Battle of Mag Coba . Magnus did not take part , but his Dublin subjects fought with Muirchertach . Since Magnus was closing in on the Irish throne , Muirchertach may have wanted him out of the way . According to Morkinskinna and Heimskringla , the two agreed that Muirchertach was to bring Magnus and his men cattle provisions for their return to Norway ; as this dragged on past the agreed time , Magnus became suspicious that the Irish planned an attack . He gathered his men on St. Bartholomew 's Day ( or the day before , according to Ágrip ) , 24 August 1103 , and ventured into the country . It is possible that Magnus and his men made an incautious landing to raid cattle , or the Ulaid mistook the Norwegians for cattle @-@ raiding Hebrideans . Alternatively , Muirchertach may have ordered the Ulaid to bring provisions to Magnus , inciting the Ulaid to ambush the Norwegians . 
 Norse sources describe a large force emerging from hiding places in an ambush . The Norwegian forces were taken by surprise , and were not in battle order . Magnus attempted to assert control over his disordered army , ordering part of his force to seize secure ground and use archery fire to slow the Irish . In the melee Magnus was pierced by a spear through both thighs above the knees but he fought on , attempting to get his men back to the level campsite . An axe @-@ wielding Irishman charged him , striking a lethal blow to his neck . When his men said that he proceeded incautiously in his campaigns , Magnus is reported to have responded " Kings are made for honour , not for long life " ; he was the last Norwegian king to fall in battle abroad . 
 Perhaps betrayed by Muirchertach , Magnus may also have been betrayed by his own men ( in particular the contingent of nobleman Torgrim <unk> from the Uplands , who fled to the ships during the battle ) . It is possible that Torgrim and his men may have been directed by powerful men in Norway , who wanted Magnus removed from the Norwegian throne . More Irishmen than Norwegians fell in the battle , according to Snorri Sturluson , and Magnus ' reign could have been different if Torgrim and his men had fought as directed . Magnus ' son Sigurd returned to Norway without his child bride after his father 's defeat , and direct Norwegian control in the region came to an end . Although Norwegian influence remained , no Norwegian king returned for more than 150 years . 
 = = Descendents = = 
 Magnus married Margaret <unk> , daughter of Swedish king Inge Stenkilsson , as part of the peace agreement of 1101 . Their marriage did not produce any children . His three sons ( who succeeded him as king ) were born to different women , and he had two known daughters by unidentified women : 
 Eystein : Born 1089 to a mother " of low birth " . 
 Sigurd : Born 1090 ; his mother 's name was Tora . 
 Olaf : Born c . 1099 , his mother was Sigrid <unk> from Vik in <unk> , Trøndelag . 
 Ragnhild : Married Harald <unk> , Danish pretender and son of Danish king Eric Evergood . 
 Tora : Married Icelandic chieftain <unk> <unk> . 
 Years after Magnus ' death , other men came forward claiming to be his sons ; however , it is impossible to ascertain the veracity of these claims : 
 Harald Gille : Born 1103 in Ireland , his claim was recognised by Magnus ' son Sigurd . 
 Sigurd Slembe : His mother was Tora <unk> from Vik ; his claim was not recognised ( by Harald Gille ) . 
 Magnus <unk> : Mentioned only in Fagrskinna . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 Magnus probably died in the vicinity of the River <unk> . According to the Chronicles of the Kings of Mann and the Isles , Magnus was " buried near the Church of St Patrick , in Down " . About two miles ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) south of the cathedral on Horse Island is a mound which became known as Magnus ' Grave after its identification on an 1859 map attributed to Danish archaeologist Jens Jacob Asmussen Worsaae . Snorri Sturluson 's description of the marshy and difficult terrain where Magnus and his men were attacked fits the conditions in and around Horse Island , making it a strong candidate for the burial site . According to <unk> McCormick , the people who ambushed Magnus may not have wanted a Christian burial for him and his men , instead burying them near where they had been slain . The Downpatrick runestone monument marking the site was erected in March 2003 to mark the 900th anniversary of his death . The burial site is largely only accessible via the heritage railway in Downpatrick ; a halt overlooking the barrow and runestone has been built by the Downpatrick and County Down Railway . 
 = = = Succession = = = 
 Magnus was succeeded peacefully by his three sons : Sigurd , Eystein and Olaf . Near the end of Sigurd 's reign ( he having outlived his brothers ) during the late 1120s , the previously unknown Harald Gille came to Norway from the west claiming to be a son of Magnus Barefoot and legitimate successor to the kingdom . Sigurd recognised Harald as his brother ( and successor ) after Harald walked uninjured over nine burning <unk> in a trial by ordeal , and he was proclaimed king after Sigurd 's death in 1130 with Sigurd 's son Magnus Sigurdsson . Since Harald was accompanied by his mother to Norway , Sigurd may have recognised a former lover of his father . 
 Relations between Harald and Magnus Sigurdsson soured , and several years later Harald had Magnus mutilated and deposed ( hence his byname " the Blind " ) . Soon afterwards , Harald was murdered by another pretender : Sigurd Slembe , who also claimed to be a son of Magnus Barefoot and had been outlawed by Harald . After Harald 's death Slembe allied himself with Magnus the Blind , but they were defeated by chieftains loyal to Harald Gille 's family in the Battle of <unk> . Magnus was killed during the battle ; Sigurd was captured , tortured and executed . This began what would become the century @-@ long Norwegian civil @-@ war era . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The earliest @-@ known native Irishman to have been named Magnus may have been the son of Muirchertach 's greatest rival , Domnall Ua Lochlainn ; Magnus became a name among the Ulaid during the 12th century . According to Morkinskinna , tribute from Ireland was received in Norway as late as about twelve years after Magnus ' death . 
 Magnus became the subject of at least two Gaelic ballads as the character Manus Mór . In the best @-@ known version , he returns to Norway after an expedition to the west ; he is killed in the second version . The different versions are probably derived from Magnus ' two expeditions . There are also traditions concerning Magnus in Scotland in legends , poems and local history . 
 In modern times a " Magnus Barelegs festival " has been held in Ireland and a beer named after his sword , <unk> . In Norway , according to Førsund , Magnus has " been reduced to a sigh " in history books ; little remains to commemorate him . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Walter de Clare = 
 Walter de Clare or Walter fitzRichard ( died probably 1137 or 1138 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman nobleman and founder of Tintern Abbey . A member of a powerful family , Walter was a younger son who was given lands around Chepstow Castle by King Henry I of England sometime before 1119 . Walter continued to appear in Henry 's charters for the rest of the reign , and was an early supporter of King Stephen of England , Henry 's successor as king . Walter last appears in the historical record in 1136 and died without children . His lands went to his nephew . 
 = = Family and background = = 
 Walter was a younger son of Richard de Clare , a Norman lord and landholder who also held Clare and Tonbridge in England . Walter 's mother was Rohese , the daughter of Walter Giffard . Rohese and Richard had at least six sons and two daughters . Besides Walter , they were Roger , Gilbert , Richard , Robert and Godfrey . The daughters were Alice and Rohese . Walter 's family of de Clare was a powerful one , with members of it having participated in rebellions and conspiracies against Henry 's older brother King William II of England ( d . 1100 ) in 1088 and 1095 . 
 = = Life = = 
 Little is known of Walter 's life , most of it deriving from the Gesta <unk> Ducum written by William of Jumieges . The first mention of Walter in the historical record is when he was granted the lordship of Netherwent , including Chepstow Castle beside the River Wye , by King Henry I of England . This occurred sometime before 1119 . Walter 's lordship of Netherwent or Chepstow was generally considered a feudal barony , and Walter is considered a baron by most historians . Walter 's land grant was part of a larger series of grants by Henry in southern Wales , including some given to Walter 's brother Gilbert de Clare . Henry also granted lands to another brother of Gilbert and Walter : Robert , who received Little Dunmow . These grants from the king to the Clare family helped bring them over to the royal side during the conflict between the king and his nephew William Clito over the control of Normandy in the late 1110s . 
 Walter was a witness on 12 of Henry 's royal charters , all before 1131 . He also was a witness for some royal charters issued by Henry 's successor , King Stephen of England , early in Stephen 's reign . One was a charter issued at Henry 's funeral on 4 January 1136 and another at Stephen 's court at Easter 1136 . These two charter attestations show that he was an early supporter of Stephen in the king 's seizure of the throne from Henry 's daughter Matilda . These early charters from Stephen 's reign are Walter 's last appearances in documents during his lifetime . Also in 1136 Walter was in charge of the defense of Le Sap in Normandy against Geoffrey V of Anjou . 
 Walter established Tintern Abbey as a Cistercian monastery on 9 May 1131 , the second Cistercian monastic house to be endowed in Britain . The monks for the establishment came from L <unk> Abbey in France . Although the ruins of Tintern were the subject of a poem by William Wordsworth and a painting by J. M. W. Turner , these ruins are not Walter 's original buildings , as little remains of them . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Historians differ over whether Walter ever married , but agree that he died childless . Michael Altschul lists no wife in his work on the Clares , and C. Warren Hollister , revising J. Horace Round 's entry in the Dictionary of National Biography for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , states that it is unclear if Walter married . Jennifer Ward , however , states that Walter married Isabella , a daughter of Ralph de <unk> . Katharine Keats @-@ Rohan states that Walter married Isabel , a daughter of Ralph de <unk> , and states that his widow gave an endowment to the cathedral chapter of Salisbury Cathedral for the sake of Walter 's soul . Walter was alive at Easter in 1136 , but died after that date . The obituary for Walter from Tintern gives his death date as 10 March , but does not state a year . A date of 1138 is usually given for his death ; though this has not been proven , it is likely . His estates passed to his nephew Gilbert de Clare , son of his brother Gilbert , who had died around 1115 . 
 = 2nd Canadian Regiment = 
 The 2nd Canadian Regiment , also known as Congress ' Own or Hazen 's Regiment , was authorized on January 20 , 1776 , as an Extra Continental regiment and raised in the province of Quebec for service with the Continental Army under the command of Colonel Moses Hazen . All or part of the regiment saw action at Staten Island , Brandywine , Germantown and the Siege of Yorktown . Most of its non @-@ combat time was spent in and around New York City as part of the forces monitoring the British forces occupying that city . The regiment was disbanded on November 15 , 1783 at West Point , New York . 
 The regiment was one of a small number of Continental Army regiments that was the direct responsibility of the Continental Congress ( most regiments were funded and supplied by a specific state ) . Commanded by Colonel ( later Brigadier General ) Moses Hazen for its entire existence , the regiment was originally made up of volunteers and refugees from Quebec who supported the rebel cause during the disastrous Invasion of Canada . Hazen and his staff were later authorized by Congress to recruit in other areas to supplement their ranks . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Late in 1775 , Colonel James Livingston raised and commanded a regiment of Canadians which fought at St. Jean , Quebec , in support of General Montgomery 's 1775 invasion of Quebec . Livingston 's 300 Canadians , along with about 50 Americans , were instrumental in the fall of Fort Chambly during that engagement . Livingston 's regiment , which was not formalized by Montgomery until November 1775 , also participated in the action at Quebec . On January 3 , 1776 , Congress commissioned him Colonel , and his organization became known as the Canadian Regiment . 
 Moses Hazen had served as a lieutenant in the 44th Regiment during the French and Indian War and was receiving a half @-@ pay pension for his British service . In 1775 , while he was living on this plus the income from his estate in St. Jean , Quebec , the colonial army invaded . The Americans plundered Hazen 's estate plundered and damaged his property damaged by the during the siege of the fort . Nevertheless , Hazen was arrested by the British on suspicion of spying for the Americans . He was held a prisoner for 54 days , until he was finally released by General Montgomery after the fall of Montreal in November . Hazen then joined the American cause , and took part in the battle of Quebec . Following the American failure to take the city , Hazen and Edward Antill , an American expatriate , traveled to Philadelphia to report on the battle . Congress partially compensated Hazen by establishing the 2nd Canadian Regiment . He accepted the command , thus forfeiting his British half @-@ pay . Antill was made lieutenant colonel of the regiment . Although John Duggan , one of Livingston 's captains , had been promised a regiment by Benedict Arnold , Hazen and Antill reached Philadelphia before Duggan , and Hazen smeared his name in his effort to get command of the regiment . 
 On January 20 , 1776 , Congress authorized the 2nd Canadian Regiment with an allowed maximum strength of 1 @,@ 000 . It would consist of four battalions ( 5 companies each ) , the only oversized regiment in the Continental Army . It was assigned to the Army 's Canadian Department , and was organized by Hazen on February 10 , 1776 at Montreal , to be recruited from the Richelieu and St. Lawrence Valleys . Over the next two months , Hazen and Antill recruited in those areas , until early April , when the recruiting funds dried up , raising about 250 men . 
 During much of the war , the 2nd Canadian Regiment was known as Congress 's Own Regiment , and Livingston 's command continued to be known as the Canadian Regiment . Greatly depleted by its five years of service , Livingston 's regiment was disbanded in the reorganization of the Continental Army on January 1 , 1781 . Its Canadian elements were assigned to Hazen 's command , which was then redesignated as the Canadian Regiment . 
 = = Montreal and retreat = = 
 The regiment was first assigned to garrison duty in and around Montreal , which was under Major General David Wooster 's command . In March 1776 , Wooster went to Quebec City to assume command of the army there ; Hazen was temporarily placed in command of the forces at Montreal until Benedict Arnold arrived from Quebec in April . Arnold then assigned the regiment to guard duty at Fort Chambly , where it remained until the American retreat in June 1776 . 
 On July 2 , the Canadian Department was disbanded , and regiment was reassigned to the Northern Department . The regiment was at Fort Ticonderoga in July 1776 , Albany in September , and then Fishkill , New York for winter quarters . By the time the regiment reached Albany , its strength had dropped to about 100 . On November 12 , the regiment was assigned to the Highlands Department . It was reorganized on January 1 , 1777 to consist of four battalions ( 20 companies ) , and Hazen was given permission to recruit " at large " – that is , he was allowed to recruit from any states , not just Quebec . These recruitment efforts met with mixed success , as most states had been assigned quotas for troop recruitment to fill their line companies , and thus preferred to have men enter those commands rather than Hazen 's . On January 8 , the regiment was assigned to the Main Army . 
 = = New Jersey campaign = = 
 The regiment was at Princeton , New Jersey as early as May 19 , 1777 , where it was assigned on May 22 to the 2nd Maryland Brigade of the Main Army . In early August the regiment , brigaded as part of General John Sullivan 's Division , was encamped at Hanover , New Jersey . Several of the regiment 's companies participated in the Battle of Staten Island on August 22 , 1777 . Its losses included 8 officers and 40 men , with the captured including Antill and Captain James Herron . Antill would not be exchanged until November 10 , 1780 . 
 " 25 August 1777 This Moment , while writing , Colo . Hazen showed Me a Letter , giving an account of an attempt by Gen. <unk> on the Enemy on Staten Island last Thursday . One party under Colo . Ogden of 500 , surprised the Enemy , killed a few , made 100 prisoners & returned . <unk> commanded <unk> Brigade , he killed 5 & made 30 prisoners . Gen. Smallwood had no Luck . He was discovered & the Enemy escaped . So far Success . About 9 o 'Clock the two Brigades joined , & began to cross at the old blazing Starr . Before all our Men got over , the Enemy came up & attacked 150 of our Men . Our People behaved bravely , drove the Enemy several Times , but were overpowered . We had but a few killed . We lost 130 privates prisoners . Colo . Antill , Major Woodson , Major Stewart , Major Tillard , Capt. Carlisle , & Duffee a Surgeons Mate are taken . Capt. <unk> , Lieut . Campbell , Lt. Anderson & Ensign Lee were not mentioned in the <unk> & are suffered to be killed . Several Field & <unk> officers fell into our Hands . The above is the substance of the Letter . " 
 = = Philadelphia campaign = = 
 = = = Battle of Brandywine = = = 
 Sullivan 's division then marched south to join Washington 's army in the defense of Philadelphia . On September 11 , 1777 , a battalion of 200 of Hazen 's men was sent a mile north of Jones 's Ford to cover Wistar 's Ford , and a second battalion of 200 men was posted at Buffington 's Ford about a mile north of Wistar 's Ford , situated just below the forks of the Brandywine Creek . Hazen 's troops spotted British troops in a flanking maneuver and crossing the Brandywine River . They sent a report of this movement to George Washington , who initially did not believe this intelligence despite its corroboration by Lieutenant Colonel James Ross . The regiment lost 4 officers and 73 men in the battle . 
 = = = Battle of Germantown = = = 
 Still under Sullivan 's command , the regiment participated in the Battle of Germantown on October 4 , 1777 . The British were encamped at Germantown northwest of Philadelphia . On the evening of October 3 General Washington ordered his troops , encamped at Skippack Creek on the north side of the Schuylkill River , to march 17 miles ( 27 km ) as part of a planned surprise attack on the British at daybreak . The Americans would then descend upon Germantown from the north in four columns , under the commands of Generals Sullivan , Greene , Armstrong and Smallwood , along four main roads leading into Germantown . The main effort of the advance was to be General Sullivan leading the column on the right and General Nathanael Greene on the left . Sullivan 's column , with the Continental troops of his own division and others , was to advance down Germantown Road against Howe 's center . 
 The regiment was part of the platoon of the advance party that first entered Germantown before the battle became general . Unbeknownst to Washington , the columns of Greene and Smallwood got lost . Washington himself accompanied Sullivan 's force and , at 5 am , ordered him to launch the assault . The leading element of Sullivan 's column , General Thomas Conway 's brigade , attacked the British 2d Light Infantry battalion , which had been reinforced by the British 40th Regiment of Foot under command of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Thomas Musgrave . The regiment formed part of Sullivan 's early attack on the British ; its losses were 3 officers and 19 men . 
 = = = Winter quarters 1777 – 1778 = = = 
 On December 21 , 1777 , the regiment and a detachment of the Maryland Line under the command of General William Smallwood ( the 2nd Maryland Brigade ) arrived at Wilmington , Delaware , to protect the city from the British . They encamped at the present @-@ day Brandywine Park in Wilmington . The highlight of this time included Smallwood 's capture of the British armed brigantine Symmetry on December 30 . This ship was laden with supplies , including winter clothing , en route to the British in Philadelphia . 
 = = Activities on the northern front = = 
 = = = New York and Connecticut = = = 
 On January 24 , 1778 , Washington ordered Hazen 's regiment to Albany , New York , transferring it from the 2nd Maryland Brigade to the Northern Department . The objective was a planned invasion of Quebec . Hazen was assigned to the deputy quartermaster 's post for the expedition , which was anticipated to involve 2 @,@ 500 men . The effort was troubled by supply and manpower difficulties , suspended in February , and then called off by Congress in March . The regiment was then reassigned to the Highlands Department on April 4 and ordered to West Point . The regiment was relieved July 22 from the Highlands Department and assigned to the New Hampshire Brigade , an element of the Main Army . In July 1778 the regiment was sent to White Plains to help guard New York City . 
 At White Plains , Hazen proposed a new potential invasion route to Quebec . This route went from Newbury in the New Hampshire Grants ( present @-@ day Vermont ) , where Hazen owned property , to Saint Francis , Quebec . On July 12 , Hazen departed Newbury to scout the route . By July 25 , he had returned to White Plains ; the effort was abandoned for the time being because the manpower was needed in the New York area . 
 That summer , low manpower in Hazen 's regiment caused Washington to consider disbanding it ; the regiment 's size had dropped to 522 , and Washington was concerned over an excessively large number of officers ( 33 ) in the regiment . Hazen successfully argued for retention of the regiment , and noted that the large number of officers was needed because companies from the regiment were often detached to other units for service . During the autumn a large shipment of clothing and shoes arrived from France . After a lottery was held in October , Hazen 's regiment were issued the uniform of brown coats faced with red . 
 In November , the regiment was ordered to Connecticut where it encamped at Redding for winter quarters . ( Today , this is the site of Putnam Memorial State Park , where more than 100 piles of stone in the area of the park known as the " Encampment Site " are believed to mark the locations of the huts that sheltered troops from this and other regiments . ) A weekly return for the brigade dated December 26 , 1778 , states that 162 men in the regiment were " unfit for duty for want of shoes . " 
 = = = Coös Country = = = 
 In March 1779 the regiment was reassigned to the Northern Department , and marched to Springfield , Massachusetts . From Springfield they marched to Charlestown , New Hampshire and picked up clothing and supplies . They arrived in what was called the Coös Country of northern New Hampshire in May , and were tasked to build a road now known as the Bayley @-@ Hazen Military Road from the Connecticut River to St. Jean , Quebec . Hazen had been secretly ordered to the area by Washington in April . Along with a large portion of Colonel Timothy Bedel 's Regiment and Major Benjamin Whitcomb 's New Hampshire rangers , they began to extend the road , a portion of which had been constructed in 1776 under the direction of Colonel Jacob Bayley . 
 Hazen 's objective was to extend a road in a northwest direction following the general path of an old <unk> Indian trail from Lower Coös to St. Johns , Quebec . The road cut through the heavily forested Upper Connecticut Valley in an area of the New Hampshire Grants that was then known as Upper Coös , but is today known as Vermont 's Northeast Kingdom . 
 The village of Peacham became the base of operations for the military road project . The road actually started at the town of Wells River on the Connecticut River just north of Newbury . Blockhouses were built at Peacham , Cabot , Walden and Greensboro . Hazen made requisition upon the selectmen of the river towns to provide teams for the movement of his stores . Wells were dug at various points , swamps were bridged with logs and the road made passable for teams . Hazen encamped for some time on the present site of Lowell village , and he called the place " the camp at the end of the road " , although the road 's actual terminus was some miles further on . 
 The road crossed the Vermont Piedmont — rolling hills and valleys with isolated mountains . On June 22 it was reported that Hazen with half his men were within 40 miles ( 64 km ) of St. John 's . The regiment was recalled to the New York area in August ; as a result , the road was never completed . A total of 54 miles ( 87 km ) of road was built ; the location where it ended is now known as <unk> Notch . 
 In the fall , Hazen leveled charges of corruption and mismanagement against Isaac Tichenor , the deputy commissioner of purchases at Coös , General Bayley , the deputy quartermaster @-@ general , and Matthew Lyons , the deputy commissioner of issues . His regiment were poorly supplied the whole summer at Coös , supplies of beef arrived spoiled , and Hazen had to send his men into the fields to help with the harvest so they could eat . Courts @-@ martial were later held . 
 = = = Winter 1779 – 1780 Jockey Hollow = = = 
 In October 1779 the regiment was ordered to Peekskill , New York , and on November 25 it was assigned to Hand 's Brigade in the Main Army . They spent the winter at Morristown , New Jersey , where they experienced severe shortages of food . The site , known as " Jockey Hollow " , is in the Morristown National Historical Park . 
 On January 14 , 1780 , the regiment participated in a " commando " raid of Staten Island planned in secrecy by General Washington and led by Lord Stirling . The object of the raid was a surprise attack on the enemy at the Watering Place Redoubts and to secure provisions . Preparations for the raid called for British attention to be focused on Irvine 's detachment in the vicinity of Elizabethtown , while the 2nd Canadian marched to Connecticut Farms ( present @-@ day Union ) . Meanwhile , Steward 's detachment would advance onto Staten Island , and Stirling 's forces would then push to Richmond , in the center of Staten Island , where they would surprise enemy troops . 
 Lord Stirling had intelligence that the enemy had a force of about 1 @,@ 000 men , with the main body in huts near the Watering Place Redoubts . These were three British circular redoubts , double @-@ <unk> , with about 200 men each , located at present @-@ day Fort Hill Circle in St. George , just north of Tompkinsville . Around midnight on January 14 , loaded with cannon and 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 troops , American forces crossed over the frozen ice of the Kill Van Kull waterway from Elizabethtown Point on 500 sleds . It was a starry night , and Loyalist spies had warned the British of the American approach . As a result , the Americans found the British on the posts and alert . With the element of surprise gone , and conditions extremely cold , the raid was aborted . American troops suffered minor frostbite injuries but brought back 17 prisoners , as well as some horses and camp supplies . 
 = = = New York 1780 = = = 
 In the spring of 1780 , the regiment was subjected to a thorough inspection by Baron von Steuben , and was found to be " well taken care of " . Von Steuben made recommendations as a result of his inspections ( which covered much of the Continental Army ) that resulted in the merging of the 1st and 2nd Canadian regiments in 1781 . 
 The regiment spent the summer of 1780 at King 's Ferry , New York . Regimental orderly books show that it was at Morristown , Bryant 's Tavern , Ramapo and Preakness between April 23 and July 26 . On August 1 the regiment was reassigned from Hand 's Brigade to the New Hampshire Brigade of the Main Army . This brigade was to be under the command of Enoch Poor , but its command was ultimately given to Hazen , although Hazen was not promoted to brigadier general . 
 On August 23 , von Steuben arrested Hazen for halting his brigade on a march without permission . The army was on the march from Tappan to the Liberty Pole , a pre @-@ war landmark located near Englewood , when Hazen halted the march for his troops to drink water . Hazen was acquitted of the charges , and promptly countercharged von Steuben with conduct unbecoming an officer over the incident ; von Steuben apologized . 
 Following the capture of British spy John André and the defection of Benedict Arnold to the British in September 1780 , one hundred of Hazen 's soldiers , under command of Lieutenant William Torrey , were detailed to be present at André 's hanging on October 2 , at Tappan , New York . 
 In the fall of 1780 the regiment was headquartered at Nelson 's Point in Garrison , New York , directly across the Hudson River from West Point , before entering winter quarters at Fishkill , New York in November . During this time eleven officers of the regiment , led by Major James Reid , complained to General Washington ( without first consulting Hazen ) over the lack of advancement opportunities in the regiment , which were due in part to its unusual position as being the direct responsibility of Congress , rather than under a state 's supervision . Reid also made complaints against Hazen , which were heard and dismissed in a November 1780 court martial . Hazen had Reid arrested and confined to quarters afterwards ; a long court martial ( running from December 1780 to February 1781 ) resulted in Reid 's conviction on two counts and a public reprimand by General Washington . 
 Regimental orderly books show that during these periods the regiment had operations at Orangetown , <unk> and West Point between September 16 and November 19 , and at West Point from October 5 to March 5 , 1781 . 
 = = = Reorganized as Canadian Regiment = = = 
 On January 1 , 1781 , in accordance with von Steuben 's recommendations , the 1st Canadian Regiment was disbanded . The Canadian members were reassigned to the 2nd Regiment , which was then designated as the Canadian Regiment . Most foreign volunteers were also assigned to the regiment . 
 Hazen and part of the regiment participated in a raid on January 22 led by Lieutenant Colonel William Hull . Hull raided a position held by a Loyalist corps under Lieutenant Colonel Oliver De Lancey Sr. that was at Morrisania ( in the present @-@ day Bronx ) . The Americans burned the enemy 's barracks , captured 52 prisoners , and took large supplies of ammunition and forage . Hazen 's men were assigned to cover their retreat . About 1 @,@ 000 British troops pursued Hull 's men beyond a point where Hazen and his men were concealed . A skirmish took place , with British losing about 35 men . 
 On June 1 , the regiment was sent from the West Point – Fishkill area to Albany and the Mohawk River valley to guard against an expected British attack . For this action it was reassigned from the Highlands Department to the Northern Department . The regiment arrived at Albany on June 5 , and spent most of the month patrolling in the Mohawk River valley against an attack that never came . When the perceived threat subsided , the regiment was immediately ordered to return to West Point . On June 29 , Hazen was finally given a brevet promotion to brigadier general . 
 = = Siege of Yorktown = = 
 On August 10 , 1781 , the Canadian Regiment was reassigned from the Northern Department to the Main Army . On August 19 , Washington used the regiment to feint preparations for an attack on New York . It crossed the Hudson River at Dobbs Ferry and was ordered to march , together with New Jersey troops , to posts on the heights between Springfield and Chatham , in which position the detachment would cover a French battery that had been set up at Chatham " to veil our real movements and create apprehensions for Staten Island . " Meanwhile , the main body of the American Army was starting their southward movement toward Yorktown . The regiment withdrew , and held near <unk> for three days from August 22 – 25 . 
 The regiment then went down the Hudson River and joined the army on the way to Yorktown . At midnight on September 2 , 270 of the regiment and other units arrived at Christiana Bridge over the Delaware . The units unloaded the boats and transported supplies for the Continental Army to Elk Landing during the three days before the boat carriages arrived . On September 24 , Hazen was given command of the second brigade of Marquis de Lafayette 's Light Division , to which the Canadian Regiment ( now under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Antill ) was assigned . After cantonment at Williamsburg , the regiment arrived at Yorktown on September 28 . 
 The regiment participated in the siege , and was heavily involved in the October 14 attacks on the British redoubts . According to Lafayette 's own account the Americans did not fire a gun , but used only the bayonet . The brigades of light infantry under Generals Peter Muhlenberg and Hazen " advanced with perfect discipline and wonderful steadiness . The battalion of Colonel Vose deployed on the left . The remainder of the division and the rear @-@ guard successively took their positions , under the fire of the enemy , without replying , in perfect order and silence . " 
 = = = Guard detail at Lancaster = = = 
 The regiment was reassigned from Hazen 's Brigade to the Middle Department on December 6 , 1781 . On this date , a portion of the regiment went to Lancaster , Pennsylvania , where they guarded prisoners taken at Yorktown . They were on this detail for 10 months with prisoners under guard at Lancaster , York and Reading . The most notable prisoner under Hazen 's watch during this time was 20 @-@ year @-@ old Captain Charles Asgill . On May 3 , 1782 , upon orders by Washington , he was selected to hang in retaliation for the brutal summary execution of American Captain Joshua Huddy by the British . In November 1782 his life was spared after heartrending correspondence by his family and intervention by the Queen of France . 
 In June 1782 Hazen again had James Reid arrested on charges including disobedience and conduct unbecoming an officer . The court martial , held in December , resulted in a mistrial , with Hazen alleging bias on the part of the presiding judge advocate . After additional hearings , Reid was ultimately acquitted of the charges . In November 1782 , the regiment was moved to Pompton , New Jersey for winter quarters . Its duties during this time included the interdiction of trade between the countryside and the British in New York City . 
 = = Disbanded = = 
 In June 1783 , with the peace nearly finalized , much of the regiment was furloughed . At the same time it was transferred to the Highland Department . Pursuant to a Resolution of Congress of May 26 , 1783 , 300 soldiers were discharged on June 9 . However , members of the regiment refused to depart , whether on furlough or discharge , until they received their pay . Members of the regiment that remained were ordered to march to Washington 's cantonment near New Windsor . The regiment was reorganized into two companies on June 30 and was completely disbanded on November 15 , 1783 , at West Point , New York . 
 Because the Canadians in the regiment were unable to return to their homes , many of them settled in camps near Albany and Fishkill , where they subsisted on handouts from Congress . General Hazen appealed to Congress to give them land grants , but this effort failed . The state of New York eventually granted Hazen and a number of his men land in the northern part of the state near Lake Champlain . 
 = = Troop strength and casualties = = 
 Strength 
 The regiment 's authorized strength was 1 @,@ 000 men . 
 Casualties 
 = Battle of Bréville = 
 The Battle of Bréville was fought by the British 6th Airborne Division and the German 346th Infantry Division , between 8 and 13 June 1944 , during the early phases of the invasion of Normandy in the Second World War . 
 In June 1944 , units of the 346th Infantry Division occupied Bréville @-@ les @-@ Monts , a village on a watershed between the rivers Orne and Dives . From this vantage point , they could observe the positions of the 6th Airborne Division , defending the River Orne and Caen Canal bridges and beyond them the British Sword Beach at Ouistreham . Following several German attacks on British positions from Bréville @-@ les @-@ Monts , the capture of the village became essential to secure the 6th Airborne Division positions and protect the Allied beachhead . 
 The British attack occurred over the night of 12 / 13 June 1944 , when Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale committed his only reserves , the 12th ( Yorkshire ) Parachute Battalion , a company from the 12th Battalion , Devonshire Regiment and the 22nd Independent Parachute Company . To support the attack , a tank squadron from the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars and five regiments of artillery were assigned to the division . The assault had to negotiate both the British and German artillery fire , which killed or wounded several men , including some senior officers . The attackers eventually reached and secured the village . However , every officer or sergeant major who took part in the attack was killed or wounded . 
 After the capture of Bréville , the Germans never seriously attempted to break through the airborne division 's lines again . The British division only being subjected to sporadic artillery and mortar fire . This lasted until 17 August , when the Germans started to withdraw and the 6th Airborne Division advanced to the River Seine . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 6 June 1944 , the 6th Airborne Division landed in Normandy to secure the left flank of the British landing zone . The division 's objectives were to capture intact the Caen canal bridge , the Orne river bridge , destroy the Merville gun battery – which was in a position to engage troops landing at the nearby Sword beach – and the bridges crossing the River Dives , the latter to prevent German reinforcements approaching the landings from the east . 
 The division 's two parachute brigades , landing in the early hours of 6 June , were scattered across the countryside during the parachute drop . Most of the battalions could only muster around sixty per cent or less of their total strength on the drop zones ( DZ ) . They did carry out all of their objectives , however , before the 6th Airlanding Brigade arrived by gliders to reinforce them at 21 : 00 that evening . 
 The 6th Airborne Division , now with the commandos of the 1st Special Service Brigade under command , had to defend the Orne bridgehead . This was not an easy task as it had to face elements of the 21st Panzer Division from the south and the 346th and 711th Infantry Divisions from the east . 
 The airborne division 's brigades prepared to hold the positions they had captured , with the 5th Parachute Brigade , as the division 's depth formation , dug into the east of the River Orne bridge . The 6th Airlanding Brigade was in the south between Longueval and <unk> . 
 The two remaining brigades dug in along a ridge of high ground that , if lost , offered the Germans a position to look down on the British landing zone . The 1st Special Service Brigade was in the north on a line from <unk> <unk> to Le Plain . In between the commandos and the airlanding brigade was the 3rd Parachute Brigade . 
 Their defensive line , however , was incomplete , as the small village of Bréville @-@ les @-@ Monts , between the commandos and the 3rd Parachute Brigade , was held by the Germans . Located on the ridge line it gave the Germans a view into Ranville , at the heart of the British position , the two captured bridges and in the distance Sword beach . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = 7 / 8 June = = = 
 At 01 : 30 on 7 June , the 9th Parachute Battalion , with only around ninety men at the time , marched through the unoccupied Bréville . Upon arrival at the 3rd Parachute Brigade 's position , the parachute battalion was ordered to dig in at the northern end of the brigade line . They would be responsible for defending an area from the Château Saint Come , across a clearing in the woods , to a house known as the Bois de Mont . To their front was a stretch of open land leading to Bréville @-@ les @-@ Monts and the road from Amfreville to Le Mesnil @-@ les @-@ Monts . A shortage in their numbers left a large gap between the 9th Parachute Battalion and No. 6 Commando , the most southern unit in the commando defensive position , to their north . 
 By now the German 346th Infantry Division had reached the area from its base at Le Havre . Their first attack , by the 744th Grenadier Regiment , was against the 1st Special Service Brigade . Attacking in strength , they were near to breaking through the line when No. 3 Commando counter @-@ attacked and drove them back . 
 Later in the morning , No. 6 Commando came under artillery and mortar fire from Bréville . The commandos attacked and cleared the village of Germans , capturing several prisoners , some machine @-@ guns and four artillery pieces . Then they withdrew to their original position . The Germans reoccupied the village and formed their own defensive positions , facing the ridge line defended by the airborne division . Their positions also isolated the 9th Parachute Battalion , which was almost cut off from the rest of the division . 
 The next day a patrol from the 9th Parachute Battalion reconnoitred the Château Saint Come . They found it abandoned , but the presence of clothing , equipment , a half @-@ eaten meal and a payroll containing 50 @,@ 000 French francs betrayed the recent German occupancy . 
 Units of the 857th Grenadier Regiment , part of the 346th Infantry Division , attacked the battalion 's position at midday . It appeared to be only a probing attack , easily fought off by ' A ' Company . Later the same day the Germans attacked ' A ' and ' C ' Companies . This time they were repelled by Vickers machine gun fire and a counter @-@ attack by the battalion 's anti @-@ tank platoon , with a Bren machine gun group under command of the Regimental Sergeant Major . 
 = = = 9 June = = = 
 The next German attack was at dawn on 9 June , when a heavy mortar barrage landed on the 9th Parachute Battalion positions . Then ' A ' and ' C ' Companies were attacked simultaneously . After taking heavy casualties , the Germans retreated into the woods surrounding the Château , where they reformed and attempted another unsuccessful attack an hour later . 
 Brigade Headquarters was attacked by a force of Germans that had infiltrated through the woods . Informed of the attack , Lieutenant Colonel Terence Otway , the commanding officer of 9th Parachute Battalion , collected ' C ' Company , his own headquarters staff and a small group armed with captured German MG 42 machine @-@ guns . They approached the Germans from the rear and trapped them in a crossfire , killing nineteen and capturing one . That afternoon two infantry platoons attacked ' A ' Company , but were fought off by a counter @-@ attack from ' C ' Company 's position . 
 At 17 : 30 a flight of Luftwaffe Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190s attacked the Orne bridgehead , causing little in the way of any damage . Soon afterward , Royal Air Force Short Stirling bombers arrived to carry out a parachute resupply for the division . Included in the parachute drop were 6 pounder anti @-@ tank guns , which until then had always been delivered by glider . Some forty @-@ one of the 9th Parachute Battalion 's missing men arrived at their position at 21 : 00 , bringing the battalion strength up to around 200 men . 
 = = = 10 June = = = 
 A reconnaissance patrol from the 13th Parachute Battalion reported a large gathering of Germans in Bréville and suspected an attack was imminent . At 08 : 00 a massive artillery and mortar bombardment fell along the 1st Special Service Brigade lines , while the 857th Grenadier Regiment , which had gathered in the village , attacked No. 6 Commando . By 10 : 30 , the attack on No. 6 Commando had been driven back , but to their left at Hauger No.4 Commandos had to win a hand @-@ to @-@ hand fight before the Germans withdrew . Twice more during the day the commandos were attacked unsuccessfully , from Sallenelles in the north and again from Bréville . 
 At 09 : 00 one battalion of the 857th Grenadier Regiment had crossed the drop zone and approached the 5th Parachute Brigades positions . Its two forward units , the 7th Parachute Battalion and the 13th Parachute Battalion , held their fire until the Germans were only 50 yards ( 46 m ) away . The few survivors of the onslaught escaped into the nearby woods . 
 Early on 10 June another group of thirty @-@ one men arrived at the 9th Parachute Battalion position . These and other stragglers , who had arrived through the night , brought the battalion strength to around 270 men . At 11 : 00 the Germans attacked ' A ' Company again , but this time the attack was ill @-@ coordinated and was easily repelled . Shortly afterwards the battalion killed around fifty Germans , who had started digging defences in full view of the British position . Then ' A ' Company ambushed a German patrol , causing several casualties . That afternoon a strong force of Germans occupied the Château and used it as a base to start an infantry and self propelled gun assault on the British battalion . With no mortar ammunition left , the British had to use their PIATs and machine @-@ guns to stop the attack . 
 The next German attack was in force , using the 2nd Battalion 857th Grenadier Regiment , the 1st and 2nd Battalion 's 858th Grenadier Regiment and several companies of the 744th Grenadier Regiment with tank and armoured car support . They attempted to force a gap in the British lines between the commandos and the 3rd Parachute Brigade to reach Ranville . 
 Two infantry companies attacked ' B ' Company 9th Parachute Battalion 's position . This assault was more determined , even naval gunfire support from the 6 inch ( 150 mm ) guns of HMS Arethusa did not stop the attack . When they reached the British position a hand @-@ to @-@ hand fight ensued , during which most of the Germans were killed . One of the prisoners taken was the commander of the 2nd Battalion 857th Grenadier Regiment , who informed his captors that " his regiment had been destroyed in the fighting against the airborne division " . The rest of the German assault came up against the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , and was stopped by an artillery bombardment , two later attacks on them suffered the same fate . Later at 23 : 00 ' C ' Company 9th Parachute Battalion fought their way to and occupied the Château , and fought off several small attacks throughout the night . 
 With his two parachute brigades and the commando brigade heavily engaged Major General Richard Gale contacted I Corps for armour support . He had decided to clear the woods at Le <unk> of Germans . The objective was given to the 7th Parachute Battalion and ' B ' Squadron 13th / 18th Royal Hussars . The tanks would advance over the open ground , their only cover being crashed gliders . Meanwhile , ' A ' and ' B ' Company 's would clear the woods . In the fighting the only British casualties were ten wounded in the parachute battalion , but eight men from the Hussars were killed and four Sherman and two Stuart tanks were destroyed . The Germans from the 857th Grenadier Regiment , had twenty killed and 100 men surrendered , and were driven out of the woods . 
 The German attacks convinced Lieutenant General John Crocker , commander of I Corps , to reinforce the 6th Airborne Division , and the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division was ordered to take over the southern sector of the Orne bridgehead . At the same time the 5th Battalion Black Watch was attached to the 3rd Parachute Brigade . The Black Watch were informed to prepare for an assault to capture Bréville and formed up to the rear of the 9th Parachute Battalion , ready to begin their attack the next day . 
 = = = 11 June = = = 
 The Black Watch would attack Bréville from the south @-@ west , but before the attack sent a company to take over the defence of the Château . At 04 : 30 supported by the guns and mortars of the airborne and highland divisions the attack began . To reach Bréville the battalion had to cross 250 yards ( 230 m ) of open ground , and when they neared the village the British artillery ceased fire . The Germans then opened fire with their artillery , mortars and machine @-@ guns . One company was completely wiped out by the German machine @-@ gun fire as it advanced over the open ground . Met with such a heavy concentrated fire , the battalion suffered 200 casualties and the attack was repulsed . The survivors retreated to the Château , but were immediately counter @-@ attacked by the 3rd Battalion , 858th Infantry Regiment , who themselves suffered heavy casualties . 
 That afternoon three troops of tanks from the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars , were sent to reinforce the Black Watch , but they had only just started to move towards the Château when three tanks were destroyed by hidden German self @-@ propelled guns . The other tanks were withdrawn being unable to deploy in the wooded ground around the Château . The rest of the day and night passed without another attack , but the Germans sent out reconnaissance patrols to establish the exact location of the British positions and German armoured vehicles could be heard moving up to the front during the night . 
 = = = 12 June = = = 
 At midday on 12 June the entire 3rd Parachute Brigade position came under artillery and mortar fire prior to a major attack scheduled to start at 15 : 00 . A German battalion attacked the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , another supported by six tanks and self @-@ propelled guns attacked the 9th Parachute Battalion and the 5th Black Watch . The battle for the Château cost the Black Watch nine Bren Gun Carriers and destroyed all of their anti @-@ tank guns . Unable to resist they were forced to pull back to the Bois de Mont , joining the 9th Parachute Battalion , which was being attacked by the German armoured vehicles . One tank in front of ' B ' Company was hit by two PIAT rounds , but remained in action . The tank destroyed two of ' B ' company 's machine @-@ gun posts , when it was hit by a third anti @-@ tank projectile and withdrew . The attack killed or wounded the last men in the Machine @-@ Gun Platoon and the Anti @-@ Tank Platoon was reduced to one PIAT detachment . The German infantry were in danger of over @-@ running the battalion , when Otway contacted brigade headquarters , informing them they were not able to hold out much longer . Brigadier James Hill personally led a counter @-@ attack of forty men from the Canadian battalion which drove off the Germans . By 20 : 00 the area defended by the two battalions had been cleared of all opposition and the front line restored . 
 = = = Night Attack = = = 
 Gale concluded that to relieve the pressure on the division , he had to take Bréville . The only units available for the attack were the division reserve , which consisted of the 12th Parachute Battalion ( 350 men ) , and ' D ' Company 12th Battalion Devonshire Regiment ( eighty @-@ six men ) . Another unit , the 22nd Independent Parachute Company , the division 's pathfinders , were to stand by and respond to any German counter @-@ attack . To provide fire support , Gale was given a squadron of tanks from the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars , three field artillery regiments armed with 25 pounder guns , a medium artillery regiment of 5 @.@ 5 inch guns and the division 's own artillery the 53rd ( Worcester Yeomanry ) Airlanding Light Regiment . The attack on Bréville would start at 22 : 00 , timed to catch the Germans tired and off @-@ guard following the days fighting . The start line was on the outskirts of Amfreville , which had already been secured by No.6 Commando . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Johnny Johnson of the 12th Parachute Battalion was in command of the assault . He decided his own ' C ' Company would secure the first crossroads , the Devonshire company would then clear the north of the village . At the same time ' A ' Company would advance through ' C ' Company and secure the south @-@ east . At the rear would be ' B ' Company the battalion reserve . The attack had to cross 400 yards ( 370 m ) of open ground to reach the village , to support the assault and destroy a German position 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the start line , a troop of Sherman tanks would accompany them . 
 At 21 : 50 the British artillery opened fire , and the Germans responded with their own artillery and mortars which forced most of the British to take cover , for the next fifteen minutes , until a lull in the German fire allowed them to continue . In the lead ' C ' Company had crossed the start line at 22 : 00 , however all its officers and the company sergeant major ( CSM ) became casualties and a senior non @-@ commissioned officer took command of the company . They continued to advance through the artillery and mortar bombardment , guided towards their objective by tracer rounds from the Hussars tanks . Repeatedly hit by the artillery and tanks , Bréville was in flames by the time the company 's fifteen survivors reached the village . 
 The battalion 's ' A ' Company suffered a similar fate , the officer commanding was wounded crossing the start line , and at the same time every member of the 2nd Platoon was killed or wounded . The CSM assumed command of the company but was killed when they reached Bréville . The company second in command who had been bringing up the rear , reached the village and found the 3rd Platoon only had nine men left but they had managed to clear the village Château and the 1st Platoon had cleared its grounds . 
 The Devonshire company , was moving towards Amfreville when an artillery round landed amongst them wounding several men . As they crossed the start line another shell landed nearby killing Johnson , their company commander Major Bampfylde and wounding Brigadiers Lord Lovat of the commando brigade and Hugh Kindersley of the airlanding brigade , who were observing the attack . Colonel Reginald Parker , deputy commander of the airlanding brigade and a former commanding officer of the 12th Parachute Battalion , had been wounded by the same shell but went forward to take over command of the attack . 
 By 22 : 45 the crossroads had been secured by what remained of ' C ' Company , the eighteen survivors of ' A ' Company were in among the south @-@ eastern buildings of Bréville . In the north @-@ east of the village the twenty survivors of the Devonshire company had captured their objective . The shelling had stopped when ' B ' Company reached the village unopposed and occupied abandoned German trenches beside the church . Fearing a German counter @-@ attack on his weakened battalion , Parker ordered a defensive artillery bombardment . However , there was a misunderstanding when the order reached the artillery and a heavy bombardment landed on the British positions in the village , causing several casualties including three of the surviving officers . 
 At 02 : 00 on 13 June the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars squadron arrived at ' C ' Company 's position at the crossroads , later followed by fifty @-@ one men from the 22nd Independent Parachute Company . Bréville was now in British control again for the third time since the landings on 6 June . But not in the numbers to defend against a German counter @-@ attack , so the 1st Battalion Royal Ulster Rifles , part of the 6th Airlanding Brigade , was moved into the village to take over from the survivors of the attack . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The final attack had cost the 12th Parachute Battalion 126 killed , and left its three rifle companies with only thirty @-@ five men between them . The 12th Devonshire company had another thirty @-@ six killed . Amongst the casualties , was every officer or warrant officer , who had either been killed or wounded . The German defenders from the 3rd Battalion 858th Grenadier Regiment , had numbered 564 men before the British assault , by the time the village had been captured there were only 146 of them left . 
 However the left flank of the invasion zone was now secure . On 13 June the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division took over responsibility for the southern sector of the Orne bridgehead , releasing the 6th Airlanding Brigade to strengthen the 6th Airborne Division position along the ridge line . The next two months was a period of static warfare , until 17 August when the division crossed the River Dives and advanced north along the French coast . By the 26 August they had reached Honfleur at the mouth of the River Seine , capturing over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners and liberating 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of France . 
 The battle of Breville has since been claimed to have been " one of the most important battles of the invasion " . Had the division lost the battle , the Germans would have been in a position to attack the landing beaches . But after the battle the Germans never attempted a serious attack on the division again . For their accomplishment , Breville was one of six battle honours awarded to the Parachute Regiment for the Normandy Campaign . 
 = History of the Royal Australian Navy = 
 The history of the Royal Australian Navy traces the development of the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) from the colonisation of Australia by the British in 1788 . Until 1859 , vessels of the Royal Navy made frequent trips to the new colonies . In 1859 , the Australia Squadron was formed as a separate squadron and remained in Australia until 1913 . Until Federation , five of the six Australian colonies operated their own colonial naval force , which formed on 1 March 1901 the Australian Navy 's ( AN ) Commonwealth Naval Force which received Royal patronage in July 1911 and was from that time referred to as Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . On 4 October 1913 the new replacement fleet for the foundation fleet of 1901 steamed through Sydney Heads for the first time . 
 The Royal Australian Navy has seen action in every ocean of the world . It first saw action in World War I , in the Pacific , Indian and Atlantic oceans . Between the wars the RAN 's fortunes shifted with the financial situation of Australia : it experienced great growth during the 1920s , but was forced to reduce its fleet and operations during the 1930s . Consequently , when it entered World War II , the RAN was smaller than it had been at the start of World War I. During the course of World War II , the RAN operated more than 350 fighting and support ships ; a further 600 small civilian vessels were put into service as auxiliary patrol boats . ( Contrary to some claims , however , the RAN was not the fifth @-@ largest navy in the world at any point during World War II . ) 
 Following World War II , the RAN saw action in Korea , Vietnam , and other smaller conflicts . Today , the RAN consists of a small but modern force , widely regarded as one of the most powerful forces in the Asia Pacific Region . 
 = = Australia Station = = 
 In the years following the establishment of the British colony of New South Wales in 1788 , Royal Navy ships of the East Indies Squadron under the command of the East Indies Station would be station in or visit Australian waters . From the 1820s , a ship was sent annually to New South Wales , and occasionally to New Zealand . 
 In 1848 , an Australian Division of the East Indies Station was established , and in 1859 the British Admiralty established an independent command , the Australia Station , under the command of a Commodore who was assigned as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Australia Station . The Australian Squadron was created to which British naval ships serving on the Australia Station were assigned . The changes were partially in recognition of the fact that a large part of the East Indies Station had been detached to Australian waters , and also reflecting growing concern for the strategic situation in the western Pacific in general , and in Tahiti and New Zealand in particular . In 1884 , the commander of the Australia Station was upgraded to the rank of Rear Admiral . 
 At its establishment , the Australia Station encompassed Australia and New Zealand , with its eastern boundary including Samoa and Tonga , its western edge in the Indian Ocean , south of India and its southern edge defined by the Antarctic Circle . The boundaries were modified in 1864 , 1872 and 1893 . At its largest , the Australia Station reached from the Equator to the Antarctic in its greatest north @-@ south axis , and covered 1 ⁄ 4 of the Southern Hemisphere in its extreme east @-@ west dimension , including Papua New Guinea , New Zealand , Melanesia and Polynesia . 
 In 1911 the Australia Station passed to the Commonwealth Naval Forces ( initially under the command of RN officers ) and the Australian Squadron was disbanded . The Station , now under nominal Australian command , was reduced to only cover Australia and its island dependencies to the north and east . In 1911 , the Commonwealth Naval Forces was renamed the Royal Australian Navy , which in 1913 came under Australian command . The Royal Navy 's Australia Station 's Sydney based depots , dockyards and structures were gifted to the Commonwealth of Australia . The Royal Navy continued to support the RAN and provided additional blue @-@ water defence capability in the Pacific up to the early years of World War II . 
 = = Colonial navies and federation = = 
 Before the Federation of Australia in 1901 , five of the six self @-@ governing colonies in Australia operated a navy , the exception being Western Australia which did not have a naval force . The colonial navies were supported by the ships of the Royal Navy 's Australian Station which was established in 1859 . In 1856 , Victoria received its own naval vessel , <unk> Victoria , which in 1860 was deployed to assist the New Zealand colonial government during the First Taranaki War . When Victoria returned to Australia , the vessel had taken part in several minor actions , with the loss of one crew member . The deployment of Victoria to New Zealand marked the first occasion that an Australian warship had been deployed overseas . In the years leading up to Federation , Victoria had the most powerful of the colonial navies . Victoria had HMVS Cerberus since 1870 , as well as HMVS Nelson , three small gunboats and five torpedo @-@ boats . NSW had two very small torpedo boats , and the corvette Wolverine . The colonial navies were expanded greatly in the mid @-@ 1880s and usually consisted of gunboats and torpedo @-@ boats for coastal defence of harbours and rivers , and naval brigades to man vessels and forts . 
 On 1 January 1901 , Australia became a federation of six States , as the Commonwealth of Australia , which on 1 March 1901 took over the defence forces from the States , to form the Commonwealth Naval Forces . The Australian and New Zealand governments agreed with the Imperial government to help fund the Royal Navy 's Australian Squadron , while the Admiralty committed itself to maintain the Squadron at a constant strength . In 1902 , the commander of the Australia Station was upgraded to the rank of Vice Admiral . The boundaries were again modified in 1908 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 A growing number of people , among them Captain William Rooke Creswell , the director of the Commonwealth Naval Forces , demanded an autonomous Australian navy , financed and controlled by Australia . In 1907 Prime Minister Alfred Deakin and Creswell , while attending the Imperial Conference in London , sought the British Government 's agreement to end the subsidy system and develop an Australian navy . The Admiralty rejected and resented the challenge , but suggested diplomatically that a small fleet of destroyers and submarines would be sufficient . Deakin was not impressed with the Admiralty , and in 1908 invited the United States Great White Fleet to visit Australia . The visit prompted public enthusiasm for a modern navy and led to the order of two 700 @-@ ton River @-@ class torpedo @-@ boat destroyers , a purchase that angered the British . The surge in German naval construction in 1909 led the Australian admiralty to change its position on an Australian navy , which resulted in the Naval Defence Act of 1910 being passed which created the Australian navy . 
 The first Australian warship , the destroyer HMAS Parramatta , was launched at Govan in Scotland on Wednesday 9 February 1910 . Sister ship HMAS Yarra was launched at Dumbarton in Scotland on Saturday 9 April 1910 . Both ships were commissioned into the Royal Navy on 19 September 1910 and sailed for Australia , arriving at Port Phillip on 10 December 1910 . The event was marred by the death of Engineer Lieutenant W. Robertson , RN , who suffered a heart attack 8 miles ( 13 km ) outside Port Phillip Heads whilst onboard HMAS Yarra , and drowned . 
 The British Australia Station passed to the Commonwealth Naval Forces in 1911 and the Australian Squadron was disbanded . On 10 July 1911 , King George V granted the title of " Royal Australian Navy " to the Commonwealth Naval Forces , and RAN ships could carry the prefix " His Majesty 's Australian Ship " ( HMAS ) . The Station was reduced to cover Australia and its island dependencies to the north and east , excluding New Zealand and its surrounds , which became part of the China Station and called the New Zealand Naval Forces . The Navy was to operate under the authority of the Australian Commonwealth Naval Board , which functioned from 1 March 1911 . 
 At the 1911 Imperial Conference Australia expressed concern about Japan 's growing naval power and it was agreed that the British government would consult Australia when negotiating renewal of the Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance . It was also decided that the Royal Navy would continue to support the RAN and provide blue @-@ water defence capability in the Pacific and that if there was war the ships of the RAN would be transferred to British Admiralty control . Under the Naval Defence Act ( 1912 ) the power to make the transfer was conferred in the Governor @-@ General . The RAN would become the Australia Squadron of the Royal Navy with all ships and personnel under the direct control of the British Admiralty , while the RAN remained responsible for the upkeep of the ships and training . 
 In 1913 , responsibility for the reduced Australia Station passed to the new Royal Australian Navy under nominal Australian command , with the Australia Squadron of the Royal Navy 's Australia Station coming to an end and its Sydney based depots , dockyards and structures being gifted to the Commonwealth of Australia . The first commanding officer was Admiral George Edwin Patey , Rear Admiral Commanding HM Australian Fleet , on loan from the Royal Navy . On Saturday 4 October 1913 the Australian fleet , consisting of the battle cruiser Australia , the cruisers Melbourne and Sydney , the protected cruiser Encounter , and the torpedo @-@ boat destroyers Parramatta , Yarra and Warrego , entered Sydney Harbour for the first time . The manpower of the fleet stood at four hundred officers and men and , for the next two years , ships were built for the fledgling navy . 
 The Royal Navy continued to support the RAN and provide blue @-@ water defence capability in the Pacific up to the early years of World War II . In 1958 , the boundaries of Australia Station was redrawn again , now to include Papua New Guinea . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On 3 August 1914 , as the prospect of war with the German Empire loomed , the Australian Government sent the following message to the Admiralty . 
 In the event of war Government prepared place vessels of Australian Navy under control British Admiralty when desired . 
 The United Kingdom declared war on Germany the next day , and on 8 August , the Australian Government received a reply , requesting that the transfer be made immediately , if not already done . Two days later , on 10 August , the Governor @-@ General officially transferred control of the Royal Australian Navy to the British Admiralty , which would retain control until 19 August 1919 . 
 At the outbreak of war , the RAN stood at 3 @,@ 800 personnel and consisted of sixteen ships , including the battlecruiser Australia , the light cruisers Sydney and Melbourne , the destroyers Parramatta , Yarra , and Warrego , and the submarines AE1 and AE2 . The light cruiser Brisbane and three destroyers were under construction , and a small fleet of auxiliary ships was also being maintained . As a consequence the Royal Australian Navy at the start of the war was a small but formidable force . 
 Australian ships first saw action Asian and Pacific theatre ; assisting in the attack on German New Guinea by the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) . Germany had colonised the northeastern part of New Guinea and several nearby island groups in 1884 , and the colony was currently used as a wireless radio base , Britain required the wireless installations to be destroyed because they were used by the German East Asia Squadron which threatened merchant shipping in the region . The objectives of the force were the German stations at Yap in the Caroline Islands , Nauru , and Rabaul in New Britain . On 30 August 1914 , the AN & MEF left Sydney under the protection of Australia and Melbourne for Port Moresby , where the force met the Queensland contingent , aboard the transport <unk> Kanowna . The force then sailed for German New Guinea on 7 September , leaving Kanowna behind when her stokers refused to work . Sydney and her escorting destroyers met the AN & MEF off the eastern tip of New Guinea . Melbourne was detached to destroy the wireless station on Nauru , while on 14 September , Encounter bombarded a ridge near Rabaul , while half a battalion advanced towards the town . The only major loss of the campaign was the disappearance of the submarine AE1 during a patrol off Rabaul on 14 September 1914 . 
 On 9 November 1914 , the German light cruiser SMS Emden attacked the Allied radio and telegraph station at Direction Island in the Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands . The inhabitants of the island managed to transmit a distress signal , which was received by Sydney , only 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . Sydney arrived within two hours , and was engaged by Emden . Sydney was the larger , faster and better armed of the two , and eventually overpowered Emden , with captain Karl von Müller running the ship aground on North Keeling Island at 11 : 15 am . At first , Emden refused to strike its colours and surrender ; Sydney fired on the stationary Emden until it eventually struck its colours . The Battle of Cocos was the first battle the RAN participated in . 
 On 6 February 1915 , the obsolescent light cruiser HMAS Pioneer joined the East African campaign . On 6 July , she engaged the German cruiser SMS Königsberg and German shore batteries , during the Battle of Rufiji Delta . Pioneer remained off East Africa and took part in many bombardments of German East Africa , including Dar @-@ es @-@ Salaam on 13 June 1916 . Pioneer then returned to Australia , to be decommissioned in October 1916 . 
 During the Naval operations in the Dardanelles Campaign the Australian submarine AE2 became the first Allied warship to breach the Turkish defences of the Dardanelles . AE2 spent five days in the area , was unsuccessfully attacked several times , but was unable to find any large enemy troop transports . On 29 April 1915 , she was damaged in an attack by the Turkish torpedo @-@ boat Sultan Hisar in <unk> Bay and was scuttled by her crew . The wreck of AE2 remained undiscovered until June 1998 . 
 Ships of the Royal Australian Navy also assisted the Royal Navy in the blockade of the German High Seas Fleet . In February 1915 , HMAS Australia joined the British Grand Fleet , and was made flagship of the 2nd Battle Cruiser Squadron . Australia was not involved in the Battle of Jutland ; in April , the battlecruiser was damaged in a collision with sister ship HMS New Zealand , and she did not return to service until June . Three RAN ships were present during the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet ; Australia , Sydney , and Melbourne , with Australia leading the port division of the Grand Fleet as it sailed out to meet the Germans . 
 The most decorated Australian Naval unit of World War One , however was not a ship at all , but the Royal Australian Navy Bridging Train , a land @-@ based unit composed mostly of reservists which landed at Suvla Bay with the British IX Corps and was responsible for receiving , storing and distributing the supplies , including potable water , of the British troops at Suvla . Due to their position working the piers and landings at Suvla , the Train was the last Australian unit to depart the Gallipoli Peninsula . After Gallipoli , the Train was sent to the Middle East , where they made a second amphibious landing at the Battle of Magdhaba , before returning to Australia and being disbanded after a series of miscommunications during May 1917 . 
 Expansion during the war had been limited , with the RAN growing to include thirty @-@ seven ships and more than 5 @,@ 000 personnel by 1918 . The RAN 's losses had also been modest , only losing the two submarines AE1 and AE2 , whilst casualties included 171 fatalities – 108 Australians and 63 officers and men on loan from the Royal Navy , with less than a third the result of enemy action . 
 = = The 1918 – 19 influenza pandemic = = 
 Between April 1918 and May 1919 , the Spanish Flu killed approximately 25 million people worldwide , far more than had been killed in four years of war . A rigorous quarantine policy was implemented in Australia ; although this reduced the immediate impact of the flu , the nation 's death toll surpassed 11 @,@ 500 . 
 When the pandemic struck in 1918 , the ships of the Royal Australian Navy were dispersed throughout the world . The speed at which the flu spread , coupled with the cramped mess decks and poorly ventilated living spaces on early 20th century warships , created a favourable environment for the disease . The pandemic swept through the British Grand Fleet in 1918 ; the Australian cruisers assigned to the fleet suffered high casualties , with up to 157 casualties in one ship alone . Outbreaks in the Mediterranean fleets were more severe than those in the Atlantic . HMAS Brisbane recorded 183 casualties between November and December 1918 , of those casualties 2 men died of pneumonia . The RAN lost a total of 26 men to the disease ; further loss prevented primarily by the ready availability of professional medical treatment . 
 = = = South Pacific aid mission = = = 
 The disease arrived in the South Pacific on the cargo vessel SS <unk> , which sailed from Auckland on 30 October 1918 whilst knowingly carrying sick passengers . <unk> stopped in Fiji , Samoa , Tonga and Nauru : the first outbreaks in these locations occurred within days of the ships visits . The local authorities were generally unprepared for the size of the outbreak , allowing the infection to spread uncontrollably . The German territory of Samoa was the worst affected of the small islands , the New Zealand administration carried out no efforts to lessen the outbreak and rejected offers of assistance from nearby American Samoa . The New Zealand government officially apologised to Samoa in 2002 for their reaction to the outbreak . On 29 November 1918 the military governor of Apia requested assistance from Wellington ; the request was turned down because all doctors were needed in New Zealand . Australia offered the only alternate source of aid . 
 The Commonwealth Naval Board was aware of the worsening situation in the region ; the sloop HMAS Fantome reported its first case on 11 November 1918 while stationed in Fiji , with half her complement eventually affected . On 20 November 1918 , the Naval Board began forming a joint relief expedition from available military medical personnel . The commanding officer of HMAS Encounter was then ordered to embark the expedition in Sydney and sail as soon as possible . Encounter departed Sydney on 24 November 1918 , ten minutes after completing loading . As a precaution , all 450 members of Encounter 's crew were doubly inoculated ; the ship had suffered 74 cases earlier in the year at Fremantle and the captain did not want a repeat . Encounter arrived in Suva on 30 November and took on half of the available coal and 39 tonnes of water . Spanish flu was rampant in Suva ; Captain Thring implemented a strict quarantine , placed guards on the wharf , and ordered that coaling be carried out by the crew instead of native labour . Encounter departed Suva in the evening of the same day and arrived off Apia on 3 December . Within six hours , the medical landing party assigned to Apia and their stores were ashore . Encounter then departed for the Tongan capital of Nukuʻalofa , arriving on 5 December . The last of the medical staff and supplies were unloaded , and Encounter sailed for Suva on 7 December to re @-@ coal . On arriving in Suva , Encounter received orders to return to Sydney , where reached on 17 December and was immediately placed into quarantine . The South Pacific aid mission is regarded as Australia 's first overseas relief expedition , and set a precedent for future relief missions conducted by the RAN . 
 = = Between the Wars = = 
 Following the end of World War I , the Australian Government believed that an immediate evaluation of the RAN was necessary . Australia had based its naval policy on the Henderson Recommendations of 1911 , developed by Sir Reginald Henderson . The government sent an invitation to Admiral John Jellicoe , he arrived in Australia in May 1919 . Jellicoe remained in Australia for three months , before returning to England via New Zealand and Canada . Jellicoe submitted his findings in August 1919 , titled the Report on the Naval Mission to the Commonwealth . The report outlined several policies designed to strengthen British naval strength in the Pacific Ocean . The report heavily stressed a close relationship between the RAN and the Royal Navy . This would be achieved by strict adherence to the procedures and administration methods of the Royal Navy . The report also suggested constant officer exchange between the two forces . Jellicoe also called for the creation of a large Far East Imperial Fleet , which would be based in Singapore and include capital ships and aircraft carriers . The creation cost for this fleet was to be divided between Great Britain , Australia and New Zealand : contributing 75 % , 20 % , and 5 % respectively . The suggested makeup of the RAN would include ; one aircraft carrier , two battlecruisers , eight light cruisers , one flotilla leader , twelve destroyers , a destroyer depot ship , eight submarines , one submarine depot ship , and a small number of additional auxiliary ships . The annual cost and depreciation of the fleet was estimated to be £ 4 @,@ 024 @,@ 600 . Except for implementing closer tier with the Royal Navy , none of Jellicoe 's major recommendations were carried out . 
 With the end of World War I , the Australian Government began to worry about the threat Japan posed to Australia . Japan had extended its empire 3 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) to the south , bringing it right to Australia 's doorstep . Japan had continued to build up its naval force , and had reached the point where it outgunned the Royal Navy in the Pacific . The RAN and the government believed that the possibility of a Japanese invasion was highly likely . In his report , Admiral Jellicoe believed that the threat of a Japanese invasion of Australia would remain as long as the White Australia Policy remained in place . Due to the perceived threat , and bilateral support in Australia for the White Australia Policy , the Australian Government became a vocal supporter of the continuance of the 1902 Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance . Australia was joined in its support for the alliance by New Zealand but was heavily opposed by Canada , which believed that the alliance had hindered the British Empire 's relationship with China and the United States . No decision on the alliance was agreed on , and the discussion was shelved pending the outcome of the Washington Naval Treaty . The results of the treaty , which allowed the British to retain naval supremacy in the Pacific Ocean , created a sense of security in Australia . Many Australians saw the Four Powers Pact as replacing the Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance . This sense of security became known as the Ten Year Rule . This led to defence <unk> in Australia , following the international trend , and a £ 500 @,@ 000 reduction in expenditure . The Governor @-@ General Henry Forster when opening parliament on 22 June 1922 was quoted as saying : 
 In view of the result of attained at the Washington Treaty which , my advisors believe , guarantee peace in the Pacific for some time to come , it is proposed to reduce the establishment of the navy and army , and postpone the expansion of the air force . 
 Between World War I and World War II , the Royal Australian Navy underwent a severe reduction in ships and manpower . As a result of the Washington Naval Treaty , the flagship HMAS Australia was scrapped with her main armaments and sunk outside Sydney Heads in 1924 . In the same year , the RAN began a five @-@ year program of obtaining new ships from Britain : the heavy cruisers Australia and Canberra and the seaplane carrier Albatross . This purchase was partly paid for by scrapping Brisbane , Melbourne , Sydney , and most of the destroyers . The Great Depression of 1929 led to another reduction of manpower ; although reduced in size , the available posts were easily filled as many men were unemployed and the offered pay was greater than most jobs . The RAN 's personnel strength fell to 3 @,@ 117 personnel , plus 131 members of the Naval Auxiliary Services . By 1932 , the strength of the Reserves stood at 5 @,@ 446 . In the early 1930s , lack of funds forced the transfer of the Royal Australian Naval College from Jervis Bay to Flinders Naval Depot in Victoria . In 1933 the Australian Government ordered three light cruisers ; HMA Ships Perth , Hobart , and Sydney ; selling the seaplane carrier Albatross to fund Hobart . During this time , the RAN also purchased destroyers of the V and W destroyer classes , the ships that would become known as the Scrap Iron Flotilla . With the ever increasing threat of Germany and Japan in the late 1930s , the RAN was not in the position it was at the outbreak of World War I. 
 = = World War II = = 
 Australia declared war on Nazi Germany one hour after the United Kingdom 's declaration of war on 3 September 1939 . Unlike the arrangements with the British Admiralty at the start of the First World War , during World War II RAN ships remained under Australian command . 
 At the onset of war the RAN was relatively modest , even if it was arguably the most combat @-@ ready of the three services . Major units included : 
 two County @-@ class heavy cruisers ; Australia and Canberra , both carried 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns and had entered service in the 1920s 
 three modern Modified Leander @-@ class light cruisers ; Hobart , Perth , and Sydney , which mounted 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns 
 the older Town @-@ class cruiser Adelaide 
 four sloops , Parramatta , Swan , Warrego , and Yarra ; although only Swan and Yarra were in commission 
 five V @-@ class destroyers 
 a variety of support and ancillary craft 
 Following the call up of reserves in 1939 the permanent forces grew from 5 @,@ 440 to 10 @,@ 259 . 
 During the war the men and vessels of the RAN served in every theatre of operations , from the tropical Pacific to the frigid Russian convoys and grew exponentially . The table illustrates the growth of the RAN between the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 and 30 June 1945 . 
 = = = Operations against Italy , Vichy France and Germany = = = 
 From mid @-@ 1940 , ships of the RAN , at the request of the Admiralty , began to deploy to the Mediterranean Sea to take part in the Battle of the Mediterranean against Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . In September 1939 , the Admiralty and the Australian Commonwealth Naval Board agreed to deploy the RAN Destroyer Flotilla outside the Australia Station ; the five ships of what was to become known as the Scrap Iron Flotilla arrived at Malta in mid @-@ December . HMAS Sydney deployed in May 1940 and was later joined by Hobart . When Italy declared war on 10 June 1940 , the Australian warships made up five of the twenty @-@ two Allied destroyers and one of the five modern light cruisers on station in the Mediterranean . The RAN then offered the services of Australia to the Admiralty , and was accepted . When Australia arrived in the Mediterranean , the RAN had sent nearly the entire combat fleet to the Northern Hemisphere , leaving Australian open to possible attack . 
 The entry of Italy into the war also lead to a far more active role for the few remaining RAN vessels on the Australian Station . Indeed , on 12 June 1940 , after a prolonged chase , the Armed Merchant Cruiser ( AMC ) HMAS Manoora forced the Italian merchant ship Romolo ( 9 @,@ 780 tons ) to scuttle south @-@ west of Nauru . 
 On 27 June 1940 , Admiral Cunningham commander of the Mediterranean Fleet ordered the 7th Cruiser Squadron , which included HMAS Sydney , to rendezvous with an Egypt @-@ bound convoy near Cape Matapan . The cruiser squadron sighted three Italian destroyers at 18 @.@ 00 on 28 June 1940 and immediately engaged them . Within an hour , the Espero was incapacitated and Sydney was signalled to sink her . As Sydney approached , Espero launched torpedoes , but failed to hit any targets . Sydney fired four salvos , scoring ten direct hits on Espero . Sydney remained at the scene for two hours picking up survivors . 
 Also on 27 June 1940 , the Console Generale Liuzzi was scuttled south of Crete after being depth @-@ charged by HMAS Voyager and the British destroyers Dainty , Ilex , Decoy , and Defender . On 29 June 1940 , another Italian submarine , the Uebi Scebeli , was sunk west of Crete by the same ships . 
 On 7 July 1940 , a 25 @-@ ship fleet departed Alexandria , intending to meet a convoy east of Malta . The next day , a submarine sighted an Italian fleet 500 miles ( 800 km ) away ; the Allied fleet altered course to intercept . The two fleets sighted each other at 15 @.@ 00 on 9 July 1940 , and a battle that became known as the Battle of Calabria began . Four vessels of the RAN took part in the battle ; HMA Ships Sydney , Stuart , Vampire , and Voyager . Sydney was the first RAN vessel to engage the enemy , and at 15 @.@ 20 opened fire on an Italian cruiser . When the Italian fleet began to withdraw , the Allied destroyer squadron was ordered forward . Stuart , leading the destroyer force , was the first to open fire ; her opening salvo was a direct hit at a range of 12 @,@ 600 yards ( 11 @,@ 500 m ) . Both fleets retired , with the Italians withdrawing under smoke , but Italian aircraft continued to attack Allied ships . Sydney , which came under heavy air attack , was believed to have sunk . The fleet arrived back in Alexandria on 13 July . 
 On 17 July 1940 , HMAS Sydney and the destroyer HMS Havock were ordered to support a Royal Navy destroyer squadron on a sweep north of the island of Crete . At 07 @.@ 20 on 19 July , the Italian cruisers Giovanni dalle Bande Nere and Bartolomeo Colleoni , which opened fire seven minutes later . The four British destroyers retreated to the north @-@ east , while Sydney and Havock , 40 miles ( 60 km ) away , began to close in . Sydney sighted the cruisers at 08 @.@ 29 , and fired the first shots of the Battle of Cape Spada at a range of 17 @,@ 360 metres ( 56 @,@ 960 ft ) . Within minutes , Sydney had successfully damaged Bande Nere , and when the Italians withdrew to the south , the six Allied ships pursued . At <unk> , with Bande Nere hiding behind a smoke screen , Sydney shifted her fire to Bartolomeo Colleoni , which was disabled by <unk> . The Australian cruiser left to pursue Bande Nere , but broke off at 10 @.@ 27 as the Italian warship was out of range , and Sydney was dangerously low on ammunition . The only damage to Sydney during the battle was caused by a shell at 09 @.@ 21 , which knocked a hole in the forward funnel , and wounded a sailor through splinter damage . 
 On 30 September 1940 , HMAS Stuart destroyed the Italian 600 @-@ Serie <unk> class submarine Gondar , killing two of its crew . Twenty @-@ eight survivors was subsequently rescued by Stuart , with a further nineteen picked up by other vessels . 
 On 27 March 1941 , an Allied fleet under Admiral Cunningham was ambushed by an Italian naval force off Cape Matapan , Greece . Three vessels of the RAN took part in the battle ; HMA Ships Perth , Stuart , and Vampire . The victory at Cape Matapan allowed the evacuation of thousands of Allied troops from Crete . 
 HMAS Parramatta was torpedoed and sunk on 27 November 1941 by U @-@ 559 whilst escorting transports resupplying the Allied garrison at Tobruk . There were 24 survivors , but 138 men , including all officers , lost their lives . 
 The Australians experienced further success on 15 December 1941 when HMAS Nestor attacked and sank the German submarine U @-@ 127 off Cape St. Vincent , Portugal . 
 = = = = West Africa = = = = 
 On 6 September 1940 , HMAS Australia was ordered to sail to Freetown , Sierra Leone to join Operation Menace , the invasion of Vichy French @-@ controlled Dakar in French West Africa . On 19 September , Australia and the cruiser HMS Cumberland sighted three Vichy cruisers heading south and shadowed them . When the French cruiser Gloire developed engine trouble , Australia escorted her towards Casablanca and returned to the fleet two days later . On 23 September Australia came under heavy fire from shore batteries , then drove two Vichy destroyers back into port . Australia then engaged and sunk the destroyer L <unk> with eight salvos in sixteen minutes . Over the next two days French and Allied forces exchanged fire ; Australia was struck twice and lost her Walrus amphibian . Australia and the rest of the fleet retired on 25 September the battle became known as the Battle of Dakar . 
 = = = = The " Scrap @-@ Iron Flotilla " = = = = 
 The Scrap Iron Flotilla was an Australian destroyer group that operated in the Mediterranean and Pacific during World War II . The name was bestowed upon the group by Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels who described the fleet as a " consignment of junk " and " Australia 's Scrap @-@ Iron Flotilla " . The flotilla consisted of five vessels ; Scott @-@ class destroyer HMAS Stuart , which acted as flotilla leader , and four V @-@ class destroyers ; Vampire , Vendetta , Voyager , Waterhen . The ships were all built to fight in World War I , and were slow and poorly armed compared to newer ships . The five destroyers — the entirety of the RAN 's destroyer force — departed Australia in November 1939 destined for Singapore where they carried out anti @-@ submarine exercises with the Royal Navy submarine HMS Rover . On 13 November 1939 , the flotilla left Singapore for the Mediterranean Sea , following a request from the Admiralty for assistance . 
 The Australian destroyer flotilla took part in multiple actions while in the Mediterranean , including the Allied evacuation following the battle of Greece in April 1941 , though the flotilla came to fame in the mission to resupply the besieged city of Tobruk . The resupply routes from Alexandria and Mersa Matruh to Tobruk became known as " Bomb Alley " and was subject to constant Axis air attacks . The flotilla , which by this time was in poor condition , managed to make 138 supply runs to Tobruk , carrying in ammunition and stores and taking out wounded soldiers . On 28 May 1941 Vampire became the first of the flotilla to leave the Mediterranean . Vendetta , the last to leave , sailed in October 1941 . 
 Of the five destroyers , three were lost during the war ; Waterhen was sunk in the Mediterranean on 30 June 1941 , Vampire was sunk by Japanese aircraft during the Indian Ocean Raid and Voyager ran aground at Betano , during the Timor campaign and was abandoned . 
 = = = = Red Sea = = = = 
 As well as serving in the Mediterranean Sea , ships of the RAN also served in the Red Sea . In August 1940 , Italian forces invaded British Somaliland . After a fighting withdrawal , the small British garrison was evacuated from Berbera , with HMAS Hobart assisting in the destruction of the port and its facilities . To aid in the delaying action , Hobart sent a 3 @-@ pounder gun ashore , operated by volunteers from the crew . The seamen were captured by the Italians , but were later liberated . Two RAN sloops joined the Red Sea force in 1940 : Parramatta on 30 July and Yarra in September . In October , Yarra engaged and drove off two Italian destroyers attempting to raid a convoy . Although vessels of the RAN served in the Red Sea throughout the war , after 1941 the larger RAN ships were deployed to Australian waters in response to the threat from Japan . 
 = = = = Loss of HMAS Sydney = = = = 
 On 19 November 1941 , the Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney and the German auxiliary cruiser Kormoran engaged each other in the Indian Ocean , off Western Australia . The two ships sank each other : Sydney was lost with all 645 hands , while the majority of the Kormoran 's crew were rescued and became prisoners of war . The location of both wrecks remained a mystery to many and subject to much controversy until 16 – 17 March 2008 , when both ships were found . 
 = = = = North Africa = = = = 
 RAN units continued to serve in the Mediterranean campaign , with HMAS Quiberon , taking part in Operation Torch , the invasion of North Africa . On 28 November 1942 Quiberon assisted in sinking the Italian submarine <unk> and three days later also took part in the destruction of a four @-@ ship convoy and a destroyer . 
 = = = = Sicily 1943 = = = = 
 During early 1943 , eight Australian @-@ designed and built Bathurst @-@ class corvettes were transferred to Egypt from the Indian Ocean , in preparation for Operation Husky , the Allied invasion of Sicily . They were part of a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ ship Allied force . The corvettes arrived in the Mediterranean in May and were formed into the 21st and 22nd Minesweeping Flotillas . All eight ships survived the campaign without damage or casualties sustained in action , although HMAS Maryborough experienced a near @-@ miss from a German bomber . When the captain of HMAS Gawler enquired what damage had been sustained , the response from Maryborough read : " no damage except to my underpants " . 
 = = = War with Japan = = = 
 After the Imperial Japanese Navy 's attacks on the Allies in December 1941 , the RAN redeployed its larger ships to home waters , to protect the Australian mainland from Japanese attack , while several smaller ships remained in the Mediterranean . From 1940 onwards , there was considerable Axis naval activity in Australian waters first from German commerce raiders and submarines and later by the Imperial Japanese Navy . 
 Initially , RAN ships served as part of the British @-@ Australian component of the American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDACOM ) naval forces or in the ANZAC Force . ABDACOM was wound up following the fall of the Netherlands East Indies and was succeeded by the South West Pacific Area ( command ) ( SWPA ) . The United States Seventh Fleet was formed at Brisbane on 15 March 1943 , for service in the SWPA . RAN ships in the Pacific generally served at part of Seventh Fleet <unk> . 
 = = = = Timor = = = = 
 From February 1942 , the RAN played a critical role in resupplying Australian and Dutch commandos on Timor . Voyager was not the only loss during the campaign . On 1 December 1942 , HMAS Armidale was attacked by thirteen Japanese aircraft while attempting to land Dutch soldiers off Betano , Portuguese Timor . Armidale sank with the loss of 40 of her crew and 60 Dutch personnel . During the engagement , Ordinary Seaman Teddy Sheean operated an Oerlikon anti @-@ aircraft gun and was wounded by strafing Japanese planes , he went down with the ship , still strapped into the gun and still shooting at the attacking aircraft . 
 = = = = Java Sea = = = = 
 On 28 February 1942 , a joint ABDA naval force met a Japanese invasion force in the Java Sea . The Leander @-@ class cruiser HMAS Perth and the American heavy cruiser USS Houston fought in and survived the Battle of the Java Sea . 
 On 1 March 1942 , the Perth and Houston attempted to move through the Sunda Strait to Tjilatjap however they found their path blocked by the main Japanese invasion fleet from western Java . The Allied ships were engaged by at least three cruisers and several destroyers and in a ferocious night action , known as the Battle of Sunda Strait , both Perth and Houston were torpedoed and sunk . Casualties aboard Perth included 350 crew and 3 civilians killed , while 324 survived the sinking and were taken prisoner by the Japanese ( 106 of whom later died in captivity ) . The loss of Perth so soon after the sinking of her sister Sydney , had a major psychological effect on the Australian people . Japanese losses included a minesweeper and a troop transport sunk by friendly fire , whilst three other transports were damaged and had to be beached . 
 = = = = Coral Sea = = = = 
 On 2 May 1942 , two ships of the RAN were part of the Allied force in the Battle of the Coral Sea ; HMA Ships Australia and Hobart as part of Task Force 44 . Both ships came under intense air attack , while part of a force guarding the approaches to Port Moresby . 
 = = = = The defence of Australian shipping = = = = 
 In late May and early June 1942 , a group of five Imperial Japanese Navy submarines made a series of attacks on Sydney and the nearby port of Newcastle . On the night of 31 May – 1 June , the submarines launched three Ko @-@ hyoteki @-@ class midget submarines against Allied shipping in Sydney Harbour . A torpedo intended for the cruiser USS Chicago exploded under the depot ship HMAS Kuttabul , killing 21 . On 8 June , two of the submarines shelled Sydney and Newcastle , with little effect . In response , the RAN instituted convoys between Brisbane and Adelaide . All ships of over 1 @,@ 200 tons and with speeds of less than 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) were required to sail in convoy when travelling between cities on the east coast . 
 The attack on Sydney and Newcastle marked the start of a sustained Japanese submarine campaign against Australia . During 1942 , Japanese submarines sank 17 ships in Australian waters , although none of these ships were sailing as part of a convoy . 16 ships were sunk in Australian waters during 1943 , before the Japanese ended the campaign in July . Five of these ships were sunk while sailing in escorted convoys . The Australian naval authorities gradually dismantled the coastal convoy system between December 1943 and March 1944 . By the end of the war , the RAAF and RAN had escorted over 1 @,@ 100 convoys along the Australian coastline . 
 While the scale of the Japanese naval offensive directed against Australia was small compared to other naval campaigns of the war such as the Battle of the Atlantic , these attacks were " the most comprehensive and widespread series of offensive operations ever conducted by an enemy against Australia " . Although the RAN only sank a single full @-@ sized Japanese submarine in Australian waters ( I @-@ 124 in January 1942 ) convoy escorts may have successfully reduced the threat to shipping in Australian waters by making it harder for Japanese submarines to carry out attacks . 
 Whilst escorting convoys between Australia and New Guinea , HMAS Arunta attacked and sank the Japanese <unk> type submarine RO @-@ 33 off Port Moresby on 24 August 1942 , killing all 42 men aboard . 
 = = = = Loss of HMAS Canberra = = = = 
 The loss of HMAS Canberra at the Battle of Savo Island in August 1942 was the largest single ship loss the RAN experienced during World War II . In the early hours of the morning of 9 August 1942 , Canberra was severely damaged off Guadalcanal in a surprise attack by a powerful Japanese naval force . Canberra was hit by 24 shells in less than two minutes , with 84 of her crew killed , including Captain Frank Getting . Following an order to abandon ship , Canberra was sunk the next day by a torpedo from a US destroyer , to prevent it being captured . 
 The loss of Canberra , following the losses of Sydney and Perth , attracted unprecedented international attention and sympathy for the RAN . US President Franklin D. Roosevelt wished to commemorate the loss of Canberra and requested that a US heavy cruiser under construction be named Canberra . USS Canberra was launched on 19 April 1943 . The British Government approved the transfer of HMS Shropshire to the RAN as a replacement , and the ship was commissioned as HMAS Shropshire on 20 April 1943 . 
 = = = = Leyte Gulf and Lingayen Gulf = = = = 
 Between 23 – 25 October 1944 four RAN warships – HMA Ships Australia , Shropshire , Arunta , and Warramunga – took part in the Battle of Leyte Gulf , one of the largest naval battles in history . In the lead @-@ up , on 21 October , Australia became the first Allied ship to be hit by a kamikaze aircraft near Leyte Island . Gunners from Australia and Shropshire fired at , and reportedly hit , an unidentified Japanese aircraft . The plane then flew away from the ships , before turning and flying into Australia , striking the ship 's superstructure above the bridge , and spewing burning fuel and debris over a large area , before falling into the sea . A 200 @-@ kilogram ( 440 lb ) bomb carried by the plane failed to explode ; if it had , the ship might have been effectively destroyed . At least 30 crew members died as a result of the attack , including the commanding officer , Captain Emile Dechaineux ; among the wounded was Commodore John Collins , the Australian force commander . Australia remained on duty , but on 25 October , was hit again and was forced to retire to the New Hebrides for repairs . 
 Shropshire and Arunta remained at Leyte and were part of the United States Seventh Fleet Support Force at the Battle of Surigao Strait on 25 October . During this action both ships contributed to the sinking of the Japanese battleship Yamashiro , with Shropshire firing thirty @-@ two eight @-@ gun broadsides into the battleship with her 8 @-@ inch guns in a period of 14 minutes . 
 HMAS Australia returned to combat at the Battle of Lingayen Gulf in January 1945 . During the battle Australia was repeatedly attacked between 5 – 9 January , suffering significant damage which forced it to retire once more . 
 = = = = Ships with British fleets 1942 – 45 = = = = 
 In 1940 – 42 , five N class and two Q class were built in the UK and commissioned into the RAN for service with the British Eastern Fleet : HMA Ships Napier , Nepal , Nestor , Nizam , Norman , Quiberon , and Quickmatch . These ships were predominantly crewed by RAN personnel , although they were often commanded by British officers and remained the property of the British government . 
 Following the Japanese raid on Ceylon of March – April 1942 , the Eastern Fleet was transferred from its base at Trincomalee , to the other side of the Indian Ocean : <unk> in Kenya . From there the fleet undertook local patrols , escorted convoys and occasionally despatched ships to operations in the Mediterranean . During Operation Vigorous , a convoy to Malta in June 1942 , Nestor was serious damaged in an air raid and slowly sank . 
 On 11 February 1944 the corvettes HMA Ships Ipswich and Launceston , in conjunction with the Indian sloop Jumna , sank the Japanese submarine Ro @-@ 110 in the Bay of Bengal after the later had torpedoed a ship in a Calcutta @-@ bound convoy . 
 From late 1944 , Nepal , Norman and Quiberon were transferred , along with many other Eastern Fleet ships , to the new British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) . Among other operations with the BPF , they took part in the Battle of Okinawa . 
 In late 1945 , following the end of hostilities , the RAN acquired three more Q @-@ class destroyers : Queenborough , Quality , and Quadrant . 
 = = = The End of the War 1945 = = = 
 By the end of World War II , the RAN 's combat strength numbered 150 ships with an additional 200 auxiliary craft with the service reaching its peak in June 1945 , when it ranks swelled to 39 @,@ 650 personnel . During the six years of war , the RAN lost three cruisers , four destroyers , two sloops , a corvette , and an auxiliary minesweeper to enemy action . Casualties included 1 @,@ 740 personnel from the 19 ships sunk , and another 436 personnel killed aboard other ships or at other posts . By most measures , such losses were heavy for such a small service , representing over half its pre @-@ war strength in ships and one @-@ fifth in men . Against this the RAN destroyed one cruiser , an armed merchant raider , three destroyers or torpedo boats , a minesweeper , many light craft and seven submarines . It also destroyed or captured more than 150 @,@ 000 tons of Axis merchant shipping and shot down more than a hundred aircraft . Although difficult to quantify the RAN also played a role in numerous other successes . 
 = = = = Surrender and occupation of Japan = = = = 
 Ten RAN vessels were present at the signing of the Japanese surrender in Tokyo Bay on 2 September 1945 ; HMA Ships Ballarat , Cessnock , Gascoyne , Hobart , Ipswich , Napier , Nizam , Pirie , Shropshire , and Warramunga . Following the surrender ceremony , the majority of the RAN vessels left Japanese waters for other duties . As part of the surrender agreement , Japan agreed to an Allied occupation and disarmament . On 17 August 1945 , the Australian Government agreed to provide two cruisers and two destroyers for service with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) . A total of 15 RAN ships served with the BCOF , the ships performed a variety of tasks but were mainly employed on the Kyushu Patrol , preventing Korean nationals from illegally entering Japan . 
 The RAN also played a role in the disarmament of Japan , assisting in the scuttling of former Imperial Japanese Navy ships , in one instance Quiberon took part in the sinking of seven submarines of Kyushu as part of Operation Bottom . When Indian and New Zealand contingents began to withdraw from the BCOF , the operation became a predominantly Australian operation . In 1948 , Kure naval base was turned over to Australia , and became known as HMAS Commonwealth . When North Korea invaded South Korea on 25 June 1950 , one RAN ship was on station as part of BCOF . The Australian Government immediately offered HMAS Shoalhaven for United Nations service . Eventually , all RAN ships in the area were transferred to the command of British Commonwealth Forces Korea ( <unk> ) . 
 Clearing mines from Australian and New Guinean waters was another focus for the RAN in the years after the war . Minesweeping began in December 1945 and was conducted by HMAS Swan , eight Bathurst @-@ class corvettes and several smaller craft from a base at Cairns . The work was arduous and dangerous , and HMAS Warrnambool was sunk with the loss of four men killed and another 25 wounded when she struck a mine off North Queensland on 13 September 1947 . The RAN completed this task in August 1948 after sweeping 1 @,@ 816 mines . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 Following World War II , the RAN reduced its surface fleet but continued to expand in other ways , acquiring two Royal Navy Majestic @-@ class aircraft carriers then under construction ( HMAS Melbourne and HMAS Sydney ) to build up a Fleet Air Arm . In the 1960s , the RAN began to move away from British @-@ designed ships ; the last major British design used was the Type 12 frigate , which formed the basis of the River @-@ class frigates . 
 When it was decided that the RAN should commission a destroyer armed with guided missiles , the obvious British design was the County class ; however , the RAN had reservations regarding the gas turbine propulsion , the <unk> missile system , and the ability to adapt the design to Australian needs . Instead , the Australian government chose the United States @-@ built , steam turbine @-@ powered Charles F. Adams @-@ class destroyer , armed with the Tartar missile as the basis for its Perth class , the first major US warship design chosen for the RAN . 
 By the mid @-@ late 1960s , the RAN was at the zenith of its operational capabilities ; it was capable of dispatching a full carrier battle group in support of major operations by having in service an aircraft carrier ( HMAS Melbourne ) , three large area defence destroyers of the Perth class , six modern River @-@ class frigates and four Oberon @-@ class submarines . 
 With the retreat of British forces west of the Suez Canal in the 1960s , the RAN began to take a more defensive role , and in co @-@ operation with the United States , allied though the ANZUS treaty . The RAN saw service in many of the world 's post war conflicts , including Korea , Vietnam , and the Indonesian Confrontation . 
 = = = Korea = = = 
 On 27 June 1950 , the United Nations Security Council called on member nations to aid South Korea . On 29 June , Prime Minister Robert Menzies announced that the frigate HMAS Shoalhaven , stationed in Japan , and the destroyer HMAS Bataan , in Hong Kong , would be placed under UN command in Korea . On 1 July , one day after President Truman committed American ground forces to Korea , the first Australian operation in Korea took place ; Shoalhaven escorted an American ammunition ship from Japan to Pusan . 
 The destroyer Warramunga was deployed in July 1950 , and provided gunfire support during the X Corps landing at Wonsan in October . In December , Bataan and Warramunga assisted the mass evacuation of troops and refugees from Hungnam . The aircraft carrier Sydney was deployed to Korea between September 1951 and January 1952 — the first carrier owned by a Commonwealth Dominion to see wartime service . During this time , 2 @,@ 366 sorties were flown from Sydney , with only fifteen aircraft lost and three pilots killed . 
 Over the course of the Korean War , nine ships of the RAN participated in the naval blockade of North Korea . 
 = = = Malaya = = = 
 The Malayan Emergency was declared on 18 June 1948 , prompted by a rise in Malayan Communist guerrillas in Malaya ( later Malaysia ) . Australia , as a member of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization , first deployed two RAAF squadrons to the region in 1950 . In 1955 , the Far East Strategic Reserve was created as a concentration of Commonwealth military forces ( primarily British , New Zealand , and Australian ) in Malaya for the protection of that nation from communist threats . Australia 's commitment included two destroyers or frigates on station at any time , plus an annual visit by an aircraft carrier , and additional ships as needed . Training for the potentiality of war was the main occurrence for ships deployed to the Strategic Reserve , with RAN personnel gaining experience in working as part of a larger naval organisation . 
 The first ships of the RAN to arrive in the area were the Tribal @-@ class destroyers Warramunga and Arunta in June 1955 . Between 1955 and 1960 , eleven other ships of the RAN operated with the Strategic Reserve : Anzac , Melbourne , Quadrant , Queenborough , Quiberon , Quickmatch , Sydney Tobruk , Vampire , Vendetta , and Voyager . 
 = = = Indonesia = = = 
 In response to the Indonesian invasion of Borneo and Malaya in 1963 , Australia increased its presence in the region . At the outbreak of hostilities , the RAN frigates Yarra and Parramatta were on duty in the area . As tension mounted , Australia increased its presence by sending Sydney , Vampire , Vendetta , Duchess , and Derwent to the area . On 19 May 1964 , the 16th Minesweeping Squadron , comprising six Ton @-@ class minesweepers , was also deployed . 
 On 13 December 1964 , the minesweeper HMAS Teal was fired upon with automatic weapons by an unlit vessel whilst operating as part of the Singapore Strait patrol . The vessel was overpowered and arrested by Teal , following a further small arms engagement that resulted in the deaths of three Indonesian crew members . On 23 February 1965 , Teal was again involved in another engagement , she detected an unlit vessel off Cape <unk> . The suspicious vessel was closed on and illuminated , and revealed nine armed men in uniform who surrendered immediately upon challenge . On 13 March 1964 , HMAS Hawk became the second vessel of the 16th Minesweeping Squadron to see action , when she was fired on by an Indonesian shore battery while patrolling off Raffles Lighthouse . Eleven high @-@ explosive rounds were fired at the ship , some landing within 200 yards ( 200 m ) of the vessel , and Hawk withdrew from the area at speed . The following morning , Hawk intercepted a sampan with five Indonesians on board who were promptly arrested . 
 When Indonesian forces crossed the border into Sebatik Island , Sabah on 28 June 1965 , HMAS Yarra was called on to carry out bombardments disrupting the withdrawal of the Indonesians . Yarra carried out two more bombardments of the border area on 5 and 10 July . During three runs , Yarra fired a total of 70 rounds on the enemy . On 13 August 1966 , an agreement between Indonesia and Malaysia brought an end to the conflict . 
 = = = Melbourne @-@ Voyager collision = = = 
 During the night of 10 February 1964 , the worst peacetime disaster in the RAN 's history occurred when the destroyer HMAS Voyager was cut in two by the bow of the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne , killing 82 of the 293 men on board Voyager . Melbourne was conducting air group exercises off Jervis Bay with Voyager acting as the plane guard destroyer . After a series of manoeuvres to reverse the course of the ships , Voyager ended up to starboard of Melbourne , and was ordered to resume her position ( behind the carrier and to port ) at 20 @.@ 52 . Instead of turning away from Melbourne , Voyager unexpectedly turned towards the carrier , and did not alter course until it was too late . At 20 @.@ 56 , Melbourne 's bow hit the destroyer just behind the bridge , and cut her in half , with the bow sinking quickly . The search for survivors went on through the night ; of the 314 aboard , 14 officers , 67 sailors , and 1 civilian dockyard worker were killed , including Captain Duncan Stevens . 
 Following the collision Prime Minister Menzies ordered a Royal Commission to investigate the event . The Commissioner concluded that the collision was primarily the fault of Voyager 's bridge crew not maintaining an effective lookout , but also placed blame on Melbourne 's Captain John Robertson ( who resigned shortly after ) and two other officers for failing to alert Voyager or take effective measures to avoid collision . The handing of the Royal Commission was seen as poor , and after a combination of public pressure and claims that Stevens had a drinking problem , a second Royal Commission was announced : the only time two Commissions have been held for the same incident . The second Royal Commission found that Stevens was likely medically unfit for command , that some of the first Commission 's conclusions were therefore incorrect , and the Melbourne officers were not at fault . The two commissions caused great anguish in the hierarchy of the RAN , which was not accustomed to such tight scrutiny , and led to the eventual dismantling of the Naval Board 's isolation from the civilian world . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 Ships of the Royal Australian Navy were stationed on continuous operational service in Vietnam between 1965 and 1972 ; a total 18 ships served in Vietnam waters during the war . During this period , the Navy performed a wide variety of operational tasks at sea , ashore , and in the air . The RAN 's primary contribution consisted of destroyers , Fleet Air Arm personnel attached to a United States Army helicopter company and No. 9 Squadron RAAF , a Clearance Diving Team , and a logistical support force consisting of transport and escort ships . Other RAN personnel served ashore in medical teams or performed staff duties at the Australian Embassy in Saigon or the 1st Australian Task Force Headquarters at Nui Dat . 
 The RAN did not deploy operationally until 1965 , but in 1962 HMAS Vampire and HMAS Quickmatch made goodwill visits to Saigon . They were followed a year later by similar visits by HMAS Quiberon and HMAS Queenborough . In 1967 , HMAS Hobart became the first RAN destroyer to be operationally deployed to Vietnam . Hobart served three tours in Vietnam from March to September in 1967 , 1968 , and 1970 . During her operations , she fired 10 @,@ 000 rounds at 1 @,@ 000 shore targets and came under fire around 10 times , including on one occasion by a United States F @-@ 4 Phantom . Hobart was awarded the United States Navy Unit Commendation in recognition of her service in Vietnam , while sister ship Perth received both the United States Navy Unit Commendation and the Meritorious Unit Commendation . Clearance Diving Team 3 was awarded the US Presidential Citation , two US Navy Unit Commendations and a US <unk> Unit Commendation . The only non US Unit to ever receive all 3 awards . After their five years of service in Vietnam , the four gunline destroyers ; Perth , Brisbane , Hobart and Vendetta steamed over 397 @,@ 000 miles and fired 102 @,@ 546 rounds . 
 The aircraft carrier HMAS Sydney was converted for troopship duties in the early 1960s , and began her first voyage to Vietnam in May 1965 , transporting the 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , from Sydney to Vung Tau in southern Vietnam . Sydney became known as the Vung Tau Ferry and made 25 voyages to Vietnam : carrying 16 @,@ 094 troops , 5 @,@ 753 deadweight tons ( 5 @,@ 845 t ) of cargo and 2 @,@ 375 vehicles . 
 In 1969 , the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne rammed and sank another destroyer . During the night of 2 – 3 June , USS Frank E. Evans was escorting the carrier during multinational wargames in the South China Sea . Ordered to the plane guard station , Evans crosses the carrier 's bows and was cut in two , killing 74 United States personnel . A Joint RAN @-@ USN Board of Inquiry was established , which found Melbourne 's Captain John Stevenson and three officers from Evans at fault . Despite being cleared by a RAN court @-@ martial , Stevenson resigned after receiving similar treatment to Robertson in the first collision . HMAS Melbourne is believed to be the only warship to sink two friendly vessels in peacetime . 
 In April 1971 , Prime Minister John Gorton announced that Australian forces in Vietnam would be reduced . This led to the withdrawal of the clearance divers in May and the Fleet Air Arm in June . The final RAN destroyer on the gunline , Brisbane , returned to Sydney on 15 October 1971 . The Whitlam government withdrew all Australian forces from and stopped military aid to South Vietnam . HMAS <unk> returned to Sydney on 11 March 1972 and was followed the next day by HMAS Sydney . During the 10 years that the RAN was involved in the war , eight officers and sailors were killed , and another 46 were either wounded or suffered other injuries . 
 = = = Cyclone Tracy = = = 
 During the morning of 25 December 1974 , Tropical Cyclone Tracy struck the city of Darwin , killing 71 people and causing $ 4 billion of damage ( 1998 A $ ) . In response to the cyclone , the RAN embarked upon Operation Navy Help Darwin ; the largest peacetime disaster relief operation in its history , involving 13 ships , 11 aircraft and some 3 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 When Tracy struck Darwin , the RAN had a total of 351 personnel based in the city , along with four Attack @-@ class patrol boat ; the small number of men limited the capability of the RAN to render immediate assistance to the citizens of Darwin . All four patrol boats were damaged in some way : Advance and <unk> were able to weather the cyclone with minor damage , but Attack was forced aground , and Arrow sank after colliding with Stokes Hill Wharf , killing two personnel . Land @-@ based naval installations were also heavily damaged by the cyclone , Darwin Naval Headquarters was destroyed , as were large sections of the patrol boat base and the married quarters . The oil fuel supply installation and naval communications station at HMAS Coonawarra were also damaged . The initial RAN relief which was limited to search and rescue in the area of Darwin Harbour and Melville Island , which was hindered by the lack of reliable communications . 
 As the severity of the disaster was realised , a naval task force was established to render aid to the people of Darwin ; Operation Navy Help Darwin . A general recall was issued to all personnel ; volunteers from shore bases and ships unable to sail were used to replace those who could not return to their ships in time . The first RAN assets arrived in Darwin on 26 December , a HS 748 aircraft carrying blood transfusion equipment and Red Cross workers , followed shortly by another HS 748 carrying Clearance Diving Team 1 ( <unk> ) . Ships also began departing for Darwin on 26 December : Balikpapan and Betano departed from Brisbane , Flinders sailed from Cairns , while Melbourne ( with Rear Admiral Wells aboard ) , Brisbane , and Stuart left Sydney . The next day , Hobart , Stalwart , Supply , and Vendetta left Sydney , while Brunei and Tarakan sailed from Brisbane . The last ship , Wewak , left Brisbane on 2 January . 
 The first vessels , HMA Ships Brisbane and Flinders , arrived in Darwin on 31 December . Flinders surveyed the approaches to Darwin , ensuring the safety of the taskforce , while Brisbane landed working parties and established communications . The entire 13 @-@ ship task force had arrived in Darwin by 13 January 1975 , bringing over 3 @,@ 000 personnel . RAN personnel was primarily assigned to clear the suburbs of <unk> , Rapid Creek , Northern Territory , and Casuarina , while aircraft and helicopters were used to move evacuees and supplies , and <unk> inspected ships in the harbour for damage and cleared several wharves . Vessels of the task force began to depart Darwin as early as 7 January , with HMA Ships Brisbane and Stalwart the last to depart on 31 January , after command of the relief operation was turned over to the Commandant of the Army 's 7th Military District . 
 = = = Pacific patrol boat program = = = 
 Following the introduction of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) the exclusive economic zone ( EEZ ) of many coastal nations was increased from 12 to 200 <unk> . The sudden expansion of responsibility dramatically increased the area of ocean requiring surveillance , monitoring and policing by these nations , increasing the strain on existing maritime patrol resources , and highlighting the need for countries without a maritime patrol force to obtain one , especially in the South West Pacific area . 
 In 1979 , the Australian and New Zealand Governments , at the request of Pacific Island nations , sent defence representatives into the South @-@ West Pacific region to assess surveillance and maritime patrol requirements . The governments of a number of the Pacific nations expressed their concern about the need for a suitable naval patrol force to meet their new surveillance requirements . The Australian government responded by creating the Defence Cooperation Project ( DCP ) , to provide suitable patrol vessels , training and infrastructure to island nations in the region . The Pacific Patrol Boat Systems Program Office was created within the Minor War Vessels Branch of the RAN procurement organisation . 
 The tender for the vessels was released in August 1984 , and was awarded to Australian Shipbuilding Industries Pty Ltd ( now Tenix Western Australia ) in September 1985 . The first of ten vessels was to be delivered in early 1987 . The first vessel , <unk> <unk> , was officially handed over to the Papua New Guinea Defence Force on 16 May 1987 . Over the course of the project the number of participating countries increased . By the end of the construction phase of the project , a total of 22 boats had been delivered to 12 countries , compared to the original order of 10 boats for 8 countries . In total , the project cost for 22 vessels and associated support was A $ 155 @.@ 25 million . 
 The RAN never operated the Pacific @-@ class patrol boat ( <unk> ) , although the project has given the RAN a number of advantages in the Pacific region . The introduction of self @-@ reliant patrol forces throughout the region has eased the strain on Australia 's own maritime patrol force . Cooperation between Australia and its Pacific neighbours has allowed for a greater allocation of RAN patrol boats to protecting Australia 's maritime resources , patrolling the Sea Lines of Communication ( <unk> ) , and conducting border protection operations . The <unk> 's have recently undergone a mid life refit which could potentially see them operating in the region until at least 2027 . 
 = = = Two @-@ Ocean Policy = = = 
 The main role of the Royal Australian Navy in the two decades following the end of Australia 's involvement in the Vietnam War was supporting Australian diplomatic initiatives . In line with this goal the RAN exercised with the navies of Australia 's allies and provided support to civil authorities in Australia and the South Pacific . The RAN 's main military concern from the 1970s was the activities of the Soviet Navy in the Indian Ocean . These concerns lead to increased co @-@ operation with the United States Navy and the development of the RAN 's main base in Western Australia , HMAS Stirling . 
 During the late 1970s , the RAN replaced many of its ageing ships with modern equivalents . While it planned to purchase the British aircraft carrier HMS Invincible to replace Melbourne , Britain 's offer of the carrier was withdrawn after the Falklands War . As a result , Melbourne was decommissioned without replacement in 1982 and the Fleet Air Arm retired almost all of its fixed wing aircraft on 30 June 1983 . 
 In 1987 , the Hawke Government 's Defence White Paper called for the RAN to become a more self @-@ reliant two @-@ ocean navy with major fleet bases in New South Wales and Western Australia . The plan called for the expansion of Stirling on Garden Island and Jervis Bay to accommodate an expanded RAN combat surface and submarine fleets . The plan originally called for the major combat units and submarines to be split between the two fleet bases , providing similar capabilities on both sides of the continent . The proposed Jervis Bay naval base never became a reality ; Fleet Base East was built up around HMAS Kuttabul in Sydney while HMAS Stirling is home to half the surface fleet and the entire submarine fleet . 
 The rationale behind the policy included the possibility of savings in fuel and maintenance that would result from Indian Ocean deployments beginning their journey from Western Australia rather than New South Wales . The report also classed the Indian Ocean as an area where contingencies might arise . The new facilities would increase Australia 's worth to the United States , particularly to do with maintenance of submarines . Expansion at Jervis Bay would allow intensified east coast visits by the United States Pacific Fleet , and its nuclear warship visits would not run into as much opposition as they do in Sydney and Melbourne . 
 The 1987 White Paper was seen by many as an attempt to strengthen Australia 's relationship with the United States , which had been damaged by New Zealand 's stance against nuclear weapons in its ports . In line with this policy , the RAN was structured to become more self @-@ reliant and its activities during the late 1980s were focused on operating within Australia 's local region . 
 The Two Ocean Policy remains in place today and is supported by the current Australian Government and the opposition . The success of the policy is especially evident at HMAS Stirling . The base is thriving and its location both in a global and local context gives it an advantage over Fleet Base East . It has been suggested that all eight Anzac class ships be relocated to Stirling , this would create an easier training environment for sailors and would lead to significant cost savings . 
 = = Post Cold @-@ War = = 
 = = = The Gulf Wars = = = 
 Australia 's contribution to the 1991 Gulf War centred on a Naval Task Group , initially Task Group 627 @.@ 4 , which formed part of the multi @-@ national fleet in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman . In addition , medical teams were deployed aboard a US hospital ship and a naval clearance diving team took part in de @-@ mining Kuwait 's port facilities at the end of the war . Over the period from 6 September 1990 to 4 September 1991 the RAN deployed a total of six ships to the area : HMA Ships Adelaide , Brisbane , Darwin , Success , Sydney , and Westralia . Clearance Diving Team 3 operated in the theatre from 27 January 1991 to 10 May 1991 . It was involved in mine clearing operations in Kuwait from 5 March to 19 April 1991 . 
 After the end of the first Gulf War the Royal Australian Navy periodically deployed a ship to the Gulf or Red Sea to assist in maintaining sanctions against Iraq . Until the outbreak of the Second Gulf War the Australian naval force in the Persian Gulf continued to enforce the sanctions against Iraq . These operations were conducted by boarding parties from the RAN warships . 
 Upon the outbreak of war , the RAN 's focus shifted to supporting the coalition land forces and clearing the approaches to Iraqi ports . HMAS Anzac provided gunfire support to Royal Marines during fighting on the Al @-@ Faw Peninsula and the Clearance Diving Team took part in clearing the approaches to Umm Qasr . Boarding operations continued during the war , and on 20 March , boarding parties from HMAS Kanimbla seized an Iraqi ship carrying 86 naval mines . 
 Since the end of the war the RAN has continuously maintained a frigate in the Persian Gulf to protect Iraq 's oil infrastructure and participate in counter @-@ smuggling operations . Twelve Australian sailors were deployed to Umm Qasr , Iraq between January and October 2004 to join the multi @-@ national training team working with the Iraqi Coastal Defense Force . The RAN has also assumed command of coalition forces in the Persian Gulf on two occasions ; Combined Task Force 58 in 2005 and Combined Task Force 158 in 2006 . 
 = = = HMAS Westralia fire = = = 
 On 5 May 1998 , a fire broke out onboard HMAS Westralia while off the Western Australia coast . The fire was caused by the rupture of a flexible fuel line ( one of a number used to replace rigid hoses ) on cylinder number nine , starboard engine . This sprayed diesel fuel onto a hot indicator cock , which ignited a spray fire , resulting in the deaths of four crew . Following the fire , the Australian Government and the RAN began a major investigation known as the Westralia Board of Inquiry . The enquiry found that the RAN and the contractor Australian Defence Industries ( ADI ) did not critically examine their course of action and that key personnel in both the RAN and the contractor were insufficiently trained and qualified . The inquiry also found that the hoses were not properly designed and were unfit for the intended purpose . In 2005 , ADI was fined $ 75 @,@ 000 for failing to provide a safe workplace . Seven sailors who were apparently severely traumatised by the fire have also sued ADI and subcontractor <unk> . In August 2006 , the Australian Government decided to accept liability after it reached settlement with the ADI and <unk> . The seven sailors stand to receive compensation totalling up to $ 10 million . 
 = = = East Timor = = = 
 During the Australian @-@ led United Nations peacekeeping mission to East Timor in 1999 known as INTERFET , the RAN deployed a total of 16 ships to the mission : HMA Ships Adelaide , Anzac , Balikpapan , Brunei , Darwin , <unk> , Jervis Bay , Labuan , Success , Sydney , Tarakan , Tobruk , Waller , Westralia , Newcastle and Melbourne . The RAN played a vital role in transporting troops and providing protection to transports and were vital to the success of INTERFET . 
 The RAN returned to East Timor in 2006 under Operation Astute the United Nations @-@ authorised , Australian @-@ led military deployment to East Timor to quell unrest and return stability during the 2006 East Timor crisis . The Royal Australian Navy deployed the Amphibious Ready Group , including the ships ; Kanimbla , Manoora , Tobruk ( until approximately 8 June ) , Balikpapan , Tarakan and Success ( until 28 May ) . The RAN also deployed the Adelaide @-@ class frigate HMAS Adelaide ( until 28 May ) . The Fleet Air Arm contributed one S @-@ 70B @-@ 2 Seahawk helicopter from 816 Squadron RAN ( until 28 May ) and two Sea King helicopters from 817 Squadron RAN . The Royal Australian Navy force committed to Operation Astute is apparently the largest amphibious task force in the Navy 's history . 
 = = = Solomon Islands = = = 
 On 24 July 2003 , HMAS Manoora arrived off Honiara , marking the beginning of Operation Anode , Australia 's contribution to the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands ( <unk> ) . The deployment of a 2 @,@ 200 strong multinational force followed several years of unrest in the Solomon Islands . Manoora was soon joined by HMA Ships Hawkesbury , Labuan , Wewak and Whyalla . Following the initial deployment , two vessels were generally kept on station in the area . By the time the RAN deployment ended , 19 Australian warships had taken part . The last ship to leave was Fremantle , which sailed home in October 2004 . 
 Operation Anode was not the first time units of the RAN had been deployed to the Solomon Islands ; Anode was unique in that the navy 's primary role was to support and facilitate the work of the Participating Police Force ( PPF ) . Moreover , along with being the first time the RAN had supported a police @-@ led mission , 
 = = = Fiji = = = 
 On 2 November 2006 , in response to the Fijian military threats to overthrow the Fijian Government , the Australian government began Operation Quickstep by deploying military resources to support Australian citizens in Fiji in the event of a coup d 'état . The contribution from the RAN was the deployment of three vessels ; HMA Ships Kanimbla , Newcastle , and Success to international waters south of Fiji . The three vessels were deployed to Fiji to evacuate the estimated 7 @,@ 000 Australian citizens present in Fiji if the need arose . Along with the three vessels a detachment of the Special Air Service Regiment ( SASR ) , helicopters from the 171st Aviation Squadron , and an evacuation team were also deployed . 
 On 29 November 2006 , an Australian Army S @-@ 70A Black Hawk helicopter operating from Kanimbla , and carrying ten Army personnel on board , crashed whilst attempting to land on the ship 's deck , killing 1 person , injuring 7 more and leaving one missing ( later confirmed dead ) . HMAS Melville arrived on task the morning of 15 December 2006 , equipped with a Towed <unk> Locating Drone supplied from the United States Navy set about locating the downed Black Hawk . Melville detected the locator beacon during its first pass over the crash site and pinpointed its exact location in subsequent passes . The helicopter is sitting in around 2900 metres of water . 
 The coup took place on 5 December , but was bloodless and almost completely without violence . The evacuation of Australians was deemed unnecessary , and vessels of the task force began arriving back in Australia on 17 December , with Kanimbla docking in Townsville , and both Newcastle and Success returning to Sydney . Melville returned to Australia in late December . The RAN has decided to attempt to recover the downed Black Hawk and has identified the United States Navy Supervisor of Salvage ( SUPSALV ) as the preferred organisation . MV Seahorse Standard recovered the remains of Trooper Joshua Porter on 5 March and the Blackhawk helicopter on 9 March , with the assistance of specialist equipment provided by the SUPSALV team . The soldier 's body was repatriated on 13 March , escorted by members of the SASR . Seahorse Standard arrived in Australia with the aircraft wreckage at the end of March . The wreckage will become evidence in the Board of Inquiry into the crash . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 Prior to 1989 , the battle honour system of the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) was linked to that of the Royal Navy . The British Ministry of Defence and the Admiralty were responsible for approving and assigning battle honours , although from 1947 , this was done on advice from the RAN Badges , Names and Honours Committee . The only uniquely Australian battle honour during this time was " Vietnam 1965 – 72 " ( and smaller date units thereof ) for deployments to the Vietnam War . Ships of the RAN inherited honours from British ships of the same name , in addition to Australian predecessors . 
 In 1989 , the RAN Chief of Naval Staff , Admiral Michael Hudson approved a decision to have Australian warships only carry battle honours earned by previous Australian vessels . The creation and awarding of battle honours came completely under RAN control . 
 A complete overhaul of the RAN battle honours system was <unk> on 1 March 2010 , to celebrate the navy 's 109th anniversary of creation . New honours were created for operations during the 1990s and 2000s — the last approved honour prior to this was " Kuwait 1991 " , for Gulf War service — and the service history of previous vessels was updated to include ' due recognition ' of previous actions . 
 = = Women in the RAN = = 
 From 1911 to 1941 women were forbidden from serving in the RAN ; the demands World War II placed on personnel and resources led to a change of policy . On 21 April 1941 , the Australian Naval Board sent a letter authorising the entry of women into the RAN to the Commodore @-@ in @-@ Charge , Sydney . The letter led to the formation of the Women 's Royal Australian Naval Service ( WRANS ) and the Royal Australian Naval Nursing Service ( <unk> ) . The two separate women 's services existed until 1984 , when they were incorporated into the permanent force . Today , female members of the RAN have a wide variety of roles open to them ; women serve on submarines , command ships and shore postings and are expected to play an increasingly important role in the future of the RAN . 
 = = The current navy = = 
 The Royal Australian Navy today is a medium @-@ sized modern navy in world terms but is one of the strongest navies in the Asia Pacific Region . Today , the combat fleet of the RAN is made up of eight Anzac @-@ class frigates , four Adelaide @-@ class frigates , fourteen patrol boats of the Armidale class , and six Collins @-@ class submarines . The RAN also comprises an amphibious and supply force to transport the Australian Army and to resupply the combat arm of the navy . The RAN is divided into seven Force Element Groups ( FEGs ) : Surface Combatants , Amphibious Warfare Forces and Afloat Support Force , Naval Aviation , Submarine Force , Mine Warfare and Clearance Diving , Patrol Boat Force and the Hydrographic Force . The FEG 's were formed to manage the operations of the separate sections of the RAN in a more efficient way . 
 The modern RAN began to form during the late 1970s when the Fraser Government announced the purchase of four Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigates , all to be built in America ; in 1980 they announced an additional two vessels both to be built in Australia . The fifteen Australian @-@ built vessels of the Fremantle class made up Australia 's patrol boat from 1979 to 2007 ; they have now been replaced by the fourteen Armidale @-@ class patrol boats . 
 The Collins class is the newest class of Australian submarines , built in Australia for the Royal Australian Navy . They were constructed by the Australian Submarine Corporation in Adelaide , South Australia , and replace the six Oberon @-@ class submarines in the Australian fleet . The first vessel , HMAS Collins , was laid down in 1990 and commissioned in 1996 , with all six vessels of the class in service and based at HMAS Stirling in Western Australia . 
 The Anzac class is the current main fleet unit of the Royal Australian Navy ; the class has eight vessels . The lead vessel of the class , HMAS Anzac , was commissioned in 1996 and the final vessel , HMAS Perth , was commissioned on 26 August 2006 . Along with the eight Australian vessels , two Anzacs were also constructed for the Royal New Zealand Navy . The Anzac class were jointly constructed in New Zealand and Australia with the final <unk> in Williamstown , Victoria . 
 The amphibious and supply arm of the RAN is made up of ; one Kanimbla @-@ class landing platform , one heavy landing ship ( HMAS Tobruk ) , six Balikpapan @-@ class landing craft , two Leeuwin @-@ class survey vessels , four Paluma @-@ class motor launches , the fleet oiler HMAS Sirius , and the Dual Stores Replenishment Vessel HMAS Success . The RAN also has six Huon @-@ class <unk> . 
 The Royal Australian Navy maintains several bases around Australia . Under the RAN 's Two @-@ Ocean Policy , HMAS Stirling ( Fleet Base West ) and HMAS Kuttabul ( Fleet Base East ) are the primary bases for all major fleet unit of the RAN . The majority of the patrol boat and amphibious forces are located at HMAS Cairns and HMAS Coonawarra , while all Fleet Air Arm squadrons are based at HMAS Albatross . 
 = = The future of the RAN = = 
 In 2000 , a major white paper was produced by the Australian Government , which set out a program of defence spending that will see significant improvements to the RAN 's fleet and capabilities . 
 The most significant current project is SEA 4000 the procurement of three Hobart @-@ class destroyers , which will replace the Adelaide class . These ships will be fitted with the Aegis combat system , and will be based on the Spanish F100 design . The class has a planned in service date of 2013 , with the three units to be named Hobart , Brisbane , and Sydney . 
 In August 2005 the Australian Government passed approval for the acquisition of two Canberra @-@ class landing helicopter dock ships ; these will displace over 20 @,@ 000 tonnes , can carry over 1 @,@ 000 troops , and will potentially be able to operate fixed wing aircraft . The project is expected to cost between A $ 1 @.@ 5 and A $ 2 billion , and be completed by around 2014 . The new ships will be named Canberra and Adelaide . 
 = Russet sparrow = 
 The russet sparrow ( Passer rutilans ) , also called the cinnamon or cinnamon tree sparrow , is a passerine bird of the sparrow family Passeridae . A chunky little seed @-@ eating bird with a thick bill , it has a body length of 14 to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) . Its plumage is mainly warm rufous above and grey below . It exhibits sexual dimorphism , with the plumage of both sexes patterned similarly to that of the corresponding sex of house sparrow . Its vocalisations are sweet and musical chirps , which when strung together form a song . 
 Three subspecies are recognised , differing chiefly in the <unk> of their underparts . The subspecies rutilans and intensior breed in parts of eastern Asia , where they are usually found in light woodland , and the subspecies cinnamomeus breeds in the Himalayas , where it is usually associated with terrace cultivation . The russet sparrow is the typical sparrow of human habitations in towns where the house and Eurasian tree sparrows are absent . In the southern part of its range , the russet sparrow prefers higher altitudes , but in the north it breeds by the sea . The russet sparrow is known well enough in the Himalayas to have a distinct name in some languages , and is depicted in Japanese art . 
 This sparrow feeds mainly on the seeds of herbs and grains , but it also eats berries and insects , particularly during the breeding season . This diet makes it a minor pest in agricultural areas , but also a predator of insect pests . While breeding , it is not social , as its nests are dispersed . It forms flocks when not breeding , although it associates with other bird species infrequently . In some parts of its range , the russet sparrow migrates , at least to lower altitudes . Its nest is located in a tree cavity , or a hole in a cliff or building . The male chooses the nest site before finding a mate and uses the nest for courtship display . The typical clutch contains five or six whitish eggs . Both sexes incubate and feed the young . 
 = = Description = = 
 The russet sparrow is a small chunky bird , with plumage warm rufous in overall colour . It is a medium @-@ sized sparrow at 14 to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) and 18 to 22 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 79 oz ) . It has a thick bill suited to eating seeds , which is black on the breeding male , horn @-@ coloured on the non @-@ breeding male , and yellowish with a dark tip on the female . Wingspans for males range between 6 @.@ 8 to 8 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 2 in ) and those for females from 6 @.@ 7 to 7 @.@ 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) . Tail , bill , and tarsus lengths are 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 1 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) , 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 43 – 0 @.@ 51 in ) , and 1 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) , respectively . 
 Measurements for the russet sparrow vary geographically , between the three subspecies , and also within the Himalayan subspecies cinnamomeus . The subspecies cinnamomeus is generally larger than the others , and within this form there is a tendency for birds at higher altitudes to be larger , and a clinal variation in size with the smallest birds in the west of the range and the largest in the east . 
 The iris is chestnut in colour . The legs of both sexes are pale brown to pinkish @-@ brown . The flight of all sparrows is swift , and that of the russet sparrow is described as swifter and more direct than that of the Eurasian tree sparrow . 
 = = = Plumage = = = 
 The sexes differ , or are dimorphic , in their plumage , and have a similar pattern to that in the corresponding sex of house sparrow . There is some variation between the three subspecies , especially in the colouration of the underparts . Birds of the subspecies rutilans are off @-@ white on their cheeks and the sides of their necks , and have pale grey underparts . Birds of the subspecies intensior have a pale yellow wash on their underparts and cheeks , as well as darker upperparts , while those of the subspecies cinnamomeus have a heavy yellow tinge to their underparts . 
 Moult is poorly recorded , the only records coming from Sakhalin and Himachal Pradesh . In Sakhalin , moult occurs in August and September , between the breeding season and migration . In Himachal Pradesh , <unk> G. A. <unk> observed captive and wild birds and reported that they were yellow from December to spring and whitish during the remainder of the year , a pattern which may be atypical . 
 The breeding male is bright russet or cinnamon red on its upperparts from its crown to its rump , with a black streaking on its mantle . It has a small black bib and black around its eye , separated from the russet of its crown by a very thin white supercilium , a stripe running from the bill to the rear of the head . The side of its neck and cheek are off @-@ white , and its underparts are pale grey or washed with yellow , varying geographically . Shoulders and greater coverts are chestnut , and its median coverts are black at the base with white at the tips . The rest of the wing is light brown with black tinges . Its tail is blackish brown , edged with ashy brown . The non @-@ breeding male differs little from the breeding male , being paler with more orange upperparts . The only species with which the male is easily confused is the Eurasian tree sparrow , which differs in its black cheek spot and brown back . 
 The female has mostly pale brown upperparts , and pale grey underparts , so it resembles the female house sparrow . It differs from the house sparrow in its slightly darker , russet @-@ tinged plumage . It has a conspicuous cream supercilium from above its eye nearly around its head , and a bold dark brown stripe through its eye . It has mostly greyish brown wings and a back streaked with black and buff . The juvenile is similar to the female , though more pale and sandy . As the male reaches its first winter , it resembles the adult , differing in less bold chestnut and a dusky bib . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The russet sparrow 's vocalisations are described by most sources as " the sweetest and most musical " of any sparrow . Its basic call is a cheep or <unk> , similar to that of other sparrows . This call is monosyllabic , unlike the house sparrow 's chirrup call , and is softer than that of the other sparrows . This call is given as a flight call , or by displaying males . Recorded variations include a <unk> given by males at the nest and a trilled <unk> . Sometimes the male strings calls together and sings them in a strident tone , to create a sort of short song , transcribed as cheep chirrup <unk> or chreet @-@ chreet @-@ chreet . The song is interspersed with sibilant chu @-@ <unk> notes similar to those of the white wagtail . A thin swee swee vocalisation not unlike that of an Indian robin has been reported , but the context of this call is unrecorded . During territorial disputes , males give a rapid chit @-@ chit @-@ chit call . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The russet sparrow was first scientifically described , as Fringilla rutilans , by the Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck in 1835 , from a specimen collected in Japan . Its specific name comes from the Latin rutilus , " of a glowing or auburn red " . It has usually been placed in the genus Passer , and within this genus it is seen as a part of the " Palearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrow " group , which includes the Eurasian tree sparrow as well as the house sparrow . It has generally been seen as a close relation of the house sparrow , and Richard Meinertzhagen even considered it to be the same species as the Somali sparrow , one of the house sparrow 's closest relatives . 
 However , studies of mitochondrial DNA indicate that the russet sparrow is an early offshoot or basal species among the Palearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrows . While <unk> DNA suggest speciation in Passer occurred during the Miocene and Pliocene , British ornithologist J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith considers the russet sparrow to have separated from the other Palearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrows about 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago , during the last glacial period . During this time , sparrows would have only been found in isolated ice @-@ free refugia , such as the lower Yangtze valley , which Summers @-@ Smith considers the most likely centre of evolution for the russet sparrow . 
 Thirteen subspecies have been described , but only three are widely recognised , these differing largely in the colour of their underparts . The nominate subspecies Passer rutilans rutilans breeds in Japan , Korea , Taiwan , and southeastern and central China . The subspecies intensior , described in 1922 by Walter Rothschild from Yunnan , breeds in southwest China and parts of India , Burma , Laos , and Vietnam . In a large part of Sichuan intensior intergrades with the nominate subspecies , and a number of subspecies names have been proposed for the intergrades . The subspecies cinnamomeus , described in 1836 by John Gould from the northwestern Himalayas , breeds from northern Arunachal Pradesh to Nuristan in Afghanistan . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The russet sparrow is found in parts of eastern Asia and in the Himalayas . It is not known whether its distribution is continuous between these two areas , since the political sensitivity of the Brahmaputra River 's valley near the China @-@ India border makes the area less accessible to ornithologists . In the Himalayas the russet sparrow breeds from the far northeast of India through southeastern Tibet , Bhutan , Sikkim , Nepal , Uttarakhand , and Himachal Pradesh to Kashmir and Nuristan in Afghanistan . Here , the russet sparrow makes short movements to lower altitudes between November and April in many areas . 
 In eastern Asia , the russet sparrow is found in Sakhalin , the Kuril Islands , a small part of mainland Russia , Japan , southern Korea , and part of northern China , where it is mostly migratory . It is distributed through southern China and Taiwan , and the mountainous parts of Burma , southern Northeast India , Laos , and Vietnam , where it is mostly resident . The russet sparrow also occurs as a winter visitor in southern Japan , the further south of China , and northern Thailand . In eastern Asia , the autumn migration occurs between August and November . 
 The russet sparrow appears to be abundant in most habitats across most of its very large range , and in the some areas it is among the most common birds . In Southeast Asia , its range has contracted at lower elevations due to global warming , but it has also moved higher at high elevations and it remains common . Although its global population has not been quantified , it is assessed for the IUCN Red List as least concern for global extinction . 
 Breeding takes place in mountains and uplands across most of the range . This preference for high altitudes is influenced by latitude : in the farthest south of its range it never breeds below 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) above mean sea level , but in the northernmost part of its range it often breeds by the sea . In eastern Asia , the russet sparrow prefers light woodland , but it is sometimes found in towns and agricultural areas . In Sakhalin , it breeds mostly in riparian forest . In Hokkaidō , the russet sparrow finds a greater food supply for its young in more remote forests , and has greater reproductive success . 
 In the Himalayas , it is strongly associated with terrace cultivation , and it probably only spread to the Himalayas when these agricultural practices arrived 3000 to 4000 years ago . In towns where it occurs alongside the house or tree sparrow , it is found in gardens and less built up areas . In those hill stations in India where both the house and the russet sparrow occur , the house sparrow breeds around more @-@ built up areas and bazaars , whereas the russet sparrow is " rather more up market at the larger houses with gardens and open spaces " . In towns where it is the only sparrow , it is not dependent on trees , breeding around houses and eating scraps in streets . In the winter , migratory birds occur in open cultivated land and riverine grasslands , but are never far from shrubs or trees . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 In many aspects of its behaviour , the russet sparrow is similar to the house and Eurasian tree sparrows . Like them , it feeds on the ground , but spends most of its time perching on branches . Unlike those species , it prefers open , exposed branches for perching . The russet sparrow is described as shy and wary by some observers , but J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith found it approachable in Indian hill stations . <unk> russet sparrows feed close to the ground , moving forward as birds from the rear of a flock move to the front , in what is called " roller feeding " . 
 Outside its breeding season , the russet sparrow is gregarious and forms flocks to find food , though it infrequently associates with other birds . Wintering flocks tend to keep away from human habitation . The russet sparrow is also social at night during the winter , and it forms large communal roosts in trees and bushes . In the breeding season , the female roosts in the nests and the male nests in foliage nearby . 
 The adult russet sparrow is mostly a seed @-@ eater , eating the seeds of herbs and weeds as well as rice , barley , and other grains . Berries , such as those of the <unk> ( certain Berberis spp . ) , are also eaten when available . Nestlings are fed mostly on insects , especially caterpillars and larval beetles obtained on trees and flying insects caught by aerial pursuit . During the breeding season adults also consume insects . 
 Mortality rates in the russet sparrow have not been studied , but it is known that many young birds die from Isospora infections , to which the bird has little resistance . Other recorded parasites of the russet sparrow include Protocalliphora blowflies , and Menacanthus chewing lice . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The russet sparrow 's breeding season is short , lasting about three months . The Himalayan subspecies cinnamomeus has been recorded breeding from April to August , the nominate subspecies breeds from May to July , and the subspecies intensior is believed to breed in March . During its breeding season , the russet sparrow is not gregarious , and its nests are dispersed uniformly rather than clustered . Its nests are most frequently built in tree cavities , often disused woodpecker nests . The russet sparrow has been recorded breeding alongside the Eurasian tree sparrow and white wagtail in black kite nests , taking advantage of the territorial defence of the kites to avoid nest predation . Other nest locations include the eaves of thatched roofs , stone walls and embankments , and electric junction boxes . In Bhutan , it nests in holes in the outer walls of monasteries , often alongside the Eurasian tree sparrow . In Sakhalin , it will sometimes build free @-@ standing nests in bushes . The russet sparrow also uses the disused nests of the red @-@ rumped swallow , and a pair of russet sparrows has been recorded attempting to oust a pair of black @-@ crested tits from their nest . 
 The male chooses the nest site , and uses it for his courtship display , spending much time calling nearby . When a female comes near a male at his nest the male begins to display by raising his head , drooping his wings , pushing his chest forward , and lowering his tail . He then bows up and down in front of the female , who will lunge and then fly away if unreceptive . Both sexes take part in building the nest , which consists of a loose , untidy bunch of dry grass which fills the nesting cavity , lined with fur and feathers for warmth . 
 Eggs are elongated ovals , with a fine texture and a slight gloss . They are whitish in overall colour with a grey tinge and brown spots , streaks , or blotches . The average size of the egg is 19 @.@ 2 × 14 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 75 × 0 @.@ 55 in ) . Eggs are similar to those of the Eurasian tree sparrow , differing in a duller colour and more narrow shape , though they cannot be separated from those of the other sparrows with certainty . Two clutches of four or sometimes five or six eggs are laid in a year . In Hokkaidō , clutches are laid between early May and early July , with two peaks in laying around mid May and late June . Both sexes incubate and feed the young , with the male often being more active in feeding the nestlings . In Hokkaidō , nestlings hatch weighing about 2 to 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 071 to 0 @.@ 176 oz ) , and fledge fourteen or fifteen days after hatching , weighing 15 to 55 grams ( 0 @.@ 53 to 1 @.@ 94 oz ) . The common cuckoo has been recorded in old literature as a brood parasite of the russet sparrow . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 In parts of the range , the russet sparrow inhabits towns , and in most of its range , it occurs near cultivation , and is a minor pest of agriculture . Though it damages crops , it also feeds its nestlings largely on insect pests . In China , the russet sparrow has been recorded as a captive bird , kept with the Eurasian tree sparrow . In Japan it was eaten in the 1870s and sold in the Yokohama game market . The russet sparrow is known well enough in the Himalayas that in most languages it has a different vernacular name from the Eurasian tree sparrow . Examples of these vernacular names include lal <unk> in Hindi and kang @-@ che @-@ go @-@ ma in Tibetan . The Japanese artist Hokusai portrayed the russet sparrow , and due to this , it has appeared on postage stamps featuring Japanese art in Japan , The Gambia , and Guyana . 
 = Kolkata @-@ class destroyer = 
 The Kolkata class ( Project 15A ) are a class of stealth guided missile destroyers constructed for the Indian Navy . The class comprises three ships – Kolkata , Kochi and Chennai , all of which are being built by Mazagon Dock Limited ( MDL ) in India , and are the largest destroyers to be operated by the Indian Navy . Due to delays in their construction , and a problem found during the sea trials , the initial commissioning date of the first ship of the class had been pushed back from 2010 to 2014 . 
 The destroyers are a follow @-@ on of the Project 15 Delhi @-@ class destroyers , but are considerably more capable due to major improvements in the design , the addition of substantial land @-@ attack capabilities , and the fitting @-@ out of modern sensors and weapons systems . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1986 , the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs ( <unk> ) approved a follow @-@ on class of the earlier Project 15 Delhi @-@ class destroyers . The aim was that the follow @-@ on class would incorporate a higher level of air @-@ defence , land attack , anti @-@ submarine and anti @-@ ship capabilities than the preceding class . However , the Indian Navy did not initially take up the option . By the year 2000 , the Indian Navy had redesigned the follow @-@ on Kolkata class to incorporate even higher levels of technology ( including modern stealth characteristics ) and in May of that year , approval for the construction was given . Concept and function for Project 15A was framed by the navy 's Directorate of Naval Design , while the detailed design was developed by Mazagon Dock Limited ( MDL ) . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction of three Kolkata @-@ class ships was sanctioned by the Government of India in May 2000 , and steel for the lead ship was cut in March 2003 . Construction began in September 2003 at Mazagon Docks , Mumbai , with an initial expectation that the first of the class would be handed over to the navy by 2010 . However , since then the Kolkata class has suffered consecutive delays , slow construction procedures and technical problems which saw the first ship of the class enter service during mid 2014 . The delays in the construction programme have been attributed to persistent design changes made by the Indian Navy to incorporate new weapons systems and sensors , failure by a Ukrainian shipyard to deliver the ship 's propellers and shafts and the contract later being awarded to a Russian firm , and finally the delay in the delivery of the Barak 8 anti @-@ air missiles , which are still in the final stages of completion with Israel Aerospace Industries and the Defence Research and Development Organisation . 
 The Kolkata class are the largest destroyers ever to be constructed at Mazagon Docks , and as of 2013 , all three ships of the class have been launched and are being fitted out . Technical problems were found during the sea trials of the lead ship Kolkata , which delayed the project by six months to early 2014 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Kolkata class share similar dimensions to the previous Delhi class , however they have 2 @,@ 363 modifications which include major upgrades in weaponry , sensors and helicopter systems . With a standard displacement of 6 @,@ 800 t ( 6 @,@ 700 long tons ; 7 @,@ 500 short tons ) and a full @-@ load displacement of 7 @,@ 400 t ( 7 @,@ 300 long tons ; 8 @,@ 200 short tons ) , they are the largest destroyers ever operated by the Indian Navy . Some media reports have even given a full @-@ load displacement of 7 @,@ 500 t ( 7 @,@ 400 long tons ; 8 @,@ 300 short tons ) . These are the first stealth destroyers being built by India and marked a significant development in India 's shipbuilding technology . The ships would incorporate modern weapons and sensors , and will have an advanced information warfare suite , an auxiliary control system with a sophisticated power distribution architecture , and modular crew quarters . 
 The class have a length of 163 m ( 535 ft ) , a beam of 17 @.@ 4 m ( 57 ft ) and a draught of 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 ft ) . The ship 's power and propulsion features a standard Combined gas and gas system utilizing twin <unk> <unk> gas turbine plants and four DT @-@ 59 reversible gas turbines . The class also features two KVM diesel engines . On @-@ board <unk> <unk> @-@ 1000 generators and <unk> AC generators supply the ship 's electricity . The two propellers are run via two RG @-@ 54 gearboxes . This configuration allows the ship to reach speeds in excess of 30 kn ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . Aviation facilities include a large flight deck , which was re @-@ designed to handle larger helicopters than the Delhi @-@ class , and an enclosed hangar for up to two maritime helicopters . 
 The primary radar sensor of the class is the EL / M @-@ 2248 MF @-@ STAR multi @-@ mission AESA . It is also equipped with Thales LW @-@ 08 long range volume search radar and EL / M @-@ 2238 S @-@ band STAR surveillance radar from Israel Aerospace Industries . A Nagin active towed array sonar and a bow @-@ mounted sonar <unk> @-@ NG ( hull @-@ mounted sonar array - new generation ) are carried for sub @-@ surface surveillance . To protect against anti @-@ ship missiles coming from multiple directions , the ship carries the Elbit Systems <unk> MK @-@ II decoy control and launching system . 
 The ship 's main air @-@ defence armament is composed of two <unk> @-@ cell vertical launching systems ( <unk> ) allowing for up to 32 Barak 8 ( medium @-@ long range ) air @-@ defence missiles . In addition , four AK @-@ 630 CIWS are fitted for close @-@ in defence . 
 The supersonic BrahMos anti @-@ ship and land @-@ attack missiles are the primary offensive armament of the Kolkata @-@ class . The BrahMos missiles are fitted into a 16 @-@ cell Universal Vertical Launcher Module ( <unk> ) allowing one missile per launch silo , and all 16 missiles can be fired in salvo . Perhaps the most distinctive and noticeable armament of the Kolkata class is its 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) naval gun located forward of the bridge . The 76 mm gun provides limited anti @-@ shipping capability and anti @-@ air capability in addition to its naval gun fire @-@ support role for land based operations . For anti @-@ submarine warfare , the Kolkata @-@ class are equipped with a torpedo launching system via four torpedo tubes and two RBU @-@ 6000 anti @-@ submarine rocket launchers . BEL 's Electronic Modular Command & Control Applications ( <unk> ) Mk4 provides combat management . 
 Four million lines of codes have been written to develop the advanced combat management system onboard INS Kochi . The system is designed so that all the data about the surrounding threat comes in one place , along with analysis about the kind of threat . The system also advises the commanding officer about the kind of weaponry he should use to tackle the threat . Obviously , all this happens in real @-@ time . The Ship is equipped with sophisticated digital networks , such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode based Integrated Ship Data Network ( <unk> ) , Combat Management System ( CMS ) , Automatic Power Management System ( APMS ) and Auxiliary Control System ( ACS ) . The <unk> is the information highway on which data from all the sensors and weapon ride . The CMS is used to integrate information from other platforms using indigenous data @-@ link system , to provide Maritime Domain Awareness . The intricate power supply management is done using APMS , and remote control and monitoring of machinery is achieved through the ACS . 
 = = Ships of the class = = 
 Initially in 2008 , the total program cost with long @-@ term spare parts was expected to cost ₹ 3 @,@ 800 crore ( US $ 560 million ) , but the construction costs escalated about 225 % , and by 2011 , cost of the program became ₹ 11 @,@ 662 crore ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 billion ) , with each ship costing ₹ 3 @,@ 900 crore ( US $ 580 million ) . The Defense Minister A. K. Antony cited the causes being the delay in supply of warship @-@ grade steel by Russia , increase in costs of Russian specialists due to inflation during the build period , wage revision due from October 2003 and delay in <unk> of cost of weapons and sensors . 
 = Robert Foliot = 
 Robert Foliot ( died 1186 ) was a medieval Bishop of Hereford in England . He was a relative of a number of English ecclesiastics , including Gilbert Foliot , one of his predecessors at Hereford . After serving Alexander , Bishop of Lincoln as a clerk , he became a clerk of Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester and brother of King Stephen of England . He attended the Council of Reims in 1148 , where another relative , Robert de Chesney , was elected as Bishop of Hereford . Chesney then secured the office of Archdeacon of Oxford for Foliot . 
 During the early 1160s , Foliot also served as a clerk for Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , but left the archbishop 's service as Becket 's dispute with the king began to intensify . He was elected to Hereford in 1173 , and served as a royal and papal judge while bishop . Archeological evidence links the building of the Bishop 's Palace at Hereford to his episcopate . After his death , Foliot was buried in Hereford Cathedral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Foliot was a relative of both Gilbert Foliot , Bishop of Hereford and Bishop of London , and of Robert de Chesney , Bishop of Lincoln . Another relative was Ralph Foliot , a royal justice . Robert Foliot 's family appears to have been the branch of the Foliot family that owned the manor of <unk> in Oxfordshire . This is made likely by Foliot 's confirmation of a gift of land from Ralph Foliot of <unk> to Ralph 's son , and it is possible that Foliot was the brother or uncle of Ralph Foliot . 
 There is no evidence of Foliot 's education , but he likely received an education to fit him for his career in the church . <unk> have frequently confused him with his predecessor as bishop , Robert of Melun , so he has mistakenly been given as the author of a number of documents . 
 = = Clerical career = = 
 Foliot was a canon of Lincoln Cathedral by 1147 , and an official of Alexander of Lincoln , the Bishop of Lincoln , who secured Foliot 's early promotions in the church . Foliot was sent to the Council of Reims in 1148 by the Lincoln cathedral chapter to learn Pope Eugene III 's wishes regarding the vacant bishopric , as Alexander had died in February 1148 . Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , was attempting to secure Lincoln for one of his nephews , but the pope agreed with the chapter and appointed Robert de Chesney as bishop instead . After his consecration , Chesney continued to employ Foliot as a clerk . 
 Foliot was later named Archdeacon of Oxford in the Lincoln diocese , sometime before 1 October 1151 , owing the appointment to Chesney . He was also a canon of Hereford Cathedral , appearing in that capacity in 1173 , but it is unclear when exactly he acquired the position . It is also unclear whether he owed this position to his relative Gilbert Foliot , who was bishop of Hereford from 1148 to 1163 , or if he received the canonry after 1163 through royal influence . Foliot served as a clerk for Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , witnessing three documents for Becket during the period 1162 – 1164 . 
 During early days of Becket 's dispute with the king , Foliot helped mediate between Becket and Gilbert Foliot , who was supporting the king . Robert Foliot was one of the first of Becket 's clerks to leave the archbishop 's service , asking permission to leave Becket 's household shortly after the council at Clarendon in January 1164 , which ratified the Constitutions of Clarendon . 
 = = Bishop of Hereford = = 
 Foliot was elected to the see of Hereford in late April 1173 and consecrated on 6 October 1174 at Canterbury by Archbishop Richard of Dover . Hereford had been vacant since the death of Robert of Melun in 1167 , due to the Becket 's exile and then death . Foliot was either elected by the cathedral chapter without guidance from the king , or was nominated to the cathedral chapter by King Henry at the urging of his relative Gilbert Foliot . Robert Foliot later attended the Third Lateran Council in 1179 . While bishop , he became involved in a <unk> with Hugh Parvus , a local baron , over the power of appointment to two churches . He also served as a judge @-@ delegate for the papacy , serving with Roger , the Bishop of Worcester on cases including one between a Norman monastery and an English priory . He judged a number of other cases for the papacy during his time as bishop . He received over 40 surviving papal commissions and communications , some of which dealt with the problems of married clergy in his diocese . From his ecclesiastical documents , almost 40 survive . 
 While bishop , Foliot gave books , altar furnishings , and land to his cathedral chapter , as well as a purple and gold cape to Wigmore Abbey . Although no documentary evidence links him to the timbered hall in the bishop 's palace at Hereford , tree @-@ ring dating of the timbers has dated its construction to 1179 , during his time as bishop . He also gave money to the Bishop 's Chapel in Hereford Cathedral . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Foliot died on 9 May 1186 , and was buried in Hereford Cathedral . Copies of his correspondence survive at the Bodleian Library at Oxford University . 
 = = Note = = 
 = James Clark ( Kentucky ) = 
 James Clark ( January 16 , 1779 – August 27 , 1839 ) was a 19th @-@ century American politician who served in all three branches of Kentucky 's government and in the U.S. House of Representatives . His political career began in the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1807 . In 1810 , he was appointed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , where he served for two years before resigning to pursue a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives . He served two terms in that body , resigning in 1816 . 
 Clark accepted an appointment to the circuit court of Bourbon and Clark counties in 1817 . It was in this capacity that the most defining event of his career occurred . In 1822 , he struck down a debt relief law in the case of Williams v. Blair on the basis that it impeded the obligation of contracts . His decision was unpopular with the legislature , who condemned the ruling and summoned Clark to appear before them and defend it . An attempt by the legislature to remove him from office fell short of the needed two @-@ thirds majority . The following year , the Kentucky Court of Appeals upheld Clark 's ruling . In retaliation , the legislature attempted to abolish the court and create a new one more sympathetic to their views . This event and its aftermath became known as the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . 
 In 1825 , Clark was chosen to fill the congressional seat vacated by Henry Clay 's elevation to Secretary of State . He served until 1831 , but did not seek re @-@ election that year . He became active in organizing the Whig Party in Kentucky and was rewarded for his efforts by being chosen as the party 's nominee for governor in 1836 . He won the election and laid out an ambitious platform to the legislature , which acted on only part of it . Clark 's most significant accomplishment as governor was securing the creation of a state board of education and the establishment of public schools in every county in the state . Clark died in office in 1839 . His estate , Holly Rood , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 James Clark was born to Robert and Susannah ( Henderson ) Clark on January 16 , 1779 , near the Peaks of Otter in Bedford County , Virginia . In 1794 , the family moved to Clark County , Kentucky , where Clark was educated by Dr. James Blythe ( who later became a professor at Transylvania University ) and attended Pisgah Academy in Woodford County . Clark then went to Virginia , where he studied law with his brother , Christopher . He was admitted to the bar in 1797 . He briefly traveled to Vincennes , Indiana and St. Louis , Missouri looking for a place to open his practice , but finding none that suited him , he returned to Kentucky and commenced practice in Winchester . 
 Clark married Susan Forsythe on July 2 , 1809 , and the couple had four children . Susan Clark died in 1825 . On March 3 , 1829 , James Clark married a widow named Margaret Buckner Thornton in Washington , D.C. Clark 's second wife died August 15 , 1836 , just days after her husband was elected governor . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Clark was elected to two consecutive terms in the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1807 and 1808 . On March 29 , 1810 , he was appointed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , and served in this capacity until his resignation in 1812 . He was elected as a Democratic @-@ Republican to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1812 . He took a leave of absence on April 18 , 1816 , and by August 1816 , had resigned his seat to accept an appointment as a circuit court judge . 
 = = = Ruling in Williams v. Blair = = = 
 From 1817 to 1824 , Clark served on the circuit court for Clark and Bourbon counties . In the 1822 case of Williams v. Blair , he declared unconstitutional a law allowing debtors to escape bankruptcy by imposing a moratorium on their debts . He contended that the law " impaired the obligation of contracts " in violation of the Contract Clause of the U.S. Constitution . This decision was in keeping with the recent Supreme Court ruling in Dartmouth College v. Woodward . 
 Clark 's ruling drew a resolution of condemnation from the Kentucky General Assembly . He was summoned to appear before the legislature , but opted to respond to their charges in writing instead . Incensed , the legislature attempted to removed him from office , but the vote of 59 – 35 fell short of the needed two @-@ thirds majority . In October 1823 , Clark 's decision was upheld by the Kentucky Court of Appeals ; that decision touched off the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy , wherein the legislature attempted to abolish the Court of Appeals and replace it with a more sympathetic court . 
 In 1825 , Clark was elected to fill the U.S. House seat left vacant by the elevation of Henry Clay to Secretary of State . He was twice re @-@ elected , and chaired the Committee on Territories . He refused re @-@ nomination in 1831 . 
 Clark was then elected to the state Senate and served from 1832 to 1835 . He was a member of the Committee for Internal Improvements . Upon the death of Governor John Breathitt in 1834 , Lieutenant Governor James Turner Morehead was elevated to governor . The office of lieutenant governor then being empty , the Senate had no presiding officer . In 1835 , Clark was elected Speaker of the Senate , and presided in Morehead 's absence . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Clark helped organize the Whig Party in Kentucky , and as a reward , he was chosen as the party 's nominee for governor in 1836 . He won the canvass , defeating Democrat Matthew Flournoy 38 @,@ 587 to 30 @,@ 491 . In his first address to the legislature , he outlined an ambitious agenda of reforms , including the establishing a public school system , strengthening the office of state auditor , and combating an increase in crime . Believing that banks should be held to their responsibilities , he insisted that the state banks not suspend specie payments . He also strongly believed in the rights of slave owners , and encouraged Ohio , Indiana , and Illinois to cooperate in returning escaped slaves . 
 The legislature heeded some of Clark 's message . They added a second auditor in the office of the state auditor , and gave greater discretion to the state 's sinking fund commission . They created a state board of education and the office of state superintendent . They also created county school commissioners in every county . In response to his remarks on slave property , the legislature enacted laws that raised the reward for apprehending a fugitive slave and made it illegal for stagecoach owners to allow fugitive slaves to use their coaches to escape . 
 However , they refused to restrict the publication and spread of abolitionist propaganda in the state , as Clark had requested , and they ignored most of his recommendations in other areas . Clark financed internal improvements in the state through the sale of bonds . 
 = = Death = = 
 Clark died in office on August 27 , 1839 . He was buried in a private cemetery near his home in Winchester , Kentucky . The house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on June 13 , 1974 . 
 = Black Country Communion = 
 Black Country Communion is an English @-@ American hard rock band based in Los Angeles , California . Formed in 2009 , the band is a supergroup composed of bassist and vocalist Glenn Hughes , guitarist and vocalist Joe Bonamassa , drummer Jason Bonham , and keyboardist Derek Sherinian . Originally formed by Hughes and Bonamassa with the help of producer Kevin Shirley , the group released its self @-@ titled debut album in September 2010 . Second album Black Country Communion 2 followed in June 2011 , which was promoted on a European tour later in the year . The band released its third and to date latest album Afterglow in October 2012 . 
 Following an impromptu performance together in Los Angeles , Hughes and Bonamassa started the side project in November 2009 , recruiting Bonham and Sherinian on the advice of Shirley to finalise the lineup of the band . The name Black Country Communion is derived from the term Black Country , which refers to the West Midlands area of England where Hughes and Bonham grew up . The group 's sound is intentionally reminiscent of popular classic rock groups of the 1970s , reflecting the previous work of frontman Hughes ( in bands such as Deep Purple and Black Sabbath ) as well as the link between Bonham and his father John 's band Led Zeppelin . 
 In March 2013 , after months of public tensions , Bonamassa announced that he was no longer a member of Black Country Communion , with the question over whether the group would continue with another guitarist unclear . Days later , Hughes confirmed that the band was officially over , hinting that he would continue working with Bonham and Sherinian under a new collective name . Sherinian later joined Bonamassa 's touring band , while Hughes and Bonham formed California Breed with guitarist Andrew Watt . In April 2016 , the band announced that it would be reuniting in 2017 after Hughes and Bonamassa reconciled , with a fourth album planned . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2009 – 10 : Formation and debut album = = = 
 Glenn Hughes ( formerly of Deep Purple , Black Sabbath , and others ) and Joe Bonamassa ( formerly of Bloodline and an established solo artist ) first met at the 2006 NAMM Show in Anaheim , California , after which they jammed together at Hughes 's studio in Hollywood with the idea to make music together in the future . Bonamassa also worked with Jason Bonham that year , when the drummer performed on the guitarist 's fifth studio album You & Me at the recommendation of producer and mutual friend Kevin Shirley . Hughes and Bonamassa reunited three years later in November 2009 , performing together at the House of Blues in Los Angeles for Guitar Center . It was at this point that the two decided to form a band . The idea of enlisting drummer Bonham ( formerly of UFO , Foreigner , and others ) and keyboardist Derek Sherinian ( formerly of Planet X , Dream Theater , and others ) to complete the band 's lineup was suggested by Bonamassa 's producer Shirley , after Hughes and Bonamassa briefly considered adding a second guitarist instead of a keyboardist . 
 The completed quartet first performed together during the encore of a Joe Bonamassa show in Riverside , California on March 17 , 2010 , playing " One Last Soul " and a cover version of the Deep Purple song " <unk> " . The name Black Country Communion was not finalised until May 2010 , after the threat of legal action from another band prevented the group from using the name Black Country . Frontman Glenn Hughes later revealed that the band in question was from Baltimore , Maryland , who reportedly demanded $ 500 @,@ 000 for the right to use the name Black Country , a move which he quickly condemned as " just rude " . Hughes later elaborated on the situation in a 2016 interview , explaining that his group had successfully bought the name Black Country from the Baltimore @-@ based band ( for less than the requested $ 500 @,@ 000 ) , although by the time the case was settled it was too late to use the name and they had to continue using the longer moniker . 
 BCC recorded their debut album at Shangri @-@ La Studios in Los Angeles in early 2010 , and scheduled its release through Mascot Music in Europe and J & R Adventures in North America for September that year . Speaking about the album , Hughes described it as " a big British rock statement " , comparing the band 's sound to that of his previous groups Deep Purple and Black Sabbath , as well as Led Zeppelin . " One Last Soul " was the first song to be released from the album , receiving its worldwide radio debut on English digital station Planet Rock ( a station on which Bonamassa produces his own show ) on August 2 . The track was later released as a free digital download on the band 's official website on August 10 . Shortly before the release of the album , Planet Rock also broadcast an hour @-@ long documentary featuring exclusive interviews with the band , as well as a selection of tracks from the album . 
 Black Country Communion was officially released in Europe on September 20 , and in North America on September 21 . On the night of its European release , the band played its first official show at the John Henry Rehearsal Studios in London , in front of a limited crowd of " around 75 – 100 people " ; the performance was broadcast on Planet Rock that night , and again later on September 24 . The album was a commercial success in the UK , reaching number 13 in the UK Albums Chart and topping the UK Rock Albums Chart , while in the US it peaked at number 54 on the Billboard 200 albums chart . It also received a widely positive critical reception , including four @-@ star reviews from website AllMusic and magazine Mojo . 
 The band did not tour in promotion of Black Country Communion , playing just two shows in the UK at the end of the year at the Wolverhampton Civic Hall and the Shepherds Bush Empire . At the end of the year the group were named Band of the Year by the listeners of Planet Rock , beating such established groups as Iron Maiden and Muse to take the accolade ; they also won the Best New Band award , ahead of The Union , The Gaslight Anthem , and The Jokers . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Second album and touring = = = 
 Talk of a second album began to circulate as early as October 2010 , just a month after the release of Black Country Communion , when it was estimated by drummer Bonham that the band would start work on their second album in January 2011 , a claim which was verified the following month by Hughes . By December Hughes had already written nine tracks for the album , which he explained would serve as a direct sequel to the first album – " part two of the first one " . During the recording process in January it was revealed that the follow @-@ up to Black Country Communion would be released in June , with the band set to embark on a promotional tour to coincide with its release . The album 's title , release date , track listing , and artwork were revealed in March . 
 The first song released from Black Country Communion 's second album was " The Outsider " , made available as a free digital download from the group 's official website in May 2011 , followed by " Man in the Middle " , for which the band 's first music video was released on June 6 . The album was released on June 13 in Europe and the following day in North America , selling over 8 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the US ( compared to the 7 @,@ 100 units of Black Country Communion ) but charting 17 places lower on the Billboard 200 at number 71 . The album was also less successful in the UK Albums Chart , peaking at number 23 ( ten places lower than its predecessor ) , although it still managed to top the UK Rock Albums Chart . 
 In promotion of the album , BCC completed a short tour of Europe between June and July , playing shows in Spain , Germany , the Netherlands , and the UK with support act the Michael Schenker Group . The group also performed in the US for the first time since its formation , playing a total of seven shows in six states between June 10 and 19 . It was confirmed in September that a live video album documenting a number of shows on the European tour , entitled Live Over Europe , would be released in October , and it was also screened in a select number of Vue Cinemas outlets across the UK and Ireland on November 1 . Live Over Europe was released on DVD on October 24 , and on Blu @-@ ray on November 15 . 
 In November 2011 the group won the Classic Rock award for Breakthrough Act of the Year . For the remainder of the year and through early 2012 , Hughes performed sporadically at a number of events and started writing for his next solo album , Bonamassa continued with his solo touring and recorded his eleventh album Driving Towards the Daylight , Sherinian released his seventh solo album Oceana and played a number of shows , and Bonham continued his Led Zeppelin Experience tour . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 : Afterglow and disbandment = = = 
 In January 2012 it was announced that the band were scheduled to return to the studio in June to record the follow @-@ up to 2 , with a release planned for later in the year . Discussing the direction of the group 's third album , Hughes explained that it serves as " a continuation of the first and second albums " , containing " darker [ material ] " and " moments of drama " . The first track to be released from the album was " Confessor " , which was made available as a free download on the band 's official website from September 19 , 2012 , and Afterglow was later released on October 29 in Europe and on October 30 in North America . Despite no touring plans in place for after the release of their third album , Black Country Communion planned to play a one @-@ off show at the Wolverhampton Civic Hall on January 5 , 2013 , with a video release of the concert planned for later in the year . It was later announced , however , that the performance was cancelled due to " unforeseen circumstances " , contributing to concerns over the band 's future . Shirley offered an apology to fans the day after the cancellation , hinting that the performance would be rescheduled for a later date by assuring fans that " your call will be answered " . 
 Speaking in August 2012 , Glenn Hughes was quoted as doubting the future of the band after the release of Afterglow , proclaiming " I hate to break it to you , but [ Afterglow ] just may be [ the band 's last album ] " , blaming the band 's lack of touring ( due in part to Joe Bonamassa 's busy solo touring schedule ) as a hindrance to the continued success of the group . Hughes later clarified his comments on the fate of the band , stating that they " were fuelled from frustration and aimed at motivating other members of the group to commit to a proper touring schedule " , and pointed out that if the band were unable to tour regularly then he would seek another band which could . Later , in an exchange on Twitter , Bonamassa and Hughes both mentioned that they were " ready to move on " , providing more evidence that the group 's disbandment was imminent . 
 In an interview in October , Hughes quelled speculation the band was splitting up . Accepting responsibility for the initial spread of the rumours , he cited the speed at which the band had produced and released music as the cause for the stress on the group . On the possibility of the band touring together again , the frontman responded positively but warned that nothing was confirmed . Bonamassa , however , later revealed his anger at Hughes , condemning his " bullying " of the guitarist to complete the planned 2013 show despite knowing he was not able to , the way in which he publicly revealed the tensions in the band , and his claims as to being the sole songwriter on Afterglow . Jason Bonham also revealed his frustration with the situation , while manager Roy Weisman admitted it was his decision to cancel the Wolverhampton gig , although this was based on Hughes 's actions . Bonamassa sought to end the situation positively , praising Hughes as a musician and proposing that the band would continue to make music for the foreseeable future , while Bonham proposed that the band could tour with a different guitarist , chosen by Bonamassa . 
 On March 13 , 2013 though , Joe Bonamassa announced his departure from the band , revealing that he was " happily not involved any more " with the group . On March 23 , Glenn Hughes confirmed that the band was over , revealing that Bonamassa would not allow the remaining members to continue with the Black Country Communion name . Speaking about the future , he hinted that " Jason , Derek and I will continue with a different name when the time is right " . In August 2013 , Sherinian joined Bonamassa 's solo band as a full @-@ time member ; in February 2014 , Hughes and Bonham formed a new band with guitarist Andrew Watt named California Breed . Since the breakup of Black Country Communion , Hughes has revealed that he initially left the band on September 21 , 2012 as he was aware there was " no hope of touring " , claiming that a number of guitarists including Zakk Wylde , Steve Vai , and Joe Satriani were contacted about joining the band , and stressing that his relationship with Bonamassa is " fine " . 
 = = = 2017 : Planned reunion and fourth album = = = 
 In April 2016 , it was announced that Black Country Communion would be reuniting in 2017 , with the group planning to record a fourth album . Speaking about the supergroup 's comeback , Bonham explained that the reunion was initially suggested by Bonamassa , who reached out to the other band members with the proposal . 
 = = Style and songwriting = = 
 As a supergroup , Black Country Communion 's style is often described as a mix of various different sounds and influences . Particular significance is attributed to the band 's mix of blues rock ( attributed primarily to Bonamassa 's history as a solo musician ) and classic rock ( originating from Hughes ' previous work with Deep Purple and Black Sabbath , and from Bonham 's tie with Led Zeppelin via his father John ) , with some critics going as far as claiming the group 's sound is based on " the vintage Deep Purple template " . In reviews for the band 's second album 2 , a number of critics compared the sound of the group to that of drummer Bonham 's father 's band Led Zeppelin – Eduardo Rivadavia of website AllMusic noted that the album " sounds like the baby of drummer Jason Bonham " , while Paul Cole of newspaper Sunday Mercury claimed it is " haunted by the spirit of Zeppelin " . Speaking about how he intended the style of the band to appear , Hughes has proclaimed that BCC " are a rock and roll band in the true sense of the word " . 
 Traditionally the writing processes for BCC 's albums have been led by Hughes , who wrote the majority of the lyrics for both Black Country Communion and 2 . The majority of the music on Black Country Communion was composed by Hughes and Bonamassa , with Shirley increasing his composition presence for the second album . Noting the extensive touring commitments of Bonamassa , Hughes has claimed that he was " left as the keeper of the keys to write [ the band 's ] albums " , noting that for each record – which have been continuations of their predecessors – he has had more and more time to write material ( six weeks for Black Country Communion , four months for 2 , and six months for Afterglow ) . Talking about the writing of the first album , Hughes has compared the approach of himself and Bonamassa to such songwriting duos as Jimmy Page and Robert Plant of Led Zeppelin , Mick Jagger and Keith Richards of The Rolling Stones , and Steven Tyler and Joe Perry of Aerosmith . Bonham has described the band 's writing style as " spur of the moment " . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Glenn Hughes – vocals , bass 
 Joe Bonamassa – guitars , vocals 
 Jason Bonham – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 Derek Sherinian – keyboards 
 Black Country Communion performing at the <unk> Rock Festival in 2011 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Black Country Communion ( 2010 ) 
 Black Country Communion 2 ( 2011 ) 
 Afterglow ( 2012 ) 
 = Capital Bikeshare = 
 Capital Bikeshare ( also abbreviated <unk> ) is a bicycle sharing system that serves Washington , D.C. ; Arlington County , Virginia ; the city of Alexandria , Virginia ; and Montgomery County , Maryland . It has more than 300 stations and 2 @,@ 500 bicycles , all owned by these local governments and operated in a public @-@ private partnership with Alta Bicycle Share . Opened in September 2010 , the system was the largest bike sharing service in the United States until New York City 's Citi Bike began operations in May 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 The SmartBike DC bike sharing service , a predecessor to Capital Bikeshare , debuted in 2008 with 10 stations and 120 bicycles . It was the first of it 's kind in the United States . D.C. Department of Transportation Director Gabe Klein came into office four months later and he eager to expand it , but found the private partner had a " lackluster commitment . " Because the agreement specifically prohibited <unk> from paying for anything related to SmartBike , an expansion required <unk> to renegotiate the contract . But in his first meeting with Clear Channel he found that Clear Channel believed they had gotten a bad deal on the original contract that created SmartBike ; that following their purchase by Bain Capital they were no longer interested in “ municipal street furniture ” and that they had neither desire nor obligation to expand the program . In addition , it was difficult and expensive to install new stations , because they required the local utility company to bring electricity to each station . As a result , Klein chose to fold the program and instead partner with Arlington County , VA to build the regional <unk> program Capital Bikeshare . 
 Capital Bikeshare was to be owned by the local governments but operated in a public @-@ private partnership with a private operator . Prior to launch Alta Bike Share was awarded the operations contract . The new service launched in September 2010 with 400 bicycles at 49 stations . Shortly thereafter , SmartBike DC ceased operations in January 2011 . 
 Planning and implementation costs for Capital Bikeshare totaled $ 5 million , with additional first @-@ year operating costs of US $ 2 @.@ 3 million for 100 stations . The District 's share of planning , implementation and first @-@ year operating costs was partially financed by a $ 6 million grant by the United States Department of Transportation . Arlington County 's operating cost share of the plan was $ 835 @,@ 000 for the first year , funded by public contributions including a grant from the Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation as well as subsidies from Arlington County Transportation , Crystal City Business Improvement District , and the Potomac Yard Transportation Management Association . In April 2011 , Capital Bikeshare administrators said they expect earned revenue to cover 50 % of the system 's annual operating costs . The District of Columbia also planned to sell advertising on Capital Bikeshare stations with the goal of raising US $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 By February 2011 , Capital Bikeshare had expanded to 100 stations in the District of Columbia and 14 stations in the Pentagon City , Potomac Yard , and Crystal City neighborhoods in Arlington . In September 2011 , Capital Bikeshare announced it had reached 18 @,@ 000 members and one million rides in its first year of operation , doubling initial expectations . During the summer of 2013 , riders averaged almost 300 @,@ 000 rides per month . That means that during the peak season , each bike is being used about four times per day . Throughout 2013 , users traveled almost 2 @.@ 5 million miles and burned 100 million <unk> average weekly savings was $ 15 @.@ 39 , resulting in about $ 370 @,@ 000 in annual transportation cost savings for the approximately 24 @,@ 000 members . 
 Capital Bikeshare has grown steadily , which has driven demand for more stations and bikes . Transportation agencies in each jurisdiction select the location of the rental stations , as well as the number of bike docks , depending on planners ' estimates of local demand . Most of the system 's users live in or near the city center ; stations in the poorer eastern portion of the city are comparatively underused . 
 The National Park Service originally prohibited Capital Bikeshare stations on the property it manages , including large areas such as the National Mall . However , the agency later reversed itself and said that it would work to include new stations in future expansions . The first two of five approved Capital Bikeshare stations opened on the National Mall on March 16 , 2012 , shortly before the start of the 2012 National Cherry Blossom Festival . 
 Also in March 2012 , the Arlington County government gave away 550 red Capital Bikeshare helmets and twice as many flashing safety lights as part of a promotion . 
 In August 2015 , Capital Bikeshare announced that it had found a new equipment supplier and would add 435 bikes and 40 stations in D.C. and 140 bikes and 20 stations elsewhere . It also reported having 29 @,@ 000 members who had taken a total of more than 10 @.@ 5 million trips . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 In 2010 , a local transportation official said that the system could be expanded further throughout the D.C. area and have as many as 5 @,@ 000 bicycles within a few years . 
 In fall 2011 , the District Department of Transportation announced plans to add 32 stations and expand 18 existing ones by year 's end , then add 50 more in 2012 . 
 Arlington County also announced plans to add 30 stations in fall 2011 , primarily along the densely populated corridor between the Rosslyn and Ballston neighborhoods , and 30 more in 2012 . 
 In October 2011 , the neighboring city of Alexandria , Virginia , approved plans to deploy 54 bicycles at six stations in the Old Town and Carlyle neighborhoods in 2012 , then add six more stations in 2013 . The cost of the first year would be $ 400 @,@ 000 , including operating costs of $ 100 @,@ 440 . The first eight Alexandria stations were deployed in August 2012 . 
 Montgomery County , Maryland , similarly approved plans to install 20 stations and 200 bikes in the Rockville and Shady Grove areas near Washington Metro stations and high @-@ traffic destinations such as Montgomery College and Rockville Town Center . The expansion will be paid for by a $ 1 @.@ 288 million grant from the National Capital Region Transportation Planning Board with a $ 688 @,@ 000 local match . Officials also cited plans to add 50 stations and 400 bicycles in southern areas of the county , including Bethesda , Silver Spring , Friendship Heights , and Takoma Park . However , bicycling advocates cautioned that clusters of stations in the county could be too far from each other as well as the larger network of stations within neighboring Washington , D.C. There was also concern that the county has too few bike lanes and trails to support the expected number of users . Despite these concerns , Montgomery County added its first stations in May 2013 . 
 By September 2012 , these additions and expansions were to have brought the network to 288 stations and 2 @,@ 800 bikes in four jurisdictions . 
 August 2015 media reports indicate about 60 stations will be added , following difficulties with supply related to supplier bankruptcy . 
 = = Technology = = 
 Capital Bikeshare uses a system designed by Montreal @-@ based <unk> Urban Solutions . 
 Rental stations are automated and powered by solar panels , allowing them to be located anywhere space is available . A wireless data link connects the docks and station kiosk to a central bike @-@ tracking and billing database . Riders can use the Capital Bikeshare website and smartphone applications to see where rental stations are located and how many bikes and empty docks they have . 
 Each bike dock has a repair button ; users press this to report a damaged or malfunctioning bike and take it out of service . Riders are expected to notify Capital Bikeshare if a bike is unable to dock at a station and are responsible for the rented bike until it has been returned . 
 The red @-@ colored aluminum unisex bicycles have three gears , an adjustable seat , and a front basket as well as a headlight and twin red taillights that are powered whenever the bicycle is in motion . 
 Alta Bike Share vans redistribute bikes among stations and pick up bikes for maintenance . Unlike some other networks , Capital Bikeshare maintains service year @-@ round except during severe weather . 
 In May 2011 , it cost $ 41 @,@ 500 to install a station with six docks and $ 49 @,@ 300 each for larger stations with 14 docks . Each bicycle cost about $ 1 @,@ 000 , and the annual operating cost per bike was $ 1 @,@ 860 . 
 = = Pricing = = 
 Capital Bikeshare has five payment options . As of July 2016 , casual riders may purchase a single trip ( $ 2 ) , a 24 @-@ hour pass ( $ 8 ) , or a 3 @-@ day pass ( $ 17 ) at any bike station . After swiping a credit card at the station 's kiosk , a rider gets a code to unlock a bike . Riders may also sign up online for monthly ( $ 28 ) , annual ( $ 85 ) , or annual installment ( $ 96 , paid in monthly increments of $ 8 ) passes ; these riders are mailed an RFID key that can unlock bikes without entering a code . The new , one @-@ trip fare of $ 2 was introduced in June 2016 during WMATA 's <unk> program , which would shut down segments of the Washington Metro for the following year . 
 Any rider may take unlimited trips of up to 30 minutes , as measured from the time the bike is withdrawn from a dock to the time it is returned . Longer trips incur fees for each additional half @-@ hour on a scale that rises from $ 1 @.@ 50 to $ 8 @.@ 00 . This pricing structure is designed to encourage short trips from place to place instead of longer leisure rides . If a destination station is full , riders can use the kiosk to get 15 more free minutes to return the bike to another location . 
 A replacement fee of $ 1 @,@ 000 is charged to the credit card on file if a rented bike is not returned within 24 hours . 
 = Amelia ( novel ) = 
 Amelia is a sentimental novel written by Henry Fielding and published in December 1751 . It was the fourth and final novel written by Fielding , and it was printed in only one edition while the author was alive , although 5 @,@ 000 copies were published of the first edition . Amelia follows the life of Amelia and Captain William Booth after they are married . It contains many allusions to classical literature and focuses on the theme of marriage and feminine intelligence , but Fielding 's stance on gender issues cannot be determined because of the lack of authorial commentary discussing the matter . Although the novel received praise from many writers and critics , it received more criticism from Fielding 's competition , possibly resulting from the " paper war " in which the author was involved . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fielding began writing Amelia in the autumn of 1749 . He turned to his own life for inspiration , and the main character , Amelia , was possibly modelled on Fielding 's first wife , Charlotte , who died in November 1744 . Likewise , the hero , Captain Booth , was partly modelled after Fielding himself . It was advertised on 2 December 1751 by the publisher , Andrew Millar , in The General Advertiser . In it , Millar claimed that " to satisfy the earnest Demand of the Publick , this Work is now printing at four Presses ; but the Proprietor not @-@ withstanding finds it impossible to get them bound in Time without spoiling the Beauty of the Impression , and therefore will sell them sew 'd at Half a Guinea a Sett . " 
 Millar ordered William Strahan to print the work on two of his printing presses to produce a total of 5 @,@ 000 copies for the first run of the work ( in comparison , only 3 @,@ 500 copies of The History of Tom Jones , a Foundling were printed for the first and second edition ) . This amount proved to be enough for Millar to sell , although he had to back down from a second printing of 3 @,@ 000 copies immediately after the first edition to ensure that the originals were completely sold . The work had two German translations published in 1752 , a Dutch translation in 1756 , and a French edition in 1762 . 
 It finally went into a second edition in 1762 . However , this edition was posthumous and in <unk> 's Works of Henry Fielding . In the prefatory essay , the Works editor , Arthur Murphy , claimed that " Amelia , in this edition , is printed from a copy corrected by the author 's own hand . The <unk> passages , which <unk> had thrown out , are here retrenched ; and the work , upon the whole , will be found nearer perfection than it was in its original state . " Although most critics agree that Murphy was telling the truth , it is possible that only some of the alterations were completed by Fielding and that other alterations were by Murphy or another editor employed by Murphy . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Amelia is a domestic novel taking place largely in London during 1733 . It describes the hardships suffered by a young couple newly married . Against her mother 's wishes , Amelia marries Captain William Booth , a dashing young army officer . The couple run away to London . In Book II , William is unjustly imprisoned in Newgate , and is subsequently seduced by Miss Matthews . During this time , it is revealed that Amelia was in a carriage accident and that her nose was ruined . Although this brings about jokes at Amelia 's behalf , Booth refuses to regard her as anything but beautiful . 
 Amelia , by contrast , resists the attentions paid to her by several men in William 's absence and stays faithful to him . She forgives his transgression , but William soon draws them into trouble again as he accrues gambling debts trying to lift the couple out of poverty . He soon finds himself in debtors ' prison . Amelia then discovers that she is her mother 's heiress and , the debt being settled , William is released and the couple retires to the country . 
 The second edition contains many changes to the text . A whole chapter on a dispute between doctors was completely removed , along with various sections of dialogue and praise of the Glastonbury Waters . The edition also contains many new passages , such as an addition of a scene in which a doctor repairs Amelia 's nose and Booth remarking on the surgery ( in Book II , Chapter 1 , where Booth is talking to Miss Matthews ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Virgilian = = = 
 There are strong Virgilian overtones in Amelia . Fielding claimed , in his 28 January The Covent Garden Journal , that there were connections of the work to both Homer and Virgil , but that the " learned Reader will see that the latter was the noble model , which I made use of on this Occasion . " The parallels are between more than the plot , and the novel follows a " twelve @-@ book structure " that matches the Aeneid . 
 Even the characters have Virgilian counterparts , with Booth being comparable to Aeneas and Miss Mathews Fielding 's version of Dido . Fielding does not shy away from such comparisons , but embraces them with his use of the line " <unk> quid Foemina <unk> " ( translated as " what a woman can do in frenzy " ) , in Book IV , Chapter Five ; this line is directly taken from the Aeneid . Likewise , Fielding 's bailiff <unk> Virgil 's " dolus an virtus , quis in <unk> <unk> " ( translated as " whether deceit or valour , who would ask in the enemy " ) when he says " <unk> and Virtus , quis in a Hostess <unk> " in Book VIII , Chapter One . However , these are not the only quotes , and Fielding cites many passages of Latin and Greek while not providing direct translations for them . To these Virgilian parallels , Samuel Richardson claimed that Fielding " must mean Cotton 's Virgil <unk> ; where the women are drabs , and the men scoundrels . " 
 = = = Feminine intelligence = = = 
 Although the novel deals with marriage and life after marriage , it also gives three " histories " : the history of Miss Mathews , Mrs Bennet , and Mrs Atkinson . It is the third story , that of Mrs Atkinson , which demonstrates feminine intellect . According to her story , she received her understanding of the classics from her father . To demonstrate her knowledge , she quotes from the Aeneid , an action that Fielding describes , in Book VI , Chapter 8 , as her performing " with so strong an Emphasis , that she almost frightened Amelia out of her Wits . " However , Fielding follows that by claiming she spoke on " that great Absurdity , ( for so she termed it , ) of excluding Women from Learning ; for which they were equally qualified with the Men , and in which so many had made so notable a Proficiency " and this idea was not accepted by either Amelia or Mrs. Booth . Unlike the two women , Dr Harrison criticises Mrs Atkinson and declares , in Book X , Chapter One , that women are " incapable of Learning . " 
 A dispute forms between the various characters on the issue , and Sergeant Atkinson , Mrs Atkinson 's husband , tries to stop the fight . Although his words provoke a harsh reaction from his wife , they soon come to accept each other 's intellectual capabilities . However , Mrs Atkinson 's status as a woman educated in the classics and as an advocate for other women to be educated , could have provoked deeper tension between herself and her husband . Her feminine intellect was described by Jill Campbell as a " threatening " force which her husband once reacted violently against , even though his violence was contained to him acting on it only in a dream @-@ like state . The actual nature of the plot lacks a certainty that would allow an overall stance on women 's issues to be determined , and it is not even certain as to where Fielding stood on the issue . His lack of authorial comments seems to reinforce a possible " anxieties about gender confusion " in the plot , and the characters ' sexual identities are blurred ; the dispute between Mrs Atkinson and Dr Harrison continues until the very end of the novel . Fielding did not comment on the gender roles , but Richardson 's friend , Anne Donnellan , did , and she asked , " must we suppose that if a woman knows a little Greek and Latin she must be a drunkard , and virago ? " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 John Cleland was one of the first reviewers of the novel , and in the December 1751 Monthly Review , claimed the work as " the boldest stroke that has yet been attempted in this species of writing " and that Fielding " takes up his heroine at the very point at which all his predecessors have dropped their capital personages . " However , he also stated that parts of the novel " stand in need of an apology . " A review in the London Magazine in the same month claimed that there were too many anachronisms . This piece was also the first to mention Amelia 's nose , and on it the writer claims that Fielding " should have taken care to have had Amelia 's nose so compleatly cured , and set to rights , after it being beat all to pieces , by the help of some eminent surgeon , that not so much as a scar remained . " John Hill soon attacked Amelia in the London Daily Advertiser on 8 January 1752 where he claimed that the book 's title character " could charm the World without the Help of a Nose . " 
 During this time , personal works , such as Fielding 's Amelia , became targets for a " paper war " between various London writers . Fielding was quick to respond , and on 11 January 1752 in a piece published in The Covent @-@ Garden Journal , he ironically stated : " a famous Surgeon , who absolutely cured one Mrs Amelia Booth , of a violent Hurt in her Nose , insomuch , that she had scarce a Scar left on it , intends to bring Actions against several ill @-@ meaning and slanderous People , who have reported that the said Lady had no Nose , merely because the Author of her History , in a Hurry , forgot to inform his Readers of that Particular . " However , Hill was not the only one to attack during this time ; Bonnell Thornton wrote satires of Amelia in the Drury @-@ Lane Journal . Thornton 's satires were first published on 16 January 1752 and included a fake advertisement for a parody novel called " <unk> " , playing off of title of Fielding 's parody Shamela . He later parodied the work on 13 February 1752 in a piece called " A New Chapter in Amelia . " Tobias Smollett joined in and published the pamphlet <unk> Hilding anonymously on 15 January 1752 . Although there was much criticism , there was some support for the work , and an anonymous pamphlet was written to attack " Hill and ' the Town ' " and praise the novel . On 25 January 1752 , Fielding defended his work again by bringing the novel before the imaginary " Court of Censorial Enquiry " , in which the prosecutors are Hill and the other critics and it is they , not Amelia that are truly put on trial . 
 Fielding 's rival , Samuel Richardson , declared in February 1752 that the novel " is as dead as if it had been published forty years ago , as to sale . " Previously , he attacked the " <unk> " of the novel and claimed that " his brawls , his <unk> , his gaols , his <unk> @-@ houses , are all drawn from what he has seen and known . " However , Richardson also claimed to have never read Amelia but , years later , Sir Walter Scott argued that Amelia was " a continuation of Tom Jones . " The second edition of Amelia was criticized for its various changes to the text . Some aspects of the revision , such as removing of Fielding 's Universal Register Office , were seen as " damaging " the work , although they were intended to remove anachronisms . In The Bible in Spain ( 1843 ) George Borrow , describing his first visit to Lisbon , wrote : " Let travellers devote one entire morning to inspecting the Arcos and the Mai das <unk> , after which they may repair to the English church and cemetery , Pere @-@ la @-@ chaise in miniature , where , if they be of England , they may well be excused if they kiss the cold tomb , as I did , of the author of Amelia , the most singular genius which their island ever produced , whose works it has long been the fashion to abuse in public and to read in secret . " 
 In recent years , critics have examined various aspects of the novel that were previous ignored ; on the Virgilian images in Amelia , Ronald Paulson claimed that they " elevate the domestic ( marriage ) plot and to connect it with public issues of a degenerating society and nation . " However , those like Peter Sabor do not agree that the themes create " an elevating experience " . 
 = Bunnies & Burrows = 
 Bunnies & Burrows ( B & B ) is a role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) inspired by the novel Watership Down . Published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976 , the game centered on intelligent rabbits . It introduced several innovations to role @-@ playing game design , being the first game to allow players to have non @-@ humanoid roles , and the first to have detailed martial arts and skill systems . Fantasy Games Unlimited published a second edition of the game in 1982 , and the game was modified and republished by Steve Jackson Games as an official GURPS supplement in 1992 . 
 As rabbits , player characters are faced with dangers mirroring those in the real world . The only true " monsters " in the game are humans , but there are many predators and natural hazards . The characters ' position in the food chain promotes an emphasis on role @-@ playing and problem solving over combat . 
 = = History = = 
 Originally published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976 , only two years after the first role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons was published , this edition is now long out of print . The game was inspired by Richard Adams ' fantasy novel Watership Down , and the players were given the opportunity to take on the role of rabbits . As such , the game emphasized role @-@ playing over combat for , according to Steffan O 'Sullivan , " You 're playing a rabbit , after all – how much combat do you want to do ? " David M. Ewalt , in his book Of Dice and Men , commented that Bunnies & Burrows " pushed setting even farther " than other early RPGs like Dungeons & Dragons and En Garde ! , as the " player characters were intelligent rabbits and had to compete for food , avoid predators , and deal with internal warren politics " . The poor production values provided a barrier to the acceptance of the game . The art , by Charles Loving , was " sketchy and of poor quality " , while the document as a whole gave the appearance of having been typewritten . 
 Building on this first edition , in 1979 , B. Dennis Sustare wrote " Different Worlds Present the World of Druid 's Valley : A Bunnies & Burrows Campaign " in Different Worlds , a magazine published by Chaosium . It detailed how to combine the world of Bunnies & Burrows with other fantasy worlds . This was followed by the mini @-@ adventure " The Jackrabbits ' Lair " , written by Daniel J. Maxfield , in Pegasus , a magazine published by Judges Guild . 
 A second edition of Bunnies & Burrows was printed in 1982 by Fantasy Games Unlimited , although the continuing popularity of the first edition is evidenced by how it was still being actively played in 2008 . 
 During a rise of " retro " games in the late 1980s and early 1990s , Steve Jackson Games entered negotiations with Dennis Sustare and Scott Robinson , the current owners of the Bunnies & Burrows copyright , to publish an official GURPS supplement . In 1988 , O 'Sullivan wrote an unofficial conversion of Bunnies & Burrows to GURPS while the negotiations continued . He indicated that he hoped to one day work on the official supplement . GURPS Bunnies & Burrows was published in 1992 . 
 The setting also had an unofficial conversion in 2004 to be used in <unk> : The Anything RPG by Boyd Mayberry under their " Rules for Free Fan @-@ Supplements and Articles " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The original game was very innovative for its time ( less than two years after the first published RPG ) . Not only could you play non @-@ humanoids for the first time , but it was the first role @-@ playing game to have detailed martial arts rules , the first attempt at a skill system , and the first RPG to appeal as widely to women as to men . 
 Bunnies & Burrows was the first role @-@ playing game to allow for non @-@ humanoid play . In addition , it was also the first role @-@ playing game to have detailed martial arts rules ( known as " Bun Fu " ) and the first attempt at a skill system . For its time , the game was considered " light years " ahead of the Original Dungeons & Dragons . 
 Players of Bunnies & Burrows take the role of rabbits as their player characters . Interaction with many different animal species is part of normal gameplay . Humans , whose thought processes and motivations are completely alien , are the only monster to be encountered . 
 Bunnies & Burrows has the advantage of offering players an intuitive grasp of relative dangers and appropriate actions not possible in game worlds that are substantially fictional . For example , a player is told their character is confronted with a fox . There is an immediate intuition on the amount of peril a rabbit is facing . Although player characters are substantially weaker than many of the dangers they face , the game is one of the first to encourage problem solving and outwitting obstacles , rather than out @-@ fighting them . 
 The mechanics of the role @-@ playing game system were created specifically for Bunnies & Burrows , common at the time of its original publishing . It features eight abilities and eight classes . The task resolution system is based on rolls of percentile dice . Although newer systems have updated game mechanics significantly , the ideas presented in Bunnies & Burrows created the framework for modern role @-@ playing games . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although the game had " incredible role @-@ playing potential " , the concept of role @-@ playing rabbits can be viewed as bizarre , and as such at least one commentator believes that " most people thought it was stupid " when it was first released . This view is mirrored by Lev Lafayette , who , when describing his first exposure to the game , says " Oh , how we laughed . ' Who on earth would want to roleplay a rabbit ? ' , we mocked . ' What 's the point ? You can 't do anything ! ' " . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Bunnies & Burrows ( 1976 ) , Fantasy Games Unlimited 
 Bunnies & Burrows ( Second edition ) ( 1982 ) , Fantasy Games Unlimited 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Different Worlds Present the World of Druid 's Valley : A Bunnies & Burrows Campaign ( B. Dennis Sustare , 1979 ) . Different Worlds , Chaosium 
 The Jackrabbits ' Lair ( Daniel J. Maxfield ) . Pegasus , Judges Guild 
 = Martin O 'Donnell = 
 Martin " Marty " O 'Donnell ( born May 1 , 1955 ) is an American composer known for his work on video game developer Bungie 's series , such as Myth , Oni , Halo , and Destiny . O 'Donnell collaborated with his musical colleague Michael Salvatori for many of the scores ; he has also directed voice talent and sound design for the Halo trilogy . O 'Donnell was Bungie 's audio lead until April 11 , 2014 . 
 O 'Donnell began his music career writing television and radio jingles as well as scoring for radio and film . O 'Donnell moved to composing video game music when his company , TotalAudio , did the sound design for the 1997 title Riven . After producing the music for Myth II , Bungie contracted O 'Donnell to work on their other projects , including Oni and the project that would become Halo : Combat Evolved . O 'Donnell ended up joining the Bungie staff only ten days before the studio was bought by Microsoft , and would be the audio director for all Bungie projects until he was fired . 
 O 'Donnell 's score to the Halo trilogy has been called iconic , earning him several awards , and the commercial soundtrack release of the music to Halo 2 was the best @-@ selling video game soundtrack of all time in the United States . He then went on to compose the scores to Halo 3 and Halo : Reach , released on September 25 , 2007 , and September 14 , 2010 , respectively . His final work for Bungie was composing music for the 2014 video game Destiny . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 O 'Donnell describes his upbringing as " typical " ; he received piano lessons and wanted to start a rock band when he reached junior high school . His father made films while his mother taught piano . Despite his interest in progressive and fusion rock , O 'Donnell studied the classical component of music and composition at Wheaton College Conservatory of Music and received his Masters of Music Degree in composition with honors from the University of Southern California in the early 1980s . 
 After getting his degree , O 'Donnell moved to Chicago , where he expected that he would teach at the American Conservatory of Music . The job fell through , and instead he worked as a grip in the film and television business . O 'Donnell began his musical career in the field after one of his colleagues who knew of his music background approached him to write for his film . O 'Donnell talked to his friend Michael Salvatori , who had his own recording studio , and offered to split the profits from the job with him ; the two became constant partners . 
 After completing a film score and a few commercials , the two decided to quit their day jobs and produce music in Chicago ; they founded a production company , TotalAudio . O 'Donnell wrote the jingles for Mr. Clean and Flintstones Vitamins . After fifteen years of composing for TV and radio commercials , he decided that he wanted to work on game soundtracks and move on from commercial @-@ sounding music . " I was hoping to find some other medium that would be new and cutting @-@ edge and sort of the Wild West , " he recalled . 
 = = Video games = = 
 In 1993 , Dick Staub , a Chicago radio personality and friend of O 'Donnell 's , asked if his eighteen @-@ year @-@ old son Josh could visit O 'Donnell 's studio , as he was interested in computer games and audio . O 'Donnell agreed , and in talking with Josh learned that he had friends in Spokane , Washington who were making a game O 'Donnell had never heard of called Myst . In hearing the theme music to the game , O 'Donnell realized that the game industry was making great strides in creating " legitimate music " that contained dramatic elements . O 'Donnell became acquainted with the game 's developers , including brothers Rand and Robyn Miller , and was hired four years later as a sound designer for Myst 's sequel , Riven . Among the games Riven 's developers would play in their downtime was a title called Marathon , created by Chicago @-@ based Bungie Studios . On returning to Chicago O 'Donnell emailed a Bungie staffer and pursued them for a job . 
 TotalAudio produced the music for Bungie 's Myth : The Fallen Lords the same year . The company later composed the music for Valkyrie Studio 's Septerra Core : Legacy of the Creator , during which O 'Donnell met Steve Downes , whom he would later recommend as the voice actor for the Master Chief . O 'Donnell described the work for Septerra Core as his most difficult assignment ; during the production the TotalAudio studio burned to the ground and O 'Donnell had to be hoisted through a window in order to save some 20 hours of recordings . 
 Soon after producing the music for Myth II , Bungie contracted O 'Donnell for several of Bungie 's other projects , including the third @-@ person game Oni . In 1999 , Bungie wanted to re @-@ negotiate the contracts for Oni , and the negotiations resulted in O 'Donnell joining the Bungie team , only ten days before the company was bought by Microsoft . O 'Donnell was one of only a handful of Bungie employees who remained working at the company since then , until his termination as of April 2014 . While O 'Donnell worked at Bungie , Salvatori handled the business side of TotalAudio . 
 = = Halo series = = 
 After producing the music for Oni , O 'Donnell was tasked with composing the music for Bungie 's next project , which would be unveiled at E3 2000 . After talking with Joseph Staten , O 'Donnell decided the music needed to be " big , exciting , and unusual with a classical orchestra touch to give it some weight and stature . We also wanted it to have some sort of ' ancient ' feel to it . " O 'Donnell came up with the idea of opening the piece with <unk> chant and jotted down the melody in his car . Because he did not know how long the presentation would be , O 'Donnell created " <unk> " opening and closing sections that could be expanded or cut as time required to back up a rhythmic middle section . The music was recorded and sent to New York the same night the piece was finished ; the resulting music became the basis for the Halo series ' " highly recognizable " signature sound , and what has been called one of the best @-@ known video game themes . The use of chant in the main theme has been credited with contributing to popular interest in the genre . Halo 's music used an interactive engine to change music in response to player 's actions ; this non @-@ linear method has since become widespread . The scores for Halo and its sequel Halo 2 garnered awards such as The Game Developer 's Choice Award and Best Original Video Game Soundtrack from Rolling Stone . 
 The music for Halo 3 contained refinements and revisions to previous themes heard in the series , as O 'Donnell stressed the importance of using previous motifs in the final installment of the trilogy ; the composer wanted to " blow out " the epic sounds from the first game . O 'Donnell also introduced a distinctive piano theme which had never been heard before , and first made its appearance in the Halo 3 announcement teaser . In an interview , O 'Donnell stated that he has always approached music from the keyboard , and that at the Electronic Entertainment Expo — where the trailer would first be shown — he had a feeling that , " no [ other announcement ] would start with a piano . " O 'Donnell planned on composing the music " at the last minute " , saying he had no intention of producing a large amount of music that would never be used . " It drives everyone crazy but it worked for me in the past and it works for the game in the best way . Writing music before the end just doesn 't work for me , " he said . 
 For Halo 3 : ODST , a planned expansion to Halo 3 that became a full game , O 'Donnell and Salvatori abandoned all previous Halo themes and started anew . Due to ODST 's shift to a new protagonist , O 'Donnell created new music that was evocative of past Halo but branched in a different direction . Since Bungie was aiming for a smaller , detective story feel , O 'Donnell felt that a jazz @-@ influenced approach worked best in echoing the film noir atmosphere . 
 In creating music for Halo : Reach , a prequel to Combat Evolved , O 'Donnell wanted to create music with a " grittier " feel because of the dark nature of the story . Reach was Bungie 's last Halo project . O 'Donnell called the prospect of writing new music both a challenge and a relief to step away from the iconic themes of Halo . 
 In 2015 , music from the Halo series was voted by listeners into the Classic FM Hall of Fame for the first time , reaching position 244 . 
 = = Destiny and post @-@ Bungie = = 
 In 2013 , O 'Donnell began composition of an eight @-@ movement symphonic suite entitled Music of the Spheres . Collaborating with famed Beatles member Paul McCartney as well as Michael Salvatori and C. Paul Johnson , the symphony contained music to be implemented in the 2014 video game , Destiny , as well as any future installments of the franchise . On April 11 , 2014 , O 'Donnell announced via Twitter he had been fired from Bungie " without cause " . In June 2014 , he filed a lawsuit against Bungie president Harold Ryan , claiming he was terminated without cause and that Ryan withheld pay for vacation and sabbatical time . In a response filed in Washington 's Superior Court , Ryan denied wrongdoing . The suit was settled in June 2014 , with a final arbitration ruling decided September 4 , 2015 , in which the court stated that " [ ... ] Bungie breached the duty of good faith and fair dealing when it caused the closure of O 'Donnell 's stock and denied him any participation in the Profit Participation Plan " . At the 2015 D.I.C.E. awards , Destiny was awarded Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition and Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design . In 2015 , O 'Donnell founded video game development studio <unk> Games . 
 = = Collections = = 
 O 'Donnell 's music has been packaged into several soundtrack collections . For Halo 's music , O 'Donnell created " frozen " arrangements that represented an approximation of a play @-@ through of the games . The Halo Original Soundtrack sold over 40 @,@ 000 copies , and was followed by two different releases of the music to Halo 2 . The two volumes of the Halo 2 Original Soundtrack were produced by Nile Rodgers , with the first album being released in sync with the video game in 2004 and became the best @-@ selling game soundtrack of all time in the United States . The second album was released more than a year after the soundtrack had been mixed and mastered . 
 The Halo 3 Original Soundtrack was released in November 2007 , and featured a fan contribution that was the select winner from a pool of entries judged by O 'Donnell , Rodgers , and others . All of O 'Donnell 's work on the series was repackaged as Halo Trilogy — The Complete Original Soundtracks in December 2008 , alongside preview tracks written by Halo Wars composer Stephen Rippy . The music to ODST was released as a two @-@ disc set to coincide with the game 's release on September 22 , 2009 . Reach 's soundtrack was available in digital formats the same day as the game 's release on September 14 ; the physical two @-@ disc soundtrack was released September 28 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 O 'Donnell has used an Apple Macintosh computer for composition . In an interview O 'Donnell wished that his software would easily upgrade to newer revisions ; " for the last twenty years of technology , every time a ' new ' version of something comes out , the old version gets trashed and I find myself unable to do something that I used to depend on , " he said . O 'Donnell was involved in the implementation of his music as well as the composition , and was Bungie 's Audio lead . He composed at Bungie from a sound @-@ proofed room in the corner of Bungie 's office , dubbed the " Ivory Tower " . 
 O 'Donnell said in an interview that he feels that one problem with games is those that play music non @-@ stop , which he feels detracts from the overall impact . Composers are forced to either write ambient music , he says , or very light music that is not emotionally driven , which he said is a detriment . O 'Donnell prefers to write music towards the end of the development cycle , because he would rather score the final timing for things like cinematics and gameplay changes . O 'Donnell credits part of the success of the Halo theme to his background writing jingles . For that music , O 'Donnell had to make sure he could write music that would " get in people 's heads " after 15 to 30 seconds . O 'Donnell pushed Bungie to spend money on hiring singers and musicians to record the theme before Macworld as a way to present a strong showing . 
 Among the video game composers O 'Donnell admires are Jeremy Soule , Jason Hayes , Koji Kondo , and Nobuo Uematsu , but he notes that he is older than most fellow game composers and that he was not directly influenced by them . Instead classic music by Beethoven , Brahms , and Barber and progressive rock groups like Jethro Tull and Genesis informed O 'Donnell 's taste and works . 
 In addition to composition , O 'Donnell also arranges his work . He created a special arrangement that was used for a Halo 3 segment of Video Games Live in London , after which O 'Donnell appeared . He has also appeared with and without Salvatori at other shows featuring his music , including later Video Games Live tours and Play ! A Video Game Symphony . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 O 'Donnell has been married for more than 30 years to his wife , Marcie , and has two daughters , Alison and Christine . His children were part of a singing choir for the Flintstones <unk> Vitamins commercials . His father did voice work for Myth as the " Surly Dwarf " , as well as " The Prophet of Objection " in Halo 2 . 
 O 'Donnell is a self @-@ described political conservative , and Bungie coworkers described him as the most right @-@ leaning employee at the company . Despite his extensive work with Bungie , O 'Donnell remained co @-@ owner and president of TotalAudio , although as of 2009 the company had not done any non @-@ Halo work since 2001 . 
 = Flannan Isles = 
 The Flannan Isles ( Scottish Gaelic : Na h @-@ Eileanan <unk> , pronounced [ nə <unk> <unk> ̪ an ̪ <unk> ] ) or alternatively , the Seven Hunters are a small island group in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland , approximately 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) west of the Isle of Lewis . They may take their name from Saint Flannan , the seventh @-@ century Irish preacher and abbot . 
 The islands have been devoid of permanent residents since the automation of Flannan Isles Lighthouse in 1971 . They are the location of an enduring mystery that occurred in December 1900 , when all three lighthouse keepers vanished without trace . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The islands are split into three groups : the main cluster of rocks that lie to the northeast include the two principal islands of Eilean Mòr ( Big Isle ) , which is approximately 17 @.@ 5 hectares ( 43 acres ) in extent , and Eilean Taighe ( House Isle ) ; to the south lie <unk> ( Eastward Isle ) and Sgeir <unk> ; while the main western outcrops are Eilean a ' <unk> ( Isle of the Blacksmith ) , <unk> ( which has a natural rock arch ) , and <unk> <unk> ( Sad Sunk Rock ) . The total land area amounts to approximately 50 hectares ( 120 acres ) and the highest point is 88 metres ( 289 ft ) above sea level on Eilean Mòr . 
 The geology consists of a dark breccia of gabbros and <unk> intruding Archaean gneiss . In prehistoric times , the area was covered by ice sheets that spread from Scotland out into the Atlantic Ocean . After the last retreat of the ice circa 20 @,@ 000 years BP , sea levels were as much as 122 metres ( 400 ft ) lower than at present and it is likely that the existing islands were part of a much larger land mass , although still separated from the Outer Hebrides by many miles of open water . Steadily rising sea levels thereafter would have reduced the land remaining above sea level to its present extent . 
 There are two possible landing places for yachts visiting Eilean Mòr to the east and west , although this may be hazardous given the regular heavy swells . 
 = = History = = 
 As the name implies , Eilean Taighe hosts a ruined stone shelter . Eilean Mòr is home to the lighthouse and a ruined chapel dedicated to St. Flannan , which the lighthouse keepers referred to as the " dog kennel " because of its small size . These ruined bothies were described collectively by the Ancient Monuments Commission as The <unk> of the Clan McPhail , or <unk> Chlann ‘ ic <unk> . It is not entirely clear which St. Flannan the chapel honours . It is likely that the honoree was either the seventh century Abbot of Killaloe in County Clare or alternatively , the half brother of the eighth century St. Ronan who gave his name to the nearby island of North Rona . There was also a certain Flann , son of an Abbot of Iona , called Maol @-@ <unk> , who died in 890 and may have loaned his name to these isolated isles . 
 The archipelago also is known as ' The Seven Hunters ' . During the Middle Ages they also may have been called the ' Seven Haley ( Holy ) Isles ' . Martin Martin ( 1703 ) lists a number of unusual customs associated with regular pilgrimages to Eilean Mòr , such as removing one 's hat and making a <unk> turn when reaching the plateau . It is possible that the saint or his acolytes lived on Eilean Mòr and perhaps , on Eilean Taighe as well . It is unlikely , however , that there were permanent residents on the islands once the Celtic Church fell into decline in the Hebrides ( as a result of ninth century Viking invasions ) , until the construction of the lighthouse and its occupation very shortly before the dawn of the twentieth century . 
 Flannan Isles Lighthouse was built near the highest point on Eilean Mòr for the Northern Lighthouse Board between 1895 and 1899 . In 1900 , its three keepers disappeared without trace , causing much public attention and speculation . The lighthouse is no longer occupied after it was automated in 1971 . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 The isles provide nesting for a population of seabirds , including Atlantic puffins , northern fulmars , European storm @-@ petrels , Leach 's petrels , common shag , and black @-@ legged kittiwakes . There is a gannetry on <unk> . From the late Middle Ages on , <unk> regularly raided these nests for eggs , birds , and feathers . There is a population of rabbits , brought to the islands by the lighthouse keepers , and crofters from Bernera graze sheep on the most fertile islands . <unk> and pilot whales , as well as Risso 's and other species of dolphin are commonly observed in the vicinity . 
 The islands became a Site of Special Scientific Interest in December 1983 . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The Flannan Isles , Eilean Mòr in particular , feature prominently as the location of a murder central to the plot of Coffin Road , a 2016 novel by Peter May . They also feature in Neil Gunn 's epic novel The Silver <unk> . 
 = Crab Bowl Classic = 
 The Crab Bowl Classic , also known as the Crab Bowl or the Maryland – Navy rivalry , is an American college football rivalry between the Maryland Terrapins football team of the University of Maryland and the Navy Midshipmen football team of the United States Naval Academy . The two institutions , located in close proximity in the state of Maryland , first met for a football game in 1905 . Since then , the series has often been marked by controversy , with incidents by players and supporters occurring both on and off the field . The winner of the game is awarded the Crab Bowl Trophy . 
 Navy dominated the series early by winning the first eight games , between 1905 and 1930 , which remains the longest streak . Maryland secured its first win in 1931 at a neutral site in Washington , D.C. After two more meetings , the series was suspended in 1934 when the Maryland administration protested a play . 
 The teams met again in 1950 when Navy had a last @-@ minute opening in its schedule . The Terrapins won three consecutive games from 1950 to 1952 , and the Midshipmen won three from 1958 to 1963 . During the 1964 game , a Maryland player twice flashed an obscene gesture , which prompted Navy to cancel the series again . After contractual obligations were fulfilled with the following year 's game , the series was put on hiatus for 40 years . Maryland and Navy finally resumed the rivalry in 2005 and again in 2010 , with the Terps winning both contests . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Naval Academy and the University of Maryland are separated by about 30 miles in the state of Maryland . The schools by their nature , a Federal service academy and a public university , differ radically in terms of culture and lifestyle . For many years , the University of Maryland possessed the reputation of a blue @-@ collar , working @-@ class school . Some students viewed the Naval Academy , with its strictly regimented culture , as elitist . A former Terrapins linebacker , Jerry Fishman , believed that many Midshipmen " thought they were far superior to the Maryland redneck coal miners . " A former Navy fullback , Pat Donnelly , said that compared to a " public institution , [ the Naval Academy ] was night and day . I think there was a feeling of mutual dislike , but it wasn ’ t personal , it was more institutional . " 
 According to former Maryland head coach ( and former Maryland player ) Ralph Friedgen , the sentiment at Navy has been that beating their archrival " Army is a must , but Maryland is a necessity . " Darryl Hill , who attended both schools and broke the color barrier on each team , said that the Midshipmen " had a saying that beating Army is great , but beating Maryland is a must . " 
 Despite a lopsided start in the early 20th century , the Terps and Midshipmen were evenly matched for most of the history of the series . Between 1931 and 1965 , Navy won six and Maryland five games . In the 2005 season opener , Navy was coming off one of its best seasons in history with a 10 – 2 record the previous year . Maryland struggled later in 2005 , but proved a competitive match for Navy and achieved a last @-@ minute win , 23 – 20 . 
 In addition to proximity and competitiveness , the rivalry was fueled by controversial incidents both on and off the field . Maryland supporters long held that Navy players used unnecessary roughness during play , a charge counter @-@ accused by the Academy after the 1963 game . Some Midshipmen would travel to College Park to meet female students , which served to aggravate the ill feelings . Pranks and vandalism were commonplace on both campuses and exacerbated the already tense situation between Maryland and Navy . 
 = = Series history = = 
 = = = Early Years : 1905 – 1934 = = = 
 On October 25 , 1905 , the team then known as the Maryland Agricultural " Farmers " ( or " Aggies " ) traveled to Annapolis to meet the Navy " Admirals " for the first time . In the first eight games of the series , Navy outscored the teams of the Maryland Agricultural College , Maryland State College ( 1916 and 1917 ) , and finally , the University of Maryland ( 1930 onwards ) by a combined margin of 256 points to 7 . 
 The 1930 game proved to be the first competitive match of the series . Navy scored the only points with a 65 @-@ yard touchdown run on the second play of the game . The remainder was a defensive struggle , and Navy and Maryland advanced to the opposing one- and nine @-@ yard lines , respectively , before being rebuffed . The 1931 match @-@ up was held for the first time at a neutral site , Griffith Stadium in Washington , D.C .. In the first Maryland win of the series , the Terrapins scored the only points on a trick " triple @-@ pass " play . The Maryland administration put a halt to the series in 1934 amidst claims that Navy scored the winning go @-@ ahead , 16 – 13 , on an illegal play after reviewing game tape . 
 = = = Revival : 1950 – 52 = = = 
 The series resumed in 1950 after Georgetown unexpectedly canceled a scheduled game with Navy . Maryland agreed to fill in for Georgetown and hosted the Academy for the Byrd Stadium dedication game in front of a then Washington area @-@ record crowd of 43 @,@ 836 fans . The two teams last met in 1934 , and since that time the Terrapins had hired head coach Jim Tatum . Tatum , an innovator of the split @-@ T offense , had brought consistent success to Maryland in the intervening years . Fearing a renewal of post @-@ game mischief , the Midshipmen attending the match were given strict orders : " Behave like gentlemen and go straight home after the Maryland – Navy football game in College Park tomorrow . No midshipmen will enter the goal post activity or other altercation following the game . " 
 Newspapers predicted that Navy would win the 1950 game due to the inexperience of the Maryland quarterbacks , who were led by 19 @-@ year @-@ old sophomore Jack Scarbath . A week before , Scarbath had his first start in a 27 – 7 loss to Georgia , but he would later become one of Maryland 's greatest quarterbacks and the 1952 Heisman Trophy runner @-@ up . 
 In the first quarter against Navy , Scarbath scored on a quarterback keeper . Before the half , he completed passes to ends Stan <unk> and Pete Augsburger for <unk> and 59 @-@ yard touchdowns . In the third quarter , the Midshipmen responded with a score of their own . In the final period , Maryland end Elmer Wingate returned an interception 34 yards for another touchdown . Then , 54 seconds later , end Lew <unk> recovered a Midshipmen fumble , which allowed Ed Modzelewski to rush five yards for the final score by the Terrapins . Navy scored twice more , but Maryland held on to win , 35 – 21 . 
 In 1951 , pranks soon returned to the two campuses . Midshipmen were caught in the act of painting the letter " N " on various buildings on the Maryland campus and defacing the grass with the Navy emblem . Early in the 1951 game , Navy 's Frank Brady returned a punt 100 yards to take the lead , 7 – 0 . It was the only time of Maryland 's undefeated season that they trailed an opponent . The Terrapins responded , and by the end of the third quarter , they had taken the game in hand , 34 – 7 . Against the stubborn Navy line , Scarbath resorted to the pass more than usual , and completed 16 of 34 for 285 yards . Despite a late Midshipmen surge , Maryland held on for the win , 40 – 21 . 
 = = = Navy resurgence : 1958 – 1963 = = = 
 Maryland struggled after the departure of Jim Tatum , and , in the next meeting in 1958 , Navy routed them , 40 – 14 . In 1959 , Maryland students painted a presumptive final score of " Maryland 59 , Navy 0 " on the statue of Tecumseh in front of Bancroft Hall . The prediction was off the mark , as first @-@ year head coach Wayne Hardin and future Heisman @-@ winning halfback Joe Bellino helped Navy to a victory , 22 – 14 . 
 In the early 1960s , the Terrapins were coached by former Florida State head coach Tom Nugent . While with the Seminoles , Nugent had wanted to recruit a black player , but felt the racial climate there was unsuitable . He said that " the head of the Ku Klux Klan lived in Tallahassee . You 'd come to your car and there 'd be a notice on it announcing a Klan meeting that night . " When he took over at Maryland in 1959 , Nugent saw his opportunity . He instructed the Terrapins ' quarterbacks coach Lee Corso to find a black player who was academically and athletically suited to come to College Park . Corso had been impressed by Roger Staubach 's preferred receiver , Darryl Hill , during a freshman match between Maryland and Navy , and had also heard a rumor that he was considering leaving the Naval Academy . In 1962 , Corso convinced Hill to transfer to Maryland , a school that had just 32 African @-@ Americans in its 35 @,@ 000 student body , and become the first black player in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) . Once there , Hill quickly befriended the team 's only Jew , linebacker Jerry Fishman . 
 = = = Middle @-@ finger incident : 1964 = = = 
 Before the 1964 game , Maryland supporters stole the Navy mascot , Bill the Goat , but what happened in the game itself was far more controversial . Terrapin players said they would seek revenge against Navy for roughing up Darryl Hill in 1963 . Roger Staubach , Navy 's Heisman Trophy quarterback , said that " it was not a friendly game ... Jerry [ Fishman ] did not have friendliness in his eyes . He had an extra mean streak that day . " 
 After a punt return , Fishman was penalized for a hard hit that injured receiver Skip Orr directly in front of the Navy stands , intensifying the ever @-@ present heckling from the crowd . In response , Fishman approached the Brigade of Midshipmen section and raised an extended middle finger . After Fishman was penalized again for a late hit on Staubach , Fishman gave the obscene gesture for a second time . High @-@ ranking Navy officers noticed Fishman 's middle finger and became incensed . Staubach later said that Fishman " told the fans he thought Maryland was number one and got his fingers wrong . " 
 Due to Fishman 's actions , Academy officials allowed their contractual obligation to the series to lapse after the 1965 game . Years later , Bud <unk> , Navy sports information director at the time , said the incident had taken place " when there was still some level of sportsmanship in athletes ... It was so out of character it was stunning . There was no inclination from Navy to seek out a renewal . That untoward act of sportsmanship created a bad taste among people . " Navy head coach Wayne Hardin called Fishman 's act " a disgrace to college football . " Maryland 's head coach , Tom Nugent , had a different opinion and said , " Both teams appeared to be just a bunch of red @-@ blooded guys trying to kill each other . " 
 The game itself was closely contested . Staubach completed 25 passes , but also threw two interceptions . Late in the fourth quarter , Navy took the lead , 22 – 21 . With less than three minutes remaining , the Midshipmen kicked off and halfback Ken <unk> fielded the ball from the Terrapins ' endzone . <unk> returned it 101 yards for a touchdown , and Maryland won the game , 27 – 22 . 
 = = = Another revival : 2005 = = = 
 In 1997 , Maryland had a new head coach , Ron Vanderlinden , and he immediately saw that Navy was a natural rival for his team , but was unaware of the past history . Vanderlinden attempted to renew the game , but it was not until after his relief that the idea materialized . In 2001 , Ralph Friedgen was hired as his successor and spearheaded efforts to reinvigorate the team 's old rivalries , including that against Navy . Friedgen , who played for Maryland as an offensive guard , was at the 1964 game as a recruit . He had also coached for nine years as Georgia Tech 's offensive coordinator , and he harbored nostalgic feelings for a rivalry with the passion of Clean , Old @-@ Fashioned Hate . Friedgen stated that , in addition to the rivalries with West Virginia and Virginia , a renewed in @-@ state series would be even more meaningful . In 2002 , the two schools agreed to meet for the first Crab Bowl Classic in forty years , scheduled for 2005 . 
 The 2005 game was played at the M & T Bank Stadium in Baltimore and attended by 67 @,@ 809 fans . The game was a close contest marked by costly Maryland turnovers and Navy penalties . A Sam Hollenbach interception helped Navy to end the first quarter with a 14 – 3 lead . Immediately before halftime , Maryland kicked a field goal and another third @-@ quarter field goal narrowed the deficit to 14 – 9 . Both Maryland and Navy rushed for touchdowns and failed to make two @-@ point conversions in the final quarter . Maryland took over on their own 18 @-@ yard line after the Navy kick , trailing 20 – 15 with 4 : 37 left on the clock . Hollenbach then engineered a 12 @-@ play , 82 @-@ yard drive capped by an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass and a two @-@ point conversion . Navy took over with one minute left , and completed a first down on their 33 @-@ yard line before an interception sealed the game for the Terps 23 – 20 . 
