 = = = Bowl game snubs : 2006 – 08 = = = 
 In the next postseason , Maryland declined an invitation to face Navy in the Meineke Car Care Bowl in Charlotte , North Carolina . Instead , the Terps had their sights on the Champs Sports Bowl , to play Purdue in Orlando . According to Maryland athletic director Deborah Yow and coach Friedgen , the decision was based on the players ' preference , a bigger school pay @-@ out , warmer weather , a Big Ten opponent , and more media exposure . Also , the Champs Sports Bowl was deemed to be the fourth @-@ most prestigious non @-@ BCS bowl while the Meineke game was number @-@ six . 
 Navy athletic director Chet <unk> stated that Maryland 's snub was the basis for their rejection of Maryland offers to renew the series in 2010 : " The stage was set for everything we had talked about , and all the good things that could have happened for fans — a big rematch , a bowl setting , a great city ... It would have been a sellout in Charlotte , and they decided to do something else . That has caused us to pause a little bit and think through the whole relationship . " Ralph Friedgen responded by saying " He 's gotta get over it , " and that the Navy rivalry never entered into the decision @-@ making process . 
 In 2008 , Navy accepted a bid to play an ACC team in the inaugural EagleBank Bowl at Washington D.C. ' s RFK Stadium . Maryland officials said they could not accept an invitation to the game due to it conflicting with the school 's final exams . <unk> said , " We have exams that week , too , but we 're going to show up ... Everybody has an excuse why they can 't do this or can 't do that . We 're finding a way to accommodate the bowl 's situation . " 
 The Maryland staff reevaluated the EagleBank Bowl but determined it was impossible as many players had an exam on the game date . Yow said , " There are people who are at [ academic ] risk and need every moment of that week to prepare for the exams . " As a result , Navy played Wake Forest for the second time of the season in the EagleBank Bowl and Maryland traveled to Boise , Idaho to play Nevada in the Humanitarian Bowl . 
 = = = Future of the series : 2010 – = = = 
 In 2007 , the two teams agreed to schedule a rematch for September 6 , 2010 . Deborah Yow stated that , " The citizens of Maryland have made it clear they want this game . " Alluding to the Navy athletic staff 's perceived reticence , she added , " We got past the Charlotte situation . " The delay in scheduling was attributed to the need for a three @-@ way contract between Maryland , Navy , and the stadium tenants , the Baltimore Ravens . For this reason , a renewal as far off as 2014 was not seriously discussed . Ralph Friedgen said , " I would like to see it as an annual game , but that 's not for me to decide . " 
 The 2010 game would be the first to award the Crab Bowl Trophy to the winner . 69 @,@ 348 fans turned out to see the game at M & T Bank Stadium in Baltimore , which was considered a home game for Maryland . Navy dominated the game statistically , controlling the ball for nearly 40 minutes and gaining 485 yards . The Midshipmen also converted 10 of 18 third @-@ down chances . But their errors and failure to convert near the goal line cost them dearly . Navy kicker Joe Buckley missed a 32 @-@ yard field goal attempt , quarterback Ricky Dobbs lost a fumble at the Maryland 1 @-@ yard line , and Maryland eventually walked away with a 17 @-@ 14 victory . 
 As of 2011 , there are no future football games scheduled between Navy and Maryland . 
 = = Trophy = = 
 In 2010 , the Touchdown Club of Annapolis commissioned the Crab Bowl Trophy , with underwriting by the D <unk> group . The trophy is a large " pewter bowl overflowing with pewter crabs " , meant to be replicas of the Chesapeake Bay blue crab . The bowl " rests atop a <unk> base " , engraved with " the results of the twenty previous Maryland @-@ Navy games " , which reach back to the rivalry 's origin in 1905 . It was designed by Tilghman Company , a family @-@ owned jewelry store in Annapolis , Maryland . The Touchdown Club , founded in 1954 , has been associated with both teams for a long time , and annually hosts a dinner honoring both teams . The trophy has been well received ; the Terrapins ' Testudo Times newspaper said that having the trophy " awarded by a third party " rather than " having a trophy dreamed up by the administrations at each school to create a more ' rivalry @-@ y ' feel " makes the award seem " more legitimate and less cheesy " . Sports Illustrated included the award in its list of the 40 most " Unusual Trophies in College Football " . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Game results = = 
 = David Icke = 
 David Vaughan Icke ( / <unk> / , born 29 April 1952 ) is an English writer and public speaker . A former footballer and sports broadcaster , Icke has made his name since the 1990s as a professional conspiracy theorist , calling himself a " full time investigator into who and what is really controlling the world . " He is the author of over 20 books and numerous DVDs , and has lectured in over 25 countries , speaking for up to 10 hours to audiences that cut across the political spectrum . 
 Icke was a BBC television sports presenter and spokesman for the Green Party , when a psychic told him , in 1990 , that he had been placed on Earth for a purpose and would begin to receive messages from the spirit world . The following year he announced that he was a " Son of the Godhead " , and that the world would soon be devastated by tidal waves and earthquakes , a prediction he repeated on the BBC 's primetime show Wogan . The show changed his life , turning him from a respected household name into someone who was laughed at whenever he appeared in public . 
 He continued nevertheless to develop his ideas , and over the next seven years — in The Robots ' Rebellion ( 1994 ) , And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , and Children of the Matrix ( 2001 ) — he set out a worldview that combined New Age spiritualism with a denunciation of totalitarian trends in the modern world . At the heart of his theories lies the idea that many prominent figures belong to the Babylonian Brotherhood , a group of shapeshifting reptilian humanoids who are propelling humanity toward a global fascist state , or New World Order . The reptilians use the rings of Saturn and the Moon , all reptilian constructs , to broadcast our " five @-@ sense prison " : an " artificial sense of self and the world " that humans perceive as reality . 
 Michael Barkun has described Icke 's position as New Age conspiracism , writing that Icke is the most fluent of the genre . Richard Kahn and Tyson Lewis argue that Icke 's reptilian hypothesis may be Swiftian satire , offering a narrative with which ordinary people can question what they see around them . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and education = = = 
 The middle child of three boys born seven years apart , Icke was born in Leicester General Hospital to Beric Vaughan Icke and Barbara J. Icke , née Cooke , who were married in Leicester in 1951 . Beric had wanted to be a doctor , but the family had no money , so he joined the Royal Air Force as a medical orderly . He was awarded a British Empire Medal for gallantry in 1943 after an aircraft crashed into the Chipping Warden air base in Northamptonshire . Along with a squadron leader , Beric ran into the burning aircraft , without protective clothing , and saved the life of a crew member who was trapped inside . 
 After the war Beric became a clerk in the Gents clock factory . The family lived in a terraced house on Lead Street in the centre of Leicester , an area that was demolished in the mid @-@ 1950s as part of the city 's slum clearance . When Icke was three , in around 1955 , they moved to the Goodwood estate , one of the council estates the post @-@ war Labour government built . " To say we were skint , " he wrote in 1993 , " is like saying it is a little chilly at the North Pole . " He recalls having to hide under a window or chair when the council man came for the rent ; after knocking , the rent man would walk around the house peering through windows . His mother never explained that it was about the rent ; she just told Icke to hide . He wrote in 2003 that he stills get a fright when someone knocks on the door . 
 Always a loner , he spent hours playing with toy trains , preferring to cross the street rather than speak to anyone . He attended Whitehall Infant School , then Whitehall Junior School , feeling nervous and shy to the point of feeling faint during morning assembly and having to leave before he passed out . The family doctor suggested a referral to a child psychologist , but his father would have none of it . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Icke made no effort at school , but when he was nine , he was chosen for the junior school 's third @-@ year football team . It was the first time he had succeeded at anything , and he came to see football as his way out of poverty . He played in goal , which he wrote suited the loner in him and gave him a sense of living on the edge between hero and villain . 
 After failing his 11 @-@ plus exam in 1963 , he was sent to the city 's Crown Hills Secondary Modern ( rather than the local grammar school ) , where he was given a trial for the Leicester Boys Under @-@ Fourteen team . He left school at 15 after being talent @-@ spotted by Coventry City , who signed him up in 1967 as their youth team 's goalkeeper . He also played for Oxford United 's reserve team and Northampton Town , on loan from Coventry . 
 Rheumatoid arthritis in his left knee , which spread to the right knee , ankles , elbows , wrists and hands , stopped him from making a career out of football . Despite often being in agony during training , he managed to play part @-@ time for Hereford United , including in the first team when they were in the fourth , and later in the third , division of the English Football League . He was earning up to ₤ 33 a week . But in 1973 , at the age of 21 , the pain in his joints became so severe that he was forced to retire . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 Icke met his first wife , Linda Atherton , in May 1971 at a dance at the <unk> Grange Hotel near Leamington Spa ; she was working as a van driver for a garage . Shortly after they met , Icke had another of the huge rows he had started having with his father — always a domineering man , his father was upset that Icke 's arthritis was interfering with his football career — so he packed his bags and left home . He moved into a bedsit and worked in a travel agency , travelling to Hereford twice a week in the evenings to play football . 
 He and Atherton were married on 30 September that year , four months after they met . A daughter arrived in March 1975 , followed by one son in December 1981 and another in November 1992 . The couple divorced in 2001 but remained good friends , and Atherton continued to work as Icke 's business manager . 
 = = = Journalism , sports broadcasting = = = 
 The loss of Icke 's position with Hereford meant that he and his wife had to sell their home , and for several weeks they lived apart , each moving in with their parents . In 1973 Icke found a job as a reporter with the weekly Leicester Advertiser , through a contact who was a sports editor at the Daily Mail . He moved on to the Leicester News Agency , and through them did some work for BBC Radio Leicester as their football reporter , then worked his way up through the Loughborough Monitor , the Leicester Mercury , and BRMB Radio in Birmingham . 
 He worked for two months in Saudi Arabia in 1976 , helping with their national football team . It was supposed to be a longer @-@ term position , but he missed his wife and new daughter and decided not to return after his first holiday back to the UK . BRMB gave him his job back , after which he successfully applied to Midlands Today at the BBC 's Pebble Mill Studios in Birmingham , a job that included on @-@ air appearances . One of the earliest stories he covered for them was the murder of Carl Bridgewater , the paperboy who was shot during a robbery in 1978 . 
 In 1981 Icke became a sports presenter for the BBC 's national programme , Newsnight , which had just started . Two years later , on 17 January 1983 , he appeared on the first edition of the BBC 's Breakfast Time , British television 's first national breakfast show , and presented the sports news for them until 1985 , which meant getting up at two o 'clock in the morning five days a week . In the summer of 1983 he achieved his ambition when he co @-@ hosted Grandstand , at the time the BBC 's flagship national sports programme . He also published his first book that year , It 's a Tough Game , Son ! , about how to break into football . 
 Icke and his family moved in 1982 to Ryde on the Isle of Wight . His relationship with Grandstand was shortlived – he wrote that a new editor arrived in 1983 who appeared not to like him – but he continued working for BBC Sport until 1990 , often on bowls and snooker programmes , and at the 1988 Summer Olympics . He was by then a household name , but a career in television began to lose its appeal ; he wrote that he found television workers insecure , shallow and sometimes vicious . In August 1990 his contract with the BBC was terminated when he refused to pay his Community Charge , a controversial local tax introduced that year by Margaret Thatcher . He did end up paying it , but his announcement that he was willing to go to jail rather than pay prompted the BBC , by charter an impartial public @-@ service broadcaster , to distance itself from him . 
 = = New Age interests = = 
 = = = Green Party , Betty Shine = = = 
 Icke had begun to flirt with alternative medicine and New Age philosophies in the 1980s , in an effort to relieve his arthritis , and this encouraged his interest in Green politics . Within six months of joining the Green Party , he was given a position as one of its four principal speakers , positions created in lieu of a single leader . The Observer called him " the Greens ' Tony Blair " . 
 His second book , It Doesn 't Have To Be Like This , an outline of his views on the environment , was published in 1989 , and he was regularly invited to high @-@ profile events . That year he discussed animal rights during a televised debate at the Royal Institute of Great Britain , alongside Tom Regan , Mary Warnock and Germaine Greer , and in 1990 his name appeared on advertisements for a children 's charity , along with Audrey Hepburn , Woody Allen and other celebrities . 
 Despite his success , Icke wrote that 1989 was a time of considerable personal despair , and it was during this period that he said he began to feel a presence around him . He often describes how he felt it while alone in a hotel room in March 1990 , and finally asked : " If there is anybody here , will you please contact me because you are driving me up the wall ! " Days later , in a newsagent 's in Ryde , he felt a force pull his feet to the ground , he wrote , and heard a voice guide him toward some books . One of them was Mind to Mind ( 1989 ) by Betty Shine , a psychic healer in Brighton . He read the book , then wrote to her requesting a consultation about his arthritis . 
 Icke visited Shine four times . During the third meeting , on 29 March 1990 , Icke felt something like a spider 's web on his face , and Shine told him she had a message from Wang Ye Lee of the spirit world . Icke had been sent to heal the Earth , she said , and would become famous but would face opposition . The spirit world was going to pass ideas to him , which he would speak about to others . He would write five books in three years ; in 20 years a new flying machine would allow us to go wherever we wanted and time would have no meaning ; and there would be earthquakes in unusual places , because the inner earth was being destabilized by having oil taken from the seabed . 
 In February 1991 Icke visited a pre @-@ Inca <unk> burial ground near Puno , Peru , where he felt drawn to a particular circle of waist @-@ high stones . As he stood in the circle , he had two thoughts : that people would be talking about this in 100 years , and that it would be over when it rained . His body shook as though plugged into an electrical socket , he wrote , and new ideas poured into him . Then it started raining and the experience ended . He described it as the kundalini ( a term from Indian yoga ) activating his chakras , or energy centres , triggering a higher level of consciousness . 
 = = = Turquoise period = = = 
 There followed what Icke called his " turquoise period " . He had been channelling for some time , he wrote , and had received a message through automatic writing that he was a " Son of the Godhead " , interpreting " Godhead " as the " Infinite Mind " . He began to wear only turquoise , often a turquoise shell suit , a colour he saw as a conduit for positive energy . He also started working on his third book , and the first of his New @-@ Age period , The Truth Vibrations . 
 In August 1990 , before his visit to Peru , Icke had met Deborah Shaw , an English psychic living in Calgary , Alberta . When he returned from Peru they began a relationship , with the apparent blessing of Icke 's wife . In March 1991 Shaw began living with the couple , a short @-@ lived arrangement that the press called the " turquoise triangle " . Shaw changed her name to Mari <unk> , while Icke 's wife became Michaela , which she said was an aspect of the Archangel Michael . 
 The relationship with Shaw led to the birth of a daughter in December 1991 , although she and Icke had stopped seeing each other by then . Icke wrote in 1993 that he decided not to visit his daughter and had seen her only once , at the request of Shaw . Icke 's wife gave birth to the couple 's second son in November 1992 . 
 = = = Press conference = = = 
 In March 1991 Icke resigned from the Green Party during a party conference , telling them he was about to be at the centre of " tremendous and increasing controversy " , and winning a standing ovation from them after the announcement . A week later , shortly after his father died , Icke and his wife , Linda Atherton , along with their daughter and Deborah Shaw , held a press conference to announce that Icke was a son of the Godhead . He told reporters the world was going to end in 1997 . It would be preceded by a hurricane around the Gulf of Mexico and New Orleans , eruptions in Cuba , disruption in China , a hurricane in Derry , and an earthquake on the Isle of Arran . The information was being given to them by voices and automatic writing , he said . Los Angeles would become an island , New Zealand would disappear , and the cliffs of Kent would be under water by Christmas . 
 Icke wrote in 1993 that he heard his voice predict the end of the world and was appalled . " I was speaking the words , but all the time I could hear the voice of the brakes in the background saying , ' David , what the hell are you saying ? ' " His predictions were splashed all over the next day 's front pages , to his great dismay . 
 = = = Wogan interview = = = 
 The headlines attracted requests for interviews , including from Nicky Campbell for BBC Radio One , Terry Wogan for his prime @-@ time Wogan show , and Fern Britton for her ITV chat show . The Wogan interview , on 29 April 1991 , was the most damaging . ( Wogan interviewed Icke again in 2006 , acknowledging that his comments had been " a bit sharp " . ) 
 Wogan introduced the 1991 segment with " The world as we know it is about to end . " Amid laughter from the audience , Icke prevaricated when asked if he was the son of God , replying that Jesus would have been laughed at too , and repeating that Britain would soon be devastated by tidal waves and earthquakes . Without these , " the Earth will cease to exist . " When Icke said laughter was the best way to remove negativity , Wogan replied of the audience : " But they 're laughing at you . They 're not laughing with you . " 
 The interview proved devastating for Icke . The BBC was criticized for allowing it to go ahead ; Des Christy of The Guardian called it a " media crucifixion " . Icke disappeared from public life for a time , unable to walk down the street without people mocking him . His children were followed to school by journalists and ridiculed by schoolmates , and his wife would open the back door to get the washing in only to find a camera crew filming her . In May 1991 police were called to the couple 's home after a crowd of over 100 youths gathered outside , chanting " We want the Messiah " and " Give us a sign , David . " Icke told Jon Ronson in 2001 : 
 One of my very greatest fears as a child was being ridiculed in public . And there it was coming true . As a television presenter , I 'd been respected . People come up to you in the street and shake your hand and talk to you in a respectful way . And suddenly , overnight , this was transformed into " Icke 's a nutter . " I couldn 't walk down any street in Britain without being laughed at . It was a nightmare . My children were devastated because their dad was a figure of ridicule . 
 = = Writing and lecturing = = 
 = = = Publishing = = = 
 The Wogan interview set every bridge to Icke 's past ablaze , he wrote in 2003 , although he considered it the making of him in the end , giving him the courage to develop his ideas without caring what anyone thought . His book The Truth Vibrations , inspired by his experience in Peru , was published in May 1991 , and he continued to write , turning himself into a popular author and speaker . 
 Between 1992 and 1994 he wrote five books , all published by mainstream publishers , four in 1993 . Love Changes Everything ( 1992 ) , influenced by the " channelling " work of Deborah Shaw , is a theosophical work about the origin of the planet , in which Icke writes with admiration about Jesus . Days of Decision ( 1993 ) is an 86 @-@ page summary of his interviews after the 1991 press conference ; it questions the historicity of Jesus but accepts the existence of the Christ spirit . Icke 's autobiography , In the Light of Experience , was published the same year , followed by Heal the World : A Do @-@ It @-@ Yourself Guide to Personal and Planetary Transformation ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = The Robots ' Rebellion = = = 
 Icke 's fifth book of that period , The Robots ' Rebellion ( 1994 ) , published by Gateway , attracted allegations that his work was antisemitic . According to Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke , the book contains " all the familiar beliefs and paranoid clichés " of the US conspiracists and militia . It claims that a plan for world domination by a shadowy cabal , perhaps extraterrestial , was laid out in a notorious antisemitic literary forgery , The Protocols of the Elders of Zion ( c . 1897 ) . Icke 's reliance on the Protocols is the first of several instances of his moving close to antisemitism , <unk> argues . 
 The Protocols of the Elders of Zion is a notorious antisemitic literary forgery , probably written under the direction of the Russian secret police in Paris , that purported to reveal a conspiracy by the Jewish people to achieve global domination . It was exposed as a work of fiction in 1920 by Lucien Wolf and the following year by Phillip Graves in The Times . Once exposed , it disappeared from mainstream discourse , Barkun writes , until interest in it was renewed by the American far right in the 1950s . Its use was spread further by conspiracy groups on the internet . 
 Icke took both the extraterrestial angle and the focus on the Protocols from Behold a Pale Horse ( 1991 ) by Milton William Cooper , who was associated with the American militia movement ; chapter 15 of Cooper 's book reproduces the Protocols im full . The Robots ' Rebellion refers repeatedly to the Protocols , calling them the Illuminati protocols , and defining Illuminati as the " Brotherhood elite at the top of the pyramid of secret societies world @-@ wide " . Icke adds that the Protocols were not the work of the Jewish people , but of Zionists . 
 The Robots ' Rebellion was greeted with dismay by the Green Party 's executive . Despite the controversy over the press conference and Wogan interview , they had allowed Icke to address the party 's annual conference in 1992 — a decision that led one of its principal speakers , Sara Parkin , to resign — but after the publication of The Robot 's Rebellion they moved to ban him . Icke wrote to the Guardian in September 1994 denying that The Robots ' Rebellion was antisemitic , and rejecting racism , sexism and prejudice of any kind , while insisting that whoever had written the Protocols " knew the game plan " for the 20th century . 
 = = = David Icke Books = = = 
 Icke 's next manuscript , And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , contained a chapter questioning aspects of the Holocaust , which caused a rift with his publisher , Gateway . Sam Taylor of the Observer argued that the chapter is not antisemitic , but that Icke was " tapping into a seriously paranoid , aggressive strain in U.S. society " . After borrowing ₤ 15 @,@ 000 from a friend , Icke set up Bridge of Love Publications , later called David Icke Books , and self @-@ published that book and all his work thereafter . He wrote in 2004 that And the Truth was one of his proudest achievements . 
 According to Lewis and Kahn , Icke set about consolidating all conspiracy theories into one project with unlimited explanatory power . His books sold 140 @,@ 000 copies between 1998 and 2011 , at a value of over £ 2 million . Thirty thousand copies of The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) were in print months after publication , according to Icke , and it was reprinted six times between 1999 and 2006 . Alice in Wonderland and the World Trade Center Disaster ( 2002 ) became a long @-@ standing top @-@ five bestseller in South Africa . By 2006 his website was getting 600 @,@ 000 hits a week , and by 2011 his books had been translated into 11 languages . 
 Icke became known , in particular , for his lengthy lectures . By 2006 he had lectured in at least 25 countries , attracting audiences of several thousand each time . He lectured for seven hours to 2 @,@ 500 people at the Brixton Academy , London , in 2008 , and the same year addressed the University of Oxford 's debating society , the Oxford Union . His book tour for Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2010 ) included a sell @-@ out talk to 2 @,@ 100 in New York and £ 83 @,@ 000 worth of ticket sales in Melbourne . In October 2012 he delivered a 10 @-@ hour lecture to 6 @,@ 000 people at London 's Wembley Arena . 
 = = = Second marriage , politics , television = = = 
 In 1997 Icke met his second wife , Pamela Leigh Richards , in Jamaica . He and Linda Atherton divorced in 2001 , and he and Richards were married the same year . The couple separated in 2008 and divorced in 2011 . 
 Icke stood for parliament in the 2008 by @-@ election for Haltemprice and Howden ( an East Yorkshire constituency ) , on the issue of " Big Brother — The Big Picture " . He came 12th , with 110 votes ( 0 @.@ 46 % ) , resulting in a lost deposit . He explained that he was standing because " if we don 't face this now we are going to have some serious explaining to do when we are asked by our children and grandchildren what we were doing when the global fascist state was installed . ' I was watching EastEnders , dear ' will not be good enough . " 
 In November 2013 Icke launched an internet television station , The People 's Voice , broadcast out of London . He founded the station after crowdsourcing over ₤ 300 @,@ 000 and worked for it as a volunteer until March 2014 . As of that year the station appeared to have stopped broadcasting . 
 = = Key ideas = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Icke combines New Age philosophical discussion about the universe and consciousness with conspiracy theories about public figures being reptilian humanoids and paedophiles . He argues in favour of reincarnation ; a collective consciousness that has intentionality ; modal realism ( that other possible worlds exist alongside ours ) ; and the law of attraction ( that good and bad thoughts can attract experiences ) . 
 In The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , he introduced the idea that many prominent figures derive from the Anunnaki , a reptilian race from the Draco constellation . In Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2012 ) , he identified the Moon ( and later Saturn ) as the source of holographic experiences , broadcast by the reptiles , that humanity interprets as reality . 
 = = = <unk> hypothesis = = = 
 In his ancient @-@ astronaut narrative , Icke argues that humanity has been genetically manipulated by the Babylonian Brotherhood , a hybrid race of human – extraterrestial reptilians , also known as the Illuminati . He briefly introduced the extraterrestrial hypothesis in The Robot 's Rebellion ( 1994 ) , citing Bill Cooper 's Behold a Pale Horse ( 1991 ) , and expanded it in And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , citing Barbara <unk> 's <unk> of the Dawn ( 1992 ) . 
 In The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , Icke identified the Brotherhood as descendants of reptilians from the constellation Draco , who live in caverns inside the earth . They are the deities known as the Anunnaki in the Babylonian creation myth , Enûma Eliš , and the fallen angels , the Watchers , who mated with human women in the Biblical apocrypha . He said in an interview : 
 When you get back into the ancient world , you find this recurring theme of a union between a non @-@ human race and humans — creating a hybrid race . 
 From 1998 , I started coming across people who told me they had seen people change into a non @-@ human form . It 's an age @-@ old phenomenon known as shape @-@ shifting . The basic form is like a scaly humanoid , with reptilian rather than humanoid eyes . 
 Robertson writes that Icke 's reptilian idea is adapted from Zecharia Sitchin 's The 12th Planet ( 1976 ) , combined with material from Credo <unk> , a Zulu healer . Sitchin suggested that the Anunnaki came to Earth for its precious metals . Icke maintains that they came for monatomic gold , a non @-@ existent mineral ( only gases can exist in a monatomic state ) that , he writes , increases the capacity of the nervous system ten thousandfold . After ingesting it , the reptilians can process vast amounts of information , speed up trans @-@ dimensional travel , and shapeshift from reptilian to human . 
 The first reptilian @-@ human breeding programmes took place 200 @,@ 000 – 300 @,@ 000 years ago ( perhaps creating Adam ) , and the third ( and latest ) 7 @,@ 000 years ago . The hybrids of the third programme , more Anunnaki than human , today control the world : " The Brotherhood which controls the world today is the modern expression of the Babylonian Brotherhood of reptile @-@ Aryan priests and ' royalty ' which came together there after the flood . " By " Aryan " he explains that he means " white " ; this includes most Jews , whom he regards as having originated in the Caucasus . 
 = = = Brotherhood aims and institutions = = = 
 At the apex of the Babylonian Brotherhood stands the Global Elite , and at the top of the Global Elite are the Prison Wardens . The goal of the Brotherhood , their " Great Work of Ages " , is a microchipped population and fascist world government . 
 The Brotherhood created and controls the United Nations , International Monetary Fund , Round Table , Council on Foreign Relations , Chatham House , Club of Rome , Royal Institute of International Affairs , Trilateral Commission and Bilderberg Group , as well as the media , military , CIA , Mossad , science , religion and the Internet , with <unk> or unwitting support from the London School of Economics . 
 As of 2003 the reptilian bloodline encompassed 43 American presidents , three British and two Canadian prime ministers , several Sumerian kings and Egyptian pharaohs , and a smattering of celebrities , including Bob Hope , Chris Christopherson and Boxcar Willie . Key bloodlines are the Rockefellers , Rothschilds , various European aristocratic families , the establishment families of the Eastern United States , and the British House of Windsor . Icke confirmed to Andrew Neil in May 2016 that he believes the British Royal Family are shapeshifting lizards . He identified the Queen Mother in 2001 as " seriously reptilian " , and said he had seen Ted Heath 's eyes turn black while the two waited for a Sky News interview in 1989 . Lewis and Kahn argue that Icke is using allegory to depict the alien , and alienating , nature of global capitalism . Icke has said he is not using allegory . 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 The reptilians not only come from another planet , but are also from another dimension , the lower level of the fourth dimension ( the " lower astral dimension " ) , the one nearest the physical world . Barkun argues that the introduction of different dimensions allows Icke to skip awkward questions about how the reptilians got here . Icke writes that the universe consists of an infinite number of dimensions that share the same space , just like television and radio frequencies . Some people can tune their consciousness to other wavelengths , and it is from one of these other dimensions that the Anunnaki control the planet , although just as fourth @-@ dimensional reptilians control us , they in turn are controlled by a fifth dimension . 
 = = = Problem – reaction – solution = = = 
 Icke writes that the Brotherhood uses human anxiety as energy . " Thus we have the encouragement of wars , " he wrote in 1999 , " human genocide , the mass slaughter of animals , sexual perversions which create highly charged negative energy , and black magic ritual and sacrifice which takes place on a scale that will stagger those who have not studied the subject . " 
 In Tales From The Time Loop ( 2003 ) , Icke argues that the reptilians creat religious , racial , ethnic and sexual division to divide and conquer humanity . Incidents and issues he attributes to the Global Elite include the Oklahoma City bombing , Dunblane , Columbine , 9 / 11 , 7 / 7 , global warming , chemtrails , water fluoridation , and Agenda 21 . The incidents allow the reptilians to respond in whatever way they intended to act in the first place , a concept Icke calls " order out of chaos " or " problem – reaction – solution " . One of their methods is to create fake opposites , or " <unk> " , such as the Axis and Allied powers of World War II . The movement of societies toward totalitarianism because of these conflicts he calls " totalitarian tiptoe " . 
 = = = Red Dresses = = = 
 In Infinite Love is the Only Truth ( 2005 ) , Icke introduces his three categories of people . The Brotherhood are " interactive software programs " , or " Red Dresses " . They lack consciousness and free will , and their human bodies are holographic veils . A second group , the " sheeple " ( the vast majority of humanity ) , are conscious , but do as they are told and are the Brotherhood 's main energy source . They include the " repeaters " , people in positions of influence who repeat what other people tell them ; he cites doctors , teachers and journalists as examples . 
 The third and smallest group are those who see through the illusion ; they are usually dubbed dangerous or mad . The Red Dress genetic lines interbreed obsessively to make sure their bloodlines are not weakened by the second or third levels of consciousness , because consciousness can rewrite the software . 
 = = = Saturn – Moon Matrix = = = 
 The Moon Matrix is introduced in Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2010 ) , in which Icke suggests that the Earth and collective human mind are manipulated from the Moon , a spacecraft and inter @-@ dimensional portal controlled by the reptilians . The Moon Matrix is a broadcast from that spacecraft to the human body – computer , specifically to the left hemisphere of the brain , which gives us our sense of reality : " We are living in a dreamworld within a dreamworld — a Matrix within the virtual @-@ reality universe — and it is being broadcast from the Moon . " Unless people force themselves to become fully conscious , their minds are the Moon 's mind . 
 This idea is further explored in Icke 's Remember Who You Are : Remember ' Where ' You Are and Where You ' Come ' From ( 2012 ) , where he introduces the concept of the " Saturn – Moon Matrix " . In this more recent conceptualization , the rings of Saturn ( which Icke believes were artificially created by reptilian spacecraft ) are the ultimate source of the signal , while the Moon is merely a sort of amplifier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Icke has emerged as a professional conspiracy theorist within a global counter @-@ cultural movement that combines New World Order conspiracism , the <unk> movement and anti @-@ globalization , with an extraterrestrial conspiracist subculture ( Roswell , alien abduction , crop circles , men in black , The X @-@ Files ) . Thanks to Icke 's prominence , public figures are regularly asked whether they are lizards . An Official Information Act request was filed in New Zealand in 2008 to ask this of John Key , the prime minister , and Facebook 's Mark Zuckerberg was asked during a Q & A in 2016 . ( Both men said they were not lizards . Key added that he had taken the unusual step of consulting not only a doctor but a vet . ) In a 2013 survey in the United States by Public Policy Polling , four percent believed that " ' lizard people ' control our societies . 
 Icke 's audiences consist of all ages and political persuasions , from the far @-@ right Christian Patriots to New Agers . Barkun categorizes Icke as a New Age conspiracist , describing his work as " improvisational millennialism " , with an end @-@ of @-@ history scenario involving a final battle between good and evil . Barkun defines improvisional millennialism as an " act of bricolage " : because everything is connected in the conspiracist world view , every source can be mined for links . 
 Barkun argues that Icke has actively tried to cultivate the radical right : " There is no fuller explication of [ their ] beliefs about ruling elites than Icke 's . " In 1996 Icke spoke to a conference in Reno , Nevada , alongside opponents of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act , including Kirk Lyons , a lawyer who has represented the Ku Klux Klan . Icke was dogged for a few years by allegations that his work is antisemitic ; the focus on the Protocols was taken to mean that Icke 's reptilians were really Jews , which Icke called " friggin ' nonsense " . After complaints from the Canadian Jewish Congress in 2000 , he was briefly detained by immigration officials in Canada where he was booked for a speaking tour , and his books were removed from Indigo Books , a Canadian chain . Several stops on the tour were cancelled by the venues , as was a lecture in London . 
 Despite his relationships with the far right , Icke 's New Age beliefs create a division between him and them , according to Barkun . Although Icke regards Christian patriots as the only Americans who understand the New World Order , he also told a Christian patriot group : " I don 't know which I dislike more , the world controlled by the Brotherhood , or the one you want to replace it with . " James Ward argues that Icke 's underlying message is hopeful , and that therein lies his appeal : as Icke said at Wembley in 2012 , " If we want a world of love and peace , we have to be loving and peaceful with everyone , even people we don 't like . " 
 Relying on Douglas Kellner 's distinction between clinical paranoia and a " critical paranoia " that confronts power , Lewis and Kahn argue that Icke displays elements of both , and that his " postmodern metanarrative " may be allegorical , a Swiftian satire used to give ordinary people a narrative with which to question what they see around them and to alert them to the emergence of a global fascist state . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Books 
 Videos 
 = Mount Pleasant Road = 
 Mount Pleasant Road is a major arterial thoroughfare in the Canadian city of Toronto , Ontario that travels from Jarvis Street south of Bloor Street north to Glen Echo Drive . The road is unique as one of the few arterial roads in Toronto to be created after the development of the suburbs which it passes through . These include the wealthy Rosedale , Moore Park and Lawrence Park neighbourhoods . The road also passes through the centre of Mount Pleasant Cemetery , after which it takes its name . 
 Mount Pleasant Road was first established in 1915 when the city of Toronto , having recently annexed Moore Park , purchased the right @-@ of @-@ way for a new road through the cemetery . This road opened to traffic in 1919 , from St. Clair Avenue to the Blythwood Ravine , south of Lawrence Avenue . Several streets were absorbed into the length of Mount Pleasant Road in 1919 , 1920 and 1935 ; the latest as part of a northward extension through Lawrence Park . In the late 1940s , what originally began as the Clifton Road Extension opened a new right @-@ of @-@ way between St. Clair Avenue and Jarvis Street , despite opposition from the Toronto Transit Commission ( TTC ) , bringing the road to its current length of 7 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) . This extension is considered Toronto 's first expressway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Between Bloor Street and York Mills Road , Mount Pleasant Road is the first major thoroughfare east of Yonge Street , the centreline of Toronto . It is classified by the city as a " major arterial " , with a speed limit of 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) in most places . The road is 7 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) in length . 
 Mount Pleasant begins as an extension of Jarvis Street , in downtown Toronto . Until late 2009 , Jarvis extended north to Bloor ; however , this section was renamed Ted Rogers Way on October 27 , 2009 , truncating Jarvis at Mount Pleasant . The road forks to the northeast between large buildings and passes beneath Bloor Street , then crosses the Rosedale Ravine . It passes through residential South Rosedale , entering a trench and passing beneath Crescent Drive . The road descends into the Yellow Creek ravine ( crossing David A. Balfour Park ) along the former route of Roxborough Drive , then climbs to pass beneath the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks . It continues to climb along the eastern bank of the ravine , entering Moore Park and turning north at St. Clair Avenue East . The road passes through the centre of Mount Pleasant Cemetery , after which it takes its name . It crosses the old Belt Line Railway trail , and winds northeast into Davisville Village . 
 Continuing north and resuming its straight northward course , Mount Pleasant passes through a historic commercial strip , then meets Eglinton Avenue East . It passes into a primarily residential area , though several auto service shops exist along this stretch , as well as Northern Secondary School . The road heads slightly west south of Blythwood Road , then crosses Blythwood Ravine , which contains the small Burke 's Brook . After climbing into Lawrence Park , the road meets Lawrence Avenue East . This intersection , featuring a multi @-@ stage traffic light , directs driver to the east before continuing north . From here to the northern terminus , it is classified as a collector road and is a wide residential street with several stop signs . The road ends near the edge of the West Don Valley at an intersection with Glen Echo Drive , adjacent to the <unk> Bus Loop . 
 = = History = = 
 The outward growth of Toronto presented an ever increasing need for a dedicated burial ground . The Toronto General Burying Grounds Trust was formed by the owners of the Potter 's Field cemetery , which lay at the northwest corner of Yonge and Bloor . As the cemetery blocked the growth of Yorkville , the village pressured the province to move the interred to a new burial ground ; the trust purchased The Necropolis . As Toronto continued to grow , the need for a new cemetery grew . As a result , the trust purchased a 0 @.@ 81 km2 ( 200 acres ) farm north of Deer Park . The new grounds , named Mount Pleasant Cemetery , opened to the public on November 4 , 1876 . Thereafter , the " outer suburbs " of Rosedale , Deer Park , North Toronto and Moore Park grew , being annexed by the City of Toronto in 1905 , 1908 and the latter two in 1912 , respectively . 
 Mount Pleasant Road was constructed over the course of several years by interconnecting several existing streets as well as building a new road in other places ; at that time , a road existed to the north and south of the cemetery . The road to the south , running between Clarence Street ( renamed Heath Street on April 7 , 1913 ) and Moore Avenue , was known as Lyle Street and Kinsman Avenue . The road to the north , running between Balliol Street and Merton Street , was known as Alberta Avenue . 
 In an attempt to improve the flow of traffic coming from within the city , the operators of Mount Pleasant Cemetery were approached beginning in 1912 with the goal of opening a new right @-@ of @-@ way through the property . The operators initially refused , prompting the city to pass By @-@ law <unk> in March 1915 , which allowed for the expropriation of the cemetery property . Over the next several months , the city and the Toronto General Burying Grounds Trustees bargained over the price of the land , settling for the extraordinary sum of $ 98 @,@ 921 @.@ 88 ( $ 2 @,@ 090 @,@ 000 , adjusted for inflation ) by July ; construction began the following spring . The route through Moore Park incorporated a small street known as Kinsman Avenue ( known as Lyle Street until April 7 , 1913 ) , while north of the cemetery , the short Alberta Avenue between Merton Street And Balliol Street was absorbed . The muddy road was opened to traffic in 1919 , featuring a paved bridge with streetcar tracks over the abandoned Belt Line Railway . 
 By the end of 1919 , Mount Pleasant Road existed between St. Clair Avenue and Blythwood Road , ending at the rim of the Blythwood Ravine . Despite this , the road on the opposite rim was renamed from Sidmouth Avenue in 1920 . Following the construction of the Vale of Avoca in the first half of the 1920s , the newly formed Toronto Transit Commission extended the St. Clair streetcar line east to Mount Pleasant Road December 1 , 1924 and then north to Eglinton Avenue on November 4 , 1925 . Between 1934 and 1936 , after gaining approval from Lawrence Park developers , a bridge was constructed over the ravine and Mount Pleasant extended north to Lawrence Avenue . In 1935 , Hilda Avenue was renamed , extending Mount Pleasant Road north to Forest Glen Crescent . 
 = = = Clifton Road Extension = = = 
 In November 1945 , at the recommendation of the planning board , in an effort to improve traffic flow outward from the downtown core , city council initiated what would come to be known as the Clifton Road Extension . Prior to the opening of this route , a road travelled southwest from the intersection of Inglewood Drive and Clifton Road into the ravine , crossed Yellow Creek , and climbed up the opposite slope north to the corner of Avoca Avenue and Rosehill Drive ; most of this route exists as a recreational path today . Roxborough Drive also crossed the ravine along the same route as Mount Pleasant today . A third route followed MacLennan Avenue north across the CPR tracks , ascending the steep MacLennan Hill . A decades @-@ old contract signed with CPR required the closing of the MacLennan Avenue crossing if a road should ever pass beneath the tracks . 
 The Maclennan Hill was a dangerous and steep bottleneck for traffic leaving the inner city . The first recommendations involved creating an underpass beneath the CPR tracks . A vote was held on January 1 , 1946 , with an overwhelming majority of voters approving the project . After several months of negotiation with residents of South Rosedale , bylaw <unk> formally approved the extension of Clifton Road to Jarvis Street on June 24 , 1946 . 
 Residents of Moore Park , opposed to the notion of widening their small residential street , approached city council in September 1948 to request the new extension connect to Mount Pleasant Road instead . A petition of residents followed , and city council accepted the recommendations . Bylaw <unk> , passed February 7 , 1949 , formally approved the project . Despite the loss of ten houses , this plan was carried out . 
 Construction included a new bridge excavated at the intersection of Huntley and Jarvis Streets , requiring the TTC to divert its streetcar tracks to the south . The closing of the MacLennan Avenue CPR crossing resulted in the construction of a pedestrian overpass . Traffic descending the MacLennan Hill was directed west along a new road to Mount Pleasant . On January 23 , 1950 , the Clifton Road Extension was renamed Mount Pleasant Road . It opened to traffic on May 17 , and is considered the first expressway in Toronto . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the notable crossroads encountered along Mount Pleasant Road . The entirety of the road lies within the city of Toronto . 
 = Matagorda Bay = 
 Matagorda Bay ( / <unk> / ) is a large Gulf of Mexico estuary bay on the Texas coast , lying in Calhoun and Matagorda counties and located approximately 80 miles ( 130 km ) northeast of Corpus Christi , 143 miles ( 230 km ) east @-@ southeast of San Antonio , 108 miles ( 174 km ) south @-@ southwest of Houston , and 167 miles ( 269 km ) south @-@ southeast of Austin . It is separated from the Gulf of Mexico by Matagorda Peninsula and serves as the mouth of numerous streams , most notably the Lavaca and Colorado Rivers . The major Texas seaport of Port Lavaca is located on the system 's northwestern extension of Lavaca Bay . The city of Palacios is found on northeastern extension of Tres Palacios Bay , and Port O 'Connor is located on the southwestern tip of the main bay 's shore . The ghost town of Indianola , which was a major port before it was destroyed by two hurricanes in the late 19th Century , is also found on the bay . 
 The bay 's shore , especially near the Colorado River delta , provides a habitat for a wide variety of wildlife . The wildlife serves as a basis for the birding and fishing tourism , and is an essential component of the production of seafood , specifically shrimp and blue crab , which are the specialties of the area . The fertile land near the bay is ideal for farming , especially for the propagation of rice . 
 = = History = = 
 Early European records suggest that the bay and the surrounding area went by the names Espíritu Santo and Costa y Bahía de San Bernardo . Spanish explorer Alonso Álvarez de Pineda 's map from the late <unk> appears to be the first documentation of the bay . In 1685 , French explorer René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle established the colony of Fort St. Louis along the bay 's shore after missing the entrance to the Mississippi River . Half of the colonists were killed by disease , and the other half , save for five children , were killed by Karankawa Indians . It was afterward referred to as a " lost colony . " The Indians kept the children until they were rescued by the Spanish during the Alonso De León and Domingo Terán de los Ríos expeditions near the bay . In 1722 Spanish built a fort , Presidio La Bahia , and Mission Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga on the site of Fort Saint Louis . 
 The port of Linnville was established on Matagorda Bay in 1831 , and served as a main port for the Republic of Texas . The Great Comanche Raid of 1840 destroyed the town and forced the inhabitants to flee to the nearby <unk> , which would later become known as Port Lavaca . Lavaca or la <unk> , Spanish for cow , was founded in the wake of the Comanche Raid in 1841 . It replaced Linnville as the main port on Matagorda Bay . However , the sandbar @-@ heavy Lavaca Bay caused some navigational problems for ships . As a result , Lavaca was surpassed by Indianola as the main port on Matagorda Bay in the 1850s , even though the sandbars were dredged later in the decade . Indianola had been founded in 1846 as a landing place for German immigrants . It rapidly developed into a major seaport , and became the second largest in the state ( after Galveston ) by the 1860s . The two ports , and strategic control of Matagorda Bay in particular , became important during the American Civil War . Control of the bay shifted between the Union and Confederate forces several times . The Union presence in the area ended in June 1864 . After the war , Indianola continued its growth , and had a population of 5 @,@ 000 in the 1870s . A hurricane in 1875 caused massive damage to the city . It was rebuilt on a smaller scale shortly thereafter , but a second and more intense hurricane made landfall in 1886 ( the fifth most intense in U.S. history ) , causing even greater destruction . The following year , Indianola was completely abandoned . Although Lavaca was also significantly affected by the hurricanes , it survived as a port , and again became the largest on the bay . It continues to hold this distinction today . It was renamed Port Lavaca in the late 19th Century . Palacios was established around 1901 , and Port O 'Connor was founded on the bay in 1909 . 
 Before 1900 , East Matagorda Bay was a free flowing extension , which formed the eastern segment of Matagorda Bay . Flooding and drainage issues caused by the Colorado River , which at the time emptied into the bay , precipitated a massive dredging campaign in the 1920s . Flooding was not remedied by the dredging , as sediment deposited in the bay and formed a tidal marsh that grew at 500 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 km2 ) a year . As a result , local citizens decided to change the course of the Colorado River in 1934 to bypass Matagorda Bay into the Gulf of Mexico , the dredging from this project causing the split and forming the isolated East Matagorda Bay . In 1992 , the river was diverted back to the bay . 
 = = Features = = 
 The shoreline of the bay is included in the Texas Coastal Plain . At the eastern end , near the Colorado River delta , there is a swampy terrain , with an abundance of wetlands and tidal marshes . Extended coastal prairies supporting native grasses , can be found throughout the area . On average , the Matagorda Bay system is 2 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep , and covers approximately 1 @,@ 093 square kilometers ( 422 sq mi ) . It is the third largest estuarine system in Texas behind Galveston Bay and Laguna Madre . The main extensions include : Lavaca Bay , which extends westward to the mouth of the Lavaca River ; Tres Palacios Bay , which extends northeast to the mouth of the Tres Palacios River and East Matagorda Bay , which is nearly isolated from the system by the Colorado River delta . Other inlets include Turtle Bay , Carancahua Bay , Keller Bay , and Cox Bay . 
 Every second , approximately 150 cubic meters ( 40 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) of water flows into the bay . The exchange with the Gulf of Mexico occurs at Pass Cavallo , Matagorda Ship Channel , Greens Bayou , the Colorado River Delta Complex and Brown Cedar Cut . As a result of the seawater exchange , the bay 's salinity is 19 parts per thousand ( ppt ) , which is lower than the seawater average of 35 ppt . This difference is caused by the large number of creeks and rivers that flow into the system , largely from the drainage basins of the Colorado and Lavaca Rivers . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 A wide variety of wildlife can be found in and around Matagorda Bay . The Mad Island @-@ Oyster Lake conservation area , located on the eastern shore of Matagorda Bay , is a habitat for over 300 species of birds including songbirds , shorebirds and waterfowl . More species of birds were found in the area than any other in the nation during the National Audubon Society 's annual Christmas Bird Count from 2000 to 2002 . Other fauna located along the bay include bobcats , white @-@ tailed deer , river otters , Texas horned lizards , reddish egret , white @-@ tailed hawk , peregrine falcon , the piping plover and alligators . 
 According to Texas Parks and Wildlife , the following fish have been caught in the bay : striped bass , <unk> catfish , Atlantic croaker , black drum , red drum , southern flounder , barred grunt , hake , skipjack herring , crevalle jack , ladyfish , Gulf menhaden , <unk> , smooth puffer , sand seatrout , spotted seatrout , blacktip shark , gray snapper , southern stingray , Gulf toadfish and <unk> . The bay serves as a nursery for finfish , shrimp and crabs . 
 = = Industry = = 
 The Matagorda Bay system is a renowned fishing location in the region , due to its status as a nutrient @-@ rich estuary . The mainstays of the settlements on the bay include seafood processing , manufacturing , agriculture and tourism . Commercial fishermen specialize in oyster , blue crab , and shrimp . Port Lavaca is the national leader in the processing of shrimp , and passed four million tons of seafood through its port in 1985 alone . Palacios houses the largest blue crab processing plant in the United States , and is home to the only individually quick frozen shrimp plant in Texas . Recreational fishing also contributes to the local economies , via tourism . Tourists often flock to the Port Lavaca State Fishing Pier , which is a major point of interest for fishermen . Other activities for visitors include hunting , oyster roasts , beach combing and birding . 
 Several manufacturing complexes have been erected along the bay , which employ local residents . The Aluminum Company of America , Union Carbide , Du Pont , and Formosa Plastics all established plants in Point Comfort . The South Texas Nuclear Generating Station is found in nearby Bay City . Petroleum and natural gas were discovered in the bay in the 1930s . Maize , cotton , soybeans , turf , and rice grow well around the bay , especially in the fertile delta region . 
 = Glass Spider Tour = 
 The Glass Spider Tour was an 1987 worldwide concert tour by David Bowie , launched in support of his album Never Let Me Down . It began in May 1987 and was preceded by a two @-@ week press tour that saw Bowie visit nine countries throughout Europe and North America to drum up public interest in the tour . The Glass Spider Tour was the first Bowie tour to visit Austria , Italy , Spain , Ireland and Wales . Through a sponsorship from Pepsi , the tour was intended to visit Russia and South America as well , but these plans were later cancelled . The tour was , at that point , the longest and most expensive tour Bowie had embarked upon in his career . At the time , the tour 's elaborate set was called " the largest touring set ever " . 
 Bowie conceived the tour as a theatrical show , and included spoken @-@ word introductions to some songs , vignettes , and employed visuals including projected videos , theatrical lighting and stage props . On stage , Bowie was joined by guitarist Peter Frampton and a troupe of five dancers ( choreographed by long @-@ time Bowie collaborator Toni Basil ) . With the theme " Rock stars vs Reality " , the show was divided into two acts and an encore . The set list was modified over the course of the tour as Bowie dropped some of his newer material in favour of older songs from his repertoire . 
 The tour was generally poorly received at the time for being overblown and pretentious . Despite the criticism , Bowie in 1991 remarked that this tour laid the groundwork for later successful theatrical tours by other artists , and the set 's design and the show 's integration of music and theatrics has inspired later acts by a variety of artists . Starting in the late 2000s , the tour began to collect accolades for its successes , and in 2010 the tour was named one of the top concert tour designs of all time . 
 The tour was financially successful and well @-@ attended ( being seen by perhaps as many as six million fans worldwide ) , but the poor critical reception of the album and tour led Bowie to not only abandon plans for other elaborate stage shows , but to reconsider his own motivations for making music . The tour was named after the album track " Glass Spider " , and performances from this tour were released on the VHS video Glass Spider ( 1988 , re @-@ released on DVD in 2007 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Preparations for the tour began as early as 1986 , when Bowie warned his band to " be ready for next year . " Bowie was initially mum on his plans for his tour , saying only " I 'm going to do a stage thing this year , which I 'm incredibly excited about , ' cause I 'm gonna take a chance again . " When asked if he would elaborate on his plans , he replied " No ! [ Laughs . ] Too many other acts are goin ' out . I 'll just be doing what I always did , which is keeping things interesting . " 
 In announcing the tour , Bowie embarked on a series of promotional press shows covering 9 countries in 2 weeks , including Canada , the US and seven countries in Europe . The press tour shows were typically delivered in smaller venues seating around 300 people , and local fans were often allowed into the events . He used the opportunity to educate the press on his album and the tour , and the multiple dates allowed him to correct misinformation . At the London Glass Spider Press Conference , he clarified that " I didn 't say ' lights , costumes and sex , ' what I said was ' lights , costumes and theatrical sets ' " in response to a question about what the audience could expect when seeing his new live show . Press tour shows included live performances of some of the songs from the album Never Let Me Down . 
 Bowie was joined by long @-@ time friend Peter Frampton on the tour . Frampton said " I don 't have a book to sell ; I don 't have an album to sell ; I 'm just here as a guitarist . The pressure is off . I 'm enjoying myself . " Frampton and Bowie had known each other since their teen years when they both attended Bromley Technical School , where Frampton 's father was Bowie 's art teacher . 
 = = Development = = 
 Bowie had a clear goal for this tour : to return to the theatrics that he had performed during his short @-@ lived 1974 Diamond Dogs Tour . He wanted this tour to be " ultra @-@ theatrical , a combination of music , theater , and rock " , and he felt that his previous tour , while successful , had veered away from the theatrics that he preferred : 
 [ In 1983 for the Serious Moonlight Tour ] the promoters were coming around and saying , " Listen David , we moved you from this 10 @,@ 000 seater up to this 30 @,@ 000 @-@ seater " ... and it grew and grew and there were 60 @,@ 000 @-@ seaters coming up . ... Let 's trim back on the theatrics and really go for giving them songs that they 've heard on the radio for the last 15 years or so – songs they probably didn 't realize when added up are a great body of work coming from this guy . ... Whereas with [ The Glass Spider ] tour coming up , I feel I 've established that . What I now want to do is have the songs work for the performance . ... Certainly there will be obscure songs on it , at least for the general public . There will be songs from albums that weren 't huge albums , but now those particular songs actually fit a section of the show . So when you put three songs together , you can create a vignette that works . It has a beginning and a conclusion and deals with one subject . 
 Bowie indicated that he was " testing the waters " with this tour , and was potentially considering other large , elaborate stage shows if the tour was successful : 
 The songs have to work within the show — not the show working for the songs , if you see what I mean . That 's why it 's so different . And that 's why it 's so exciting , because that 's the way I really like working . I mean , I like devising a show . I 've got a show book that is almost like the bible you have when you 're working on a play . It 's written and structured with various thematic devices . Unfortunately , it 's in revue form , because none of the songs were written for the show . That 's the ultimate , of course . If this works the way I hope it does , then the next step for me will be to write a piece specifically for arenas and stadiums , which is almost like taking a musical on the road that has one narrative form all the way through , with a cast of characters , and is written for epic theater . 
 Bowie decided that the theme for the show would be " the reality and unreality of rock , " or , as one critic called it , " rock stars vs. reality " . Bowie said , " It 's not just about a rock singer , it 's about rock music , so it has a lot to do with the audience and how they perceive rock , and rock figures , and all the cliches , archetypes and stereotypes , and also family relationship . " 
 During the show itself , Bowie incorporated a wide variety of props : " I 'm really attempting to do a lot of stuff ! It incorporates movement , dialogue , fragments of film , projected images , it 's what used to be called multi @-@ media in the ' 60s . " Bowie described how he assembled the show , saying , " The idea was to concoct surrealist or minimalist stage pieces to accompany rock @-@ and @-@ roll songs . I wanted to bridge together some kind of symbolist theater and modern dance . Not jazz dance , certainly not MTV dance , but something more influenced by people like Pina Bausch and a Montreal group called [ La La La Human Steps ] . There are some symbolist pieces , some minimalist pieces , and some vulgar pieces , too – some straightforward vaudeville bits . " 
 When Bowie was asked what he thought his audience expected of him on this tour , he said : 
 I guess that they come along to see whether I 'll fall down or something . I really don 't know . I know that they get what they consider is a really good performance . I think that over the years I 've proved that I do my best to provide them with some new vision of musical information on the stage . So I think there 's probably that element in it , but I couldn 't go any further than that . I really don 't know what they want from me . I 've never really been able to write for them . I 've only written and performed that which interests me . So essentially they have an agreement with me and that 's great . I mean , I 've lost audiences many times over the years , and they 've come back again for one reason or another . I 've sort of got that mutual agreement with them . If it 's not going very well then they stay away . Which is fair enough , you know . 
 Bowie reportedly coordinated aspects of the tour via email , a rarity in the late 1980s . 
 = = Song selection = = 
 Bowie elected to play less well @-@ known songs on the tour and avoided some of his bigger hits . He was eager to not repeat the formula that made the Serious Moonlight Tour a success , saying , " It seemed so easy . It was cheers from the word go . You know how to get a reaction – play ' Changes , ' ' Golden Years ' and they 'd be up on their feet . You get the reaction , take the money and run away . It seemed too easy . I didn 't want to do that again . " 
 All but two songs ( " Too Dizzy " and " Shining Star ( Makin ' My Love ) " ) from his album Never Let Me Down were played live during the tour . Songs performed during the tour were " chosen because they fit the performance " and fit Bowie 's goal to make a show that was much more theatrical and had strong dramatic content . When he was asked how he was going to make his rock show " dramatic " , he replied , " You 'll be surprised what you can do with a 6 @-@ piece rock band and a stage and a couple of lights . " 
 Several songs that Bowie had anticipated playing on the tour were ultimately dropped before rehearsals even started , including " Space Oddity " , " Ricochet " , " Joe the Lion " and " Don 't Look Down " . Some songs that the band rehearsed were never played on the tour . 
 Bowie was looking to avoid playing some of the songs that he was tired of playing after the long Serious Moonlight Tour , saying " I 'm not doing ' Star ' again . That was quite hard . I don 't think I 'm doing much Ziggy material on this tour ! [ laughs ] Probably use a lot of that mid @-@ 70s material , but not the more ponderous things like ' Warszawa . ' I tried that , and that was a bit yawn @-@ making . There was one I was humming to myself the other day : [ sings ] ' Baby , baby , I 'll never let you down ' – oh lord , what 's that one ? Jesus , I can 't remember it . ... ' Sons of the Silent Age ! ' [ snaps fingers ] Ah ! That 's right ! Thank god I could remember it ! So that for me now is a new song . I 've never done that one onstage . " " Sons of the Silent Age " was performed every night of the tour . 
 = = Set design = = 
 The tour 's set , described at the time as " the largest touring set ever , " was designed to look like a giant spider . It was 60 feet ( <unk> ) high , 64 feet ( <unk> ) wide and included giant <unk> tube legs that were lit from the inside with 20 @,@ 000 ' ( <unk> ) of color @-@ changing lights . A single set took 43 trucks to move and was estimated to weigh 360 tons . 16 ' x 20 ' ( <unk> x 6m ) video screens displayed video and images from the show to those in the audience who were further away from the stage . The system required to run the show included two separate sound systems , 260 speaker cabinets , 1 @,@ 000 lights ( with an output total of 600 @,@ 000 watts ) and three computers . 
 This was Bowie 's first tour where wireless microphone technology was available , allowing Bowie considerable freedom to move around the stage during a concert . This allowed him to interact with the dancers and musicians much more freely , and as such the set included 3 @-@ story high mobile scaffolding , onto which Bowie and his dancers would occasionally climb during the show . 
 Each set cost US $ 10 million , about $ 20 @.@ 8 million in today 's dollars . Bowie himself invested over $ 10 million of his own money to help fund the tour , and he paid $ 1 million a week to maintain a staff of 150 people to maintain and build the three sets as the tour moved around the world . In Philadelphia , where the tour opened in the US , the set was described as taking " 300 people 4 days " to build . 
 About halfway through the first leg of the tour in Europe , Bowie discovered that the full Spider set was so large that it would not fit in most indoor venues . He said , " It would cost me between $ 500 @,@ 000 and $ 600 @,@ 000 to alter the sets enough to bring the show indoors . ... I may decide to have a smaller ' indoor ' set made somewhere during the tour . " He did in fact commission a third slightly smaller set ( called the " Junior Bug " set ) to be used at indoor venues where the full spider would not fit , such as New York 's Madison Square Garden . 
 Bowie thought of the whole set as a metaphor of life , describing the stage as having " a feeling of a ship , which is the voyage , with the rigging and the climbing and the ropes . And the bottom circular area is like the Circus of Lights , so it really is from birth , and the voyaging through life . " 
 = = Rehearsals = = 
 Bowie assembled his band in early 1987 and were joined on stage by five dancers who were choreographed by Bowie 's long @-@ time friend Toni Basil . The band and the dancers spent time in 12 @-@ hour @-@ a @-@ day rehearsals in New York before moving on to Europe . Bowie described his rehearsal routine : 
 I prepare the day 's work when I get up in the morning , and then I go in around 10 o 'clock ( a.m. ) for rehearsals . Then it 's constant rehearsals , both the visual side and the musical side , through about 8 o 'clock ( p.m. ) . At around 8 p.m. I look at the video tapes of what we 've been doing during the day , and make adjustments if necessary . So there really isn 't time to do anything else at all except Sundays , and then I sleep for most of the day . It 's very intensive rehearsals , and physically it 's quite demanding . 
 Rehearsals with the full Spider set were staged in Rotterdam 's Ahoy Stadium starting on 18 May before moving to De Kuip stadium for the dress rehearsals ( 27 and 28 May ) . Due to relatively easy access to the venues during rehearsals , fans knew what the set list for the show would be before the tour even opened . 
 Bowie stated that he was looking for dancers who did not look like typical MTV dancers and who knew both American street @-@ dancing and European performance art . Originally Bowie had hoped to have Édouard Lock of La La La Human Steps be involved in the show , but the group was booked with other commitments . Bowie later lamented that the Tour may have been viewed differently if La La La Human Steps had been involved : " It would have been a different ballgame . " La La La Human Steps would provide the choreography for Bowie 's next tour , the Sound + Vision Tour of 1990 . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show was divided into two parts and included a planned encore . 
 Bowie entered the show to the song " Glass Spider " , for which he was lowered from the set 's ceiling while seated in a silver chair and singing into a telephone . Bowie was dressed in a single @-@ breasted three @-@ quarters length red suit , a red shirt , and red shoes . The show 's first vignette began with " Bang Bang " , during which Bowie pulled an audience member out of the crowd , only to be rejected by the fan , who by the end of the song was revealed to be one of the troupe 's dancers . Later in the show , for the song " Fashion " , the dance troupe threatened Bowie with a street fight , which , by the end of the song , he accidentally wins . For the live performance of " Never Let Me Down " , Bowie was influenced by the minimalist choreography of Pina Bausch . Bowie said : 
 I wanted one straight movement that starts upstage and comes all the way downstage and doesn 't vary . I 'm on my knees , with my arms in a kind of straitjacket , and a crawl for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . A girl is with me , as if she 's accompanying her pet in a park , but she has a cylinder on her back , and every now and then she 's giving me oxygen . It felt like a very protective , a very sad little image , and it felt right for the song . 
 For Part 2 , Bowie appeared on the stage 's scaffolding to " ' 87 & Cry " , flew through the air in a Flying by Foy abseiling harness , and was subsequently tied up by riot police . On at least one occasion , the flying segment of the song was dropped due to a malfunction with the set . The movie footage shown behind Bowie during " ' Heroes ' " was shot by Bowie during his time in Russia in 1974 . Of the footage , Bowie said : 
 There 's a poignant image of a Mongolian with a <unk> in his hand waving goodbye to his family getting on a train to Moscow and I loop that up so there 's a never ending sequence of this old fellow <unk> his tears and waving bye @-@ bye . That plays behind the action in black and white and it 's alarmingly sad . It 's like saying goodbye to heroism ; it 's like saying goodbye to a world of a 19th century ideal . It 's irretrievable and now maybe we ’ re just looking for seeds of intelligence and not heroes . There 's something about it that I really like . It 's a piece of theatricality that I really adore . I ’ m really proud of it . 
 The encore typically opened with the song " Time " , for which Bowie emerged from the top of the spider 's head with angel wings behind him , 60 feet above the crowd . The song was occasionally cut from outdoor shows when bad weather made the perch atop the spider too precarious to perform . Bowie 's outfit for the encore was a gold lamé leather suit complete with gold winged cowboy boots . One of these suits , autographed by Bowie , sold at a Sotheby 's auction in 1990 for $ 7 @,@ 000 ( worth about $ 12 @,@ 700 today ) , several times its expected selling price . One of the outfits that Bowie wore for Part 2 , also signed by Bowie , was put up for auction on 21 May 2016 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 On tour , the band typically performed a roughly two and a half @-@ hour set that varied only a little from night to night . 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 The opening act for the tour varied from country to country ; in North America some dates of the tour were supported by Duran Duran or Siouxsie and the Banshees . The opening acts in Europe varied , and included such acts as Iggy Pop , Big Country , The Cult , Erasure , The Stranglers and Nina Hagen . The tour also played festival dates , on one occasion with The Eurythmics headlining one night and Bowie headlining the next . 
 = = Tour incidents = = 
 The tour took a physical toll on Bowie . Not only did he grow noticeably thinner over the course of the tour , he found that he was exhausted before the tour even started : 
 I think [ tours like this ] are extravagantly dangerous to do because they 're so fucking tiring . Just the pressures of organising the event , and it 's no longer a show , it 's an event . Even before you go out on tour , you 're knackered . There 's God knows how many people running around , and everybody 's doing something and people are forgetting to delegate jobs to the right people , and it 's a mass of confusion and somehow it 's all supposed to come together . 
 The tour played at large @-@ capacity venues , and in Europe the tour alternated between indoor and outdoor , open @-@ field venues . Michael Clark , a lighting engineer for the tour , died at the Stadio Comunale in Florence , Italy on 9 June after falling from the scaffolding before the show commenced . The following day on 10 June , another worker fell ( without lethal injury ) while helping build the set in Milan . Mobs of fans , some who had camped out overnight to get into the venue , rioted and had to be controlled by police . Both shows in Rome ( on 15 and 16 June ) saw similar rioting as fans who could not get tickets to the shows clashed with police . On the second night , Bowie had to sing through tear gas as 50 people were arrested and 15 policemen were injured in the rioting . As the band 's plane was leaving Rome after their show on 16 June , a bomb scare forced the plane to return the airport , only to discover that the local chief of police had used it as ruse to get Bowie 's autograph . Said Bowie of the incident , " I was not so much annoyed as stunned – that could only happen in Italy ! " The 27 June concert , originally scheduled to be performed at Ullevi , Gothenburg , Sweden had to be moved to nearby <unk> in <unk> because a previous concert by Bruce Springsteen held at Ullevi Stadium incurred £ <unk> ( or about £ 7m today ) in damages . A fan trying to enter the Slane Castle backstage area by swimming the River Boyne drowned just before the show on 11 July . 
 At one point during the European tour , guitarist Carlos Alomar ripped a ligament in his leg , an injury that caused him to change his on @-@ stage character . Said Alomar , " [ I ] had to change my character into the mad , limping Mad Max reject with spiky hair . I went to a chiropractor and asked him for a lot of metal stuff -- leg braces , back braces and everything . Now I 'll be adding more metal as the show progresses . " 
 Bowie was occasionally visited or had his shows attended by European royalty , including Princess Diana at the second show in Wembley Stadium ; Sarah , Duchess of York at Sunderland ; and Danish Prince Joachim and Crown Prince Frederik at Stadt Park . 
 The Glass Spider Tour was the first Bowie tour to reach Austria , Italy , Spain , Ireland and Wales . Some of the outdoor performances in Britain had to start early due to curfew laws ( a problem typically avoided in other European shows ) , which reduced the impact of the lighting of the stage and set dressing , and bothered Bowie considerably . 
 During the North American leg of the tour , a 30 @-@ year @-@ old woman claimed that Bowie sexually assaulted her at the Mansion Hotel after a show at Reunion Arena in Dallas . A grand jury cleared Bowie of all charges a year later . 
 = = Ticket sales and attendance = = 
 Demand for tickets to the tour was high : The 3 September show at Sullivan Stadium in Massachusetts set a record for quickest sellout at that venue , a record matched by U2 and unsurpassed until The Who sold 100 @,@ 000 tickets to two shows there in less than 8 hours in 1989 . For one venue , Bowie sold US $ 3 million worth of tickets to 3 shows in 90 minutes . The concert drew the largest crowd ever to see a concert in Ottawa , Canada at the time . Advance sales for the Australian leg of the tour was $ 8 @.@ 6 million , surpassing even Michael Jackson 's advance sales for the Australian leg of his " Bad " concert tour ( estimated at $ 4 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 Writers have estimated that by the conclusion of the tour between two and six million people had attended , with another source suggesting that three million fans saw the tour worldwide . 
 Four of the tour 's shows were among the Top 20 grossing concert shows of the year 1987 in the US , and at the end of 1987 it was estimated that the entire tour grossed more than $ 50 million . In 1991 , it was estimated that each show of the tour grossed US $ 1 million , for roughly $ 86 million over the course of the tour ( or approximately $ 179 million today , adjusted for inflation ) . 
 = = Contemporary critical reviews = = 
 The European leg of the tour seemed to garner mostly unfavorable reviews from the media , although there were positive reviews as well . Bowie was frustrated how the reviews in Europe changed from initially positive to negative , blaming the early start of the tour in some outdoor venues for the poor reception . He said , " the biggest mistake that was made on that tour , was opening in the daylight . The whole reason for the entire damn show was lost . " He noted that reviews from indoor shows ( where the set and lighting were more effective ) were quite positive . 
 The US media seemed kinder , with papers in Orlando , Florida and Boston , Massachusetts writing positive reviews . The Philadelphia Inquirer and Chicago Tribune were both mixed in their reviews of shows in Philadelphia and Chicago , respectively . The review of Bowie 's first show in New York was mostly negative , calling the show " spectacular " , but adding that " overkill reigns " and lamenting " a dizzying overload of visual activity . " A review in the Christian Science Monitor was mostly positive , highlighting the dazzling visuals and complaining that the dancing was only occasionally inspired . A local paper in Portland , Oregon had a positive review that said that the dancers , music , set and band combined into an " overall effect [ that ] could rightly be called spectacular . It is performance art and rock opera ; it is a stunning assemblage worthy of any stage or arena in the world . " 
 Despite criticism in the press , Bowie at the time said that performing on this tour was the most fun he had ever had on the road because it was the " most inventive " tour he had ever been involved with . 
 = = Live recordings = = 
 Despite stating during the press tour that there would be no live album from the tour , the performances at Sydney Entertainment Centre – Sydney on 7 and 9 November 1987 were filmed and released on video as Glass Spider in 1988 . An edit of this show was subsequently aired in the US in an ABC TV concert special , ABC 's first concert special since airing Elvis Presley 's Aloha from Hawaii in 1973 . A 2007 DVD re @-@ release of the show included an audio recording of the performance at the Olympic Stadium , Montreal on 30 August 1987 . The 6 June 1987 Platz der Republik ( Reichstag – City Of Berlin Festival ) performance was broadcast live on FM Radio . 
 A critic found that the 1988 ( and 2007 DVD reissue ) video release rendered the intended meaning of the show largely nonsensical , as several songs and vignettes that made the show 's message explicit were excised from the release . 
 = = Commercial sponsorship = = 
 Bowie agreed to what at the time was considered a controversial commercial sponsorship agreement with PepsiCo , which was later seen as helping to pave the way for other big money tours by other artists . For his part , Bowie recorded a TV commercial with Tina Turner to the tune " Modern Love " in May 1987 while he was preparing for the tour . The commercial had a short run , as Pepsi withdrew the commercial after Bowie was accused of sexual assault during the tour . Of the sponsorship agreement , Bowie said , " We did a commercial sponsorship thing only for North America with the Pepsi @-@ Cola company . As far as I 'm concerned , what it 's allowed me to do , having them underwrite the tour , is to be able to produce a far more extravagant show than if I were just doing it myself . It means that instead of just having 1 or 2 sets I can have 3 or 4 sets made , and they can travel independently and they can be far more complicated . " 
 Bowie had originally planned to take the Glass Spider Tour to Russia , albeit with the band only ( no dancers or elaborate props ) , but with the money and extra stage provided by the sponsorship , Bowie felt he could take the full tour to Russia and South America . However , these plans failed to come to fruition , and the tour never reached those regions . 
 = = Tour legacy = = 
 Bowie found himself under great stress during the tour , and after the tour ended in New Zealand , he reportedly had the Spider set burned , saying " It was so great ... We just put the thing in a field and set light to it . That was such a relief ! " This was , however , partially refuted in 2016 by road manager Peter <unk> , who claimed to have purchased and stored at least one of the sets in his West Auckland warehouse . 
 The entire tour was so physically demanding and such a large production that Bowie said at the time that " I don 't think I 'll ever take a tour quite this elaborate out on the road again . It 's a real headache to put it together " . 
 Bowie became engaged to Melissa Hurley , one of the dancers from the tour , but the two split up without being wed after four years . 
 Critics have often compared later David Bowie tours to this one , commonly echoing this later review : " [ Bowie ] mounted a stadium @-@ sized production combining the excitement of rock with the perils of Broadway . ... An incredible spectacle , but the effect was overwhelming . Each additional theatrical device served to distract , ultimately flattening the impact of the music . " 
 In 1989 while working with Tin Machine , Bowie said " I overstretched . ... There was too much responsibility on the last [ Glass Spider ] tour . I was under stress every single day . It was a decision a second . It was so big and so unwieldy and everybody had a problem all the time , every day , and I was under so much pressure . It was unbelievable . ... I put too many fine details into something that was going to be seen ( indicates tiny figure with his finger and thumb ) this big . " 
 In 1990 , while giving interviews for his Sound + Vision Tour , Bowie said that he was pleased that the tour was regarded as " innovative " , noting reviews that pointed out how the tour had " areas of it that surely would change the way rock was done . " 
 In 1991 , while preparing for his second tour with Tin Machine , Bowie reflected on the Glass Spider Tour 's theatrics and presentation , suggesting that many tours and acts that followed benefited from this tour : 
 The Stones ' show , Prince 's show , Madonna 's show ... all of them have benefited from [ this ] tour . ... I like lots of it [ the Glass Spider Tour ] , but ... the whole thing should have been a lot smaller . Three @-@ quarters of it was really innovative , and I 've seen a lot of it in other people 's shows . ... One day , if you get the chance , get a copy of that show on video and take another look at it , because in the light of what 's been done since , there 's some interesting shit going on . 
 In the late 2000s , the tour began to be re @-@ examined by critics , and the tone of the coverage began to change . In 2009 , an article in the BBC News singled out the Glass Spider Tour 's innovative set and marriage of music and theatre as an inspiration to later acts , including Britney Spears , Madonna , U2 and others . In 2010 , the Glass Spider Tour won an award for being one of the best concert designs of all time ( alongside other such notable tours as U2 's 360 ° Tour [ 2009 – 2011 ] and Pink Floyd 's Division Bell Tour [ 1994 ] ) . 
 In 2013 , new critical reviews began to take note of some of the tour 's strengths and innovations and proposed that the tour was better than its reputation suggested . Although critics still found some elements of the tour questionable ( including the set itself and the prevalence of Bowie 's newer material ) , the tour was praised for Bowie 's strong voice , musical arrangements and choice of relatively unheard " jewels " in the set list . Peter Frampton credited his participation in this tour for helping to revive his own career . 
 The show on 6 June 1987 was played close to the Berlin Wall . The show was heard by thousands of Eastern Germany citizens across the wall and was followed by violent rioting in East Berlin . According to Tobias <unk> , these protests in East Berlin were the first in the sequence of riots that led to those around the time of the fall of the wall in November 1989 . Although other factors were probably more influential in the fall of the wall , on Bowie 's death in 2016 , the German Foreign Office tweeted " Good @-@ bye , David Bowie . You are now among # Heroes . Thank you for helping to bring down the # wall . " 
 Ultimately , given the negative reaction to the Never Let Me Down album and this tour , Bowie found himself creatively exhausted and in low critical standing . Bowie decided to return to making music for himself , and , having been put in touch with Reeves Gabrels through his publicist for the Glass Spider Tour , Bowie formed his band Tin Machine in 1989 and retired his back catalogue of songs from live performance with his Sound + Vision Tour in 1990 . 
 = = Tour details = = 
 = = = Tour design = = = 
 Allen Branton – Lighting design 
 Mark Ravitz – Set design 
 Christine Strand – Video director 
 = = = Band equipment = = = 
 Peter Frampton played two natural @-@ finish maple body <unk> @-@ <unk> Strat types , hand @-@ made by New York @-@ based John <unk> . For the song " Zeroes " , he used a Coral electric sitar , given to him in the late 70s and previously owned by Jimi Hendrix . Carlos Alomar played on six Kramer American series guitars and one custom Alembic . Multi @-@ instrumentalist Erdal <unk> played Yamaha DX7 , Emax , Korg SGI and Yamaha <unk> keyboards . He also played a Tokai Stratocaster , a Yamaha <unk> bass and a Pedulla fretless bass . Additional instruments played included a set of Latin Percussion timbales and white congas , a cowbell , 6- and 8 @-@ inch Zildjian cymbals , <unk> drum sticks , a Simmons SDS @-@ 9 , a cornet and a 17th @-@ century Italian viola . Richard Cottle played on two Prophet 5s , an Oberheim , a Yamaha DX7 , DX7 @-@ <unk> and <unk> keyboards as well as a Selmer alto saxophone . Carmine Rojas used two Spector basses , and Alan Childs played on Tama <unk> II drums . 
 = = = Tour dates = = = 
 = = = The songs = = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 David Buckley , Strange Fascination : The Definitive Biography of David Bowie , Virgin Books , 1999 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 784 @-@ X 
 David Currie , David Bowie : Glass Idol , Omnibus Press , 1987 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7119 @-@ 1182 @-@ 7 
 = We 've Come for You All = 
 We 've Come for You All is the ninth studio album by American thrash metal band Anthrax . It was released on May 6 , 2003 through Nuclear Blast in Europe and Sanctuary Records in North America . This was the first Anthrax record to feature Rob Caggiano on lead guitar and their final studio album with John Bush on vocals . The album was recorded over one @-@ year span at the <unk> Recording Studio in Suffern , New York . The cover art was designed by comic book artist Alex Ross , while the production was handed by Scrap 60 Productions team . The Who vocalist Roger Daltrey and Pantera guitarist Dimebag Darrell made guest appearances on the album . 
 The album received positive reviews by contemporary music critics , with About.com crediting it for " getting the band back on track " . Despite this , the album only reached number 122 on the Billboard 200 , with first week sales of 10 @,@ 000 copies . To date , We 've Come For You All has sold over 62 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 This album followed Volume 8 : The Threat Is Real , which was released in 1998 . Anthrax decided to sign with record label Nuclear Blast for the release of their upcoming album . Asked if changing the record company will affect the songwriting , guitarist Scott Ian replied : " To be honest , I don 't care about that at all . You know , business is business and the creative side is the creative side . Creatively , there was no big challenge . We just wanted to try to make the best record we can . " 
 The band started writing new material during the months of May and June 2001 , and entered the studio in November the same year . The recording process was shortly interrupted because the band went on a tour with Judas Priest early in 2002 . They returned to the studio in March and in the next few months worked on the record and successfully finished it . According to Ian , the whole process of making the album took the band a year . Ian also said that there is no leftover material out of the recording sessions , except for the song " Ghost " , which was released as a B @-@ side on the single " Taking the Music Back " . The Who vocalist Roger Daltrey and Pantera guitarist Dimebag Darrell made guest appearances on the album . Daltrey was featured in the song " Taking the Music Back " , while Darrell contributed to the songs " Cadillac Rock Box " and " Strap It On " . The band explained their appearances by saying they " felt the need to invite some friends to make something special for the album and the result is simply fantastic . " 
 The album was produced by Scrap 60 Productions team , consisted of Anthrax guitarist Rob Caggiano , Eddie Wohl , and Steve Regina . The front cover was designed by comic book artist Alex Ross . Vocalist John Bush stated that the band was honored to work with Ross , who also did the artwork for their previous pair of recordings . Bush explained that the band gave Ross a complete freedom over the concept of the artwork . Apart from suggesting the album 's title as an idea , Bush said that the other members had not participated much in creating the cover art . 
 = = Release = = 
 The release date of the album was delayed several times . The album was originally set for a release on February 4 , 2003 in Europe and Japan , and on February 24 in the US and Canada . After the prolongation of the release date for territories outside Japan and Europe , drummer Charlie Benante posted an explanation on the band 's official website : " I hate to tell you this but ... the record got pushed back to April 15 . It 's only been 73 years since Vol . 8 [ was released ] , what 's another week or two ? The record company needed the extra time to put more time into the promotion . One day all this crap will be over , you 'll be rocking out to some killer shit . " It was later announced that the release date for Europe would be also pushed back to March 3 , 2003 , eventually setting it on May 6 . The problems occurred after a breakdown in negotiations between Beyond Records and Sanctuary Records over a buy @-@ out of the band 's contract . According to Blabbermouth , Beyond Records was in the process of selling their entire catalog to Sanctuary , but the arrangement have fallen through . However , the problems were resolved and the record was successfully distributed through Sanctuary in North America and Nuclear Blast in Europe . 
 The album debuted at No. 122 on the Billboard 200 chart with first week sales of just under 10 @,@ 000 units . Since its release in May 2003 , We 've Come For You All sold about 62 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Apart from entering the French Albums Chart at number 95 , the record did not manage to chart in any other country . Referring to the low record sales , Ian posted a message on the band 's official web site saying : " That 's more than I thought it would do after five years away . That 's basically what [ the group 's last album ] Volume 8 did in its first week and this one was based on mostly just Internet promo . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Bush opined that this record wasn 't very different from their previous releases . " It 's still an Anthrax album with many different parts that can appeal to a wide audience . Our sound is recognizable each time you listen to one of our songs and that 's something we really want for our music . You have the fastest rhythms , the more danceable ones , you have everything you can expect from an Anthrax record . " Benante said that elements from their earlier albums are still present on the record , though it explores " other territories " . 
 Johnny Loftus from AllMusic described the music as a strained fusion of thrash and traditional heavy metal , accompanied by the harsh vocals of Bush . He noted the record for using modern production techniques , as well as displaying melodies and instrumentation that have always been Anthrax 's trademark . Magazine Rock Hard observed that the record was a combination of " tradition and modernity " , with strong vocals and " thrashy " tunes . They pointed that the sound was extremely complex with " super fat " production , having nothing similar with the nu metal sound of the early 2000s . Exclaim ! wrote that the songs had rock @-@ based structures , unlike the band 's earlier releases which featured " brutal beats and razor riffs " . Gregory Bradley also noted that couple of songs had " distinct hard @-@ rock vibe " , while others demonstrated " very metal " sound . In their guide to Anthrax discography , Kerrang ! wrote that We 've Come for You All was " leaning towards a groove @-@ orientated hard rock sound " with several slower and radio friendly efforts . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 We 've Come for You All received positive reviews upon release , with About.com crediting it for " getting the band back on track " . Allmusic 's Johnny Loftus noted the album for its " pile @-@ driving thrash " sound , which reminded him of the group 's earlier days . Loftus concluded that We 've Come for You All was the definitive thrash metal album , released in a period when albums from that genre were not common . In a review for Raidió Teilifís Éireann , Harry Guerin wrote that the band has preserved their sense of melody and aggression . He praised the fast blast beat percussion on " Black Dahlia " , and finished the review by saying that the album would likely exceed the expectations of their most devoted fans . 
 Writing for Metal Review , Gregory Bradley stopped short of calling the album a return to form , but asserted that the record was an " acceptable " release . Bradley did , however , credit the album for having some " very metal " songs , singling out " What Doesn 't Die " and " Black Dahlia " in particular . Chris Ayers from Exclaim ! opined that We 've Come for You All was the band 's strongest release since Sound Of White Noise ( 1993 ) and easily the best of the John Bush era : " <unk> and more confident , the self @-@ produced We 've Come for You All is a certified classic that proves the ageless Anthrax are still a viable metal option . " Vik Bansal , of MusicOMH , summarized the album as " a bold , sleek and raucous slab of modern metal " , containing elements that were absent from many heavy metal albums at the time . Bansal cited " What Doesn 't Die " for particular praise , noting the " razor @-@ sharp " riffs on the song . He noted " Cadillac Rock Box " for sounding similar to bands like Lynyrd Skynyrd and Black Sabbath . Bansal summed up his review by stating that We 've Come for You All is a " mighty album from a still mighty band " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by John Bush , Rob Caggiano , Scott Ian , Frank Bello and Charlie Benante , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from AllMusic . 
 Anthrax 
 John Bush – lead vocals 
 Rob Caggiano – lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Scott Ian – rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 Frank Bello – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Charlie Benante – drums 
 Guest musicians 
 Dimebag Darrell – guitar on " Strap It On " and " Cadillac Rock Box " 
 Roger Daltrey – additional vocals on " Taking the Music Back " 
 Technical personnel 
 Rob Caggiano – producer 
 Steve Regina – mixing , producer 
 Eddie Wohl – mixing , producer 
 Paul Crook – assistant engineer 
 Anthony <unk> – assistant engineer 
 George Marino – mastering 
 Alex Ross – cover art concept and illustration 
 Brent Thompson – art direction , graphic design , illustrations 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Kayla Clarke = 
 Kayla Clarke ( born 6 August 1991 ) is an Australian swimmer who represented Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in swimming , and has medalled at the 2010 Australian Disability Age Group Nationals , and 2010 International Paralympic Swimming World Championships , 2009 Queensland State Championships , 2009 Queensland Secondary School Titles , and 2009 Global Games . She competes in a number of events , including the 100m freestyle , 100m backstroke , 100m breaststroke , 100m butterfly and 200m individual medley . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Clarke was born in <unk> , Queensland . She has an intellectual disability . She attended Ipswich Central High School and Bremer State High School , and was named the 2009 – 10 Ipswich News <unk> Sports winner . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Clarke started swimming competitively in 2007 , and competes in the S14 classification . She was a member of the <unk> Swimming Club , and was coached by Tony Keogh , who became her coach in 2008 . She has a swimming scholarship with the Queensland Academy of Sport , is involved in the Australian Institute of Sport program , and received A $ 20 @,@ 000 in Australian Government Direct Athlete Support ( DAS ) funds in the 2011 – 12 financial year . One of her major swimming rivals is fellow Australian swimmer Taylor Corry . 
 At the 2009 Queensland State Championships , she won five gold medals in her classification races . The Queensland Secondary School Titles that year ended with her winning seven first place finishes , and she earned five gold medals , a silver medal two bronze medals at the 2009 Global Games . 
 In 2010 , she won eight gold and two silver medals at Australian Disability Age Group Nationals , and competed in the International Paralympic Swimming World Championships , where she finished second with a personal best time of 1 : 11 @.@ 13 in the S14 100m backstroke event . She also finished fourth in the 200m freestyle and fifth in the 100m breaststroke . 
 Clarke became affiliated with the Yeronga Park Club in 2011 in an effort to make the Paralympic Games , and switched coaches , taking on Rick Van Der Zant as her new coach . The 2011 Australian national championships saw her win six golds in seven events , including the 100m freestyle , 100m backstroke , 100m breaststroke , 100m butterfly and 200m individual medley . She competed in the inaugural 2011 Para Pan Pacific Championships , where she finished first in the S14 200m freestyle event , and at the 2011 Can @-@ Am Swimming Open , in which she posted first place finishes in the 100m backstroke and 200m freestyle events . 
 Clarke was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in the S14 100m backstroke , 200m freestyle and 100m breaststroke events . These were her first Paralympic Games , and she was the only female swimmer from Queensland . Going into the Games , she was ranked second in the world in the 100m backstroke . She trained for the Games in China in order to acclimatise , and participated in a two @-@ week @-@ long national team training camp in Cardiff prior to the start . Support for her Paralympic efforts came from sponsors including <unk> Racing and Training Swimwear . She made the finals in all three events , but finished outside the medals , being placed fourth in the 200m freestyle and 100m breaststroke , and sixth in the 100m backstroke . 
 = = = Personal bests = = = 
 Personal bests as of 16 September 2012 : 
 = Hurricane Charley ( 1986 ) = 
 Hurricane Charley ( US : / <unk> / ) was the costliest tropical cyclone of the 1986 Atlantic hurricane season . The third tropical storm and second hurricane of the season , Charley formed as a subtropical low on August 13 along the Florida panhandle . After moving off the coast of South Carolina , the system transitioned into a tropical cyclone and intensified into a tropical storm on August 15 . Charley later attained hurricane status before moving across eastern North Carolina . It gradually weakened over the north Atlantic Ocean before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on August 20 . Charley 's remnants remained identifiable for over a week until after crossing the British Isles and dissipating on August 30 . 
 The storm brought light to moderate precipitation to much of the southeastern United States . In Georgia and South Carolina , the rainfall alleviated drought conditions . In North Carolina , where the hurricane made landfall , tidal flooding and downed trees were the primary impacts . The storm brought high winds to southeastern Virginia , where 110 @,@ 000 people were left without power . Minor damage extended along the Atlantic coastline northward through Massachusetts . One traffic fatality was reported each in North Carolina and Virginia . Three people in Maryland died due to a plane crash related to the storm . Throughout the United States , Hurricane Charley caused an estimated US $ 15 million in damage ( equivalent to US $ 32 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . One person drowned in Newfoundland . 
 As an extratropical cyclone , Charley brought heavy rainfall and strong winds to Ireland and the United Kingdom , causing at least 11 deaths . In Ireland , the rainfall set records for 24 @-@ hour totals , including an accumulation of more than 7 @.@ 8 in ( 200 mm ) which set the record for the greatest daily rainfall total in the country . In the country , the rainfall caused widespread flooding , causing two rivers to exceed their banks . In the Dublin area , 451 buildings were flooded , some up to a depth of 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . In the United Kingdom , the storm flooded rivers and brought down trees and power lines . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Charley originated in an area of convection associated with a trough of low pressure first observed on August 11 across southern Florida and the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . The area of disturbed weather spread northward , spawning a broad low @-@ pressure area on August 12 . Moving northward over the Florida panhandle , the low became slightly better organized as it merged with a weakening weather front . On August 13 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) identified the system as a developing subtropical low near Apalachee Bay along the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico . The agency defines a subtropical cyclone as " a non @-@ frontal low pressure system that has characteristics of both tropical and extratropical cyclones . " 
 After becoming a subtropical low , the cyclone tracked northeastward through Georgia , before turning eastward and exiting South Carolina into the Atlantic Ocean . Its track was influenced by the western periphery of the subtropical ridge , which is a large belt of high pressure . While moving over land , the cyclone had become better organized , and on August 15 it transitioned into a tropical depression about 70 miles ( 110 kilometres ) southeast of Charleston , South Carolina . The depression strengthened further , and based on reports from the Hurricane Hunters , it intensified into Tropical Storm Charley late on August 15 . With a weak ridge to its north , the storm initially tracked slowly eastward just off the coast of North Carolina , before turning to the north @-@ northeast as a trough approached from the west . A broad cyclone , Charley gradually intensified , and a single ring of convection around the center developed into an eyewall . At 1200 UTC on August 17 , it attained hurricane status about 13 mi ( 21 km ) off the North Carolina coastline . About two hours later , Hurricane Charley made landfall near Cape Fear , and it subsequently moved across the eastern portion of the state . 
 Hurricane Charley did not weaken while moving over land ; instead , it intensified , attaining peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) after emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near the North Carolina – Virginia border . Within 12 hours of reaching peak intensity , however , the hurricane weakened to tropical storm status . The approaching trough , which had previously caused Charley to turn northward , forced the hurricane to accelerate northeastward and later eastward , bringing the storm about 80 mi ( 130 km ) southeast of Nantucket , Massachusetts on August 19 . As the trough was not very strong , Charley slowly underwent the process of extratropical transition , unlike other tropical cyclones that complete the transition much quicker with a stronger trough . As a result , the storm maintained hybrid , or subtropical characteristics for several days . By August 21 , Charley completed the transition south of Atlantic Canada . 
 After becoming extratropical , Charley re @-@ intensified under baroclinic instability . The resulting storm was a very large and fairly strong gale that gradually moved across the northern Atlantic Ocean . As an extratropical cyclone , Charley attained an atmospheric pressure of 980 mbar , which was lower than its pressure as a tropical cyclone . On August 24 , it spawned a separate extratropical cyclone , which initially moved northeastward before turning and dissipating near Spain . The remnants of Charley accelerated as it approached the British Isles , and after passing south of Ireland it moved across Great Britain on August 27 . While in the North Sea , the cyclone weakened as it executed a counter @-@ clockwise loop , and on August 30 the remnants of Charley dissipated near Denmark as a new circulation developed to its southwest . 
 = = North American impact = = 
 = = = Southeastern United States = = = 
 As the hurricane paralleled the east coast of the United States and its exact track and strength were uncertain , there were several tropical cyclone warnings and watches issued in association with Charley ; in a post @-@ storm analysis , the NHC described " the complication of the warning process for this type of situation . " Initially , the storm was not expected to affect land . In its first advisory on Charley , the NHC issued a 22 % probability of Charley passing within 65 mi ( 105 km ) of land ; specifically , it was predicted to be closest to the South Carolina coastline . About 16 hours prior to the hurricane 's landfall , the NHC issued a gale warning between Bogue Inlet and Oregon Inlet along the North Carolina coastline , including the Pamlico Sound . When the storm 's intensification and track close to land became apparent , the gale warning was replaced by a hurricane warning , and additional gale warnings were issued westward to Topsail Beach and northward to Virginia Beach , Virginia . Up to 10 @,@ 000 people evacuated the Outer Banks , which resulted in traffic jams on roadways heading out of the area . Ocracoke island was partially evacuated by six ferries , although many people were unable to leave and instead rode out the storm on the island . 
 Hurricane Charley affected at least ten U.S. states , resulting in five total deaths and $ 15 million in damage ( 1986 USD ) . The precursor disturbance to Charley brought rainfall to much of Florida , including a total of 8 @.@ 61 inches ( 219 millimetres ) in Steinhatchee ; that rainfall maxima was the greatest total associated with Charley within the United States . The system also produced light to moderate rainfall across Georgia and South Carolina , which proved beneficial as the region was in a major drought . However , its heaviest rainfall remained over open waters . 
 Moving across eastern North Carolina as a minimal hurricane , Charley produced locally strong wind gusts , peaking at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Frisco . However , no stations recorded sustained winds of hurricane force . The cyclone dropped rainfall along the coastline , amounting to over 7 in ( 175 mm ) near Manteo . As it moved ashore , the storm generated high tides reaching 5 @.@ 78 feet ( 1 @.@ 76 metres ) at the Duck Coe fishing pier . Near Cape Hatteras , a woman drowned while attempting to drive through a flooded roadway . The hurricane 's passage left roads and bridges flooded with up to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water , including a portion of North Carolina Highway 12 on Hatteras Island . Across the Outer Banks , the storm left about 8 @,@ 000 people without power , but damage was minimal and limited to shingles and roofs . Impact in the state was primarily caused by tidal flooding and downed trees , and a preliminary damage estimate placed total monetary losses at $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 1986 USD ) . 
 = = = Northeastern United States and Canada = = = 
 As Charley moved across eastern North Carolina , hurricane warnings were extended northward , first to Virginia Beach ; they were later extended to Cape Charles , then to the Maryland / Delaware border , and ultimately as far north as Sandy Hook , New Jersey . Prior to its arrival , the storm resulted in the closure of Norfolk International Airport , and more than 9 @,@ 000 people evacuated the coastline for emergency shelters . Tropical storm force winds spread across southeastern Virginia , with wind gusts reaching 82 mph ( 133 km / h ) on Cape Charles . Offshore , a station on the Chesapeake Bay Bridge – Tunnel recorded sustained winds of 97 mph ( 157 km / h ) with gusts to 104 mph ( 168 km / h ) . After the gust , the bridge @-@ tunnel was closed overnight . The winds downed many trees , and in Norfolk , a motorist died after crashing into a downed tree . In Virginia Beach , the winds blew off the roof of a hotel and destroyed two homes under construction . Across the area , the storm left about 110 @,@ 000 customers without power . Rainfall in Virginia was fairly light , including a 24 @-@ hour total of just over 1 in ( 25 mm ) in Norfolk . Strong waves destroyed 250 ft ( 76 m ) of Harrison 's Pier in Norfolk . A preliminary damage estimate for the area was $ 1 million ( 1986 USD ) . 
 Thunderstorms to the north of the circulation brought moderate rainfall to Maryland ; the same thunderstorms caused a light aircraft to crash near Baltimore , resulting in the death of its three occupants . Rainfall spread across much of Maryland , peaking at 4 @.@ 24 in ( 105 mm ) in Hollywood . Tropical storm force winds extended into Delaware , and a peak wind gust of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) was reported in Rehoboth Beach . Only isolated and minor damage occurred in Maryland and Delaware . In New Jersey , a hurricane force wind gust was reported on Long Beach Island , and 1 @.@ 3 in ( 33 mm ) of rainfall was reported in Atlantic City . In the southernmost counties in the state , the winds left about 15 @,@ 000 electrical customers without power . In New York , after Hurricane Gloria in the previous season left thousands of customers without power , the Long Island Lighting Co. arranged for additional workers for potential power restoration . Light rainfall and gusty winds extended into the New York metropolitan area . 
 Officials issued gale warnings through Chatham , Massachusetts , including Martha 's Vineyard and Nantucket . As Charley passed south of Massachusetts , it produced precipitation in the southeastern portion of the state . Nantucket reported 3 @.@ 20 in ( 81 mm ) of rainfall , and Chatham recorded 2 @.@ 68 in ( 68 mm ) in a 24 @-@ hour period . Nantucket also reported sustained winds of 60 mph ( 96 km / h ) , and as the storm passed the island it produced a storm tide of 3 @.@ 5 – 4 ft ( 1 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) . High tides and heavy rain caused significant street flooding on Nantucket . Several boats were damaged , others were beached , and one large boat sunk in Nantucket Harbor . Damage on the island $ 75 @,@ 000 ( 1986 USD ) . 
 Before becoming extratropical , the storm brushed the coast of Nova Scotia with wind gusts of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and moderate precipitation totaling 4 @.@ 57 in ( 116 mm ) . Strong waves damaged several boats along the coasts of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , killing one person in St. John 's , Newfoundland . 
 = = European impact = = 
 After Charley became extratropical , the United Kingdom Met Office issued weather alerts prior to the arrival of the storm , noting the potential for " extremely heavy rainfall [ which would ] cause local flooding . " In the United Kingdom , the threat of the storm resulted in the cancellation of ferry service between Northern Ireland and Great Britain , as well between Great Britain and France . The extratropical remnants of Hurricane Charley moved across Ireland and United Kingdom with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The storm 's rainfall significantly affected most of both countries , with the exception of Scotland in the United Kingdom . In the English Channel , waves up to 26 ft ( 8 m ) in height breached and flooded a ship ; the 31 passengers on board were rescued by helicopters and other ships . Throughout the region , the storm resulted in at least 11 deaths . 
 First passing just south of Ireland on August 25 , the storm dropped heavy rainfall and brought strong winds , significantly affecting the coastline where winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) were reported . Rainfall spread across the entire country , peaking at 11 @.@ 0 in ( 280 mm ) in <unk> . There , a station reported more than 7 @.@ 8 in ( 200 mm ) in 24 hours , which set the record for the greatest daily rainfall total in the country . Several 24 @-@ hour rainfall records were set during the storm , and new six @-@ hour and twelve @-@ hour record totals at Casement Aerodrome were set with 1 @.@ 63 in ( 41 @.@ 5 mm ) and 2 @.@ 61 in ( 66 @.@ 2 mm ) , respectively . The rainfall left some areas flooded , particularly in the Dublin area where 451 buildings were inundated , some up to a depth of 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . <unk> , it was described as the worst flooding in the history of Dublin . Two small rivers , the Dodder and the Dargle , overflowed their banks due to the rainfall . The River Dargle overflowed in Bray , flooding some areas up to a depth of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and forcing about 1 @,@ 000 people to evacuate ; several special @-@ needs people were evacuated by boat . The flood , which originated about one mile north of the town , damaged over 500 houses and brought down several trees . Despite local politicians promising for flood protection after the flood , the town remained vulnerable to such flooding at least 20 years after the storm . The River Dodder , which also overflowed , nearly exceeded the reservoir dam in Bohernabreena in South Dublin . Additional spillways were later added in the event of another similar flood . In the Wicklow Mountains , the rainfall resulted in significant runoff , which caused erosion along the <unk> River . The passage of the storm left heavy crop damage , part of a larger period of poor agriculture in the country . Throughout the country , the storm caused at least five deaths , four of which were drownings in flooded rivers ; the fifth death was caused by a heart attack while being evacuated from flooding . Two months after the storm struck , the government of Ireland allocated IR £ 6 @,@ 449 @,@ 000 ( 1986 IEP , $ 8 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 1986 USD ) to repair roads and bridges damaged by the weather system . 
 The storm also affected the United Kingdom as it moved across the southern portion of the country . In Wales , Charley produced record @-@ breaking daily rainfall , which surpassed 4 inches ( 100 mm ) in Dyfed . Some locations received hundred @-@ year rainfall . The storm struck the area during the Late Summer Bank Holiday , creating unfavorable conditions for driving and resulting in several accidents . Heavy rainfall flooded rivers , which swept away several people . This prompted officials to deploy boats and helicopters to assist in rescues , although at least three deaths were reported due to drowning in the rivers . Severe flooding was reported in Cumbria and Gloucestershire . The storm also left roads blocked by fallen trees and power lines . At the start of the storm , the inaugural Birmingham Super Prix motorsport race was just getting underway but poor visibility from precipitation contributed to an accident which temporarily called halt to proceedings . In Whitland , Wales , local soldiers assisted rescuing people , and later contributed to the cleanup of the town . Throughout the country , five people were missing after the storm , all of whom are presumed to have drowned ; an additional death was confirmed in Newry , Northern Ireland . 
 = John Albert Taylor = 
 John Albert Taylor ( June 6 , 1959 – January 26 , 1996 ) was an American who was convicted of burglary and carrying a concealed weapon in the state of Florida , and sexual assault and murder in the state of Utah . Taylor 's own sister tipped off police in June 1989 after 11 @-@ year @-@ old Charla King was found raped and strangled to death in Washington Terrace , Utah . His fingerprints were found at the crime scene , which was located in an apartment complex where he had been staying . In December 1989 , Taylor was sentenced to death and placed on death row at Utah State Prison . 
 Taylor gave up appealing his sentence after his request for retrial was rejected by the Utah Supreme Court . He became the second person to be executed by firing squad in the United States ( after Gary Gilmore ) since the death penalty was reinstated in 1976 . Taylor said he chose this method of execution to embarrass the state of Utah . On January 26 , 1996 , the day of Taylor 's execution , legislation was introduced in the Utah House of Representatives to eliminate the firing squad . 
 = = Background = = 
 John Albert Taylor was born in Ogden , Utah to Albert and <unk> Taylor , who separated during his infancy . He moved several times during his youth , including a move to Colorado at the age of nine , when he was told that his father had died . According to Taylor , he was raised in Florida , where he was abused as a child and became involved in drugs by his teens . Taylor stated that he did not get along with his stepfather , a Vietnam veteran , or his mother : " But she could never control me . My mother had a lot of animosity toward my father . They alienated me for a long time . I was the whipping post . " At the age of 13 , he stabbed his stepfather . According to court records , he repeatedly raped and sodomized his sister Laurie during his teens , and raped , and sodomized other young girls , and was committed to a sex offender program . In 1974 , Taylor moved back to Ogden to live with his grandmother , but soon returned to Florida . 
 In 1977 , Taylor was arrested in Florida and charged with burglary and carrying a concealed weapon after he was caught with a stolen gun . He was convicted and imprisoned until December 1981 , when he was released on parole . In March 1982 , he was arrested in Fort Lauderdale , Florida for armed burglary , armed robbery , and sexual assault . He had been diagnosed at the age of 17 as " a remorseless pedophile . " He was acquitted of the charges in September 1982 , but was sentenced to 15 additional years in prison for parole violations . In 1989 , Taylor was released and departed for Utah to be with his sisters and biological father , who he discovered was still alive . 
 From all I saw , my father was a good man . But while I was growing up , I was told so many stories about him that I 've come to learn were all lies . My father was being painted a villain when he really wasn 't one . I 've come to learn that the real villain was my mother . 
 = = Murder of Charla King = = 
 At around 3 : 20 p.m. on June 23 , 1989 , Sherron King returned from work to her apartment in Washington Terrace , Utah to find the body of her daughter Charla in the bedroom with a nightgown wrapped around her head and panties stuffed in her mouth . After calling the police , she was instructed to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation and discovered that Charla had been strangled to death with a telephone cord . Charla 's foster grandmother Bertha Poster stated that she had dropped Charla off at the apartment at about 1 : 30 p.m. after visiting the mall . Charla had been planning to celebrate her 12th birthday at an amusement park on the next day . Prosecutors believe that John entered the house with intent on sexually molesting the girl . When she caught him in the house , Prosecutors believe , he chased her into the bedroom , and place her underwear in her mouth . He raped her , placed a nightgown over her head , and strangled her to death . 
 = = = Arrest = = = 
 On June 25 , a tipster , who was later revealed to be Taylor 's sister Laurie Galli , contacted Washington Terrace Police officer Marcia Gathercole with information connected to the murder . Taylor 's fingerprints were found on a telephone in the King residence and matched to records provided by authorities in Fort Lauderdale . He was arrested at about 9 p.m. on June 28 at the home of his half @-@ sister / <unk> lover <unk> Taylor in Ogden , Utah and charged with , First Degree Burglary , First Degree Child Rape , and First @-@ Degree Murder the next morning . Taylor had arrived from Florida four days before the murder and had been staying with another sister in the same apartment complex . 
 I remember telling my father that whoever they arrested for this crime was history , and that was before my arrest . 
 Sherron King moved out of the apartment complex on June 28 . She was upset that the neighbors who came forward as witnesses did nothing when they heard her daughter screaming . 
 = = = Murder trial = = = 
 On November 27 , 1989 , the trial commenced under District Judge David Roth after Taylor waived his right to a jury . Taylor testified on his own behalf that he only entered the apartment in the act of burglary while no one was home , leaving his fingerprints on the phone when he found money underneath it . Weber County deputy attorney William Daines stated that Taylor previously denied being in the apartment and that two witnesses placed him at the scene at the time of the crime . Prison inmate Mike Gallegos testified that he had a brief conversation in which Taylor told him that he killed a girl by accident , and masturbated on the corpse . Duane Moyes and James Gaskill of the Weber State College crime laboratory testified that the person who cut the telephone cord with a knife and wrapped it around the neck of the victim was likely the same as the one who left behind fingerprints on the phone . Lab director Gaskill stated that the prints , three of which were matched to fingers on Taylor 's left hand , were the only evidence that placed Taylor at the crime scene . Gaskill said there was no evidence in the apartment to indicate a burglary took place or that any other person was connected to the murder . 
 On December 5 , 1989 , Judge Roth found Taylor guilty of the first @-@ degree child rape and first @-@ degree murder of Charla Nicole King . During the penalty phase of Taylor 's trial , his half @-@ sister Leslie Beale traveled from Florida to testify about his harsh treatment under his stepfather and the three years that Taylor spent in a sex offender program at a Florida mental institution . On December 19 , Taylor became the first convict in 40 years to be sent to death row by a Weber County court . Roth said that the facts of the case outweighed any mitigating circumstances . Taylor 's father Albert attended most of his son 's court proceedings until he died of heart failure on October 8 , 1990 . Taylor said he was not permitted to attend his father 's funeral . 
 = = = Appeals = = = 
 The case was automatically appealed to the Utah Supreme Court , which upheld Taylor 's conviction and sentence in October 1991 . Taylor 's execution was initially scheduled for January 15 , 1992 . The date was rescheduled to June 24 when Taylor 's attorney Martin Gravis requested to withdraw from the case . On June 17 , Judge Roth granted a stay of execution after Taylor 's new defense attorney Ron Yengich requested more time to prepare an appeal . At issue was a new 1992 law in Utah that established the sentence of life imprisonment without parole . 
 While incarcerated at Utah State Prison , Taylor kept busy in an effort to overcome his claustrophobia and boredom . He earned his high school diploma and studied to be a paralegal until his educational grant money ran out . 
 In October 1995 , Taylor decided to end further appeals after the Utah Supreme Court rejected his argument that his legal counsel was ineffective . He fired defense attorney Ed Brass , stating : " If I don 't fight for my appeal , I don 't need an attorney . " Taylor said he was prepared to die partly because of his failing health , including an enlarged heart , bleeding ulcers , and swollen legs and feet . 
 I don 't want to die alone in my cell . 
 Judge Roth ordered Taylor to choose a method of execution . Taylor chose to be executed by firing squad to make the process more difficult for Utah state officials . In an interview with the Deseret News , he stated : " I didn 't commit the murder , and I 'm not going to submit to letting them kill me on that table . " Regarding the option of lethal injection , Taylor said , " I don 't want to go flipping around like a fish out of water on that table . " 
 To be strapped to a table and injected full of drugs leaves me with a feeling of helplessness ; because I am innocent of the crime for which I was convicted of . Anyway , if my execution is carried out , it will be a murder . Granted , it may be legally sanctioned , but , nonetheless , murder it will be , and the firing squad is my way of showing that point ; and because of the cost and the inconvenience it will cause the state because they are not really prepared for an execution by firing squad . 
 = = Execution = = 
 When Taylor ordered a last meal of pizzas " with everything , " some law enforcement veterans recalled that the same request was made by Barton Kay Kirkham , the last man to be hanged in Utah . Like Taylor , Kirkham had selected his method of execution with the goal of inconveniencing the state . On January 25 , 1996 , Taylor spent his final evening sharing his pizza with his uncle Gordon Lee while joined by former attorney Ed Brass and Catholic priest Reyes Rodriguez , who administered the Last Rites . Taylor , whose stomach had been doing " flip @-@ flops " earlier in the day , requested antacid medication and declined deputy warden Wally <unk> 's offer for more pizza , soda , and coffee . He gave his glasses to warden Hank <unk> and said , " There is no need for them . " Taylor refused an offer to be sedated before his execution , but was allowed his first cigarette in six years . 
 Five police officers , who volunteered to carry out the execution , were each paid $ 300 . The shooters used identical Winchester Model 94 rifles . One prison official selected each rifle at random from a table and handed them to another prison official sitting in a small room , out of sight . The second prison official would then load the rifle , and return it to the table . Four of the rifles were loaded with live ammunition . One was secretly loaded with a wax bullet so that none of the officers would be certain that they fired a deadly shot . The non @-@ lethal cartridge was tested to ensure that the report and recoil was difficult to distinguish from a real cartridge . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 Over 168 news and television crews from around the world were on hand to report the execution , which was set up inside a warehouse at Utah State Prison in Draper . Nine media witnesses were allowed to record the actual event . Actor and activist Mike Farrell appeared as a commentator for the American Civil Liberties Union in opposition to the death penalty . Elliott King , the uncle of Charla King , was the sole member of the victim 's family to arrive as a witness and expressed that he had no sympathy for Taylor . Sister Helen Prejean , the author of Dead Man Walking , wrote Taylor a letter that was delivered right before his execution . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Shortly before midnight , Taylor was led into the execution chamber and strapped to a chair 17 feet away from the shooters with a hood covering his head . Multiple bright lights covered Taylor . Sandbags were arranged behind him to prevent any ricochets . The captain walked down the aisle , tapping each shooter on the shoulder to check to see if they were ready . At 12 : 03 a.m. Mountain Standard Time on January 26 , 1996 , every shooter fired at the count of five and the white cloth target on Taylor 's chest flew off . His chest moved upward and his left hand tightened into a fist . His grip gradually loosened and his head fell back . A doctor checked Taylor 's neck for a pulse and cut two holes in his hood to check for a pupillary light reflex . Taylor was declared dead at 12 : 07 a.m. and became the 49th person to be executed in the state of Utah since 1852 . 
 I would like to say for my family and my friends — as the poem was written , ' Remember me , but let me <unk> 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After an autopsy , Taylor 's remains were cremated and shipped to his uncle Gordon Lee in Oregon . The Salt Lake County Sheriff 's Office said it would specify homicide as the cause of death on Taylor 's death certificate because the execution met the state 's definition of " intentional death by another hand . " However , Utah state law exempts the actions of executioners from prosecution . A commemorative coin was created to recognize the staff who had participated in the execution . Eight hours after Taylor 's execution , Utah State Representative Sheryl Allen first introduced a bill to eliminate the firing squad , and later succeeded in passing <unk> , which removed the right of the condemned to choose their method of execution after February 2004 . 
 If they choose the firing squad , it 's one last magnificent manipulation of the system to bring attention to themselves ... It 's time for Utah to do away with the firing squad . 
 = The Twilight Saga : New Moon = 
 The Twilight Saga : New Moon , commonly referred to as New Moon , is a 2009 American romantic fantasy film based on Stephenie Meyer 's 2006 novel New Moon . It is the second film in The Twilight Saga film series and is the sequel to 2008 's Twilight . Summit Entertainment greenlit the sequel in late November 2008 , following the early success of Twilight . Directed by Chris Weitz , the film stars Kristen Stewart , Robert Pattinson , and Taylor Lautner , reprising their roles as Bella Swan , Edward Cullen , and Jacob Black , respectively . Melissa Rosenberg , who handed in a draft of the film script during the opening weekend of Twilight , returned as screenwriter for New Moon as well . 
 Filming began in Vancouver in late March 2009 , and in Montepulciano , Italy in late May 2009 . The film was released on November 20 , 2009 in most countries , and set domestic box office records as the biggest midnight screening , grossing $ 26 @.@ 3 million , which was superseded by its sequel , Eclipse . This led to the highest single day , domestic gross on an opening day , with $ 72 @.@ 7 million , until it was beaten in 2011 by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , which made $ 91 @.@ 1 million , by nearly $ 20 million . Furthermore , New Moon opened with the third highest domestic opening weekend since 2002 grossing a total of $ 142 @,@ 839 @,@ 137 . The film also became the highest @-@ grossing film released by Summit Entertainment , and was the widest independent release , playing in over 4 @,@ 100 theaters in its theatrical run , until it was surpassed by The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . 
 New Moon was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on March 20 , 2010 through midnight release parties . As of July 2012 , $ 184 @,@ 916 @,@ 451 in North American DVD sales , selling more than 8 @,@ 835 @,@ 501 units , 4 million of which were sold within its first weekend , beating Twilight 's 3 @.@ 8 million units sold in its first two days . The film was well received by fans , but received generally negative reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On her 18th birthday , Bella Swan wakes up from a dream in which she sees herself as an old woman . She expresses her distaste about growing older than her boyfriend Edward Cullen , a vampire who stopped aging physically at 17 . Despite her lack of enthusiasm , Edward 's adoptive family throw Bella a birthday party . While unwrapping a gift , Bella gets a paper cut . Edward 's brother , Jasper , becomes overwhelmed by the scent of Bella 's blood and attempts to kill her . Realizing the danger that he and his family pose to Bella , Edward ends their relationship , and the Cullens leave Forks , Washington . 
 Edward 's departure leaves Bella heartbroken and depressed for months ; however , when her father , Charlie , finally decides to send her to live with her mother in Florida , Bella refuses and agrees to spend more time with her friends . After seeing a movie with Jessica , Bella sees a group of men on motorcycles . This reminds her of when Edward previously rescued her from an assault , and she sees his image warning her to stay away . Bella discovers that any thrill @-@ seeking activities she engages in evoke Edward 's preserved image . She is also comforted by Jacob Black , a cheerful companion who helps to ease her pain over losing Edward . When Jacob suddenly begins avoiding her , Bella discovers that he , and others of his tribe , are descended from a long line of werewolves , and Jacob has just undergone his first transformation . Bella also learns that the werewolves are an age @-@ old enemy of vampires . Jacob 's pack members are on constant alert for Victoria , a vampire seeking to avenge the death of her mate , James , who was killed by Edward after James kidnapped and tried to kill Bella . They rescue Bella from Laurent , when he tries to kill her . With Jacob busy coming to terms with his shape @-@ shifting nature , Bella again finds herself alone , and she returns to seeking thrill @-@ inducing activities . 
 Bella jumps off a cliff into the ocean believing Edward will come and save her . Alice sees this in her vision and Edward believes Bella committed suicide . Instead Jacob saves her without Edward 's knowledge and she and Jacob are about to kiss , but he ceases himself to do so . Edward travels to Italy and attempts to provoke the Volturi ( powerful coven who act as vampiric overlords ) to kill him by exposing himself as a vampire to humans . Alice , Edward 's sister , and Bella rush to Italy to save Edward , and arrive just in time to stop him . Edward explains that he always loved Bella and only left to protect her . However , the Volturi determine that Bella , a human who knows that vampires exist , must either be killed or transformed into a vampire herself . Alice stops them from killing her by sharing her premonition , in which Bella has been transformed , with Aro ( Michael Sheen ) , a Volturi elder who is able to read thoughts through touch . Soon after , they return to Forks and Cullens again settle themselves in Forks . Bella asks Edward to transform her and Cullens vote in favor of that much to Edward and Rosalie 's dismay . Later , Jacob reminds Edward , the treaty Cullens and <unk> made years before that they will not attack each other , as long as the Cullens do not feed on any humans , a necessity for Bella 's transformation . The movie concludes with Edward telling Bella that he will change her into a vampire after she marries him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Main cast 
 Kristen Stewart as Bella Swan , a teenage girl who falls into a deep depression after her true love , Edward Cullen , leaves her . Her friendship with Jacob Black is expanded as she realizes that he can mend the hole left open by Edward . 
 Robert Pattinson as Edward Cullen , Bella 's vampire boyfriend who abruptly leaves town to protect her . 
 Taylor Lautner as Jacob Black , a cheerful companion who eases Bella 's pain over losing Edward . He reveals to Bella that he is part of a pack of werewolves whose main goal is to protect her from the vampires Laurent and Victoria . 
 Secondary cast 
 Peter Facinelli as Carlisle Cullen , leader and father figure of the Cullen family . 
 Elizabeth Reaser as Esme Cullen , Carlisle 's wife and the mother figure of the Cullen family . 
 Ashley Greene as Alice Cullen , a member of the Cullen family who can see " subjective " visions of the future and who develops a deep friendship with Bella . 
 Kellan Lutz as Emmett Cullen , a member of the Cullen family . 
 Nikki Reed as Rosalie Hale , a member of the Cullen family . 
 Jackson Rathbone as Jasper Hale , a member of the Cullen family who thirsts for Bella 's blood after she receives a paper cut . 
 Billy Burke as Charlie Swan , Bella 's father and Forks ' Chief of Police . 
 Rachelle Lefevre as Victoria , a ruthless vampire who wants to avenge her lover , James . 
 Edi Gathegi as Laurent , a vampire who wants to kill Bella , because he thirsts for her blood . 
 Michael Sheen as Aro , the leader of an ancient Italian vampire coven known as the Volturi . 
 Dakota Fanning as Jane , a guard of the Volturi who has the ability to torture people with illusions of pain . 
 Noot Seear as Heidi , she leads the tourists into the Volturi 's chamber and urges them to stay together while Demetri leads Bella , Alice and Edward in the opposite direction . Heidi 's special ability to make her attractive to other people , regardless of species or gender . 
 Anna Kendrick as Jessica Stanley , Bella 's self @-@ involved friend . 
 Michael Welch as Mike Newton , Bella 's friend who has a crush on her . He joins her on a date with Jacob . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In early November 2008 , Summit Entertainment announced that they had obtained the rights to the remaining books in Stephenie Meyer 's Twilight series : New Moon , Eclipse , and Breaking Dawn . On November 22 , 2008 , one day after the theatrical release of Twilight , Summit confirmed that they would begin working on New Moon . " I don 't think any other author has had a more positive experience with the makers of her movie adaptation than I have had with Summit Entertainment , " said Meyer . In early December 2008 , it was announced that Twilight director Catherine Hardwicke would not be returning to direct the sequel . Hardwicke cited time restrictions as the reason behind her leaving the project . On December 13 , 2008 , it was announced that Chris Weitz , director of The Golden Compass and co @-@ director of About a Boy , had been hired to direct New Moon . Weitz released a statement shortly after the announcement , assuring Twilight fans that he would " protect on their behalf the characters , [ the ] themes and story they love . " He continued by saying , " This is not a task to be taken lightly , and I will put every effort into realizing a beautiful film to stand alongside a beautiful book . " 
 Melissa Rosenberg had been working on adapting the novel prior to Twilight 's release and handed in the draft for New Moon during Twilight 's opening weekend in November 2008 . " I would sit down at ten o 'clock in the morning and work on [ the script ] ... until six o 'clock in the evening . " Rosenberg spent the months of October though June 2008 alternating between writing for the Showtime television series Dexter , and writing New Moon on weekends . She and Meyer kept in touch during this five @-@ month period . One of the key changes the screenwriter made while adapting the book was the decision to take Edward 's voice in Bella 's head and make it visual . This change caused the first confrontation between the two main characters , one an " apparition " , to be emotional . For the screenplay , the four men who Bella approaches needed to create a significant and dangerous situation , and so Rosenberg gave these men motorcycles . " I added the motorcycles , [ mainly ] because ... they became an important part of [ Bella 's ] relationship with Jacob . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Due to major physical changes that occur in the character of Jacob Black between Twilight and New Moon , Weitz considered replacing Taylor Lautner in the sequel with an actor who could more accurately portray " the new , larger Jacob Black " . In an attempt to keep the role , Lautner weight @-@ trained extensively and gained approximately 30 pounds . In January 2009 , Weitz and Summit Entertainment announced that Lautner would continue to play the role of Jacob in the sequel . In an interview , fellow cast member Kristen Stewart talked about Lautner 's transformation saying , " He 's an entirely different person physically . " 
 In late March 2009 , Summit Entertainment released a list of the actors who would be portraying the " wolf pack " alongside Lautner . The casting for the rest of the Quileute tribe was headed by casting director Rene Haynes , who has worked on films with large Native American casts , such as Dances with Wolves and Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee . A casting call was also held in Vancouver in February 2009 , specifically asking for " any first nations / aboriginal actors and actresses between the ages of 15 and 25 " . Referring to the casting of Michael Sheen as Aro , Weitz claims to have " ' aggressively ' pursued the actor " , and describes the character as " on the surface , a very gracious and friendly vampire , but beneath that he is a tremendous threat . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Pre @-@ production for New Moon began in December 2008 . Filming was scheduled to begin on March 23 , 2009 in Vancouver , but began a few days early . Weitz envisioned a warm color palette for the sequel , contrary to the first film in the series , whose blue tones were prevalent . His intention resulted in golden tones , a change that was inspired by Italian paintings , and ultimately served as the basis for the crew 's collaborative work . The approach also included the use of specific colors at certain points in the movie . For example , although Jacob 's house is red , the color does not dominate until the climax of the movie . The director noted that , " The square becomes a flood of red , that 's how conscious we were of every visual aspect . " 
 The use of film , rather than digital , cameras added to the " old @-@ fashioned " nature of the production . Two main Panavision cameras , a high @-@ speed Arri 435 camera capable of shooting at 150 frames per second , a Steadicam , and VistaVision cameras for visual effect shots were among the equipment used to bring the book to the big screen . As with the use of specific colors , the different cameras and shooting setups would help serve the story points . When Bella was with Edward , the camera was moved on a dolly , in a very rigid , straight line to reflect how their relationship was " perfect " . When Bella is with Jacob , the Steadicam provided a fluid and organic style ; and when she is with her schoolmates , a slangy visual language was reflected by a handheld . 
 Once the film went into production , the decision to shoot in Vancouver , rather than in Portland , came after debate on how to match the locations that were introduced in the first film . One member involved in the decision process pointed out that Vancouver had been scouted as a potential setting for Twilight , and it was only because the U.S. dollar had , at that time , dropped below the Canadian dollar that Oregon drew Twilight principal photography to Portland and its surrounding areas . Vancouver was chosen because it allowed a higher production value , while the surrounding areas contained beautiful forests and gray weather . With this decision , however , came the issue of reconstructing key sets that were used in the first film . For the exterior of Forks High School , crew members were able to find a parking lot , but the school 's steps needed to be filmed with a greenscreen backing to match those that were originally presented in Twilight . David Thompson Secondary School would then be able to serve as the interior for the high school scenes . 
 The Cullen house was one of the major " match " assignments , mainly because of the Portland area location 's unique design . The production team agreed upon finding a house in the Vancouver area with an interior that emulated the high ceilings , glass walls , and forest surroundings of the first location . One location was positively compared to the one in Portland , and therefore Weitz and the production team filmed portions of the film there . In order to keep with the design of the original house , portions of the story that took place in New Moon were moved to different sections of the house that were not seen before . 
 After scouting Vancouver for a place to film scenes that involved the Swan house , the decision was made to recreate the house on an empty lot with a tree line and approaching road . The production team was able to rearrange the exterior of the house to match that in the first movie . When faced with creating the interior , the team measured the house in Portland , and built various pieces of the house on the lot and on a stage in Vancouver . The second film also attempted to clarify the location of Bella 's room , which , as seen in the first film , seemed to be located in the front of the house , when in reality it was on the right @-@ hand side . Complications arose when the Portland house was repainted after Twilight 's release , which took away the aging the house had come to depict in the film . When recreating the house , the production team referenced the first film on high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc . 
 As a director , Weitz had the pleasure of introducing and filming on new locations and sets . Of particular interest was the Quileute reservation and Jacob 's house . Using the Quileute country in Washington as a basis , the production team decided to place Jacob 's house on the edges of the territory , rather than in the community , because of Jacob 's attachment to the wolves . To Weitz , Jacob 's house was the stepping stone into the forest world , where the reality of the werewolves is hidden . The production designer was faced with a " real world " versus " book world " challenge when the barn they located , described in the book as a red barn , was green . Initially bordered by a green fence , the decision of painting the barn , aging it , and renovating the exterior proved to be a layout that fit well with Jacob 's character . 
 After scouting more than twelve possible locations to film scenes that would take place in Volterra , Italy , the scouting team selected the town of Montepulciano , which they believe was the best representation of Meyer 's description in the book . Principal photography concluded with the scenes that were filmed in this area from May 25 through the 29 . For the face @-@ off between the Volturi and Edward , the idea was to have a bigger " bang " , rather than just the paralysis of Edward . Initially what was a huge battle with vampires being thrown everywhere turned into a one @-@ on @-@ one fight between Felix and Edward , after receiving a stamp of approval from Meyer . The idea quickly changed from the typical outlandish battle , to portraying Edward as an average guy caught in the middle of a bad situation ; for Bella , conveying the feeling of being caught in the middle of a group of vampires fighting was important as well . This scene also required special effects , stunt work , and figuring out how to portray vampires fighting at very fast speeds . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Overseeing the visual effects department for New Moon was Susan MacLeod , who had previously worked with Weitz during the production of The Golden Compass . MacLeod enlisted Tippett Studio to create the computer generated wolves , while Prime Focus of Vancouver handled the effects of the vampires . To prepare for the aggressive task of making the wolves look real , <unk> artists studied wolf culture . They also were able to reflect leadership and human muscle size by adjusting certain features of the wolves , such as their fat and tallness . In February 2009 , a group of artists were able to travel to Wolf Mountain Sanctuary , outside of Los Angeles , and see real wolves . The artists were able to observe the behavior of both the timber and arctic wolves , who ran in packs of three to five . The idea was to give everyone a deeper feeling of the creature that they were creating . 
 MacLeod explained that creating the shape @-@ shifting werewolves was not an easy task . The wolf work included shooting " plates " , or photographic imagery into which CG creations are integrated . Since the book described the wolves as being as big as horses , full @-@ scale aluminum and board wolf cutouts were used as a visual reference for both actors and crew members . Once the actors had a reference , the cutouts would be removed allowing the cameras to capture the scene . In order for the CG wolves to be in sync with the live action cameras and actors ' movements , the team used match movers , a land surveying tool that recorded the shooting location 's topography with reference marks . 
 A raw 3D model of Jacob 's wolf was the basis for creating the others . A muscle system , which gave the appearance of muscles firing and flexing , contributed to this model . From there , the initial fur layout went to painters who were responsible for its color and groom . They also added characteristics , such as wet hair clumping together , and applied it to the fur . They refined this look before passing it off to the lighting and technical directors . 
 One challenge for the production team was how to convey Bella 's depression once Edward departs . In the novel , these pages were filled with the names of the passing months , and in the movie , would be represented as a visual effects shot with a camera circling around Kristen Stewart . The window that was used for the original film did not quite fit what Weitz was looking for , so the production team created a bay window when recreating the Swan house . The effect was one of the 300 visual effects helmed by Prime Focus led by visual effects supervisor Eric <unk> . It required matching two camera shots : one that shot the actress in a chair , and the other shooting the view outside the window as seen from the house built on location . Using a greenscreen , Prime Focus was able to enhance the changing of seasons with computer @-@ generated leaves and falling snow . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for New Moon was composed by Alexandre Desplat while the rest of the soundtrack was chosen by music supervisor Alexandra Patsavas , who also produced the Twilight soundtrack . The Twilight Saga : New Moon : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on October 16 , 2009 , by Patsavas ' Chop Shop label , in conjunction with Atlantic Records . It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart , and climbed to number one a week later after selling 153 @,@ 000 copies in its first full week of release . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In February 2009 it was announced that the franchise would take the name The Twilight Saga with the book 's title separated by a colon , though the title that appears on @-@ screen is simply New Moon . The first promotional poster was released on May 19 , 2009 . On May 31 , Robert Pattinson , Kristen Stewart , and Taylor Lautner revealed the film 's first trailer at the MTV Movie Awards . Following the release of the trailer , two scenes from the film were presented at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con. A 14 @-@ second preview of the second trailer was released online on August 12 , 2009 , and the full @-@ length trailer was featured before theater showings of the film Bandslam . The film 's third trailer was shown at the MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 , 2009 . Spike TV also aired a new trailer at the 2009 Scream Awards on October 27 , 2009 . 
 American Idol finalist Allison Iraheta hosted an 8 @-@ minute block prior to the showing of the film in over 1 @,@ 200 theaters across the United States , where she talked about her upcoming album and played some tracks , including " Friday I 'll Be Over U " , " Pieces " , and " Trouble Is " . In addition , prior to the film 's release , author Stephenie Meyer made an appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show to promote the film . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Many theater showings sold out as early as two months prior to New Moon 's release date . The film set records for advance ticket sales , causing some theaters to add additional showings . The film is also the biggest advance ticket seller on Fandango , surpassing Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith . New Moon accounted for 86 percent of Fandango 's online ticket sales the weekend before the film was released , and its total morning ticket sales on November 20 , 2009 are estimated to total $ 13 @.@ 9 million . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Various midnight release parties were held to help promote the film 's DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc release on March 20 , 2010 , in the United States and on March 22 , 2010 , in the United Kingdom . Special features include an audio commentary by director Chris Weitz and editor Peter Lambert , a behind the scenes documentary , and music videos . Unlike the DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc versions , the Ultimate Fan Edition DVD includes a 7 @-@ minute first look at the sequel , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . Within its first weekend of release in the U.S. , the film sold over 4 million units , beating Twilight 's 3 @.@ 8 million units sold in its first two days . In North American DVD sales , the film has currently grossed $ 185 @,@ 166 @,@ 822 and has sold more than 8 @,@ 864 @,@ 541 units . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 New Moon set records as the biggest midnight opening in domestic ( United States and Canada ) box office history , grossing an estimated $ 26 @.@ 3 million in 3 @,@ 514 theaters . The record was previously held by Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , which grossed $ 22 @.@ 2 million domestically during its midnight premiere . In 2010 , the following sequel , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse , broke New Moon 's record with $ 30 million in over 4 @,@ 000 theaters but surpassed by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , which made $ 43 @.@ 5 million in 2011 . The film grossed $ 72 @.@ 7 million on its opening day domestically , becoming the biggest single @-@ day opening in domestic history , beating The Dark Knight 's $ 67 @.@ 2 million . This opening strongly contributed to another record — the first time that the Top 10 films at the domestic box office had a combined gross of over $ 100 million in a single day . The record was later broken in 2011 by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , which made $ 91 @.@ 1 million . 
 New Moon 's opening weekend is the ninth highest opening weekend in domestic history with $ 142 @,@ 839 @,@ 137 and is also has the 10th highest worldwide opening weekend with $ 274 @.@ 9 million total . At the time of its release , the film achieved the highest weekend debut in November , breaking Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire 's record ( $ 102 @.@ 7 million ) until The Hunger Games : Catching Fire surpassed it with $ 158 @.@ 1 million . With an estimated budget of just under $ 50 million , it is the least expensive movie to ever open to more than $ 200 million worldwide . On Thanksgiving weekend , the film grossed $ 42 @.@ 5 million , and including Wednesday and Thursday ticket sales , grossed $ 66 million . It has earned $ 230 @.@ 7 million in total since opening last week , 22 % more than the previous film grossed in its entire theatrical run . Internationally , the film grossed roughly $ 85 million over the weekend , adding up to a total worldwide gross of $ 473 @.@ 7 million in 10 days . In its third weekend New Moon grossed $ 15 @.@ 7 million in the domestic market and another $ 40 @.@ 7 million internationally for a worldwide gross of $ 570 @.@ 1 million . In its fourth weekend , the film dropped down to # 4 with an estimated $ 10 million , bringing its domestic total to $ 296 @,@ 623 @,@ 634 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 New Moon received negative reviews from critics . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 28 % of 220 critics have given the film a positive review , with a rating average of 4 @.@ 7 out of 10 . The site 's general consensus is that " The Twilight Saga 's second installment may satisfy hardcore fans of the series , but outsiders are likely to be turned off by its slow pace , relentlessly downcast tone , and excessive length . " On Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 reviews from film critics , the film has a rating score of 44 based on 32 reviews . 
 Robert Ignizio of the Cleveland Scene described the film as an " entertaining fantasy " , and noted that it " has a stronger visual look [ than Twilight ] and does a better job with its action scenes while still keeping the focus on the central love triangle . " Michael O 'Sullivan of The Washington Post gave the film two and half stars out of four , praised Stewart 's performance in the film and wrote , " Despite melodrama that , at times , is enough to induce diabetes , there 's enough wolf whistle in this sexy , scary romp to please anyone . " The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer gave the film a " B " grading and said , " the movie looks tremendous , the dialogue works , there are numerous well placed jokes , the acting is on point . " 
 Time Out New York gave the film 3 stars out of 5 , calling it " acceptable escapism for those old enough to see it yet still young enough to shriek at undead <unk> . " Jordan <unk> from Variety stated , " Stewart is the heart and soul of the film " , and added that she " gives both weight and depth to dialogue ... that would sound like typical chick @-@ lit blather in the mouth of a less engaging actress , and she makes Bella 's psychological wounds seem like the real deal . " 
 British film critic Mark Kermode gave the film a positive review , saying , " After an initial 20 @-@ minute dip , when I thought , ' This is actually going to be two @-@ hours of mopey @-@ mopey , ' I thought it found its feet . " He also excused the film 's characterization of Taylor Lautner 's character , saying , " The sight of the buff , young guys running through the forest with their tops off was slightly smirk @-@ inducing . But it 's fine . They know what their target @-@ audience is . " 
 Mick Lasalle from the San Francisco Chronicle responded with a more mixed review , stating , " [ E ] <unk> this film to satisfy its fans . Everybody else , get ready for a bizarre soap opera / pageant , consisting of a succession of static scenes with characters loping into the frame to announce exactly what they 're thinking . " Digital Spy gave the film 2 stars out of 5 , praising Kristen Stewart for " carrying the film on her shoulders and , once again , bringing plenty of soul to a character who might otherwise come across as self @-@ indulgent " , but was critical of its lack of action , ultimately calling it " a draining experience " . Roger Ebert gave the film 1 star out of 4 and said that it " takes the tepid achievement of Twilight , guts it , and leaves it for undead . " Richard Roeper graded New Moon with a C − and called it a " plodding , achingly slow , 130 @-@ minute chapter in the saga " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Since its release , New Moon has received several nominations and awards . In March 2010 , the film received the ShoWest Fandango Fan Choice Award for 2009 's Best Movie . At the 2010 Empire Awards , Pattinson was nominated for Best Actor and Anna Kendrick was nominated for Best Newcomer . , the film won the award for Best Fantasy Film , while Pattinson won an award for Best Performance . At the 2010 Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards , the film was nominated for Best Movie , but lost to Alvin and the Chipmunks : The Squeakquel , Lautner won an award for Favorite Movie Actor , and Jacob and Bella , who were also nominated alongside Edward and Bella , won an award for Best Couple . At the 2010 MTV Movie Awards , Pattinson , who was nominated alongside Stewart and Lautner , won the award for Global Superstar ; the Best Male Performance award was also given to Pattinson , who was , again , nominated against Lautner . Stewart and Pattinson won the award for Best Kiss , while New Moon won the award for Best Movie . For the 2010 Teen Choice Awards , held on August 8 , the film and its actors were given a combined total of ten nominations , eight of which the film won , and three separate awards going to The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . In addition , the film was nominated for Best Horror Film and Taylor Lautner was nominated for Best Performance by a Younger Actor at the 36th Saturn Awards , but lost to Drag Me To Hell and Saoirse Ronan , respectively . Lautner was also nominated for Best Performance in a Feature Film – Leading Actor at the 2010 Young Artist Awards . However , it was nominated for four Razzies : Worst Supporting Actor ( Robert Pattinson ) , Worst Screen Couple ( Kristen Stewart and either Taylor Lautner or Robert Pattinson ) , Worst Prequel , Remake , Rip @-@ off or Sequel and Worst Screenplay . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In February 2009 , Summit Entertainment scheduled a film adaptation of Eclipse , the third novel in the Twilight series , for release on June 30 , 2010 . Weitz would not be able to direct the third film of The Twilight Saga as it would be filming while New Moon would be in post @-@ production . David Slade was therefore confirmed as the director of The Twilight Saga : Eclipse on April 22 , 2009 . 
 = Washington State Route 904 = 
 State Route 904 ( SR 904 , named the Lt. Col. Michael P. Anderson Memorial Highway ) is a 16 @.@ 96 @-@ mile ( 27 @.@ 29 km ) long state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , located entirely in Spokane County . The route starts at an interchange with Interstate 90 ( I @-@ 90 ) and U.S. Route 395 ( US 395 ) in Tyler and travels to Cheney , serving the Eastern Washington University , before ending at I @-@ 90 and US 395 in Four Lakes . The roadway , named First Street in Downtown Cheney , is paralleled by three rail lines , a BNSF Railway route that carries Amtrak 's Empire Builder , a Union Pacific route and the Eastern Washington Gateway Railroad . 
 The Central Washington Highway was established in 1913 and served Cheney via the current route of SR 904 . The highway 's designation were changed starting in 1923 , when it became State Road 11 . US 395 was extended southwest from Spokane to Pasco between 1933 and 1939 . In 1937 , State Road 11 became Primary State Highway 11 ( PSH 11 ) , which was concurrent with both US 395 and US 10 by 1940 . A bypass of Cheney between Tyler and Four Lakes was planned at the same time as the Interstate Highway System . I @-@ 90 was created and PSH 11 was routed onto the future alignment in 1957 . Secondary State Highway 11H ( SSH 11H ) used the original route and became SR 904 during the 1964 highway renumbering . The Cheney bypass was opened in 1966 . After the Space Shuttle Columbia disintegrated during re @-@ entry during STS @-@ 107 in 2003 , killing all seven passengers , the road was renamed the Lt. Col. Michael P. Anderson Memorial Highway after one of the passengers that was raised in Cheney . The Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) is currently planning to widen SR 904 between Cheney and Four Lakes from two to five lanes as part of the route development plan , but no funds have been made available for the work . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 904 ( SR 904 ) begins at a diamond interchange with Interstate 90 ( I @-@ 90 ) , concurrent with U.S. Route 395 ( US 395 ) in Tyler . Traveling northeast over an unnamed creek to Babb , the highway becomes parallel with a rail line owned by BNSF Railway and used by Amtrak 's Empire Builder route from Portland , Oregon to Spokane . The BNSF line is paralleled by a Union Pacific rail line while the roadway and railways enter Cheney . Within Cheney , the road is named First Street and passes Eastern Washington University . SR 904 turns north , now parallel to the Eastern Washington Gateway Railroad , at an intersection with the Cheney – Spokane Road , which was the busiest intersection on the highway , with an estimated daily average of 13 @,@ 000 motorists in 2007 . After the intersection , the road turns northwest to exit Cheney and intersect the old alignment of Primary State Highway 11 ( PSH 11 ) . Shortly afterwards , the roadway enters Four Lakes , passing Meadow Lake and leaving the Eastern Washington Gateway Railroad before ending at a trumpet interchange with I @-@ 90 and US 395 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first state – maintained highway to serve Cheney using the present @-@ day route of SR 904 was the Central Washington Highway , added to the state highway system in 1913 . The highway served Pasco , Ritzville , Cheney and Spokane , but the segment between Cheney and Four Lakes wasn 't completed until after 1919 . The Central Washington Highway became State Road 11 in a 1923 restructuring of the highway system . Between 1933 and 1939 , U.S. Route 395 ( US 395 ) was extended southwest from Spokane to Pasco , via Cheney . The state roads became Primary state highways in 1937 and hence , Primary State Highway 11 ( PSH 11 ) was established to replace State Road 11 . US 10 later became concurrent with US 395 and PSH 11 in 1940 after it was moved to a southern alignment . 
 On June 29 , 1956 , President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 into law , establishing a system of freeways that would later become the Interstate Highway System . Included in the system was Interstate 90 , which was to replace US 10 and become concurrent with US 395 , while bypassing Cheney . PSH 11 , US 395 and I @-@ 90 were rerouted onto the future bypass in 1957 . The former highway from Tyler to Four Lakes became Secondary State Highway 11H ( SSH 11H ) in 1961 ; the Cheney bypass opened on November 18 , 1966 . During the 1964 highway renumbering , SSH 11H became SR 904 , part of the new highway system , then named the " sign routes " . During STS @-@ 107 , a NASA Space Shuttle mission , <unk> colonel Michael P. Anderson , a Cheney native , along with the rest of the Columbia 's crew , were killed when it disintegrated during re @-@ entry on February 1 , 2003 . SR 904 was posthumously renamed to the Lt. Col. Michael P. Anderson Memorial Highway in his honor later that February . The official dedication ceremony was held on August 1 , 2003 . Increasing traffic accidents and traffic has caused the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) to create plans to widen the roadway between Cheney and Four Lakes . The plans , later named the route development plan , calls for a five @-@ lane highway with new intersections built on the highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Spokane County . 
 = Tifa Lockhart = 
 Tifa Lockhart ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : Tifa <unk> ) is a fictional character in Square 's ( now Square Enix ) role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII . Created and designed by Tetsuya Nomura , she has since appeared in the fighting game Ehrgeiz and made cameo appearances in several other titles , as well as the CGI film sequel to Final Fantasy VII , Advent Children and related games and media in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII series . 
 A member of the eco @-@ terrorist group AVALANCHE and owner of the 7th Heaven bar in the slums of Midgar , Tifa is the childhood friend of Cloud Strife , the protagonist of Final Fantasy VII . Convincing him to join the group to keep him close and safe , she later assists him in saving the Planet from the game 's villain , Sephiroth . <unk> in The Compilation of Final Fantasy VII later expanded upon her character , such as in the film Advent Children , where she attempts to convince Cloud to let go of his self @-@ imposed guilt , and move on with his life after Sephiroth 's defeat . 
 Named the pin @-@ up girl of the " cyber generation " by The New York Times , Tifa has been compared to Lara Croft as an example of a strong , independent and attractive female character in video games . Media have repeatedly praised both the character 's strength and appearance and described her as one of the best female characters in gaming . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Introduced in Final Fantasy VII , Tifa is the childhood friend of Cloud Strife , and owner of the 7th Heaven bar , as well as a member of the eco @-@ terrorist organization AVALANCHE , who oppose the megacorporation Shinra and their use of Mako energy as a power source . She convinces Cloud to join the group to keep a closer eye on him after noticing his personality has changed , and she follows him in pursuit of the game 's antagonist , Sephiroth . Unable to keep him from being manipulated by Sephiroth , she helps him recover after his mind becomes fractured , and they realise their mutual feelings for one another , working together to defeat Sephiroth . 
 In flashbacks , it is revealed that as children Tifa and Cloud had decided to follow a path to a mountain near their hometown of Nibelheim . However , they were both injured and Tifa was in a coma for a week , with her father holding Cloud responsible for the incident . Cloud eventually left to join Shinra 's SOLDIER program in order to become stronger , but it is later revealed that he did it primarily to attract her attention . In response , she requested if she was ever in danger , he would return to save her . Years later , after Sephiroth destroyed the town of Nibelheim , Cloud rescued Tifa after she was wounded by Sephiroth . Surviving the incident , Tifa was taken to safety by her martial arts instructor Zangan , eventually arriving in Midgar and meeting AVALANCHE 's leader , Barret Wallace . Upon recovering , she joined AVALANCHE so as to get revenge for the destruction of her home . She eventually encountered an incoherent Cloud at the city 's train station , and convinced him to work for Barret , so as to keep him close and safe . This is the point at which the game begins . 
 In early drafts of Final Fantasy VII , Tifa was to be a background character . Her role in AVALANCHE was to add support behind the scenes , and to cheer everyone up after missions , as well as having a particular fondness for Cloud . She was also supposed to have a large scar on her back caused by Cloud , and partial amnesia from the incident when she had received it . A scene intended to imply herself and Cloud having sex was proposed by Masato Kato , one of the event planners , but it was replaced with a toned down version by Kitase in which a risqué line is followed by a fade to black . In an interview Nojima stated that none of the staff thought the scene would become such an issue at the time . 
 = = = Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 In 2005 , she appeared in the CGI film Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , set two years after the events of the game . In it , she tries to give emotional support to Cloud , urging him to come to terms with the unwarranted guilt he places upon himself . In addition , she takes care of Barret Wallace 's adopted daughter Marlene and another child , Denzel . During the film , she fights against one of the antagonists , Loz , and later she helps battle the summoned creature Bahamut SIN . Script writer Kazushige Nojima described her role in the film as " very much like any woman who 's been left behind by a man , " stating that while they did not want her to appear clingy , they also wanted to portray that she was emotionally hurt by Cloud 's departure . In the film 's initial draft , she was intended to have a more central role in the then @-@ short film , which only featured herself , Cloud , and several children , with the story revolving around a note being delivered to him . 
 Tifa is featured in the prequel games Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII and Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , as well as the OVA Last Order : Final Fantasy VII . In each , her appearance relates to Nibelheim 's destruction . The novella " Case of Tifa " , written as part of the On the Way to a Smile series , is a story set between the original game and Advent Children . Told from her point of view , the story details how she creates a new 7th Heaven bar in the city of Edge , and attempts to hold onto the concept of a normal family with herself and Cloud , despite him beginning to isolate himself from others . Tifa also appears briefly in the game Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , set one year after the events of Advent Children in which she helps the protagonist Vincent Valentine defend the Planet against Omega WEAPON ; she later appears in the game 's epilogue , discussing Vincent 's apparent disappearance . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Outside of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , Tifa appears in the fighting game Ehrgeiz , as an unlockable character and an optional boss . She later appears in the electronic board games Itadaki Street Special and Itadaki Street Portable . In Kingdom Hearts II , she appears in her Advent Children attire , searching for Cloud and later fighting various Heartless , the series ' monsters . She was originally planned to appear in the Final Mix version of the original Kingdom Hearts , but due to time constraints the staff members chose to incorporate Sephiroth instead . Tifa is one of player characters in the fighting game Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , which features characters from various Final Fantasy games . She is featured in her Final Fantasy VII outfit , but the player has also access to her Advent Children form and a third form that is shown during Tifa 's appearances in Nibelheim . The first print run of the game also features another form based on artwork by Yoshitaka Amano . In LittleBigPlanet 2 , Tifa is featured as a downloadable character model . 
 Korean singer Ivy portrayed the character in a 2007 music video for the song " <unk> <unk> " ( " Sonata of Temptation " ) . Recreating a fight scene from Advent Children , the video was banned from airing on Korean television after a copyright lawsuit by Square Enix citing plagiarism . In 2015 Tifa was added to the iOS game Final Fantasy : Record Keeper as a playable character . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Designed by Tetsuya Nomura , Tifa was not present in early versions of Final Fantasy VII , as initially , the game was to have only three playable characters ; the protagonist Cloud Strife , Aerith Gainsborough and Barret Wallace . However , during a phone call to project director Yoshinori Kitase , it was suggested that at some point in the game , one of the main characters should die , and after much discussion as to whether it should be Barret or Aerith , the producers chose Aerith . Nomura later joked that this was his idea , so as to enable him to introduce Tifa into the game . Regardless , the notion of having two concurrent heroines , and having the hero waver between them , was something Kitase liked , describing it as something new in the Final Fantasy series . Nomura describes Tifa 's character in Advent Children as having several dimensions , calling her " like a mother , a sweetheart , and a close ally in battle " and " remarkably strong , not only emotionally , but physically as well . " 
 Tifa was designed to use the " monk " character class that appears in previous games in the series . She has long , black hair in a style resembling a dolphin 's tail at the tip , and garments described as simple and monotone , consisting of a white tank top and black miniskirt . She also wears red boots and gloves , and sleeves extend up her arms from her wrists to her elbows , with suspenders connecting her skirt to her shoulders , and a large metal guard covering her left elbow . She stands about 5 feet 4 inches ( 167 cm ) tall , and has measurements of 36 @-@ 24 @-@ 35 " ( 92 @-@ 60 @-@ 88 cm ) . 
 Initially , Nomura had difficulty deciding whether to go with a miniskirt or long pants . Seeking input , he passed his sketches around Square 's offices , and the majority of the staff members approved of the miniskirt design . This additionally served as a contrast to Aerith , whose " Long Skirt " was her trademark . The attire was explained in respect to the game as giving her freedom of movement , due to her affinity with hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , and the skirt , referred to as " quite short [ ... ] giving a considerable degree of exposure , " was kept as a staple of her alternate costumes . The developers additionally noted that due to her figure , her otherwise plain garments took on a pleasant appearance . 
 When producing Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , co @-@ director Takeshi Nozue had difficulty developing a framework for Tifa 's body that was " balanced , yet showed off her feminine qualities . " Her outfit too was redesigned at this point , with emphasis on expressing those qualities , while still being pleasing to the eye . A white tank top with black zipped up vest covers her front , a pink ribbon wraps around her left biceps , and boots cover her feet . A black buttoned @-@ up skirt covers her thighs , and she wears shorts beneath , with a piece of cloth similar to a coattail extending from the back of the skirt 's waistband and ending at her ankles . While her gloves remain , they are worn only during the film 's fight scenes . Her hairstyle was changed to end at the middle of her back , with the removal of the dolphin tail from her original design . This alteration was because of the difficulty of animating her original length of hair , as well as problems that arose due to its black color and lighting . 
 Nomura noted he liked Ayumi Ito as an actress , and wished to work with her on Advent Children . With Aerith 's voice actor already decided , Nomura asked Ito to voice Tifa , feeling her " husky voice " would offer a good contrast to Maaya Sakamoto 's soft @-@ spoken Aerith . Nomura additionally noted that after completing Tifa 's updated design , the producers debated about her finalized details , but once Ito had been cast for the role they chose to blend many traits from the voice actress into the character 's final appearance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since her introduction , Tifa has received an extremely positive reaction from both critics and fans . In 2000 , GameSpot readers voted her as the fifth best female character in video games , with the site 's editors noting they agreed . In 2004 , Play featured Tifa in the first issue of their Girls of Gaming annual periodical , describing her as " the most adored female in recent history . " In 2007 , Tifa was named the eighth best character of all time in Dengeki PlayStation 's retrospective awards feature about the original PlayStation , the third highest ranked character from Final Fantasy VII . That same year , Tom 's Hardware listed her as one of the 50 greatest female characters in video game history , describing her as " one of the more richly drawn and intricate female characters around . " In 2008 , UGO listed her as one of the top " girls of gaming " , placing her at number five , and stating a preference for her over Aerith , adding " Tifa 's outfit is a marvel of understatement – but it 's her natural assets and unforgettable personality that earn her a spot on this list . " That same year , Chip ranked her as the tenth top " girl of gaming " . In 2009 , IGN named Tifa one of the ten best heroines in gaming , describing her as " without a doubt , a legendary heroine of the Final Fantasy universe . " A 2010 poll by Famitsu named her the 19th most popular video game character by Japanese audiences . Complex ranked her as the 13th greatest heroine in video game history in 2013 . 
 In 2001 , The Beaumont Enterprise cited Tifa as an example of a strong female character in video games in the wake of Lara Croft 's introduction . In 2008 , Joystiq named her their top pick out of 20 characters from the Final Fantasy franchise they wished to see in Square Enix 's crossover fighting game Dissidia Final Fantasy , describing her as one of the series ' " greatest heroines . " IGN listed Tifa as the 13th best Final Fantasy character of all time in 2008 , describing her as an attempt by Square to " give Final Fantasy characters real sex appeal , " and someone who " could take care of herself in a pinch " ; in a follow @-@ up Reader 's Choice edition of the list , Tifa placed first , with the staff repeating their previous comments while attributing her placement on the list to her breasts . In a 2009 IGN article focusing solely on Final Fantasy VII characters , Tifa placed fourth , with a comment that while her sex appeal contributes to her popularity , " Tifa helped drive a tradition of tough , independent RPG heroines . " Other sources too praised Tifa for that aspect of her character . Mania Entertainment placed her tenth in the 2010 list of " video game women that kick ass , " stating that while subsequent games in the Final Fantasy series introduced other memorable female characters , " Tifa is our first Final Fantasy girl and holds a special place in our hearts . " In 2013 , Gus Turner of Complex ranked Tifa as the 12th greatest Final Fantasy character of all time , stating that " next to Lara Croft and Samus , Tifa Lockhart stands out as one of gaming 's most independent and empowered females ever . " 
 Much of Tifa 's reception regarded her sex appeal . In 1998 , The New York Times featured her as the pin @-@ up girl of for the " cyber generation . " That same year , Electronic Gaming Monthly awarded her the " Hottest Game Babe " of 1997 , calling her " as well @-@ proportioned as they come , " and praising her as a viable alternative to Lara Croft . UGO ranked her as 24th in their 2008 list of " videogame hotties , " adding they could not " get over how much better she looks in each subsequent game release . " That same year , GameDaily ranked her 31st on their " hottest game babes " list , sharing UGO.com 's preference for her and praising both her appearance and combat abilities . MSN shared a similar sentiment when they included " this loving , caring , super @-@ sexy gal " on the list of " gaming 's hottest babes " , placing her at number six , and stating that her presence in the series was " a little subtle , giving her more of an emotional undertone , " and that the franchise would not be as special without her . <unk> ranked her at second place on their 2009 list of the " hottest " female video game protagonists . In 2010 , VideoGamer.com included her among the top ten video game crushes , while Sarah Warn of AfterEllen ranked her as the ninth " hottest " female video game character . In 2011 , Complex ranked her as the 16th best looking " sideline chick in games , " while UGO placed her 13th among the " fighting games ' finest hottest women " just for her appearance in Ehrgeiz . That same year , GameFront placed her breasts at ninth place on the list of " the greatest boobs in video game history , " calling her " the existential crisis version of Lara Croft ; " she was also included on the list of " incredible chests in video games " by Joystick Division , but with a comment that she " has much more than sex appeal . " In 2012 , Complex ranked her as the second " hottest " video game character overall , while MSN included her among the 20 " hottest women in video game history " , adding that " she 's one of the famous game gals in history , and has everlasting appeal . " In 2013 , Scott Marley of Daily Record ranked her as the second most attractive female video game character , while CheatCodes.com declared her " the # 1 hottest " female video game character of all time . Similarly , La Nueva España included the " sexy , independent and strong " Tifa among the top ten sexiest video game characters of both genders in 2014 , and Thanh Niên ranked her as the most sexy female video game character in 2015 . 
 = Extreme Rules ( 2012 ) = 
 Extreme Rules ( 2012 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by WWE . It took place on April 29 , 2012 at the Allstate Arena in Chicago , Illinois . It was the fourth event under the Extreme Rules chronology . Eight professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card and one pre @-@ show match was streamed on YouTube . It featured Brock Lesnar 's first WWE match since WrestleMania XX in 2004 . 
 The concept of Extreme Rules was that the event would feature various hardcore @-@ based matches . In the main event , John Cena defeated Brock Lesnar in an Extreme Rules match . Elsewhere on the card , CM Punk defeated Chris Jericho in a Chicago Street Fight to retain the WWE Championship , and Sheamus defeated Daniel Bryan in a 2 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 3 falls match to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view received universally positive reviews , with the main event and two world championship matches drawing high praise from critics and fans . The event received 263 @,@ 000 buys , up 25 @.@ 8 % from the 209 @,@ 000 buys for the previous year 's event , whereas the next Extreme Rules event in 2013 received 231 @,@ 000 buys , a drop of 12 @.@ 1 % . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 The professional wrestling matches at Extreme Rules featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre @-@ determined by the hosting promotion , WWE . Storylines between the characters played out on WWE 's primary television programs , Raw and SmackDown . 
 On the April 2 Raw , John Cena spoke about his loss to The Rock the previous night at WrestleMania XXVIII , which was dubbed a once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime match and the most important battle of Cena 's career . Cena asked for the Rock to come out so that Cena could offer his congratulations . Instead , Brock Lesnar came into the ring , making his first WWE appearance since 2004 . Lesnar offered to shake hands with Cena but instead executed the F @-@ 5 maneuver , dropping Cena onto the mat . The next week , General Manager John Laurinaitis revealed that he signed Lesnar to bring " legitimacy " and for Lesnar to become the " new face of the WWE " ; Laurinaitis also announced that Lesnar would face Cena at Extreme Rules . On April 16 , the match was made into an Extreme Rules match . 
 On the January 2 Raw , Chris Jericho returned to WWE . He made it clear that he wanted to reclaim his title as the " best wrestler in the world , " which CM Punk had claimed to be since Money in the Bank 2011 . Punk defeated Jericho at WrestleMania XXVIII . In the weeks following the event , Jericho attacked Punk several times , once pouring a bottle of Jack Daniel 's over him — a pointed insult to the straight edge Punk , and vowed to lead Punk " down the path to alcoholism just like [ his ] father . " On the April 16 Raw , Jericho announced that he would face Punk in a Chicago Street Fight at Extreme Rules for the WWE Championship . Punk had held the WWE Championship since November 2011 at Survivor Series . 
 At WWE 's Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view event on January 29 , Sheamus won the Royal Rumble match to earn the opportunity to face either WWE Champion CM Punk or World Heavyweight Champion Daniel Bryan for their respective titles at WrestleMania XXVIII . Sheamus elected to wrestle Bryan and defeated him in 18 seconds to win the championship . On the April 10 SmackDown , Bryan used his rematch clause as ex @-@ champion to announce a 2 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 3 Falls match for the championship at Extreme Rules between him and Sheamus . Bryan chose the multiple @-@ falls format to prevent Sheamus from scoring another quick victory . 
 Another rivalry heading into Extreme Rules was between Randy Orton and Kane . In July 2011 , Kane lost in a Street Fight to Orton , and the two shook hands after the match as a sign of respect . In 2012 , a newly re @-@ masked Kane viewed the handshake as a sign of weakness , hence Kane started a feud with Orton and defeated him at WrestleMania XXVIII . Yet , on the April 6 SmackDown , Orton defeated Kane in a No Disqualification match . On the April 10 SmackDown , Kane attacked Orton and his father " Cowboy " Bob Orton . On the April 20 SmackDown , it was announced that Kane and Orton would face off at Extreme Rules in a Falls Count Anywhere match . 
 On April 23 , the fifth match for the event was announced , a rematch between Big Show and Cody Rhodes for the WWE Intercontinental Championship ; Big Show won the title from Rhodes at WrestleMania XXVIII . Later that same day , it was announced that The Miz would challenge Santino Marella for the United States Championship in a pre @-@ show match that would be streamed live on YouTube , on WWE.com , and on WWE 's official Facebook page . 
 Also on April 23 , Nikki Bella defeated the Divas Champion , Beth Phoenix , to capture the Divas Championship . Phoenix was slated to receive a rematch for the title during Extreme Rules , but due to suffering a sprained left ankle in storyline during the aforementioned match on April 23 , Phoenix was not medically cleared to compete at the event . During the PPV , Phoenix was replaced by Layla , who made her first WWE appearance since the 13 May 2011 SmackDown . Layla had suffered a knee injury at the previous year 's Extreme Rules event and was subsequently attacked by Kharma . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ show = = = 
 The Miz challenged Santino Marella in a singles match for the United States Championship in the pre @-@ show . This was Marella 's third defense of the title . Before the match , Miz complained about being in the pre @-@ show after he was in the main event a year before at Extreme Rules ( 2011 ) . The title match ended with Marella pinning Miz after hitting the Cobra . After the match , the format for the Intercontinental Championship match between champion Big Show and Cody Rhodes was determined by a wheel spin to be a Tables match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The English commentators for the event were Michael Cole , Jerry Lawler and Booker T , while there were also Spanish commentators . Justin Roberts and Lilian Garcia acted as ring announcers . In the first face @-@ off on the main card of Extreme Rules , Randy Orton defeated Kane in a Falls Count Anywhere match . The match started with Kane and Orton brawling into the crowd and then backstage , where Zack Ryder made an appearance to attack Kane and allow Orton to deliver an inverted headlock backbreaker for a two count . Orton and Kane eventually headed back into the ring , where Orton was unable to beat Kane despite multiple pin attempts after repeated chair shots , an elevated DDT onto the floor and a superplex . However , Orton managed to survive a chokeslam from Kane to counter the Tombstone piledriver into an RKO on a steel chair for the pinfall victory . 
 Brodus Clay defeated Dolph Ziggler in the main show 's second match . Interference from Jack Swagger at ringside led to Ziggler seizing an early advantage with a leg drop bulldog and a sleeper hold . Clay then mounted a comeback ; his headbutt floored an onrushing Ziggler , and he delivered a running splash for the pinfall victory . 
 In the main show 's third match , Big Show 's first defense of his Intercontinental Championship ended in failure when he lost to Cody Rhodes in a Tables match . Big Show had the upper hand early on , but Rhodes managed to escape being thrown into a table propped up in the ring corner by running up and pushing off it to hit the Beautiful Disaster kick . Big Show then re @-@ established the advantage with superior size and strength , but Rhodes later dropkicked his leg as he attempted to re @-@ enter the ring from the outside . To regain his balance , Big Show stepped on and broke a table at ringside , and Rhodes was announced as the winner and new Intercontinental Champion as Big Show " went through a table " with his foot . An angry Big Show assaulted Rhodes after the match . 
 The fourth match on the main card was a 2 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 3 falls match for the World Heavyweight Championship in which Sheamus defended his title against Daniel Bryan in his first title defense . Sheamus held the early advantage , putting Bryan in a Texas Cloverleaf and countering Bryan 's flying knee off the apron by catching and ramming Bryan 's back into the guardrail . Bryan then began to target Sheamus ' left arm and shoulder with a hammerlock , and he repeatedly went for the " Yes ! " Lock ( <unk> crossface ) , although Sheamus was able to shake him off . Bryan then sent Sheamus flying shoulder @-@ first into the corner ring post , and continued to ram Sheamus into the ring post shoulder @-@ first while outside the ring . Back in the ring , Bryan repeatedly kicked Sheamus ' left arm while it was in the ropes and refused to stop at the referee 's five count . The referee disqualified Bryan and awarded the first fall to Sheamus . Bryan , who intentionally disqualified himself to hurt Sheamus , immediately rushed to put the " Yes ! " Lock on Sheamus , targeting the injured arm as soon the match was restarted . Sheamus soon passed out due to the " Yes ! " Lock and the referee awarded the second fall to Bryan . WWE officials then tended to a dazed Sheamus , who insisted that he could continue the match , as Bryan started shouting " Yes ! " , prompting his fans to chant with him and his detractors in the crowd to yell " No ! " . As Bryan rushed in again at the restart , Sheamus floored him with a desperation Brogue Kick . Sheamus was slow to cover Bryan , and Bryan kicked out at two . Bryan then peppered Sheamus with kicks , and a kick to Sheamus ' head got a two count . However , Bryan missed a diving headbutt and a corner dropkick , allowing Sheamus to make a comeback with double axe handles and an Irish Curse backbreaker . Sheamus finished Bryan off with a Brogue Kick to score a pinfall and win 2 falls to 1 . With this victory , Sheamus retained his World Heavyweight Championship . 
 The fifth match featured Ryback facing two local competitors Aaron Relic and Jay Hatton in a 2 @-@ on @-@ 1 Handicap match . Ryback hit a powerslam on Hatton , then a clothesline and a stunner on Relic . Ryback then delivered his finisher on Hatton and pinned both opponents at the same time for the dominant victory . 
 The next match was the sixth on the main card , a Chicago Street Fight for the WWE Championship , in which CM Punk defended his title in his hometown against Chris Jericho in his tenth title defense . After weathering an initial flurry of offense from Punk , Jericho gained the edge and taunted Punk and his family . This earned Jericho a slap from Punk 's sister at ringside . An aggravated Jericho went after Punk 's sister , causing Punk to go into a frenzy , slamming Jericho through the top piece of the announcers ' table , which had been removed and propped up against the under @-@ structure of the table . When Jericho managed to re @-@ establish an advantage , he taunted the straight edge Punk by pouring beer all over him . Then , Punk made a comeback and performed the Randy Savage diving elbow drop , but Jericho kicked out at two . Yet Jericho managed to block Punk 's attempts at executing his finisher , the Go to Sleep , and managed to hit his own finisher on Punk , the Codebreaker . Jericho then locked Punk in his finishing submission , the Walls of Jericho . Punk made it to the ropes while in the hold , but there were no rope breaks in the Street Fight format . Punk then reached under the ring , grabbed a fire extinguisher and sprayed it in Jericho 's face to blind him and break the hold . Punk then jumped off the top rope with a diving elbow drop onto Jericho , who was at ringside on the Spanish announcers ' table . The blow sent both men through the table . That did not give Punk a pinfall victory , however , and he locked Jericho in the Anaconda Vise , his finishing submission . Jericho broke it by hitting Punk with a kendo stick . Punk then grabbed a chair and prepared to attack Jericho , but Jericho nailed Punk with a Codebreaker into the chair . Jericho made the cover but Punk kicked out at the last second . Aiming to humiliate Punk , Jericho attempted Punk 's finishing move , the Go to Sleep , but Punk countered the move and then catapulted Jericho into an exposed turnbuckle that Jericho himself had exposed earlier in the match . Punk finished by delivering the Go to Sleep to Jericho for the pin and the win . Punk then celebrated retaining his WWE Championship with his hometown crowd . 
 Then , a backstage segment revealed that Beth Phoenix was declared not medically fit to wrestle . As a result , Divas Champion Nikki Bella would have to make her first defense of her title against a mystery opponent . The mystery opponent was revealed as Layla , who managed to counter Bella 's Twin Magic switcheroo to score the pinfall victory with a neckbreaker . 
 = = = Main event match = = = 
 The main event for the night saw John Cena face Brock Lesnar in an Extreme Rules match ; this was Lesnar 's first match in WWE since 2004 . The match , refereed by Charles Robinson , started with Lesnar causing Cena to bleed with a vicious elbow to his head after a double leg takedown . Lesnar continued to dominate the match , delivering punches , clotheslines and knee strikes to Cena ; the match had to be paused twice while a medic attended to Cena to clean up the blood . After the match restarted for the second time , Lesnar continued to brutalize Cena , hanging him from the turnbuckles and throwing him into the steel steps and the guardrail . Cena desperately went for his finishing move , the Attitude Adjustment , but Lesnar countered into his own finishing move , the F @-@ 5 . While throwing Cena to the mat , however , Lesnar inadvertently caused Cena to hit and knock out the referee . By the time another referee got to the ring to make the count , Cena was able to kick out at two . Lesnar then brought the metal ring steps into the ring and put a kimura lock on Cena while on the steps . Cena lifted and slammed Lesnar onto the metal steps to break the hold . After Lesnar avoided a Cena diving leg drop bulldog , Lesnar charged and leapt off the ring steps and over the top rope onto Cena , sending both men to the floor . When Lesnar tried the same move again , Cena countered by hitting Lesnar in the head with a metal chain that he brought to the match , bloodying Lesnar . An intense and re @-@ energized Cena then delivered an Attitude Adjustment to Lesnar onto the metal steps and pinned him . Following his victory , a bloodied Cena , selling an arm injury , closed the event by announcing his intentions to go home for a vacation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The event sold out the Allstate Arena with 14 @,@ 817 people in attendance . The official buy total for the 2012 Extreme Rules event was 263 @,@ 000 , up from 209 @,@ 000 for the 2011 event and 182 @,@ 000 for the 2010 event , whereas the next Extreme Rules event in 2013 received 231 @,@ 000 buys , a drop of 12 @.@ 1 % . 
 Extreme Rules received widespread acclaim from critics and fans . The professional wrestling section of Canoe.ca described the event as " outstanding " and " a show where all the big matches delivered in spades " , rating the entire event a 9 out of 10 , while also rating each of the three main events 9 out of 10 . 
 The Sun rated the entire event 9 out of 10 , saying that Extreme Rules " was about as good a show and ( sic ) one could realistically expect " . The Sun also described the Cena @-@ Lesnar main @-@ event as " a peculiar — but effective — hybrid of MMA and pro wrestling ... The most important thing is that this match was different to what we usually see in a WWE ring . It was intriguing and most of all compelling . " 
 Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awarded out of 5 stars , 4 @.@ 5 for the Cena @-@ Lesnar match , 4 for the Bryan @-@ Sheamus match and 3 @.@ 5 stars for the Punk @-@ Jericho match . 
 Benjamin Tucker of Pro Wrestling Torch rated the event 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , stating that " with a solid under @-@ card and three four @-@ star @-@ plus [ out of five stars ] matches , the show was a lot of fun to watch and had a lot of emotional highs . " Tucker described the Punk @-@ Jericho match as a " <unk> brawl that built really well and had a great emotional aspect to it " . James Caldwell , also of Pro Wrestling Torch , praised the event 's strong matches and performances and the " nice pace with downs to follow the big ups " . Caldwell described the Cena @-@ Lesnar main @-@ event as " super @-@ intense " , saying that Lesnar offered " physicality not seen in years " . Caldwell described the World Heavyweight Championship match as an " excellent , excellent bout " with Bryan " phenomenal in defeat " and Sheamus " looking strong headed into the next chapter of his title run " . As 2012 drew to a close , Pro Wrestling Torch rated Extreme Rules as the best pay @-@ per @-@ view of all the WWE and TNA pay @-@ per @-@ views produced in that year with an average staff rating of 8 @.@ 3 compared to the second best WWE PPV , WrestleMania XXVIII 's 7 @.@ 6 and TNA 's best pay @-@ per @-@ view , Destination X 's 7 @.@ 0 . The average rating across all of WWE 's pay @-@ per @-@ views in 2012 was 6 @.@ 1 . 
 The Baltimore Sun summarized the " terrific " event being engineered by " a ' perfect storm ' of a stellar Chicago crowd , excellent matches with several clever finishes , refreshing commentary and WWE rarities including violence , blood and referee assault " . The Baltimore Sun also felt that " all four rematches on this card from WrestleMania exceeded their matches one month ago " , while reserving special praise for Daniel Bryan and Dolph Ziggler , saying that although " Bryan doesn 't hold the World Heavyweight title , he proved that he is a champion in terms of someone who can be counted on to always be one half of a fantastic match in big @-@ stage situations " , while Ziggler " made Brodus look like a million dollars in his offense " . 
 Patrick Lennon of the Daily Star described the main @-@ event as " compelling " while perceiving a " discrepancy " between WWE 's TV @-@ PG approach and " Lesnar elbowing Cena repeatedly in the face until he bleeds profusely " . 
 The International Business Times rated Extreme Rules as the best pay @-@ per @-@ view of the year and listed both the Cena @-@ Lesnar and Bryan @-@ Sheamus matches in the top five WWE matches in 2012 . Cena @-@ Lesnar was described as " as brutal as anyone could have hoped for " while Bryan @-@ Sheamus " stole the show " . Bryan was also spotlighted as the " greatest in @-@ ring performer that WWE has at the moment " . 
 Fans also praised to the event 's match quality , but raised concerns about Cena beating Lesnar in Lesnar 's first return match . 
 In 2013 , WWE released a list of their " 15 best pay @-@ per @-@ views ever " , with 2012 's Extreme Rules being ranked at # 11 . 
 Extreme Rules was released on DVD by WWE Home Video on 29 May 2012 , featuring the DVD extra of Matt Striker interviewing CM Punk . About.com 's Eric Cohen rated the DVD 5 stars out of 5 , stating that for " a three @-@ hour pay @-@ per @-@ view event , it doesn 't get much better than this " . DVD Talk gave a " Recommended " rating to the DVD , stating that the release was " right on target with other recent WWE DVDs ( for better or worse ) , from the decent technical presentation to the lack of bonus features " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Extreme Rules saw the culmination of most of its feuds , some of which started before the previous pay @-@ per @-@ view , WrestleMania XXVIII . The Cena @-@ Lesnar , Punk @-@ Jericho , Sheamus @-@ Bryan and Orton @-@ Kane feuds ended at Extreme Rules ; the only feud to continue on after the event was the Rhodes @-@ Show feud , which ended before the next pay @-@ per @-@ view , Over the Limit . 
 Immediately after Extreme Rules on the April 30 Raw , WWE 's Chief Operating Officer Triple H refused to give in to Brock Lesnar 's unreasonable contract demands , starting a feud between the duo and resulting in Lesnar attacking Triple H and ( in storyline ) breaking Triple H 's arm . This led to Lesnar defeating Triple H via submission at SummerSlam . At WrestleMania 29 , with Triple H 's career on the line , Triple H defeated Lesnar in a No Holds Barred match . The feud ended in the main event of 2013 's Extreme Rules , where Lesnar ( with his manager Paul Heyman 's interference ) defeated Triple H in a steel cage match . 
 Also on the April 30 Raw , General Manager John Laurinaitis , unhappy that his hand @-@ picked star Lesnar lost to Cena at Extreme Rules , revealed himself to be Cena 's next opponent for Over the Limit . In the storyline , WWE 's board of directors declared that as a condition of the match , if Laurinaitis lost , he would be fired , and any wrestler who interfered would be fired . At Over the Limit , Laurinaitis defeated Cena after Big Show interfered on Laurinaitis ' behalf . Show was free to interfere in the match because he had already been fired the week before Over the Limit by Laurinaitis after he mocked Laurinaitis ' speech mannerisms . 
 To determine the # 1 contendership for CM Punk 's WWE Championship , a Beat @-@ the @-@ Clock challenge was held on the April 30 Raw . A series of five singles matches took place where the victor with the lowest match @-@ time was deemed the overall winner ; Daniel Bryan set the fastest time by defeating Jerry Lawler in under three minutes . Notably , during the Beat @-@ the @-@ Clock challenge , The Miz avenged his loss to Santino Marella by defeating Marella in a non @-@ title match . Marella eventually lost the United States Championship in August to Antonio Cesaro at SummerSlam . 
 At Over the Limit , Punk retained his title in controversial fashion when Bryan rolled back onto his shoulders as he applied the " Yes ! " Lock on Punk , Punk tapped out immediately after the referee counted a pinfall win for Punk . Punk would continue to hold the WWE Championship until January 2013 when he was defeated by The Rock at the Royal Rumble , a title reign of 434 days . 
 Before Extreme Rules , Alberto Del Rio defeated World Heavyweight Champion Sheamus via disqualification on the April 6 SmackDown to earn a future title shot . After Extreme Rules on the May 7 Raw , Sheamus and Randy Orton faced Del Rio and Chris Jericho , with Sheamus accidentally delivering a Brogue Kick to Orton followed by Jericho hitting the Codebreaker on Sheamus and pinning him . Orton then gave Sheamus an RKO after the match . Due to this , the World Heavyweight Championship match at Over the Limit was made a fatal @-@ four way match . Sheamus pinned Jericho at Over the Limit to retain his title . Sheamus remained as World Heavyweight Champion until October 2012 , where he lost his title to Big Show at Hell in a Cell . 
 Cody Rhodes ' feud with Big Show continued after Extreme Rules , ending on the May 7 Raw when Show defeated Rhodes in a title match via count @-@ out , but this meant Rhodes retained the title . At Over the Limit , Christian made his surprise return after a month 's absence from injury and won a battle royal to earn an Intercontinental Championship opportunity later that night ; Rhodes lost the match and the title to Christian . 
 After Nikki Bella lost the Divas Championship to Layla at Extreme Rules , both Bella Twins received a title shot in a triple threat match on the April 30 Raw . Layla won the match quickly and the Bella Twins were " fired " from WWE ( in actuality , the twins ' contracts expired ) . Layla moved on to feud with Beth Phoenix , whom she beat at Over the Limit to retain her title . Layla remained Divas Champion until September 2012 , where she lost her title to Eve at Night of Champions . 
 After Extreme Rules , both Brodus Clay and Ryback 's winning streaks continued through Raw and SmackDown into Over the Limit as Clay defeated the Miz while Ryback defeated Camacho . Clay 's streak ended at 24 wins on the June 25 Raw with a loss to Big Show . Ryback 's streak ended at 38 wins in October 2012 at Hell in a Cell with a loss to CM Punk . Meanwhile , Dolph Ziggler and Jack Swagger moved on to feud with Tag Team Champions Kofi Kingston and R @-@ Truth but would fail to win their title . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Bruce Jackson ( audio engineer ) = 
 Bruce Robert Jackson ( 3 June 1949 – 29 January 2011 ) was an Australian audio engineer who co @-@ founded JANDS , an Australian audio , lighting and staging company . He joined American touring audio engineer Roy Clair and mixed concert stage monitors for Elvis Presley in the 1970s . With Clair Brothers , a concert sound company , Jackson designed audio electronics including a custom mixing console . Beginning in 1978 , Jackson toured as Bruce Springsteen 's band engineer for a decade , using Clair Brothers sound systems . A business interest in Fairlight CMI in Sydney introduced Jackson to digital audio , and he subsequently founded the digital audio company Apogee Electronics in Santa Monica , California , where he lived at the time . After selling his share of Apogee , Jackson co @-@ founded with Roy and Gene Clair a joint venture which produced the Clair <unk> , a loudspeaker management system for control of complex concert sound systems . Jackson turned the venture commercial with the help of Dave McGrath 's Lake Technology . Dolby Laboratories bought the technology and formed Dolby Lake with Jackson as vice president , then in 2009 Lab.gruppen acquired the brand . Jackson was honoured with the Parnelli Innovator Award in 2005 for his inventive loudspeaker controller . 
 While still a partner at Apogee , Jackson began touring with Barbra Streisand , mixing concert sound and serving as sound designer from 1993 to 2007 . With two other audio engineers he received an Emmy Award for sound design and sound mixing on Streisand 's TV special Barbra : The Concert . Jackson worked on sound design for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney and served as audio director for the opening and closing ceremonies . He performed the same role in Doha , Qatar , at the 2006 Asian Games and in Vancouver , Canada , at the 2010 Winter Olympics . 
 = = JANDS = = 
 Bruce R. Jackson was the first of five children born to Bruce H. Jackson , Sr and Mavis Jackson , living in Rose Bay , New South Wales . His wealthy parents moved to a mansion in Point Piper , a harbourside suburb east of Sydney in the district of Vaucluse , New South Wales . ( The mansion , " Altona " , is one of Australia 's most expensive homes . ) Jackson first expressed an interest in electronics at age 13 when he set up a basement workbench and small lab under his parents ' mansion . While at Vaucluse Boys ' High School , Jackson was discovered by investigators of the Postmaster @-@ General 's Department , along with a group of his electronics @-@ minded schoolmates , Phillip Storey , Wally Pearce , Bruce Morrison and Adrian Wood operating a pirate radio station " <unk> " , with a too @-@ powerful AM transmitter — which the boys operated during and after school , and on the weekends , tuned to 1350 kHz in the upper end of the commercial AM band to avoid more powerful commercial radio station signals . The boys did not know that their tube transmitter and very long , very efficient full wavelength antenna were so well crafted that their unlicensed signal was broadcasting all over Sydney and parts of the state of New South Wales 600 km away , at night time . 
 At age 18 , Jackson and one of the boys , Phillip Storey , dropped out of university and became partners in an electronics business . They used their surname initials to form the company name : J & S Research Electronics Pty Limited . The partnership 's largest customer , Roger Foley , doing business as Ellis D Fogg , a producer of psychedelic lighting effects , refused to write out the full company name and instead wrote <unk> on his checks . The partners added an equipment rental company with the name JANDS Pty Limited , in response . After moving the company from Point Piper to Rose Bay , JANDS made " whatever the hell they felt like " , according to Jackson : lighting equipment , guitar amplifiers and public address system components such as column loudspeakers . He described how , with so many American servicemen stationed in Vietnam spending their recreation time in Sydney , Australian bands and clubs were doing well : " the live music scene was jumping , and we were busy " . JANDS ' successful rental business paid for the design of new gear . After two years , Jackson and Storey quarrelled and the two decided to disband the company . They sold out to Paul Mulholland , David Mulholland and Eric Robinson , who were operating a small lighting company <unk> Gaslight , on Sydney 's north shore . Later , JANDS grew under Mulholland and Robinson to become Australia 's largest sound and lighting company . Jackson and Storey served as consultants to JANDS , from time to time . 
 = = Clair Brothers = = 
 Jackson first met Roy Clair in 1970 during a world tour by the band Blood , Sweat & Tears when they stopped at Sydney for a concert held at Randwick Racecourse . Clair had brought his unusually large American concert sound system to Australia and Jackson was curious to hear it , and to see how the big black ' W ' bins were designed . He and a friend sneaked into the concert and spoke with Clair , asking " a whole stack of questions " . Clair decided to leave his sound system in Jackson 's hands for a series of Johnny Cash tour dates coming up in some six months , rather than shipping all the gear home to the USA and back in between . Jackson stored the system and then mixed the Cash tour across Australia . Afterward , Clair invited Jackson to visit him in Lititz , Pennsylvania . Following a trip to London , Jackson stopped in at Clair Brothers and stayed to live in Pennsylvania . 
 Jackson assisted Clair Brothers by teaming with Ron Borthwick to design a mixing console that folded up into its own road case , a proprietary model used by Clair Brothers for some 12 years of top tours . The console used novel plasma <unk> meters which displayed both average and peak sound levels , combining the characteristics of fast peak meters and slower VU meters . Clair Brothers built 10 of the consoles , the first live sound console to incorporate parametric equalisation . 
 = = = Elvis Presley = = = 
 Working for Clair Brothers , Jackson toured with Elvis Presley , mixing monitors while independent engineer Bill Porter mixed front of house ( FOH ) for the audience . Clair Brothers supplied all the audio gear ; Jackson designed a powerful stage monitor system for Presley 's show . To make more room for audience seating , he also used a sound reinforcement system that was not mounted on scaffolding but hung with steel chain above the audience from overhead beams , using chain hoists rigged upside down to raise the loudspeakers from the floor — a now @-@ common method used by licensed riggers . Jackson has said that he made a number of concert recordings during this period , all unreleased . 
 The earliest of these Clair Brothers @-@ supported dates did not have a dedicated monitor engineer — monitors were mixed from FOH by Porter , assisted by Jackson . Jackson noticed that Presley 's performance was very much dependent on how easily he was able to hear himself from the monitor speakers . Jackson said , " some nights would work well and others would be a total train wreck . " He advocated for a separate monitor mixing position at the side of the stage and after overcoming resistance to the concept was given this dedicated position . Asked whether he thus invented the role of concert monitor engineer , Jackson replied , " no , not really . It was more that its time had just come . " 
 Jackson had to deal with Presley 's absence from rehearsals at Graceland and concert soundchecks . The singer would usually show up at the concert venue at the last minute , walk out on stage and start to sing , having never heard the sound system . Presley sometimes turned to the side of the stage to ask Jackson to make changes , and a few times he stopped the show to have Jackson come out and stand center stage and listen carefully to the monitors while Presley sang to 20 @,@ 000 people . One night in Fort Worth , Texas , Presley led the audience in singing " Happy Birthday to You " in honour of the engineer 's birthday — an " amazing , and very embarrassing " occasion for Jackson . Jackson can be seen at his side @-@ stage mix position in Presley 's 1977 " CBS Special " TV show . At Presley 's final performance on 26 June 1977 , he said " I would like to thank my sound engineer : Bruce Jackson from Australia . " 
 Touring with Presley was like no other assignment . Presley and his entourage travelled in four or five jets to the next tour stop : one for Elvis and his closest colleagues , one for the band , one for Colonel Tom Parker ( Presley 's manager ) , one for concessions and crew , and a Learjet used by RCA Records management to fly ahead of everyone else . For two weeks during June and July 1973 , Elvis flew on an all @-@ black DC @-@ 9 airliner with a Playboy logo on the tail ; the aircraft was named Big Bunny . Jackson said he and the other Elvis @-@ chosen passengers were served food and drinks by elite Playboy Bunnies called " Jet Bunnies " . 
 Parker managed the concert tours for Presley , and exerted a strong influence . Jackson quit his job while on tour after he was " pushed too far " by Parker , according to Roy Clair . Presley apologised to Jackson , and he rejoined the tour as an independent engineer , answering only to Presley . Jackson mixed hundreds of concerts for the singer , who called him " Bruce the Goose " — a working life filled with strange hours , hard physical labour and constant travelling . In August 1977 he was in Portland , Maine setting up at the next Presley engagement when he heard he had died . 
 = = Independent engineer = = 
 = = = Bruce Springsteen = = = 
 As an independent engineer , Jackson signed a contract to work directly for Bruce Springsteen , on concert tours supported by Clair Brothers . Jackson mixed Springsteen on four major tours from 1978 to 1988 , and is credited as engineer on the album Live / 1975 – 85 . The tours include Darkness , The River , Born in the U.S.A. and Tunnel of Love Express . Prior to each tour , Springsteen and the E @-@ Street Band practised at Clair Brothers in Lititz to check out new sound system components and lighting effects , and to give crew members a chance to work out the technical details . Jackson mixed the rehearsals and concerts on the folding console he designed for Clair Brothers . Springsteen called him " BJ " . 
 Right away , Jackson noticed that Springsteen was a very particular critic of his own concert sound . At every new venue , Springsteen would take " BJ " around to various seats in the concert venue , sitting in every section , even the last row of seats , and listen to the E @-@ Street Band play . He asked Jackson why the sound was not so good far away as it was up close , and if the audio crew could do anything about it . Jackson said , " we can do a lot about it " , and worked with Clair Brothers to design a ring of delay loudspeakers positioned closer to the farthest seats to augment the high frequencies lost over distance by sound waves travelling through air . This made the hi @-@ hat sound more " crisp and clean " , with higher quality sound in the back row than previously experienced in such large venues . Throughout Jackson 's years with him , Springsteen maintained his interest in delivering high quality sound to every seat , and the solutions grew in size and complexity until by 1984 there were eight rings of delays set up for the largest venues . 
 In 1981 for the River tour , Jackson arrived at a " checkerboard " configuration of loudspeakers which were supplied with nominal left and right stereo signals , the signals connected throughout the sound system in an alternating pattern of vertical lines of eight loudspeakers each , giving the audience a semblance of stereo imaging otherwise impractical on such a large scale . He continued its use on the Born in the U.S.A. tour in 1985 . A reporter from Popular Mechanics described the 160 main and 40 auxiliary loudspeakers typically used at a large arena or stadium . Jackson set the main loudspeakers 54 feet ( 16 m ) high on scaffolding , each enclosure holding two 18 @-@ inch low @-@ frequency cone drivers , four 10 @-@ inch mid @-@ frequency cone drivers , two high @-@ mid compression drivers and two high @-@ frequency compression drivers . The auxiliary zones covered audience areas which wrapped around to the sides of the stage . The 200 loudspeakers were driven by 96 amplifier channels capable of putting out a total of 380 @,@ 000 watts . The tour was said to have drawn " unusual critical acclaim for crispness and distortion @-@ free performances . " Jackson was nominated for a TEC Award as 1985 's best sound reinforcement engineer but Gene Clair received the honour . 
 Jackson worked closely with individual musicians in Springsteen 's band to help them achieve the sound they wanted . Keyboard player Danny Federici received attention from John Stilwell and Jackson who collaborated in modifying his cut @-@ down Hammond B @-@ 3 organ . Clarence Clemons came to Jackson with his ideas about microphones ; subsequently , the sound of his saxophones was picked up by a device invented jointly by Clemons and Jackson . Bassist Garry Tallent described the elements of his bass rig to a reporter then summed up its overall effect by saying , " the rest is up to God and Bruce Jackson . " 
 Jackson was close to Presley , but the two men were not near in age . Springsteen was closer to Jackson 's age and the two got along as friends , the singer giving a Jeep off @-@ road vehicle as a gift in thanks for his contribution to successful concerts . Jackson said of the Jeep that he sold it after tiring of " bouncing around the place in it . " In 1988 , Jackson quit touring at the birth of his son Lindsey . He settled in Santa Monica , California , to concentrate on audio electronics ideas . However , <unk> and then he was called as consultant by Springsteen staff and Clair Bros to solve acoustic issues during the following world tours , for instance in Verona , Italy ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = Barbra Streisand = = = 
 Jackson was working as an entrepreneur in digital audio electronics in 1993 when Barbra Streisand 's producer asked him to mix her first concert tour in decades . Jackson signed on partly because he was assured he could do anything to make her concert sound as good as possible . Jackson determined that huge concert venues such as Wembley Stadium and Madison Square Garden would be carpeted for Streisand , and that expensive heavy drapes would be hung at the walls to damp sound reflections . After discovering that Streisand did not like to listen to any stage monitors made after the 1960s , he designed a stage wedge which used soft dome drivers for midrange and for high frequencies rather than the more powerful compression drivers in common use after the 1970s . As well , the main sound system Jackson specified was a new design by Clair Brothers , a proprietary line array system called the I4 . Streisand was not willing to wear in @-@ ear monitors but the band was fitted with them , to reduce stage wash and make the band 's instruments stand out better individually in the mix . The stage monitors , line array and extravagant acoustic treatments were a hit with Streisand , who said of Jackson that he was " the best sound engineer in the world . " 
 Streisand employed Jackson 's mixing talents on her 1995 TV special called Barbra : The Concert . Along with Ed Greene and Bob La <unk> who worked on post @-@ production mixing , he received an Emmy Award for sound design and the mixing of the live show . Jackson designed the sound for Streisand 's 1999 – 2000 Timeless : Live in Concert Tour , and he mixed the New Year 's Eve concert 31 December 1999 at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Paradise , Nevada . He mixed Streisand 's appearances in Sydney and Melbourne in March 2000 , connecting the large backing choir 's sound mix by optical fibre from a nearby polo field where the choir was stationed . The fibre connection was Jackson 's real @-@ world test of a similar setup planned to be used for the Summer Olympics six months later . 
 Jackson mixed Streisand 's U.S. and world tours in 2006 and 2007 , using a Digidesign Venue digital mixing console at FOH for its smaller footprint ( allowing more audience seats ) and its plug @-@ in audio effects . As well , the Venue mixing system was chosen for its integration with Pro Tools hardware and software , to make 128 @-@ channel hard disk recordings of the concerts directly from the three Digidesign consoles : one to mix strings , one to mix brass , reeds and percussion , and one under Jackson 's control out in the audience , with Streisand 's microphone inputs and stems ( <unk> of other microphones ) from the other consoles . The recordings made in New York City and Washington , D.C. were remixed into the album Live In Concert 2006 — Jackson was listed as sound designer . Sharing sound designer and FOH mixing duties with Chris Carlton , Jackson made certain that the custom soft dome monitor wedges were positioned correctly aiming up from under the stage to cover everywhere Streisand might walk . Clair Brothers supplied 18 Dolby Lake Processors for the tour , the majority used by Jackson to tune the main sound system , and the rest for control of monitor wedges used by Streisand and by the supporting artist , Il Divo . For Streisand 's voice , Jackson auditioned several wireless microphones and ended up using a Sennheiser SKM 5200 transmitter equipped with a Neumann KK 105 S <unk> capsule . He used the vocal microphone to test the sound system from different locations around the arena . When the tour hit the UK and continental Europe , Jackson changed from a Neumann to a <unk> Microphones capsule , custom made to his requirements ; one that <unk> called the " Jackson Special " . Jackson used Millennia microphone <unk> for any microphone that was required to be sent to multiple mixing consoles , such as at Madison Square Garden where cable runs to the recording trucks were 800 feet ( 240 m ) long . The use of only one preamp prevents the microphone output from being loaded down by too little resistance which can change its tone quality . 
 = = = Other artists = = = 
 In addition to Presley , Springsteen and Streisand , Jackson mixed concert sound for Diana Ross , Stevie Wonder , Rod Stewart and the Faces , Barry White , Jefferson Airplane , Ozzy Osbourne , Carly Simon , Three Dog Night , The Jackson 5 , Cat Stevens , Glen Campbell , Art Garfunkel , Procol Harum and Lou Reed . During 1983 when Springsteen was not touring , Jackson mixed sound for Stevie Nicks on The Wild Heart Tour , June to November 1983 . Fourteen years later he mixed for Fleetwood Mac during their live performances recorded in Burbank for MTV , released as the album The Dance . 
 = = World events = = 
 In 1998 , Jackson was contacted by Ric Birch of the Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games ( <unk> ) to mix sound for the 2000 Summer Olympic Games in Sydney . Jackson felt that his skills would be put to best use as organiser and audio director rather than as one man behind a mixing console . He put together a team of audio professionals as well as an equipment design composed of digital nodes linked with optic fibre to transport digital audio around the largest venues without attenuation or ground hum . To wire the spectacle which played to 110 @,@ 000 people in attendance and some 3 billion distant viewers around the world , redundant systems were connected throughout so that a single failure point could not halt the show . To complete the assignment , Jackson said one of the main factors was working within budget , which was not unlimited as it had been with Streisand . He served as audio director for the opening ceremony on 15 September and the closing ceremony on 1 October . Before the event , he told a reporter , " I have a well rehearsed crew in place and there is every reason to expect it to go well . " 
 In December 2006 , Jackson served as audio director at the 15th Asian Games , held in Doha , Qatar . The main loudspeakers for the opening and closing ceremonies were the <unk> model from L @-@ <unk> . Jackson found that extreme heat and occasional downpours did not adversely affect the <unk> fibre audio connections around the largest venues . Digital audio was passed to a combination of Lake Contour and Dolby Lake Processors . 
 Following his success in Sydney , Jackson was tapped to direct the audio design and production at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , where he directed the opening ceremony and the closing ceremony . His sound design for BC Place Stadium did not have loudspeakers at ground level aimed up at the seating areas — Jackson determined that this approach would produce too much uncontrolled reverberation from sound waves bouncing off the ceiling . Instead , he configured two rings of loudspeakers hung from the ceiling 100 ft ( 30 m ) above the ground , aimed downward . The inner ring held 8 arrays each composed of 12 Clair Brothers i3 line array speakers and the outer ring held 12 arrays of 7 Clair Brothers i3 line array speakers , augmented by 16 subwoofers . The lot was powered by 160 Lab.gruppen amplifiers which were also hung from the ceiling , and were networked via Dante in a triple @-@ redundant configuration . Two <unk> D5 digital mixing consoles served as main and backup for the main audience sound , and two Yamaha <unk> handled main and backup duties for monitor mixing . Other equipment included dual @-@ redundant <unk> fibre connections , two Dolby Lake Processors , and time code generated by two pairs of <unk> which also handled audio cues timed to the action on the field . 
 Jackson directed sound for the 2010 Shanghai Expo opening ceremony , held on 30 April 2010 . He used four Fairlight digital audio systems to replay music cues , connected to Studer routing and distribution gear which supplied signal to <unk> digital mixers and an analogue mixer . Some 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) of fibre optic cable in a dual @-@ redundant star topology connected 72 amplifier racks along both sides of the Huangpu River . Each amp rack held a BSS Audio loudspeaker controller and multiple Crown International amplifiers , pushing audio signal to more than 400 JBL loudspeakers . 
 = = Digital audio = = 
 Beginning in 1979 between Springsteen tour dates , Jackson crisscrossed the U.S. promoting the Fairlight CMI , a digital sampler made by fellow Australians Peter Vogel and Kim Ryrie . ( Ryrie grew up in Point Piper next to Jackson 's house . ) The earliest <unk> were prohibitively expensive , and their 24 kHz sampling rate was not considered high enough for audio mastering , but Jackson found that musicians immediately discovered how useful the Fairlight was for composition . Rick Wakeman explored the sampler , as did Tony Bongiovi , founder of the Power Station recording studio in New York City . There , Springsteen was shown the sampler and said , " Ah yeah , BJ that 's great , but what am I gonna do with it ? " 
 None of Jackson 's prospects bought one in the first year . He had better luck with Herbie Hancock , Stevie Wonder , and Geordie Hormel who bought two for $ 27 @,@ 500 each . Wonder , who had recently recorded Stevie Wonder 's Journey Through " The Secret Life of Plants " using a Computer Music <unk> sampler , paid for his Fairlight by signing a personal check with his thumbprint . He then convinced Jackson to mix sound for a tour he was undertaking in support of Secret Life of Plants . Jackson 's close association with Fairlight made him intimately aware of the limitations of early digital audio , " weaknesses " such as noise and <unk> distortion . 
 During an April 1985 Springsteen tour leg in Japan , Jackson first listened to Compact Discs played on a CD player connected to his concert sound system , and he did not like what he heard . 
 = = = Apogee Electronics = = = 
 After finishing Springsteen 's Born in the U.S.A. tour , Jackson expressed his ideas about possible improvements to digital audio in a conversation with Christof Heidelberger , a designer of digital audio electronics , and Betty Bennett , the president of <unk> 's U.S. division . Jackson , Bennett and Heidelberger formed Apogee Electronics in December 1985 ( announced in the 23 November issue of Billboard ) and started investigating 44 kHz digital audio circuits for audible problems . They found that " textbook filters " which were unnecessarily steep were protecting the CD player output from high levels of 20 kHz signals , an exceedingly unlikely occurrence in music . Jackson determined that Apogee could improve the sound of CDs if the low @-@ pass filters used in the recording process were made less steep , for less phase shift throughout the hearing range . The small company produced better anti @-@ aliasing filters for recording equipment . Initially operating out of his garage , Jackson served as the company 's owner and president , and his third wife Bennett headed up sales . They demonstrated their first product at the Audio Engineering Society 's 81st convention held in Los Angeles in November 1986 : the 944 Series low @-@ dispersion , linear phase , active low @-@ pass filter , intended to replace existing filters on multi @-@ track digital tape recorders such as the Sony PCM @-@ 3324 . After a slow start , the firm sold 30 @,@ 000 of the filters : " a great success . " The 944 earned a TEC Award in 1988 , the first of many such awards for Apogee . 
 Apogee 's branding was largely Jackson 's doing . Bennett said in 2005 that the company 's decision to sell purple @-@ coloured products was one of Jackson 's ideas : " He has a good eye for design , and we wanted to distinguish ourselves from the all @-@ black rack gear that everybody had at that point . " Jackson encouraged a lighting designer from Clair Brothers to sketch a company logo on a cocktail napkin over dinner one evening , and that was immediately made the Apogee logo . 
 In 1994 , Jackson spoke to a Billboard reporter about digital audio . Described as Apogee 's president and chief engineer , he said , " digital is finally living up to the warm , natural sound of analogue that we know and love . " A decade later , he warned against the belief that bigger specification numbers guarantee better sound quality . He noted that 192 kHz sampling rate was often cited as being better than 96 kHz because of it being twice as fast " when in reality there 's a whole bunch of other influencing factors responsible for any audible improvements . " 
 Jackson and Bennett divorced in the mid @-@ 1990s and he sold his share of Apogee to finance the divorce settlement . Company co @-@ founder Bennett became CEO . 
 = = = Loudspeaker management system = = = 
 After leaving Apogee , Jackson entered into a joint venture with Clair Brothers to design a digital loudspeaker controller for control of complex concert sound systems . Jackson estimated that the project would cost $ 800 @,@ 000 in U.S. dollars , but it ended up costing Clair Brothers more than $ 2M . From the same garage in which he started Apogee , Jackson developed the proprietary Clair <unk> : a two @-@ input , six @-@ output digital audio matrix with <unk> @-@ isolated output circuits . An essential element of the system was its ability to be controlled by wireless tablet computer by an audio engineer walking around to various seating sections in a concert venue , to tailor the system 's response more precisely . 
 Jackson then joined with Dave McGrath of Lake Technology to produce a commercial version of the controller , the Lake Contour , essentially the same hardware but with different software . McGrath and Jackson acquired Clair Technologies LLC , the earlier joint venture . In turn , Dolby Laboratories bought Lake in 2004 , Jackson staying with the product line to become vice president of the live sound division at Dolby , and by 2005 the loudspeaker controller was being used by seven of the ten top concert tours ; 3 @,@ 000 units had been built . Jackson moved back to Sydney in 2005 with Terri — his fourth wife — and their children , but in November he returned to the U.S. to accept his Parnelli Innovator Award . In 2006 , the digital audio product was redesigned and introduced as the Dolby Lake Processor , capable of 4 @-@ in , 12 @-@ out operation as a loudspeaker crossover ; 8 @-@ in , 8 @-@ out operation as a system equaliser ; or a combination of 2 crossovers and 4 equalizers — the whole integrated with <unk> audio analysis software . A collaboration between Dolby and Swedish audio electronics company Lab.gruppen was announced in 2007 ; Jackson 's technology would be incorporated into Lab.gruppen 's Powered Loudspeaker Management ( PLM ) system . Two years later , Lab.gruppen acquired the Lake brand for further development of the PLM and other product lines . John Carey of Dolby said , " As we pass the live sound torch to Lab.gruppen we are confident that they will continue to innovate and evolve the technology . " 
 = = Pilot = = 
 Jackson was an avid pilot , licensed to fly from early adulthood . He flew often , for pleasure , one of the few concert audio engineers who did . In the 1970s between Presley concert dates , Jackson flew the singer 's personal jet airliner , a converted Convair 880 named Lisa Marie after Presley 's daughter . For Presley 's band rehearsals at Graceland , Jackson would fly some 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) from Lititz to Memphis with the back of a small plane loaded with assorted mic stands , cables and monitor loudspeakers . The band would rehearse for a bit in Graceland 's racquetball court , then hang out in the Jungle Room waiting for Presley who rarely came downstairs . 
 A small aircraft owner , at one time Jackson operated a 1975 Grumman American AA @-@ 5B Tiger . In 1979 he sold it to his lighting company friend , Tait Towers founder Michael Tait , to pay for an earlier purchase of a more powerful aircraft , a new Mooney <unk> that he registered 7 December 1978 . Jackson used the <unk> to carry Fairlight samplers across the U.S. to demonstrate them to studios and musicians , once flying from New York to Los Angeles in 15 hours after he heard Herbie Hancock was interested . Interviewed in 2005 at his Sydney office , Jackson said he missed his " little plane " terribly , that it was kept in a hangar for his use whenever he visited California , surrounded by dusty boxes of audio gear and stored memorabilia . He said he had considered flying it from California to Australia but his wife was " not too keen on the idea . " 
 Jackson was interested in aviation developments . In mid @-@ 2010 he flew himself and a friend to Mojave Air and Space Port to see Virgin Galactic 's <unk> Enterprise , a sub @-@ orbital spacecraft being glide @-@ tested . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Jackson landed his Mooney at Furnace Creek Airport ( the lowest elevation airstrip in North America ) near the visitor center of Death Valley National Park early in the afternoon of 29 January 2011 . He had no flight plan filed . Following a brief stop he took off in clear , sunny weather bound for Santa Monica , but a few minutes later he crashed and died about 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 11 km ) south of the airfield in a dry lake bed . The wreckage was discovered by park rangers on the morning of 31 January , and was later examined by investigators who did not determine a cause for the accident . Jackson was survived by two brothers and two sisters , and by his fourth wife , Terri , their daughter Brianna , and Aja , Jackson 's stepdaughter . He was survived by his third wife Betty Bennett and their son Lindsey and daughter Alex . Jackson was survived by his second wife Ruth Davis who sang background vocals for Springsteen . He was also survived by his first wife Margaret who married him when they were both 21 years old . Margaret was with him when he started JANDS , and accompanied him to the U.S. when he went to work for Clair Brothers . 
 A memorial celebration of Jackson 's life was held 25 February at the Sydney Opera House . Some 500 attendees listened to remembrances and anecdotes from family members and from business colleagues such as Roy Clair and David McGrath . <unk> videos were played , sent from Springsteen , the band U2 , Streisand and her manager Martin <unk> , and members of Fleetwood Mac . 
 = Braathens Helikopter = 
 Braathens Helikopter A / S was a Norwegian helicopter airline based at Stavanger Airport , Sola , and Bergen Airport , Flesland . It used a fleet of seven Aérospatiale Super Pumas to serve offshore oil platforms in the North Sea . The customers were Phillips Petroleum , Norsk Hydro , Statoil , Amoco and British Petroleum , serving their oil fields Ekofisk , Oseberg , Gullfaks , Veslefrikk , Valhall , Ula and Gyda . Braathens Helikopter operated from 1989 to 1993 , after which it was sold to and merged with the main competitor , Helikopter Service . Braathens Helikopter was owned by Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi and was a sister company of the airline Braathens SAFE . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Braathens Helikopter was a pure helicopter airline , with a main base at Stavanger Airport , Sola and a secondary base at Bergen Airport , Flesland . It operated seven Aérospatiale Super Puma helicopters , each with nineteen seats . They were used exclusively on long @-@ term contracts with oil companies to ship crews to their oil platforms in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea . The company employed at the most 120 people , was owned by Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi , and was a sister company of Braathens SAFE . The airline served seven oil fields : Ekofisk , Gullfaks , Gyda , Oseberg , Ula , Valhall , Veslefrikk . These were on contract with Amoco , British Petroleum , Norsk Hydro , Phillips Petroleum and Statoil . The company had a 30 % market share before it was sold . 
 = = History = = 
 Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi 's first attempt at entering the helicopter market was in 1982 , when it applied for a concession from the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications to operate offshore helicopters , which it was awarded in 1983 . As a protest , the incumbent Helikopter Service applied for the airline routes that Braathens SAFE operated from Stavanger , but this application was rejected . 
 The airline was not founded until 1 September 1989 , after Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi , the owner of Braathens SAFE , made an agreement with the oil companies Phillips Petroleum , Norsk Hydro and Statoil . The agreement involved flights to the platforms Ekofisk , Oseberg , Gullfaks og Veslefrikk . Prior to this , Helikopter Service had held a monopoly on flights for the oil companies to their offshore installations . The oil companies wanted to establish a competitor to Helikopter Service to press down prices . The initial agreement gave a revenue of NOK 800 million and gave the new company a 20 % market share . Four 19 @-@ seat Aérospatiale Super Puma helicopters were ordered , each costing NOK 60 million . Total investment costs were NOK 300 million . Two helicopters were stationed at Stavanger Airport , Sola , and two at Bergen Airport , Flesland . 
 Bjarne <unk> was appointed managing director . The first helicopter was delivered in May , with a new helicopter being delivered each month . They were named <unk> , <unk> , Havørn and <unk> . Owner Bjørn G. Braathen stated that his goal was that the airline would reach a 50 % market share . In 1990 , another challenger , <unk> , had also established themselves in the market . For the start of operations , Braathens Helikopter hired 22 pilots , most of them previously working for the Royal Norwegian Air Force . The company had 70 employees in total . Services started on 1 September 1990 , where the initial contract involved flying 10 @,@ 000 passengers per year . 
 In January 1991 , the company placed an order and an option for the Super Puma . In June , Braathens Helikopter signed a three @-@ year agreement , with an option for a two @-@ year extension , with Amoco for flights from Stavanger to Valhall . The revenue was between NOK 100 and 200 million , depending on the length of the contract and the capacity needed . Operations started in February 1992 , and involved the company purchasing the Super Puma they had an option for . On 10 September , Braathens Helikopter was awarded the contract with British Petroleum for flights from Stavanger to Ula and Gyda . The contract gave a revenue of up to NOK 300 million in the course five years . Operations started on 1 November 1992 , and involved about 2 @,@ 000 hours of flying per year . With this contract , Braathens Helikopter had about a 30 % market share . As a consequence of the contract , Braathens purchased another Super Puma . After operations started , the company had grown to 120 employees and was the second @-@ largest helicopter operator in the country . The company made a profit of NOK 14 million in 1991 , NOK 11 million in 1992 and NOK 23 million in the seven first months of 1993 . 
 In 1993 , Norway decided to allow any airline from the European Economic Area to operate helicopter services in Norway from 1995 . This meant that companies like Bristow Group , KLM and Maersk Air could start operation in Norway . This would be coordinated through common technical rules for helicopters through the Joint Aviation Authorities . Braathens Helikopter and Helikopter Service announced on 1 October 1993 that the two companies would merge from 1 January 1994 . Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi would be paid NOK 225 million in Helikopter Service shares . The Norwegian Competition Authority stated they would have to look at the merger , since the new company would have a near @-@ monopoly on offshore flights . However , the Ministry of Transport and Communications stated that the authority could not hinder the merger , because by the time new contracts were awarded in 1995 , helicopter operators from foreign countries would also be allowed to bid . The ownership of Braathens Helikopter was transferred to Helikopter Service on 14 December . Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi received 14 % of the shares in the merged company . They were immediately sold , giving Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi a NOK 170 million profit on the five @-@ year venture . Ludvig G. Braathens Rederi needed the capital to participate in an initial public offering of Braathens . Most of the management of Braathens Helikopter was hired at the newly established competitor United Helicopter , a joint venture between Bristow Helicopters , Leif <unk> & Co and Andreas <unk> & <unk> . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 The following is a list of Braathens <unk> 's destinations . It includes the name of the location or platform , the aerodrome 's ICAO and IATA codes and name . 
 = Night of the Long Knives = 
 The Night of the Long Knives ( German : Nacht der <unk> Messer , also called Operation Hummingbird or , in Germany , the Röhm Putsch ( German spelling : Röhm @-@ Putsch ) , or sometimes mockingly Reich Murder Week ( <unk> ) ) , was a purge that took place in Nazi Germany from June 30 to July 2 , 1934 , when the Nazi regime carried out a series of political extra @-@ judicial executions intended to consolidate Hitler 's absolute hold on power in Germany . Many of those killed were leaders of the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) , the Nazis ' own paramilitary Brownshirts organization ; the best @-@ known victim was Ernst Röhm , the SA 's leader and one of Hitler 's longtime supporters and allies . Leading members of the left @-@ wing <unk> faction of the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) , along with its figurehead , Gregor Strasser , were also killed , as were prominent conservative anti @-@ Nazis ( such as former Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher and Gustav Ritter von Kahr , who had suppressed Adolf Hitler 's Beer Hall Putsch in 1923 ) . 
 Hitler moved against the SA and its leader , Ernst Röhm because he saw the independence of the SA and the penchant of its members for street violence as a direct threat to his newly gained political power . Hitler also wanted to conciliate leaders of the Reichswehr , the official German military who feared and despised the SA — in particular Röhm 's ambition to absorb the Reichswehr into the SA under his own leadership . Additionally , Hitler was uncomfortable with Röhm 's outspoken support for a " second revolution " to redistribute wealth ( in Röhm 's view , President Hindenburg 's appointing of Hitler as German Chancellor on January 30 , 1933 had accomplished the " nationalistic " revolution but had left unfulfilled the " socialistic " motive in National Socialism ) . Finally , Hitler used the purge to attack or eliminate critics of his new regime , especially those loyal to Vice @-@ Chancellor Franz von Papen , as well as to settle scores with old enemies . 
 At least 85 people died during the purge , although the final death toll may have been in the hundreds , and more than a thousand perceived opponents were arrested . Most of the killings were carried out by the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) and the Gestapo ( Geheime Staatspolizei ) , the regime 's secret police . The purge strengthened and consolidated the support of the Reichswehr for Hitler . It also provided a legal grounding for the Nazi regime , as the German courts and cabinet quickly swept aside centuries of legal prohibition against extra @-@ judicial killings to demonstrate their loyalty to the regime . The Night of the Long Knives was a turning point for the German government . It established Hitler as " the supreme judge of the German people , " as he put it in his July 13 , 1934 speech to the Reichstag . 
 Before its execution , its planners sometimes referred to it as Hummingbird ( German : Kolibri ) , the codeword used to send the execution squads into action on the day of the purge . The codename for the operation appears to have been chosen arbitrarily . The phrase " Night of the Long Knives " in the German language predates the massacre itself and refers generally to acts of vengeance . Germans still use the term Röhm @-@ Putsch to describe the murders , the term given to it by the Nazi regime , despite its unproven implication that the murders were necessary to prevent a coup . German authors often use quotation marks or write about the <unk> Röhm @-@ Putsch ( " so @-@ called Röhm Putsch " ) for emphasis . 
 = = Hitler and the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) = = 
 President Paul von Hindenburg appointed Hitler Chancellor on January 30 , 1933 . Over the next few months , during the so @-@ called Gleichschaltung , Hitler dispensed with the need for the Reichstag as a legislative body and eliminated all rival political parties in Germany , so that by the middle of 1933 the country had become a one @-@ party state under his direction and control . Hitler did not exercise absolute power , however , despite his swift consolidation of political authority . As chancellor , Hitler did not command the army , which remained under the formal leadership of Hindenburg , a highly respected veteran field marshal . While many officers were impressed by Hitler 's promises of an expanded army , a return to conscription , and a more aggressive foreign policy , the army continued to guard its traditions of independence during the early years of the Nazi regime . 
 To a lesser extent , the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) , a Nazi paramilitary organisation , remained somewhat autonomous within the party itself . The SA evolved out of the remnants of the Freikorps movement of the post @-@ World War I years . The Freikorps were nationalistic organisations primarily composed of disaffected , disenchanted , and angry German combat veterans founded by the government in January 1919 to deal with the threat of a Communist revolution when it appeared that there was a lack of loyal troops . A very large number of the Freikorps believed that the November Revolution had betrayed them when Germany was alleged to be on the verge of victory in 1918 . Hence , the Freikorps were in opposition to the new Weimar Republic , which was born as a result of the November Revolution , and whose founders were contemptuously called " November criminals " . Captain Ernst Röhm of the Reichswehr served as the liaison with the Bavarian Freikorps . Röhm was given the nickname " The Machine Gun King of Bavaria " in the early 1920s , since he was responsible for storing and issuing illegal machine guns to the Bavarian Freikorps units . Röhm left the Reichswehr in 1923 and later became commander of the SA . During the 1920s and 1930s , the SA functioned as a private militia used by Hitler to intimidate rivals and disrupt the meetings of competing political parties , especially those of the Social Democrats and the Communists . Also known as the " brownshirts " or " stormtroopers " , the SA became notorious for their street battles with the Communists . The violent confrontations between the two contributed to the destabilisation of Germany 's inter @-@ war experiment with democracy , the Weimar Republic . In June 1932 , one of the worst months of political violence , there were more than 400 street battles , resulting in 82 deaths . 
 Hitler 's appointment as chancellor , followed by the suppression of all political parties except the Nazis , did not end the violence of the stormtroopers . Deprived of Communist party meetings to disrupt , the stormtroopers would sometimes run riot in the streets after a night of drinking . They would attack passers @-@ by , and then attack the police who were called to stop them . Complaints of " overbearing and loutish " behaviour by stormtroopers became common by the middle of 1933 . The Foreign Office even complained of instances where brownshirts manhandled foreign diplomats . 
 Hitler 's move would be to strengthen his position with the army by moving against its nemesis , the SA . On July 6 , 1933 , at a gathering of high @-@ ranking Nazi officials , Hitler declared the success of the National Socialist , or Nazi , brown revolution . Now that the NSDAP had seized the reins of power in Germany , he said , it was time to consolidate its control . Hitler told the gathered officials , " The stream of revolution has been undammed , but it must be channelled into the secure bed of evolution . " 
 Hitler 's speech signalled his intention to rein in the SA , whose ranks had grown rapidly in the early 1930s . This would not prove to be simple , however , as the SA made up a large part of Nazism 's most devoted followers . The SA traced its dramatic rise in numbers in part to the onset of the Great Depression , when many German citizens lost both their jobs and their faith in traditional institutions . While Nazism was not exclusively – or even primarily – a working class phenomenon , the SA fulfilled the yearning of many unemployed workers for class solidarity and nationalist fervour . Many stormtroopers believed in the socialist promise of National Socialism and expected the Nazi regime to take more radical economic action , such as breaking up the vast landed estates of the aristocracy . When the Nazi regime did not take such steps , those who had expected an economic as well as a political revolution were disillusioned . 
 = = Conflict between the army and the SA = = 
 No one in the SA spoke more loudly for " a continuation of the German revolution " , as one prominent stormtrooper put it , than Röhm . Röhm , as one of the earliest members of the Nazi Party , had participated in the Munich Beer Hall Putsch , an attempt by Hitler to seize power by force in 1923 . A combat veteran of World War I , Röhm had recently boasted that he would execute 12 men in retaliation for the killing of any stormtrooper . Röhm saw violence as a means to political ends . He took seriously the socialist promise of National Socialism , and demanded that Hitler and the other party leaders initiate wide @-@ ranging socialist reform in Germany . 
 Not content solely with the leadership of the SA , Röhm lobbied Hitler to appoint him Minister of Defence , a position held by the conservative General Werner von Blomberg . Although nicknamed the " Rubber Lion " by some of his critics in the army for his devotion to Hitler , Blomberg was not himself a Nazi , and therefore represented a bridge between the army and the party . Blomberg and many of his fellow officers were recruited from the Prussian nobility , and regarded the SA as a plebeian rabble that threatened the army 's traditional high status in German society . 
 If the regular army showed contempt for the masses belonging to the SA , many stormtroopers returned the feeling , seeing the army as insufficiently committed to the National Socialist revolution . Max Heydebreck , an SA leader in Rummelsburg , denounced the army to his fellow brownshirts , telling them , " Some of the officers of the army are swine . Most officers are too old and have to be replaced by young ones . We want to wait till Papa Hindenburg is dead , and then the SA will march against the army . " 
 Despite such hostility between the brownshirts and the regular army , Blomberg and others in the military saw the SA as a source of raw recruits for an enlarged and revitalised army . Röhm , however , wanted to eliminate the generalship of the Prussian aristocracy altogether , using the SA to become the core of a new German military . Limited by the Treaty of Versailles to one hundred thousand soldiers , army leaders watched anxiously as membership in the SA surpassed three million men by the beginning of 1934 . In January 1934 , Röhm presented Blomberg with a memorandum demanding that the SA replace the regular army as the nation 's ground forces , and that the Reichswehr become a training adjunct to the SA . 
 In response , Hitler met Blomberg and the leadership of the SA and SS on February 28 , 1934 . Under pressure from Hitler , Röhm reluctantly signed a pledge stating that he recognised the supremacy of the Reichswehr over the SA . Hitler announced to those present that the SA would act as an auxiliary to the Reichswehr , not the other way around . After Hitler and most of the army officers had left , however , Röhm declared that he would not take instructions from " the ridiculous corporal " – a demeaning reference to Hitler . While Hitler did not take immediate action against Röhm for his intemperate outburst , it nonetheless deepened the rift between them . 
 = = Growing pressure against the SA = = 
 Despite his earlier agreement with Hitler , Röhm still clung to his vision of a new German army with the SA at its core . By early 1934 , this vision directly conflicted with Hitler 's plan to consolidate power and expand the Reichswehr . Because their plans for the army were mutually exclusive , Röhm 's success could only come at Hitler 's expense . Moreover , it was not just the Reichswehr that viewed the SA as a threat . Several of Hitler 's lieutenants feared Röhm 's growing power and restlessness , as did Hitler himself . As a result , a political struggle within the party grew , with those closest to Hitler , including Prussian premier Hermann Göring , Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels , SS Chief Heinrich Himmler , and Hitler 's deputy Rudolf Hess , positioning themselves against Röhm . While all of these men were veterans of the Nazi movement , only Röhm continued to demonstrate his independence from , rather than his loyalty to , Adolf Hitler . Röhm 's contempt for the party 's bureaucracy angered Hess . SA violence in Prussia gravely concerned Göring , Minister @-@ President of Prussia . Finally in the spring of 1934 , the growing rift between Röhm and Hitler over the role of the SA in the Nazi state led the former Chancellor , General Kurt von Schleicher , to start playing politics again . Schleicher criticised the current Hitler cabinet while some of Schleicher 's followers such as General Ferdinand von Bredow and Werner von <unk> started passing along lists of a new Hitler Cabinet in which Schleicher would become Vice @-@ Chancellor , Röhm Minister of Defence , Heinrich Brüning Foreign Minister and Gregor Strasser Minister of National Economy . The British historian Sir John Wheeler @-@ Bennett , who knew Schleicher and his circle well , wrote that Bredow displayed a " lack of discretion " that was " terrifying " as he went about showing the list of the proposed cabinet to anyone who was interested . Although Schleicher was in fact unimportant by 1934 , increasingly wild rumours that he was scheming with Röhm to reenter the corridors of power helped stoke the sense of crisis . 
 As a means of isolating Röhm , on April 20 , 1934 , Göring transferred control of the Prussian political police ( Gestapo ) to Himmler , who , Göring believed , could be counted on to move against Röhm . Himmler envied the independence and power of the SA , although by this time he and his deputy Reinhard Heydrich had already begun restructuring the SS from a bodyguard formation for Nazi leaders ( and a subset of the SA ) into its own independent elite corps , one loyal to both himself and Hitler . The loyalty of the SS men would prove useful to both when Hitler finally chose to move against Röhm and the SA . By May , lists of those to be " liquidated " started to circulate amongst Göring and Himmler 's people , who engaged in a trade , adding enemies of one in exchange for sparing friends of the other . At the end of May two former Chancellors , Heinrich Brüning and Kurt von Schleicher , received warnings from friends in the Reichswehr that their lives were in danger and they should leave Germany at once . Brüning fled to the Netherlands while Schleicher dismissed the tip @-@ off as a bad practical joke . By the beginning of June everything was set and all that was needed was permission from Hitler . 
 Demands for Hitler to constrain the SA strengthened . Conservatives in the army , industry , and politics placed Hitler under increasing pressure to reduce the influence of the SA and to move against Röhm . While Röhm 's homosexuality did not endear him to conservatives , they were more concerned about his political ambitions . Hitler for his part remained indecisive and uncertain about just what precisely he wanted to do when he left for Venice to meet Benito Mussolini on June 15 . Before Hitler left , and at the request of Presidential State Secretary Otto <unk> , Foreign Minister Baron Konstantin von Neurath ordered the German Ambassador to Italy Ulrich von Hassell — without Hitler 's knowledge — to ask Mussolini to tell Hitler that the SA was blackening Germany 's good name . Neurath 's manoeuvre to put pressure on Hitler paid off , with Mussolini agreeing to the request ( Neurath was a former ambassador to Italy , and knew Mussolini well ) . During the summit in Venice , Mussolini upbraided Hitler for tolerating the violence , hooliganism , and homosexuality of the SA , which Mussolini stated were ruining Hitler 's good reputation all over the world . Mussolini used the affair occasioned by the murder of Giacomo <unk> as an example of the kind of trouble unruly followers could cause a dictator . While Mussolini 's criticism did not win Hitler over to acting against the SA , it helped push him in that direction . 
 On June 17 , 1934 , conservative demands for Hitler to act came to a head when Vice @-@ Chancellor Franz von Papen , confidant of the ailing Hindenburg , gave a speech at Marburg University warning of the threat of a " second revolution " . Privately according to his memoirs , von Papen , a Catholic aristocrat with ties to army and industry , threatened to resign if Hitler did not act . While von Papen 's resignation as vice @-@ chancellor would not have threatened Hitler 's position , it would have nonetheless been an embarrassing display of independence from a leading conservative . 
 = = Heydrich and Himmler = = 
 In response to conservative pressure to constrain Röhm , Hitler left for <unk> to meet with Hindenburg . Blomberg , who had been meeting with the President , uncharacteristically reproached Hitler for not having moved against Röhm earlier . He then told Hitler that Hindenburg was close to declaring martial law and turning the government over to the Reichswehr if Hitler did not take immediate steps against Röhm and his brownshirts . Hitler had hesitated for months in moving against Röhm , in part due to Röhm 's visibility as the leader of a national militia with millions of members . However , the threat of a declaration of martial law from Hindenburg , the only person in Germany with the authority to potentially depose the Nazi regime , put Hitler under pressure to act . He left <unk> with the intention of both destroying Röhm and settling scores with old enemies . Both Himmler and Göring welcomed Hitler 's decision , since both had much to gain by Röhm 's downfall – the independence of the SS for Himmler , and the removal of a rival for the future command of the army for Göring . 
 In preparation for the purge both Himmler and Reinhard Heydrich , chief of the SS Security Service , assembled a dossier of manufactured evidence to suggest that Röhm had been paid 12 million marks ( EUR 48 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) by France to overthrow Hitler . Leading officers in the SS were shown falsified evidence on June 24 that Röhm planned to use the SA to launch a plot against the government ( Röhm @-@ Putsch ) . Göring , Himmler , Heydrich , and Victor Lutze ( at Hitler 's direction ) drew up lists of people in and outside the SA to be killed . One of the men Göring recruited to assist him was Willi Lehmann , a Gestapo official and NKVD spy . On June 25 , General Werner von Fritsch placed the Reichswehr on the highest level of alert . On June 27 , Hitler moved to secure the army 's cooperation . Blomberg and General Walther von Reichenau , the army 's liaison to the party , gave it to him by expelling Röhm from the German Officers ' League . On June 28 Hitler went to Essen to attend a wedding celebration and reception ; from there he called Röhm 's adjutant at Bad Wiessee and ordered SA leaders to meet with him on June 30 at 11h . On June 29 , a signed article in Völkischer Beobachter by Blomberg appeared in which Blomberg stated with great fervour that the Reichswehr stood behind Hitler . 
 = = Purge = = 
 At about 04 : 30 on June 30 , 1934 , Hitler and his entourage flew into Munich . From the airport they drove to the Bavarian Interior Ministry , where they assembled the leaders of an SA rampage that had taken place in city streets the night before . Enraged , Hitler tore the epaulets off the shirt of Obergruppenführer August Schneidhuber , the chief of the Munich police , for failing to keep order in the city on the previous night . Hitler shouted at Schneidhuber that he would be shot . Schneidhuber was executed later that day . As the stormtroopers were hustled off to prison , Hitler assembled a large group of SS and regular police , and departed for the <unk> Hotel in Bad Wiessee , where Ernst Röhm and his followers were staying . 
 With Hitler 's arrival in Bad Wiessee between 06 : 00 and 07 : 00 , the SA leadership , still in bed , were taken by surprise . SS men stormed the hotel and Hitler personally placed Röhm and other high @-@ ranking SA leaders under arrest . According to Erich <unk> , Hitler turned Röhm over to " two detectives holding pistols with the safety catch removed " , and the SS found Breslau SA leader Edmund <unk> in bed with an unidentified eighteen @-@ year @-@ old male SA senior troop leader . Goebbels emphasised the latter in subsequent propaganda justifying the purge as a crackdown on moral turpitude . Both <unk> and his partner were shot on the spot in the hotel grounds on the personal order of Hitler . Meanwhile , the SS arrested the other SA leaders as they left their train for the planned meeting with Röhm and Hitler . 
 Although Hitler presented no evidence of a plot by Röhm to overthrow the regime , he nevertheless denounced the leadership of the SA . Arriving back at party headquarters in Munich , Hitler addressed the assembled crowd . Consumed with rage , Hitler denounced " the worst treachery in world history " . Hitler told the crowd that " undisciplined and disobedient characters and asocial or diseased elements " would be annihilated . The crowd , which included party members and many SA members fortunate enough to escape arrest , shouted its approval . Hess , present among the assembled , even volunteered to shoot the " traitors " himself . Joseph Goebbels , who had been with Hitler at Bad Wiessee , set the final phase of the plan in motion . Upon returning to Berlin , Goebbels telephoned Göring at 10 : 00 with the codeword Kolibri to let loose the execution squads on the rest of their unsuspecting victims . 
 = = = Against conservatives and old enemies = = = 
 The regime did not limit itself to a purge of the SA . Having earlier imprisoned or exiled prominent Social Democrats and Communists , Hitler used the occasion to move against conservatives he considered unreliable . This included Vice @-@ Chancellor Papen and those in his immediate circle . In Berlin , on Göring 's personal orders , an armed SS unit stormed the Vice @-@ Chancellery . Gestapo officers attached to the SS unit shot Papen 's secretary Herbert von Bose without bothering to arrest him first . The Gestapo arrested and later executed Papen 's close associate Edgar Jung , the author of Papen 's Marburg speech ; they disposed of his body by dumping it in a ditch . The Gestapo also murdered Erich <unk> , the leader of Catholic Action , and a close Papen associate . Papen was unceremoniously arrested at the Vice @-@ Chancellery , despite his insistent protests that he could not be arrested in his position as Vice @-@ Chancellor . Although Hitler ordered him released days later , Papen no longer dared to criticise the regime and was sent off to Vienna as German ambassador . 
 Hitler , Göring , and Himmler unleashed the Gestapo against old enemies as well . Both Kurt von Schleicher , Hitler 's predecessor as Chancellor , and his wife were murdered at their home . Others killed included Gregor Strasser , a former Nazi who had angered Hitler by resigning from the party in 1932 , and Gustav Ritter von Kahr , the former Bavarian state commissioner who crushed the Beer Hall Putsch in 1923 . Kahr 's fate was especially gruesome . His body was found in a wood outside Munich ; he had been hacked to death , apparently with pickaxes . The murdered included at least one accidental victim : Willi Schmid , the music critic of the Münchner <unk> Nachrichten , a Munich newspaper . The Gestapo mistook him for Ludwig Schmitt , a past supporter of Otto Strasser , the brother of Gregor . As Himmler 's adjutant Karl Wolff later explained , friendship and personal loyalty were not allowed to stand in the way : 
 Among others , a charming fellow [ named ] Karl von <unk> , Röhm 's personal adjutant . He held the same position with Röhm as I held with Himmler . [ He ] died with words " Heil Hitler " on his lips . We were close personal friends , we often dined together in Berlin . He lifted his arm in the Nazi salute and called out " Heil Hitler , I love Germany " . 
 Several leaders of the disbanded Catholic Centre Party were also murdered in the purge . The Party had generally been aligned with the Social Democrats and Catholic Church during the rise of Nazism , being critical of Nazi ideology , but voting nonetheless for the enabling act of 1933 . 
 = = = Röhm 's fate = = = 
 Röhm was held briefly at <unk> Prison in Munich , while Hitler considered his future . In the end , Hitler decided that Röhm had to die . On July 1 , at Hitler 's behest , Theodor Eicke , later Commandant of the Dachau concentration camp , and SS Officer Michel Lippert visited Röhm . Once inside Röhm 's cell , they handed him a Browning pistol loaded with a single bullet and told him he had ten minutes to kill himself or they would do it for him . Röhm demurred , telling them , " If I am to be killed , let Adolf do it himself . " Having heard nothing in the allotted time , they returned to Röhm 's cell at 14 : 50 to find him standing , with his bare chest puffed out in a gesture of defiance . Lippert then shot Röhm three times , killing him . In 1957 , the German authorities tried Lippert in Munich for Röhm 's murder . Until then , Lippert had been one of the few executioners of the purge to evade trial . Lippert was convicted and sentenced to 18 months in prison . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As the purge claimed the lives of so many prominent Germans , it could hardly be kept secret . At first , its architects seemed split on how to handle the event . Göring instructed police stations to burn " all documents concerning the action of the past two days " . Meanwhile , Goebbels tried to prevent newspapers from publishing lists of the dead , but at the same time used a July 2 radio address to describe how Hitler had narrowly prevented Röhm and Schleicher from overthrowing the government and throwing the country into turmoil . Then , on July 13 , 1934 , Hitler justified the purge in a nationally broadcast speech to the Reichstag : 
 In this hour I was responsible for the fate of the German people , and thereby I became the supreme judge of the German people . I gave the order to shoot the ringleaders in this treason , and I further gave the order to <unk> down to the raw flesh the ulcers of this poisoning of the wells in our domestic life . Let the nation know that its existence — which depends on its internal order and security — cannot be threatened with impunity by anyone ! And let it be known for all time to come that if anyone raises his hand to strike the State , then certain death is his lot . 
 Concerned with presenting the massacre as legally sanctioned , Hitler had the cabinet approve a measure on July 3 that declared , " The measures taken on June 30 , July 1 and 2 to suppress treasonous assaults are legal as acts of self @-@ defence by the State . " Reich Justice Minister Franz <unk> , a conservative who had been Bavarian Justice Minister in the years of the Weimar Republic , demonstrated his loyalty to the new regime by drafting the statute , which added a legal veneer to the purge . Signed into law by Hitler , <unk> , and Minister of the Interior Wilhelm Frick , the " Law Regarding Measures of State Self @-@ Defence " retroactively legalised the murders committed during the purge . Germany 's legal establishment further capitulated to the regime when the country 's leading legal scholar , Carl Schmitt , wrote an article defending Hitler 's July 13 speech . It was named " The Führer <unk> the Law " . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Almost unanimously , the army applauded the Night of the Long Knives , even though the generals Kurt von Schleicher and Ferdinand von Bredow were among the victims . The ailing President Hindenburg , Germany 's highly revered military hero , sent a telegram expressing his " profoundly felt gratitude " and he congratulated Hitler for " nipping treason in the bud " . General von Reichenau went so far as to publicly give credence to the lie that Schleicher had been plotting to overthrow the government . In his speech to the Reichstag on July 13 justifying his actions , Hitler denounced Schleicher for conspiring with Ernst Röhm to overthrow the government ; Hitler alleged both were traitors working in the pay of France . Since Schleicher was a good friend of the French Ambassador André François @-@ Poncet , and because of his reputation for intrigue , the claim that Schleicher was working for France had enough surface plausibility for most Germans to accept it . François @-@ Poncet was not declared persona non grata as would have been usual if an Ambassador were involved in a plot against his host government . The army 's support for the purge , however , would have far @-@ reaching consequences for the institution . The humbling of the SA ended the threat it had posed to the army but , by standing by Hitler during the purge , the army bound itself more tightly to the Nazi regime . One retired captain , Erwin Planck , seemed to realise this : " if you look on without lifting a finger , " he said to his friend , General Werner von Fritsch , " you will meet the same fate sooner or later . " Another rare exception was Field Marshal August von Mackensen , who spoke about the murders of Schleicher and Bredow at the annual General Staff Society meeting in February 1935 after they had been rehabilitated by Hitler in early January 1935 . 
 Rumours about the Night of the Long Knives rapidly spread . Although many Germans approached the official news of the events as described by Joseph Goebbels with a great deal of scepticism , many others took the regime at its word , and believed that Hitler had saved Germany from a descent into chaos . Luise <unk> , a Hamburg schoolteacher , echoed the sentiments of many Germans when she cited Hitler 's " personal courage , decisiveness and effectiveness " in her private diary . She even compared him to Frederick the Great , the 18th @-@ century King of Prussia . Others were appalled at the scale of the executions and at the relative complacency of many of their fellow Germans . " A very calm and easy going mailman , " the diarist Victor Klemperer wrote , " who is not at all National Socialist , said , ' Well , he simply sentenced them . ' " It did not escape Klemperer 's notice that many of the victims had played a role in bringing Hitler to power . " A chancellor " , he wrote , " sentences and shoots members of his own private army ! " The extent of the massacre and the relative ubiquity of the Gestapo , however , meant that those who disapproved of the purge generally kept quiet about it . Among the few exceptions were General Kurt von Hammerstein @-@ <unk> and Field Marshal August von Mackensen , who started a campaign to have Schleicher rehabilitated by Hitler . Hammerstein , who was a close friend of Schleicher , had been much offended at Schleicher 's funeral when the SS refused to allow him to attend the service and confiscated the wreaths that the mourners had brought . Besides working for the rehabilitation of Schleicher and Bredow , Hammerstein and Mackensen sent a memo to Hindenburg on July 18 setting out in considerable detail the circumstances of the murders of the two generals and noted that Papen had barely escaped . The memo went on to demand that Hindenburg punish those responsible , and criticised Blomberg for his outspoken support of the murders of Schleicher and Bredow . Finally , Hammerstein and Mackensen asked that Hindenburg reorganise the government by firing Baron Konstantin von Neurath , Robert Ley , Hermann Göring , Werner von Blomberg , Joseph Goebbels and Richard Walther Darré from the Cabinet . Instead , the memo asked that Hindenburg create a directorate to rule Germany comprising the Chancellor ( who was not named ) , General Werner von Fritsch as Vice @-@ Chancellor , Hammerstein as Minister of Defense , the Minister for National Economy ( also unnamed ) and Rudolf Nadolny as Foreign Minister . The request that Neurath be replaced by Nadolny , the former Ambassador to Moscow who had resigned earlier that year in protest against Hitler 's anti @-@ Soviet foreign policy , indicated that Hammerstein and Mackensen wanted a return to the " distant friendliness " towards the Soviet Union that existed until 1933 . Mackensen and Hammerstein ended their memo with : 
 Excellency , the gravity of the moment has compelled us to appeal to you as our Supreme Commander . The destiny of our country is at stake . Your Excellency has thrice before saved Germany from foundering , at Tannenberg , at the end of the War and at the moment of your election as Reich President . Excellency , save Germany for the fourth time ! The undersigned Generals and senior officers swear to preserve to the last breath their loyalty to you and the Fatherland . 
 Hindenburg never responded to the memo , and it remains unclear whether he even saw it , as Otto <unk> , who decided that his future was aligned with the Nazis , may not have passed it along . It is noteworthy that even those officers who were most offended by the killings , like Hammerstein and Mackensen , did not blame the purge on Hitler , whom they wanted to see continue as Chancellor , and at most wanted a reorganization of the Cabinet to remove some of Hitler 's more radical followers . 
 In late 1934 – early 1935 , Werner von Fritsch and Werner von Blomberg , who had been shamed into joining Hammerstein and Mackensen 's rehabilitation campaign , successfully pressured Hitler into rehabilitating Generals von Schleicher and von Bredow . Fritsch and Blomberg suddenly now claimed at the end of 1934 that as army officers they could not stand the exceedingly violent press attacks on Schleicher and Bredow that had been going on since July , which portrayed them as the vilest traitors , working against the Fatherland in the pay of France . In a speech given on January 3 , 1935 at the Berlin State Opera , Hitler stated that Schleicher and Bredow had been shot " in error " on the basis of false information , and that their names were to be restored to the honour rolls of their regiments at once . Hitler 's speech was not reported in the German press , but the army was appeased by the speech . However , despite the rehabilitation of the two murdered officers , the Nazis continued in private to accuse Schleicher of high treason . During a trip to Warsaw in January 1935 , Göring told Jan <unk> that Schleicher had urged Hitler in January 1933 to reach an understanding with France and the Soviet Union , and partition Poland with the latter , and Hitler had Schleicher killed out of disgust with the alleged advice . During a meeting with Polish Ambassador Józef Lipski on May 22 , 1935 , Hitler told Lipski that Schleicher was " rightfully murdered , if only because he had sought to maintain the Rapallo Treaty " . The statements that Schleicher had been killed because he wanted to partition Poland with the Soviet Union were later published in the Polish White Book of 1939 , which was a collection of diplomatic documents detailing German – Polish relations up to the outbreak of the war . 
 Former Kaiser Wilhelm II , who was in exile in Doorn , Netherlands , was horrified by the purge . He said , " What would people have said if I had done such a thing ? " . Hearing of the murder of former Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher and his wife , he also commented , " We have ceased to live under the rule of law and everyone must be prepared for the possibility that the Nazis will push their way in and put them up against the wall ! " 
 = = SA leadership = = 
 Hitler named Victor Lutze to replace Röhm as head of the SA . Hitler ordered him , as one prominent historian described it , to put an end to " homosexuality , debauchery , drunkenness , and high living " in the SA . Hitler expressly told him to stop SA funds from being spent on limousines and banquets , which he considered evidence of SA extravagance . Lutze did little to assert the SA 's independence in the coming years , and the SA lost its power in Germany . Membership in the organisation plummeted from 2 @.@ 9 million in August 1934 to 1 @.@ 2 million in April 1938 . 
 The Night of the Long Knives represented a triumph for Hitler , and a turning point for the German government . It established Hitler as " the supreme leader of the German people " , as he put it in his July 13 speech to the Reichstag . Later , in April 1942 , Hitler would formally adopt this title , thus placing himself de jure as well as de facto above the reach of the law . Centuries of jurisprudence proscribing extra @-@ judicial killings were swept aside . Despite some initial efforts by local prosecutors to take legal action against those who carried out the murders , which the regime rapidly quashed , it appeared that no law would constrain Hitler in his use of power . The Night of the Long Knives also sent a clear message to the public that even the most prominent Germans were not immune from arrest or even summary execution should the Nazi regime perceive them as a threat . In this manner , the purge established a pattern of violence that would characterise the Nazi regime . 
 Röhm was purged from all Nazi propaganda , such as the film of the 1933 Nuremberg rally , although a print copy of the motion picture by film director Leni Riefenstahl survived and was found in the United Kingdom many years later . 
 = Gilbert du Motier , Marquis de Lafayette = 
 Marie @-@ Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier , Marquis de Lafayette ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> də la <unk> ] ; 6 September 1757 – 20 May 1834 ) , in the U.S. often known simply as Lafayette , was a French aristocrat and military officer who fought in the American Revolutionary War . A close friend of George Washington , Alexander Hamilton , and Thomas Jefferson , Lafayette was a key figure in the French Revolution of 1789 and the July Revolution of 1830 . 
 Born in Chavaniac , in the province of Auvergne in south central France , Lafayette came from a wealthy landowning family . He followed its martial tradition , and was commissioned an officer at age 13 . He became convinced that the American cause in its revolutionary war was noble , and travelled to the New World seeking glory in it . There , he was made a major general , though initially the 19 @-@ year @-@ old was not given troops to command . Wounded during the Battle of Brandywine , he still managed to organize an orderly retreat . He served with distinction in the Battle of Rhode Island . In the middle of the war , he returned home to lobby for an increase in French support . He again sailed to America in 1780 , and was given senior positions in the Continental Army . In 1781 , troops in Virginia under his command blocked forces led by Cornwallis until other American and French forces could position themselves for the decisive Siege of Yorktown . 
 Lafayette returned to France and , in 1787 , was appointed to the Assembly of Notables convened in response to the fiscal crisis . He was elected a member of the Estates @-@ General of 1789 , where representatives met from the three traditional orders of French society — the clergy , the nobility , and the commoners . He helped write the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen , with the assistance of Thomas Jefferson . After the storming of the Bastille , Lafayette was appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the National Guard , and tried to steer a middle course through the French Revolution . In August 1792 , the radical factions ordered his arrest . Fleeing through the Austrian Netherlands , he was captured by Austrian troops and spent more than five years in prison . 
 Lafayette returned to France after Napoleon Bonaparte secured his release in 1797 , though he refused to participate in Napoleon 's government . After the Bourbon Restoration of 1814 , he became a liberal member of the Chamber of Deputies , a position he held for most of the remainder of his life . In 1824 , President James Monroe invited Lafayette to the United States as the nation 's guest ; during the trip , he visited all twenty @-@ four states in the union at the time , meeting a rapturous reception . During France 's July Revolution of 1830 , Lafayette declined an offer to become the French dictator . Instead , he supported Louis @-@ Philippe as king , but turned against him when the monarch became autocratic . Lafayette died on 20 May 1834 , and is buried in Picpus Cemetery in Paris , under soil from Bunker Hill . For his accomplishments in the service of both France and the United States , he is sometimes known as " The Hero of the Two Worlds " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lafayette was born on 6 September 1757 to Michel Louis Christophe Roch Gilbert Paulette du Motier , Marquis de La Fayette , colonel of grenadiers , and Marie Louise Jolie de La Rivière , at the château de Chavaniac , in Chavaniac @-@ Lafayette , near Le Puy @-@ en @-@ <unk> , in the province of Auvergne ( now Haute @-@ Loire ) . 
 Lafayette 's lineage was likely one of the oldest and most distinguished in Auvergne , perhaps in all of France . Males of the family enjoyed a reputation for courage and chivalry , and were noted for their contempt for danger . One of Lafayette 's early ancestors , Gilbert de Lafayette III , a Marshal of France , who had been a companion @-@ at @-@ arms of Joan of Arc 's army during the Siege of Orléans in 1429 . According to legend , another ancestor acquired the crown of thorns during the Sixth Crusade . His non @-@ Lafayette ancestors are also notable ; his great @-@ grandfather ( his mother 's maternal grandfather ) was the Comte de La Rivière , until his death in 1770 commander of the <unk> du Roi , or Black Musketeers , King Louis XV 's personal horse guard . Lafayette 's paternal uncle Jacques @-@ Roch died on January 18 , 1734 while fighting the Austrians at Milan in the War of the Polish Succession ; upon his death , the title of marquis passed to his brother Michel . 
 Lafayette 's father likewise died on the battlefield . On 1 August 1759 , Michel de Lafayette was struck by a cannonball while fighting a British @-@ led coalition at the Battle of Minden in Westphalia . Lafayette became marquis and Lord of Chavaniac , but the estate went to his mother . Perhaps devastated by the loss of her husband , she went to live in Paris with her father and grandfather , leaving Lafayette to be raised in Chavaniac @-@ Lafayette by his paternal grandmother , Mme de Chavaniac , who had brought the château into the family with her dowry . 
 In 1768 , when Lafayette was 11 , he was summoned to Paris to live with his mother and great @-@ grandfather at the comte 's apartments in Luxembourg Palace . The boy was sent to school at the Collège du Plessis , part of the University of Paris , and it was decided that he would carry on the family martial tradition . The comte , the boy 's great @-@ grandfather , enrolled the boy in a program to train future Musketeers . Lafayette 's mother and great @-@ grandfather died , on 3 and 24 April 1770 respectively , leaving Lafayette an income of 25 @,@ 000 livres . Upon the death of an uncle , the 12 @-@ year @-@ old Lafayette inherited a handsome yearly income of 120 @,@ 000 livres . 
 In May 1771 , aged less than 14 , Lafayette was commissioned an officer in the Musketeers , with the rank of sous @-@ lieutenant . His duties , which included marching in military parades and presenting himself to King Louis , were mostly ceremonial and he continued his studies as usual . 
 At this time , Jean @-@ Paul @-@ François de Noailles , Duc d <unk> was looking to marry off some of his five daughters . The young Lafayette , aged 14 , seemed a good match for his 12 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Marie Adrienne Françoise , and the duc spoke to the boy 's guardian ( Lafayette 's uncle , the new comte ) to negotiate a deal . However , the arranged marriage was opposed by the duc 's wife , who felt the couple , and especially her daughter , were too young . The matter was settled by agreeing not to mention the marriage plans for two years , during which time the two spouses @-@ to @-@ be would meet from time to time in casual settings and get to know each other better . The scheme worked ; the two fell in love , and were happy together from the time of their marriage in 1774 until her death in 1807 . 
 = = Departure from France = = 
 = = = Finding a cause = = = 
 After the marriage contract was signed in 1773 , Lafayette lived with his young wife in his father @-@ in @-@ law 's house in Versailles . He continued his education , both at the riding school Versailles ( his fellow students included the future Charles X ) and at the prestigious Académie de Versailles . He was given a commission as a lieutenant in the Noailles Dragoons in April 1773 , the transfer from the royal regiment being done at the request of Lafayette 's father @-@ in @-@ law . 
 In 1775 , Lafayette took part in his unit 's annual training in Metz , where he met Charles @-@ François de Broglie , Marquis de Ruffec , the Army of the East 's commander . At dinner , both men discussed the ongoing revolt against British rule by Britain 's North American colonies . One historiographical perspective suggests that the marquis was disposed to hate the British for killing his father , and felt that a British defeat would diminish that nation 's stature internationally . Another notes that the marquis had recently become a Freemason , and talk of the rebellion " fired his chivalric — and now Masonic — imagination with descriptions of Americans as ' people fighting for liberty ' " . 
 In September 1775 , when Lafayette turned 18 , he returned to Paris and received the captaincy in the Dragoons he had been promised as a wedding present . In December , his first child , Henriette , was born . During these months , Lafayette became convinced that the American Revolution reflected his own beliefs , saying " My heart was dedicated . " 
 The year 1776 saw delicate negotiations between American agents , including Silas Deane , and Louis XVI and his foreign minister , Comte Charles de Vergennes . The king and his minister hoped that by supplying the Americans with arms and officers , they might restore French influence in North America , and exact revenge against Britain for the loss in the Seven Years ' War . When Lafayette heard that French officers were being sent to America , he demanded to be among them . He met Deane , and gained inclusion despite his youth . On 7 December 1776 , Deane enlisted Lafayette as a major general . 
 The plan to send French officers ( as well as other aid ) to America came to nothing when the British heard of it and threatened war . Lafayette 's father @-@ in @-@ law , de Noailles , scolded the young man and told him to go to London and visit the Marquis de Noailles , the ambassador to Britain and Lafayette 's uncle by marriage , which he did in February 1777 . In the interim , he did not abandon his plans to go to America . Lafayette was presented to George III , and spent three weeks in London society . On his return to France , he went into hiding from his father @-@ in @-@ law ( and superior officer ) , writing to him that he was planning to go to America . De Noailles was furious , and convinced Louis to issue a decree forbidding French officers from serving in America , specifically naming Lafayette . Vergennes may have persuaded the king to order Lafayette 's arrest , though this is uncertain . 
 = = = Departure for America = = = 
 Lafayette learned that the Continental Congress did not have the money for his voyage ; hence , he acquired the sailing ship Victoire with his own funds for 112 000 pounds . He journeyed to Bordeaux , where Victoire was being prepared for her trip , and sent word asking for information on his family 's reaction . The response , including letters from his wife and other relatives , threw Lafayette into emotional turmoil . Soon after departure , he ordered the ship turned around and returned to Bordeaux , to the frustration of the officers traveling with him . The army commander there ordered Lafayette to report to his father @-@ in @-@ law 's regiment in Marseilles . De Broglie , who hoped to become a military and political leader in America , met with Lafayette in Bordeaux and convinced him that the government actually wanted him to go . This was not true , though there was considerable public support for Lafayette in Paris , where the American cause was popular . Lafayette wanted to believe it , and pretended to comply with the order to report to Marseilles , going only a few miles east before turning around and returning to his ship . Victoire set sail for the United States on 20 April 1777 . 
 The two @-@ month journey to the New World was marked by seasickness and boredom . The ship 's captain , <unk> , intended to stop in the West Indies to sell cargo , but Lafayette , fearful of arrest , bought the cargo to avoid docking at the islands . He landed on North Island near Georgetown , South Carolina , on 13 June 1777 . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 On arrival , Lafayette met Major Benjamin Huger , a wealthy landowner , with whom he stayed for two weeks before going to Philadelphia . The Continental Congress had been overwhelmed by French officers recruited by Deane , many of whom could not speak English or lacked military experience . Lafayette had learned some English en route ( he became fluent within a year of his arrival ) , and his Masonic membership opened many doors in Philadelphia . After Lafayette offered to serve without pay , Congress commissioned him a major general on 31 July 1777 . Lafayette 's advocates included the recently arrived American envoy to France , Benjamin Franklin , who by letter urged Congress to accommodate the young Frenchman . 
 General George Washington , commander in chief of the Continental Army , came to Philadelphia to brief Congress on military affairs . Lafayette met him at a dinner on 5 August 1777 ; according to <unk> , " the two men bonded almost immediately . " Washington was impressed by the young man 's enthusiasm and was inclined to think well of a fellow Mason ; Lafayette was simply in awe of the commanding general . General Washington took the Frenchman to view his military camp ; when Washington expressed embarrassment at its state and that of the troops , Lafayette responded , " I am here to learn , not to teach . " He became a member of Washington 's staff , although confusion existed regarding his status . Congress regarded his commission as honorary , while he considered himself a full @-@ fledged commander who would be given control of a division when Washington deemed him prepared . Washington told Lafayette that a division would not be possible as he was of foreign birth , but that he would be happy to hold him in confidence as " friend and father " . 
 = = = Brandywine , Valley Forge , and Albany = = = 
 Lafayette 's first battle was at Brandywine on 11 September 1777 . The British commanding general , General Sir William Howe , planned to take Philadelphia by moving troops south by ship to Chesapeake Bay ( rather than the heavily defended Delaware Bay ) and bringing them overland to the rebel capital . After the British outflanked the Americans , Washington sent Lafayette to join General John Sullivan . Upon his arrival , Lafayette went with the Third Pennsylvania Brigade , under Brigadier Thomas Conway , and attempted to rally the unit to face the attack . The British and Hessian forces continued to advance with their superior forces , and Lafayette was shot in the leg . During the American retreat , Lafayette rallied the troops , allowing a more orderly pullback , before being treated for his wound . After the battle , Washington cited him for " bravery and military ardour " and recommended him for the command of a division in a letter to Congress , which was hastily evacuating , as the British took Philadelphia later that month . 
 Lafayette returned to the field in November after two months of recuperation in the Moravian settlement of Bethlehem , and received command of the division previously led by Major General Adam Stephen . He assisted General Nathanael Greene in reconnaissance of British positions in New Jersey ; with 300 soldiers , he defeated a numerically superior Hessian force in Gloucester , on 24 November 1777 . 
 Lafayette stayed at Washington 's encampment at Valley Forge in the winter of 1777 – 78 , and shared the hardship of his troops . There , the Board of War , led by Horatio Gates , asked Lafayette to prepare an invasion of Quebec from Albany , New York . When Lafayette arrived in Albany , he found too few men to mount an invasion . He wrote to Washington of the situation , and made plans to return to Valley Forge . Before departing , he recruited the Oneida tribe , who referred to Lafayette as <unk> ( fearsome horseman ) , to the American side . In Valley Forge , he criticized the board 's decision to attempt an invasion of Quebec in winter . The Continental Congress agreed , and Gates left the board . Meanwhile , treaties signed by America and France were made public in March 1778 , and France formally recognized American independence . 
 = = = Barren Hill , Monmouth and Rhode Island = = = 
 Faced with the prospect of French intervention , the British sought to concentrate their land and naval forces in one location , New York City . In May 1778 , the British began to evacuate Philadelphia . On 18 May , Washington dispatched Lafayette with a 2 @,@ 200 @-@ man force to reconnoiter near Barren Hill , Pennsylvania . The next day , the British heard that Lafayette had made camp nearby and sent 5 @,@ 000 men to trap and capture him . On 20 May , General Howe led a further 6 @,@ 000 soldiers and ordered an attack on his left flank . The flank scattered , and Lafayette organized a retreat while the British remained indecisive . To feign numerical superiority , Lafayette ordered men to appear from the woods on an outcropping ( now Lafayette Hill ) and to fire upon the British periodically . Lafayette 's troops simultaneously escaped via a sunken road , and he was then able to cross Matson 's Ford with the remainder of his force . 
 Unable to trap Lafayette , the British marched from Philadelphia toward New York ; the Continental Army , including Lafayette , followed and finally attacked at Monmouth Courthouse , in central New Jersey . At Monmouth , Washington appointed General Charles Lee to lead the attacking force . On 28 June , Lee moved against the British flank ; however , soon after fighting began , he gave conflicting orders , causing chaos in the American ranks . Lafayette sent a message to Washington to urge him to the front ; upon his arrival he found Lee 's men in retreat . Washington relieved Lee , took command , and rallied the American force . After suffering significant casualties at Monmouth , the British withdrew in the night , and successfully reached New York . 
 The French fleet arrived at Delaware Bay on 8 July 1778 , under Admiral d 'Estaing , with whom General Washington planned to attack Newport , Rhode Island , the other major British base in the north . Lafayette and General Greene were sent with a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ man force to participate in the attack . Lafayette wanted to control a joint Franco @-@ American force but was rebuffed by the admiral . On 9 August , the American land force attacked the British without consulting d 'Estaing . When the Americans asked the admiral to place his ships in Narragansett Bay , d 'Estaing refused and , at sea , sought to defeat the British fleet . The fighting was inconclusive as a storm scattered and damaged both fleets . 
 D 'Estaing moved his ships north to Boston for repairs . When the fleet arrived , it faced an angry demonstration from Bostonians who considered the French departure from Newport a desertion . John Hancock and Lafayette were dispatched to calm the situation . Lafayette then returned to Rhode Island to prepare the retreat made necessary by d 'Estaing 's departure . For these actions , Lafayette was cited by the Continental Congress for " gallantry , skill , and prudence " . Lafayette wanted to expand the war to fight the British elsewhere in North America and even , under the French flag , in Europe , but found little interest in his proposals . In October 1778 , he requested permission of Washington and of Congress to go home on leave . They agreed , with Congress voting to give Lafayette a ceremonial sword , to be presented to him in France . His departure was delayed by illness , and he sailed for France in January 1779 . 
 = = = Return to France = = = 
 In February 1779 , Lafayette reached Paris . For disobeying the king by going to America , he was placed under house arrest for eight days . This was merely face @-@ saving by Louis XVI ; Lafayette was given a hero 's welcome and was soon invited to hunt with the king . As the American envoy was ill , Benjamin Franklin 's grandson presented Lafayette with the gold @-@ encrusted sword commissioned by the Continental Congress . 
 Lafayette pushed for an invasion of Britain , with himself to have a major command in the French forces . Spain was now France 's ally against Britain , and sent ships to the English Channel in support . The Spanish ships did not arrive until August 1779 , to be met by a faster squadron of British ships that the combined French and Spanish fleet could not catch . In September , the idea of an invasion was abandoned , and Lafayette turned his hopes to a return to America . 
 In December 1779 , Adrienne gave birth to a son they named Georges Washington Lafayette . Working with Benjamin Franklin , Lafayette secured the promise of 6 @,@ 000 soldiers to be sent to America , commanded by General Jean @-@ Baptiste de Rochambeau . Lafayette would resume his position as a major general of American forces , serving as liaison between Rochambeau and Washington , who would be in command of both nations ' forces . In March 1780 , Lafayette departed for America aboard the frigate Hermione , from Rochefort . He arrived in Boston on 27 April 1780 . 
