 = = = Second voyage to America = = = 
 On his return , Lafayette found the American cause at a low ebb , rocked by several military defeats , especially in the south . Lafayette was greeted in Boston with enthusiasm , seen as " a knight in shining armor from the chivalric past , come to save the nation " . He journeyed southwest and on 10 May 1780 had a joyous reunion with Washington at Morristown , New Jersey . The general and his officers were delighted to hear that the large French force promised to Lafayette would be coming to their aid . Washington , aware of Lafayette 's popularity , had him write ( with Alexander Hamilton to correct his spelling ) to state officials to urge them to provide more troops and provisions to the Continental Army . This bore fruit in the coming months , as Lafayette awaited the arrival of the French fleet . However , when the fleet arrived , there were fewer men and supplies than expected , and Rochambeau decided to wait for reinforcements before seeking battle with the British . This was unsatisfactory to Lafayette , who proposed grandiose schemes for the taking of New York City and other areas , and Rochambeau briefly refused to receive Lafayette until the young man apologized . Washington counseled the marquis to be patient . 
 That summer Washington placed Lafayette in charge of a division of troops . The marquis spent lavishly on his command , which patrolled Northern New Jersey and adjacent New York State . Lafayette saw no significant action , and in November , Washington disbanded the division , sending the soldiers back to their state regiments . The war continued badly for the Americans , with most battles in the south going against them , and General Benedict Arnold abandoning them for the British side . 
 Lafayette spent the first part of the winter of 1780 – 81 in Philadelphia , where the American Philosophical Society elected him its first foreign member . Congress asked him to return to France to lobby for more men and supplies , but Lafayette refused , sending letters instead . 
 After the Continental victory at the Battle of Cowpens in South Carolina in January 1781 , Washington ordered Lafayette to re @-@ form his force in Philadelphia and go south to Virginia to link up with troops commanded by Baron von Steuben . The combined force was to try to trap British forces commanded by Benedict Arnold , with French ships preventing his escape by sea . If Lafayette was successful , Arnold was to be summarily hanged . British command of the seas prevented the plan , though Lafayette and a small part of his force ( the rest left behind in Annapolis ) was able to reach von Steuben in Yorktown , Virginia . Von Steuben sent a plan to Washington , proposing to use land forces and French ships to trap the main British force under Lord Cornwallis . When he received no new orders from Washington , Lafayette began to move his troops north toward Philadelphia , only to be ordered to Virginia to assume military command there . An outraged Lafayette assumed he was being abandoned in a backwater while decisive battles took place elsewhere , and objected to his orders in vain . He also sent letters to the Chevalier de la Luzerne , French ambassador in Philadelphia , describing how ill @-@ supplied his troops were . As Lafayette hoped , la Luzerne sent his letter on to France with a recommendation of massive French aid , which , after being approved by the king , would play a crucial part in the battles to come . Washington , fearing a letter might be captured by the British , could not tell Lafayette that he planned to trap Cornwallis in a decisive campaign . 
 = = = Virginia and Yorktown = = = 
 Lafayette evaded Cornwallis ' attempts to capture him in Richmond . In June 1781 , Cornwallis received orders from London to proceed to the Chesapeake Bay and to oversee construction of a port , in preparation for an overland attack on Philadelphia . As the British column travelled , Lafayette sent small squads that would appear unexpectedly , attacking the rear guard or foraging parties , and giving the impression that his forces were larger than they were . 
 On 4 July , the British left Williamsburg and prepared to cross the James River . Cornwallis sent only an advance guard to the south side of the river , hiding many of his other troops in the forest on the north side , hoping to ambush Lafayette . On 6 July , Lafayette ordered General " Mad " Anthony Wayne to strike British troops on the north side with roughly 800 soldiers . Wayne found himself vastly outnumbered , and , instead of retreating , led a bayonet charge . The charge bought time for the Americans , and the British did not pursue . The Battle of Green Spring was a victory for Cornwallis , but the American army was bolstered by the display of courage by the men . 
 By August , Cornwallis had established the British at Yorktown , and Lafayette took up position on Malvern Hill , stationing artillery surrounding the British , who were close to the York River , and who had orders to construct fortifications to protect the British ships in Hampton Roads . Lafayette 's containment trapped the British when the French fleet arrived and won the Battle of the Virginia Capes , depriving Cornwallis of naval protection . On 14 September 1781 , Washington 's forces joined Lafayette 's . On 28 September , with the French fleet blockading the British , the combined forces laid siege to Yorktown . On 14 October , Lafayette 's 400 men on the American right took Redoubt 9 after Alexander Hamilton 's forces had charged Redoubt 10 in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . These two redoubts were key to breaking the British defenses . After a failed British counter @-@ attack , Cornwallis surrendered on 19 October 1781 . 
 = = Hero of two worlds = = 
 Although Yorktown was to be the last major land battle of the American Revolution , the British still held several major port cities . Lafayette wanted to lead expeditions on them , but Washington felt he would be more useful seeking additional naval support from France . In Philadelphia , Congress appointed him its advisor to the three American envoys abroad — Franklin in Paris , John Jay in Madrid , and John Adams in The Hague , " to communicate and agree on everything with him " . It also sent Louis XVI an official letter of commendation on the marquis 's behalf . 
 Lafayette left Boston for France on 18 December 1781 . On arrival he was welcomed as a hero , and on 22 January 1782 he was received at Versailles . He witnessed the birth of his daughter , whom he named Marie @-@ Antoinette Virginie upon Thomas Jefferson 's recommendation . He was promoted to maréchal de camp , skipping numerous ranks . He was made a Knight of the Order of Saint Louis . In 1782 , with no treaty yet signed ending the war , Lafayette helped prepare for a combined French and Spanish expedition against the British West Indies . The Treaty of Paris signed between Great Britain and the U.S. in 1783 made the expedition unnecessary — Lafayette took part in the negotiations . 
 Lafayette worked with Jefferson to establish trade agreements between the U.S. and France . These negotiations aimed to reduce the U.S. debt to France . He joined the French abolitionist group Society of the Friends of the Blacks , which advocated the end of the slave trade and equal rights for free blacks . In 1783 , in correspondence with Washington , a slave owner , he urged the emancipation of slaves and their establishment as tenant farmers . Although Washington declined to free his slaves ( though expressing interest in the young man 's ideas ) , Lafayette purchased land in French Guiana for a plantation to house the project . 
 In 1784 , Lafayette visited America , where he enjoyed an enthusiastic welcome ; he visited all the states except Georgia . The trip included a visit to Washington 's farm at Mount Vernon on 17 August . Lafayette addressed the Virginia House of Delegates , where he called for " liberty of all mankind " and urged emancipation of slaves . Lafayette urged the Pennsylvania Legislature to help form a federal union ( the states were then bound by the Articles of Confederation ) . He visited the Mohawk Valley in New York to participate in peace negotiations with the Iroquois , some of whom he had met in 1778 . Lafayette received an honorary degree from Harvard , a portrait of Washington from the city of Boston , and a bust from the state of Virginia . Maryland 's legislature honored Lafayette by making him and his male heirs " natural born Citizens " of the state , which made him a natural born citizen of the United States after the 1789 ratification of the new national Constitution . Lafayette later boasted that he had become an American citizen before the concept of French citizenship existed . Connecticut , Massachusetts , and Virginia also granted him citizenship . 
 Through the next years , Lafayette made his house , the Hôtel de La Fayette in Paris 's rue de Bourbon , the headquarters of Americans there . Benjamin Franklin , John and Sarah Jay , and John and Abigail Adams met there every Monday , and dined in company with Lafayette 's family and the liberal nobility , including Clermont @-@ Tonnerre and Madame de Staël . Lafayette continued to work on lowering trade barriers in France to American goods , and on assisting Franklin and his successor as envoy , Jefferson , in seeking treaties of amity and commerce with European nations . He also sought to eliminate the injustices that Protestants in France had endured since the revocation of the Edict of Nantes a century before . 
 = = French Revolution = = 
 = = = Assembly of Notables and Estates @-@ General = = = 
 On 29 December 1786 , King Louis XVI called an Assembly of Notables , in response to France 's fiscal crisis . The king appointed Lafayette to the body , which convened on 22 February 1787 . In speeches , Lafayette decried those with connections at court who had profited from advance knowledge of government land purchases ; he advocated reform . He called for a " truly national assembly " , which represented the whole of France . Instead , the king chose to summon an Estates General , to convene in 1789 . Lafayette was elected as a representative of the nobility ( the Second Estate ) from <unk> . The Estates General , traditionally , cast one vote for each of the three Estates : clergy , nobility , and commons , meaning the much larger commons was generally outvoted . 
 The Estates General convened on 5 May 1789 ; debate began on whether the delegates should vote by head or by Estate . If by Estate , then the nobility and clergy would be able to outvote the commons ; if by head , then the larger Third Estate could dominate . Before the meeting , as a member of the " Committee of Thirty " , Lafayette agitated for voting by head , rather than estate . He could not get a majority of his own Estate to agree , but the clergy was willing to join with the commons , and on the 17th , the group declared itself the National Assembly . The loyalist response was to lock out the group , including Lafayette , while those who had not supported the Assembly met inside . This action led to the Tennis Court Oath , where the excluded members swore to not separate until a constitution was established . The Assembly continued to meet , and on 11 July 1789 , Lafayette presented a draft of the " Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen " to the Assembly , written by himself in consultation with Jefferson . The next day , after the dismissal of Finance Minister Jacques Necker ( who was seen as a reformer ) , lawyer Camille Desmoulins led an armed mob . The king had the royal army under the duc de Broglie surround Paris . On 14 July , the fortress known as the Bastille was stormed by the mob . 
 = = = National Guard , Versailles , and Day of Daggers = = = 
 On 15 July , Lafayette was acclaimed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the National Guard of France , an armed force established to maintain order , and under the control of the Assembly . Lafayette proposed the name and the symbol of the group : a blue , white and red cockade . This combined the red and blue colors of the city of Paris with the royal white , and originated the French tricolor . He faced a difficult task as head of the Guard — the king and many loyalists considered Lafayette and those who agreed with him little better than revolutionaries , whereas many commoners felt he was helping the king keep power . On 26 August , the National Assembly approved the Declaration . 
 On 2 October , the king rejected the Declaration . Three days later , a Parisian crowd , led mostly by women fishmongers , marched to Versailles in response to the scarcity of bread . Members of the National Guard followed the march , with Lafayette reluctantly leading them . At Versailles , the king accepted the Assembly 's votes on the Declaration , but refused requests to go to Paris . At dawn , the crowd broke into the palace . Lafayette took the royal family onto the palace balcony and attempted to restore order . The crowd insisted that the king and his family move to Paris and the Tuileries Palace . The king came onto the balcony , and the crowd started chanting " Vive le Roi ! " When the unpopular queen , Marie Antoinette , appeared there with her children , she was told to send the children back in . When she returned alone , people shouted to shoot her , but when she stood her ground , no one opened fire . Lafayette kissed her hand , leading to cheers from the crowd . 
 As leader of the National Guard , Lafayette attempted to maintain order and steer a middle ground , even as the radicals gained increasing influence . On 12 May 1790 , he instituted , along with Jean Sylvain Bailly ( mayor of Paris ) , a political club called the Society of 1789 . The club 's intention was to provide balance to the influence of the radical Jacobins . On 14 July 1790 , Lafayette , before a huge assembly at what came to be known as the Fête de la Fédération , took the civic oath on the Champs de Mars , vowing to " be ever faithful to the nation , to the law , and to the king ; to support with our utmost power the constitution decreed by the National Assembly , and accepted by the king . " That oath was taken as well by Lafayette 's troops , and also by the king . 
 Lafayette continued to work for order in the coming months . On 28 February 1791 , Lafayette and part of the National Guard left the Tuileries to handle a conflict in Vincennes . While he was gone , hundred of armed nobles arrived at the Tuileries to defend the king ; however , there were rumors that these nobles had come to take the king away and place him at the head of a counter @-@ revolution . Lafayette quickly returned to the Tuileries and disarmed the nobles after a brief standoff . The event , later called the Day of Daggers , boosted Lafayette 's popularity with the French people for his quick actions to protect the king . 
 Members of the royal family were increasingly prisoners in their palace . On 18 April , the National Guard disobeyed Lafayette and stopped the king from leaving for Saint @-@ Cloud , where he planned to attend Mass . 
 = = = Decline : Flight to Varennes and Champs de Mars massacre = = = 
 On 20 June 1791 , a plot , dubbed the Flight to Varennes , almost allowed the king to escape from France . As leader of the National Guard , Lafayette had been responsible for the royal family 's custody . He was thus blamed by extremists like Danton for the near @-@ escape and called a traitor to the people by Robespierre . These accusations made Lafayette appear a royalist , damaging his reputation in the eyes of the public , and strengthened the hands of the Jacobins and other radicals . Lafayette continued to urge the constitutional rule of law , but was drowned out by the mob and its leaders . 
 Through the latter half of 1791 , Lafayette 's standing continued to decline . On 17 July , the radical Cordeliers organized an event at the Champ de Mars to gather signatures on a petition to the National Assembly that it either abolish the monarchy or allow its fate to be decided in a referendum . The assembled crowd , estimated at up to 10 @,@ 000 , hanged two men believed to be spies after they were found under the platform . At the head of his troops , Lafayette rode into the Champ de Mars to restore order ; they were met with gunshots and thrown stones . When a dragoon went down , the soldiers fired on the crowd , wounding or killing dozens . Martial law was declared , and the leaders of the mob , such as Danton and Marat , fled or went into hiding . In September , the Assembly finalized a constitution , and in early October , with a semblance of constitutional law restored , Lafayette resigned from the National Guard . Immediately after the massacre , a crowd of rioters attacked Lafayette 's home , attempting to harm his wife . His reputation among the common people suffered dramatically after the massacre as they believed he sympathized with royal interests . 
 = = = Conflict and exile = = = 
 Lafayette returned to his home province of Auvergne in October 1791 . France declared war on Austria on 20 April 1792 , and preparations to invade the Austrian Netherlands ( today 's Belgium ) began . Lafayette , who had been promoted to Lieutenant General on June 30 , 1791 , received command of one of the three armies , the Army of the Centre , based at Metz on December 14 , 1791 . Lafayette did his best to mold inductees and National Guardsmen into a cohesive fighting force , but found that many of his troops were Jacobin sympathizers and hated their superior officers . This emotion was common in the army , as demonstrated after the Battle of <unk> , when the routed French troops dragged their leader to Lille , where he was torn to pieces by the mob . One of the army commanders , Rochambeau , resigned . Lafayette , along with the third commander , Nicolas Luckner , asked the Assembly to begin peace talks , concerned at what might happen if the troops saw another battle . 
 In June 1792 , Lafayette criticized the growing influence of the radicals through a letter to the Assembly from his field post , and ended his letter by calling for their parties to be " closed down by force " . He misjudged his timing , for the radicals were in full control in Paris . Lafayette went there , and on 28 June delivered a fiery speech before the Assembly denouncing the Jacobins and other radical groups . He was instead accused of deserting his troops . Lafayette called for volunteers to counteract the Jacobins ; when only a few people showed up , he understood the public mood and hastily left Paris . Robespierre called him a traitor and the mob burned him in effigy . He was transferred to command of the Army of the North on July 12 , 1792 . 
 The 25 July Brunswick Manifesto , which warned that Paris would be destroyed by the Austrians and Prussians if the king was harmed , led to the downfall of Lafayette , and of the royal family . A mob attacked the Tuileries on 10 August , and the king and queen were imprisoned at the Assembly , then taken to the Temple . The Assembly abolished the monarchy — the king and queen would be beheaded in the coming months . On 14 August , the minister of justice , Danton , put out a warrant for Lafayette 's arrest . Hoping to travel to the United States , Lafayette entered the Austrian Netherlands , the area of present Belgium . 
 = = Prisoner = = 
 Lafayette was taken prisoner by the Austrians near Rochefort when another former French officer , Jean @-@ Xavier Bureau de <unk> , asked for rights of transit through Austrian territory on behalf of a group of French officers . This was initially granted , as it had been for others fleeing France , but was revoked when the famous Lafayette was recognized . Frederick William II of Prussia , Austria 's ally against France , had once received Lafayette , but that was before the French Revolution — the king now saw him as a dangerous <unk> of rebellion , to be interned to prevent him from overthrowing other monarchies . 
 Lafayette was held at Nivelles , then transferred to Luxembourg where a coalition military tribunal declared him , de <unk> , and two others to be prisoners of state for their roles in the Revolution . The tribunal ordered them held until a restored French king could render final judgment on them . On 12 September 1792 , pursuant to the tribunal 's order , the prisoners were transferred to Prussian custody . The party travelled to the Prussian fortress @-@ city of Wesel , where the Frenchmen remained in verminous individual cells in the central citadel from 19 September to 22 December 1792 . When victorious French revolutionary troops began to threaten the Rhineland , King Frederick William II transferred the prisoners east to the citadel at Magdeburg , where they remained an entire year , from 4 January 1793 to 4 January 1794 . 
 Frederick William decided that he could gain little by continuing to battle the unexpectedly successful French forces , and that there were easier pickings for his army in the Kingdom of Poland . Accordingly , he stopped armed hostilities with the Republic and turned the state prisoners back over to his erstwhile coalition partner , the Habsburg Austrian monarch Francis II , Holy Roman Emperor . Lafayette and his companions were initially sent to Neisse ( today <unk> , Poland ) in Silesia . On 17 May 1794 , they were taken across the Austrian border , where a military unit was waiting to receive them . The next day , the Austrians delivered their captives to a barracks @-@ prison , formerly a college of the Jesuits , in the fortress @-@ city of Olmütz , Moravia ( today Olomouc in the Czech Republic ) . 
 Lafayette , when captured , had tried to use the American citizenship he had been granted to secure his release , and contacted William Short , United States minister in The Hague . Although Short and other U.S. envoys very much wanted to succor Lafayette for his services to their country , they knew that his status as a French officer took precedence over any claim to American citizenship . Washington , who was by then president , had instructed the envoys to avoid actions that entangled the country in European affairs , and the U.S. did not have diplomatic relations with either Prussia or Austria . They did send money for the use of Lafayette , and for his wife , whom the French had imprisoned . Secretary of State Jefferson found a loophole allowing Lafayette to be paid , with interest , for his services as a major general from 1777 to 1783 . An act was rushed through Congress and signed by President Washington . These funds allowed both <unk> privileges in their captivity . 
 A more direct means of aiding the former general was an escape attempt sponsored by Alexander Hamilton 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Angelica Schuyler Church and her husband John Barker Church , a British Member of Parliament who had served in the Continental Army . They hired as agent a young Hanoverian physician , Justus Erich <unk> , who acquired an assistant , a South Carolinian medical student named Francis Kinloch Huger . This was the son of Benjamin Huger , whom Lafayette had stayed with upon his first arrival in America . With their help , Lafayette managed to escape from an escorted carriage drive in the countryside outside Olmütz , but he lost his way and was recaptured . 
 Once Adrienne was released from prison in France , she , with the help of U.S. Minister to France James Monroe , obtained passports for her and her daughters from Connecticut , which had granted the entire Lafayette family citizenship . Her son Georges Washington had been smuggled out of France and taken to the United States . Adrienne and her two daughters journeyed to Vienna for an audience with Emperor Francis , who granted permission for the three women to live with Lafayette in captivity . Lafayette , who had endured harsh solitary confinement since his escape attempt a year before , was astounded when soldiers opened his prison door to usher in his wife and daughters on 15 October 1795 . The family spent the next two years in confinement together . 
 Through diplomacy , the press , and personal appeals , Lafayette 's sympathizers on both sides of the Atlantic made their influence felt , most importantly on the post @-@ Reign of Terror French government . A young , victorious general , Napoleon Bonaparte , negotiated the release of the state prisoners at Olmütz , as a result of the Treaty of Campo Formio . Lafayette 's captivity of over five years thus came to an end . The Lafayette family and their comrades in captivity left Olmütz under Austrian escort early on the morning of 19 September 1797 , crossed the Bohemian @-@ <unk> border north of Prague , and were officially turned over to the American consul in Hamburg on 4 October . 
 From Hamburg , Lafayette sent a note of thanks to General Bonaparte . The French government , the Directorate , was unwilling to have Lafayette return unless he swore allegiance , which he was not willing to do , as he believed it had come to power by unconstitutional means . As revenge , it had his remaining properties sold , leaving him a pauper . The family , soon joined by Georges Washington , who had returned from America , recuperated on a property near Hamburg belonging to Adrienne 's aunt . Due to conflict between the United States and France , Lafayette could not go to America as he had hoped , making him a man without a country . 
 Adrienne was able to go to Paris , and attempted to secure her husband 's repatriation , flattering Bonaparte , who had returned to France after more victories . After Bonaparte 's coup d 'état of 18 Brumaire ( 9 November 1799 ) , Lafayette used the confusion caused by the change of regime to slip into France with a passport in the name of " Motier " . Bonaparte expressed rage , but Adrienne was convinced he was simply posing , and proposed to him that Lafayette would pledge his support , then would retire from public life to a property she had reclaimed , La Grange . France 's new ruler allowed Lafayette to remain , though originally without citizenship and subject to summary arrest if he engaged in politics , with the promise of eventual restoration of civil rights . Lafayette remained quietly at La Grange , and when Bonaparte held a memorial service in Paris for Washington , who had died in December 1799 , Lafayette was not invited , nor was his name mentioned . 
 = = Retreat from politics = = 
 Bonaparte restored Lafayette 's citizenship on 1 March 1800 , and he was able to recover some of his properties . The ruler offered to make Lafayette minister to the United States , but was met with a firm refusal , as Lafayette would not have anything to do with Napoleon 's government . In 1802 , Lafayette was part of the tiny minority that voted no in the referendum that made Bonaparte consul for life . Bonaparte offered to appoint Lafayette to the Senate and to bestow the Legion of Honor upon him , but Lafayette declined , though he stated he would gladly have taken the honors from a democratic government . 
 In 1804 , Bonaparte was crowned the Emperor Napoleon after a plebiscite in which Lafayette did not participate . The retired general remained relatively quiet , although he made Bastille Day addresses . After the Louisiana Purchase , Jefferson , by then president , asked if he would be interested in the governorship . Lafayette declined , citing personal problems and his desire to work for liberty in France . During a trip to Auvergne in 1807 , Adrienne became ill , suffering from complications stemming from her time in prison . She became delirious but recovered enough on Christmas Eve to gather the family around her bed and to say to Lafayette : " Je suis toute à vous " ( " I am all yours " ) . She died the next day . 
 In the years after Adrienne 's death , Lafayette mostly remained quietly at La Grange as Napoleon 's power in Europe waxed , and then waned . Many influential people and members of the public visited him , especially Americans . He wrote many letters , especially to Jefferson , and exchanged gifts with him , as the Frenchman had once done with Washington . 
 = = Bourbon restoration = = 
 In 1814 , the coalition that opposed Napoleon invaded France and restored the monarchy ; the comte de Provence ( brother of the executed Louis XVI ) took the throne as Louis XVIII . Lafayette was received by the new king , but the staunch republican opposed the new , highly restrictive franchise for the Chamber of Deputies that granted the vote to only 90 @,@ 000 men in a nation of 25 million . Lafayette did not stand for election in 1814 , remaining at La Grange . 
 There was discontent in France among demobilized soldiers and others . Napoleon had been exiled only as far as Elba , an island in the Tuscan archipelago ; seeing an opportunity , he landed at Cannes on 1 March 1815 with a few hundred followers . Frenchmen flocked to his banner , and he took Paris later that month , causing Louis to flee to Ghent . Lafayette refused Napoleon 's call to serve in the new government , but accepted election to the new Chamber of Representatives under the Charter of 1815 . There , after Napoleon 's defeat at the Battle of Waterloo , Lafayette called for his abdication . Responding to the emperor 's brother Lucien , Lafayette argued : 
 By what right do you dare accuse the nation of ... want of perseverance in the emperor 's interest ? The nation has followed him on the fields of Italy , across the sands of Egypt and the plains of Germany , across the frozen deserts of Russia . ... The nation has followed him in fifty battles , in his defeats and in his victories , and in doing so we have to mourn the blood of three million Frenchmen . 
 On 22 June 1815 , four days after Waterloo , Napoleon abdicated . Lafayette arranged for the former emperor 's passage to America , but the British prevented this , and Napoleon ended his days on the island of Saint Helena . The Chamber of Representatives , before it dissolved , appointed Lafayette to a peace commission that was ignored by the victorious allies who occupied much of France , with the Prussians taking over La Grange as a headquarters . Once the Prussians left in late 1815 , Lafayette returned to his house , a private citizen again . 
 Lafayette 's homes , both in Paris and at La Grange , were open to any Americans who wished to meet the hero of their Revolution , and to many other people besides . Among those whom Irish novelist Sydney , Lady Morgan met at table during her month @-@ long stay at La Grange in 1818 were the Dutch painter Ary Scheffer and the historian Augustin Thierry , who sat alongside American tourists . Others who visited included philosopher Jeremy Bentham , American scholar George Ticknor , and writer Fanny Wright . 
 During the first decade of the Bourbon Restoration , Lafayette lent his support to a number of conspiracies in France and other European countries , all of which came to nothing . He was involved in the various Charbonnier plots , and agreed to go to the city of Belfort , where there was a garrison of French troops , and assume a major role in the revolutionary government . Warned that the royal government had found out about the conspiracy , he turned back on the road to Belfort , avoiding overt involvement . More successfully , he supported the Greek Revolution beginning in 1821 , and by letter attempted to persuade American officials to ally with the Greeks . Louis ' government considered arresting both Lafayette and Georges Washington , who was also involved in the Greek efforts , but were wary of the political ramifications if they did . Lafayette remained a member of the restored Chamber of Deputies until 1823 , when new plural voting rules helped defeat his bid for re @-@ election . 
 = = Grand tour of the United States = = 
 President James Monroe and Congress invited Lafayette to visit the United States in 1824 , in part to celebrate the nation 's upcoming 50th anniversary . Monroe intended to have Lafayette travel on an American warship , but the general felt having such a vessel as transport was undemocratic , and booked passage on a merchantman . Louis XVIII did not approve of the trip , and his officers had troops disperse the crowd that gathered at Le Havre to see Lafayette off . 
 Lafayette arrived at New York on 15 August 1824 , accompanied by his son Georges Washington and his secretary Auguste Levasseur . On arrival , Lafayette was greeted by a group of Revolutionary War veterans , who had fought alongside him many years before . New York erupted for four continuous days and nights of celebration . When he departed for what he thought would be a restful trip to Boston , he instead found the route lined by cheering citizens , with welcomes organized in every town along the way . According to Unger , " It was a mystical experience they would relate to their heirs through generations to come . Lafayette had materialized from a distant age , the last leader and hero at the nation 's defining moment . They knew they and the world would never see his kind again . " 
 New York , Boston , and Philadelphia did their best to outdo each other in the celebrations honoring Lafayette . Needing a place to hold a reception for him , Philadelphia renovated the Old State House ( today Independence Hall ) , which might otherwise have been torn down . Until that point , it had not been usual in the United States to build monuments , but Lafayette 's visit set off a wave of construction , usually with Lafayette , in his capacity as Mason , laying the cornerstone . The arts benefited by his visits as well , as many cities commissioned portraits for their civic buildings , and the likenesses were seen on innumerable souvenirs . Lafayette had intended to visit only the original thirteen states during a four @-@ month visit ; the stay stretched to sixteen months as he visited all twenty @-@ four . 
 The towns and cities he visited — including Fayetteville , North Carolina , the first city named in his honor — gave him enthusiastic welcomes . He visited Washington City , the capital , and was surprised by the simple clothing worn by President Monroe , and the lack of any guards around the White House . In Virginia , he went to Mount Vernon , as he had forty years before , this time viewing Washington 's grave . On 19 October 1824 , he was at Yorktown for the anniversary of Cornwallis 's surrender , then journeyed to Monticello to meet with his old friend Jefferson — and Jefferson 's successor , James Madison , who arrived unexpectedly . Lafayette had dined with the other living former president , 89 @-@ year @-@ old John Adams , at his home near Boston . 
 With the roads becoming impassable , Lafayette stayed in Washington City for the winter of 1824 – 25 , and thus was there for the climax of the hotly contested 1824 election , in which no presidential candidate was able to secure a majority of the Electoral College , throwing the decision to the House of Representatives . On 9 February 1825 , that body selected Secretary of State John Quincy Adams as president ; that evening , the runner @-@ up , General Andrew Jackson , shook hands with Adams at the White House as Lafayette looked on . 
 In March 1825 , Lafayette began to tour the southern and western states . The general pattern of the trip was that he would be escorted between cities by the state militia , and he would enter each town through specially constructed arches to be welcomed by local politicians or dignitaries , all anxious to be seen with Lafayette . There would be special events , visits to battlefields and historic sites , celebratory dinners , and time set aside for the public to meet the legendary hero of the Revolution . 
 Lafayette visited General Jackson at his home , The Hermitage , in Tennessee . While he was traveling up the Ohio River by steamboat , Lafayette 's vessel sank beneath him . He was put in a lifeboat by his son and secretary , then taken to the Kentucky shore and rescued by another steamboat . Although it was going the other direction , its captain insisted on turning around and taking Lafayette to Louisville . From there , he went generally northeast , viewing Niagara Falls , and taking the Erie Canal — considered a modern marvel — to Albany . Again in Massachusetts in June 1825 , he laid the cornerstone of the Bunker Hill Monument after hearing an oration by Daniel Webster . From Bunker Hill , Lafayette took home soil that would , at his death , be sprinkled on his grave . 
 After Bunker Hill , Lafayette went to Maine and Vermont , thus visiting all of the states . He met again with John Adams , then went back to New York and then to its rival city , Brooklyn , where he laid the cornerstone for its public library . Lafayette celebrated his 68th birthday on 6 September at a reception with President John Quincy Adams at the White House , and departed the next day . He took with him , besides the soil to be placed on his grave , other gifts . Congress , at Monroe 's request , had voted him $ 200 @,@ 000 in gratitude for his services to the country , and a large tract of public lands in Florida . The passage back to France was aboard a ship that was originally called the Susquehanna , but was renamed the USS Brandywine in honor of the battle where the Marquis de Lafayette shed his blood for the United States . 
 = = Revolution of 1830 = = 
 While Lafayette was returning to France , Louis XVIII died , and Charles X took the throne . As king , Charles intended to restore the absolute rule of the monarch , and his decrees had already prompted protest by the time Lafayette arrived . Lafayette was the most prominent of those who opposed the king . In the elections of 1827 , the 70 @-@ year @-@ old Lafayette was elected to the Chamber of Deputies again . Unhappy at the outcome , Charles dissolved the Chamber , and ordered a new election : Lafayette again won his seat . 
 Lafayette remained outspoken against Charles ' restrictions on civil liberties and the newly introduced censorship of the press . He made fiery speeches in the Chamber , denouncing the new decrees and advocating American @-@ style representative government . He hosted dinners at La Grange , for Americans , Frenchmen , and others ; all came to hear his speeches on politics , freedom , rights , and liberty . He was popular enough that Charles felt he could not be safely arrested , but Charles ' spies were thorough : one government agent noted " his [ Lafayette 's ] seditious toasts ... in honor of American liberty " . 
 On 25 July 1830 , the king signed the Ordinances of Saint @-@ Cloud , removing the franchise from the middle class and dissolving the Chamber of Deputies . The decrees were published the following day . On 27 July , Parisians erected barricades throughout the city , and riots erupted . In defiance , the Chamber continued to meet . When Lafayette , who was at La Grange , heard what was going on , he raced into the city , and was acclaimed as a leader of the revolution . When his fellow deputies were indecisive , Lafayette went to the barricades , and soon the royalist troops were routed . Fearful that the excesses of the 1789 revolution were about to be repeated , deputies made Lafayette head of a restored National Guard , and charged him with keeping order . The Chamber was willing to proclaim him as ruler , but he refused a grant of power he deemed unconstitutional . He also refused to deal with Charles , who abdicated on 2 August . Many young revolutionaries sought a republic , but Lafayette felt this would lead to civil war , and chose to offer the throne to the duc d <unk> , Louis @-@ Philippe , who had lived in America and had far more of a common touch than did Charles . Lafayette secured the agreement of Louis @-@ Philippe , who accepted the throne , to various reforms . The general remained as commander of the National Guard . This did not last long — the brief concord at the king 's accession soon faded , and the conservative majority in the Chamber voted to abolish Lafayette 's National Guard post on 24 December 1830 . Lafayette went back into retirement , expressing his willingness to do so . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 Lafayette grew increasingly disillusioned with Louis @-@ Phillippe , who backtracked on reforms and denied his promises to make them . The retired general angrily broke with his king , a breach which widened when the government used force to suppress a strike in Lyon . Lafayette used his seat in the Chamber to promote liberal proposals , and in 1831 his neighbors elected him mayor of the village of La Grange and to the council of the département of Seine @-@ et @-@ Marne . The following year , Lafayette served as a pallbearer and spoke at the funeral of General Jean Maximilien Lamarque , another opponent of Louis @-@ Phillippe . Despite Lafayette 's pleas for calm , there were riots in the streets and a barricade was erected at the Place de la Bastille . The king forcefully crushed this June Rebellion , to Lafayette 's outrage . Lafayette returned to La Grange until the Chamber met in November 1832 . He condemned Louis @-@ Phillippe for introducing censorship , as Charles X had . 
 Lafayette spoke publicly for the last time in the Chamber of Deputies on 3 January 1834 . The next month , he collapsed at a funeral from pneumonia . Although he recovered , the following May was wet and , after being caught in a thunderstorm , he became bedridden . 
 On 20 May 1834 , Lafayette died on 6 rue d 'Anjou @-@ Saint @-@ Honoré in Paris ( now 8 rue d 'Anjou in the 8th arrondissement of Paris ) at the age of 76 . He was buried next to his wife at the Picpus Cemetery under soil from Bunker Hill , which his son Georges Washington sprinkled upon him . King Louis @-@ Philippe ordered a military funeral in order to keep the public from attending . Crowds formed to protest their exclusion . 
 In the United States , President Jackson ordered that Lafayette receive the same memorial honors that had been bestowed on Washington 's death in December 1799 . Both Houses of Congress were draped in black bunting for thirty days , and members wore mourning badges . Congress urged Americans to follow similar mourning practices . Later in 1834 , former president John Quincy Adams gave a eulogy of Lafayette that lasted three hours , calling him " high on the list of the pure and disinterested benefactors of mankind " . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Throughout his life , Lafayette was an exponent of the ideals of the Age of Enlightenment , especially on human rights and civic nationalism . Despite the fact that he spent most of his political career in opposition , his views were taken very seriously by intellectuals and others on both sides of the Atlantic . 
 In the United States , Lafayette 's image , from the time of the American Revolution , derived from his " disinterestedness " in fighting , without pay , for the freedom of a country not his own . As Samuel Adams praised Lafayette , in " foregoing the pleasures of Enjoyment of <unk> [ sic ] Life and exposing himself to the Hardship and Dangers " of war , he fought " in the glorious cause of freedom " . This view was shared by many contemporaries , establishing an image of Lafayette seeking to advance , not the national interest of one country or another , but the liberty of all mankind . As Lafayette took on his roles in the French Revolution , he gained a new role in American eyes : that of an advocate for the virtues of the American republic , seeking to transport them from New World to Old . This was reinforced by his position as surrogate son and disciple of George Washington , who was deemed the Father of His Country and the embodiment of the American experiment . 
 Lafayette became an American icon in part because he was not associated with any particular region of the country : he was of foreign birth , did not live in America , and had fought in New England , the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , and the South . Thus , he was a unifying figure . His role in the French Revolution , in which he was seen by Americans as steering a middle course , enhanced this popularity . Americans were naturally sympathetic to a republican cause , but also remembered Louis XVI as a friend of the nascent United States . When Lafayette fell from power in 1792 , Americans tended to blame factionalism for the ouster of a man who was , in their eyes , above such things . 
 In 1824 , Lafayette returned to the United States at a time when Americans were questioning the success of the republican experiment in view of the disastrous economic Panic of 1819 and the sectional conflict resulting in the Missouri Compromise . Lafayette 's hosts considered him a judge of how successful the experiment had been . According to cultural historian Lloyd Kramer , Lafayette ( as well as a later visitor to America , Alexis de Tocqueville ) " provided foreign confirmations of the self @-@ image that shaped America 's national identity in the early nineteenth century and that has remained a dominant theme in the national ideology ever since : the belief that America 's Founding Fathers , institutions , and freedom created the most democratic , egalitarian , and prosperous society in the world " . 
 Historian Gilbert Chinard wrote in 1936 : “ Lafayette became a legendary figure and a symbol so early in his life , and successive generations have so willingly accepted the myth , that any attempt to deprive the young hero of his republican halo will probably be considered as little short of iconoclastic and sacrilegious . ” That legend has been used politically : the name and image of Lafayette were repeatedly invoked in 1917 in seeking to gain popular support for America 's entry into World War I , culminating in the famous phrase , " Lafayette , we are here " . This occurred at some cost to Lafayette 's image in America : veterans returned from the front singing " We 've paid our debt to Lafayette , who the hell do we owe now ? " A longer @-@ term threat was the increasing sophistication of Americans and the lessened need for symbols of patriotism ; by 1971 , according to Anne C. Loveland , " Lafayette no longer served as a national hero @-@ symbol . " In 2002 , however , Congress voted to grant Lafayette honorary citizenship . 
 Lafayette 's reputation in France is more problematic . Thomas Gaines , in his book about Lafayette , noted that the response to Lafayette 's death was far more muted in France than in America , and suggested that this may have been because Lafayette was the last surviving hero of America 's only revolution , whereas the evolution of the French government has been far more chaotic . Lafayette 's role , especially in the French Revolution , created a more nuanced picture of him in French historiography . To the 19th century historian Jules Michelet , Lafayette was a " mediocre idol " , lifted by the mob far beyond what his talents deserved . In their Histoire et <unk> de la Révolution française , Jean <unk> , Jean @-@ François <unk> , and Alfred Fierro noted Napoleon 's deathbed comment about Lafayette that , if Napoleon had had Lafayette 's place during the French Revolution , " the king would still be sitting on his throne " . They called Napoleon 's comment " not too excessive " and deemed Lafayette " an empty @-@ headed political dwarf [ and ] one of the people most responsible for the destruction of the French monarchy " . Gaines disagreed , and noted that liberal and Marxist historians have also dissented from that view of Lafayette . As Lloyd Kramer related in a survey of the French public , just before the Revolution 's bicentennial in 1989 , 57 percent deemed Lafayette the figure from the Revolution they most admired , with Marat and Saint @-@ Just tying for second with 21 percent each : " he [ Lafayette ] clearly had more French supporters in the early 1990s than he could muster in the early 1790s " . 
 Marc <unk> concluded his study of Lafayette 's life : 
 The Marquis de Lafayette was far from perfect . He was sometimes vain , naive , immature , and egocentric . But he consistently stuck to his ideals , even when doing so endangered his life and fortune . Those ideals proved to be the founding principles of two of the world 's most enduring nations , the United States and France . That is a legacy that few military leaders , politicians , or statesmen can match . 
 = Series 4 , Episode 8 ( Cold Feet ) = 
 Series 4 , Episode 8 is the final episode of the fourth series of the British comedy @-@ drama television series Cold Feet . It was written by Mike Bullen , directed by Ciaran Donnelly , and was first broadcast on the ITV network on 10 December 2001 . The plot follows on directly from the previous episode , as Adam and Rachel ( James Nesbitt and Helen Baxendale ) , and Karen and David ( Hermione Norris and Robert Bathurst ) travel to Sydney , Australia for Pete and Jo 's ( John Thomson and Kimberley Joseph ) impromptu wedding . Adam is sceptical that Pete is truly in love with Jo , and Jo 's rich father Rod ( Gary Sweet ) suspects that Pete is only marrying her to get access to his money . Under pressure from Rod , Pete gets cold feet and he and Jo call off the wedding . The couple soon reconcile and marry with Rod 's blessing . Meanwhile , David discovers that Karen has been having an affair with her colleague Mark ( Sean Pertwee ) and ends their marriage , and Rachel gives birth prematurely in a Sydney hospital . 
 The episode was conceived by Mike Bullen and Cold Feet 's executive producer Andy Harries in 2000 . Both attended a television conference in Sydney and decided to contrive the main plot of the fourth series so the characters would end up in Australia . Helen Baxendale was pregnant and could not fly to Australia , so all scenes featuring Rachel were filmed in Manchester and Salford , England . After location scouting and casting around the Sydney area in May and July , production in Australia ran for 18 days in October 2001 . Locations used included a heritage home in Vaucluse for the wedding scenes , Palm Beach for a beach barbecue scene , and outside the Opera House . The episode was watched by nearly nine million people on its original UK broadcast and received a mixed reaction from newspaper critics ; some believed the trip to Sydney was an unnecessary jaunt for the cast and crew , others selected the episode as a " pick of the day " . It also received mixed reviews in Australia and New Zealand . Kimberley Joseph 's performance was praised , as was Gary Sweet 's guest role . The episode represented the series when it won the award for Best Drama Series at the British Academy Television Awards 2002 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Adam and Rachel ( James Nesbitt and Helen Baxendale ) , and Karen and David ( Hermione Norris and Robert Bathurst ) arrive in Sydney , Australia for Pete and Jo 's ( John Thomson and Kimberley Joseph ) hastily arranged wedding . Jo 's father Rod Ellison ( Gary Sweet ) is surprised to learn that his daughter is getting married to a man he suspects is only after his money . After speaking to Rod , Adam tells Pete that he thinks the wedding is going ahead for the wrong reasons . Pete reacts angrily and tells Adam to forget being his best man . The following morning , Rod tries to bribe Pete to call off the wedding , but Pete declines . He later overhears Rod forbidding Jo to marry him and tells her they ought to postpone the wedding . Jo is devastated at his decision , and tells him to get out of her house . She confides her sorrow in her ex @-@ fiancé Shawn ( Sandy Winton ) , who unsuccessfully tries to restart their relationship by proposing to her . 
 Rachel , who is spending most of her time in her hotel room on account of her pregnancy , receives a visit from her expatriated lesbian sister Lucy ( Susannah Doyle ) . Lucy tells Rachel that she has been sleeping around with men in order to have a child . When Adam learns of this , he suggests to Lucy that she use some of his banked sperm . They broach the idea to Rachel , who is disgusted at the thought of her husband having a baby with her sister and forbids it from going ahead . Meanwhile , Karen finally assures David that the animosity between them caused by his extramarital affair is in the past . She emails Mark Cubitt ( Sean Pertwee ) , a man she has been having an affair with in England , to tell him their fling is over . Mark arrives at her apartment the next morning and spends the day with her after David cancels a visit to an art gallery with her . He convinces her that David is still the same insensitive man that he has always been . The next day , Karen tells Rachel that she will leave David to be with Mark . 
 Pete and Adam make up after their row and Adam goes to Jo 's to collect Pete 's clothes . Her regret over her breakup with Pete leads Adam to convince Rod that he should give the wedding his blessing . He follows David to a business meeting with Rod , which David has arranged as a prelude to emigrating his family to Sydney , and with David 's help changes Rod 's mind about Pete . Rod later meets Jo and Pete to give them his blessing , and they reconcile . On the day of the wedding , David finally reveals his plans for the family to Karen , unaware that Mark is in the apartment . Karen is surprised that David has made the plans , including finding a house for them to live in . Mark is irritated by David 's attitude and reveals the affair to him . Enraged , David lashes out at Mark and the two fight . Karen angrily tells Mark to leave . Outside the hotel , Rachel goes into premature labour . Adam rushes her to hospital , where she is taken into surgery . At the wedding venue , Pete asks David to take Adam 's place as best man . As Adam has the rings , David volunteers his own wedding band to Pete , and Karen does the same for Jo . Pete and Jo exchange their wedding vows and are pronounced husband and wife . After the wedding , Karen tries to approach David but he just walks away , telling her " no more " . Later , Pete , Jo and Karen join Adam and Rachel at the hospital , where they are introduced to the baby , Matthew Sydney Williams . David flies home alone in tears . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was devised following a lecture given by writer Mike Bullen and executive producer Andy Harries at the Screen Producers Association of Australia conference in November 2000 . Bullen and Harries already knew that actress Fay Ripley did not want to renew her contract to play Jenny Gifford for the whole fourth series , so developed a storyline where Jenny 's ex @-@ husband Pete would meet and fall in love with an Australian woman after his divorce . The storyline would culminate in an episode set in Australia , which Harries wanted " for no desperately good reason except that it 's a nice place to go " . The storyline was plotted and Kimberley Joseph was cast as Jo Ellison , who makes her first appearance in Series 4 , Episode 1 . As originally planned , the fourth series would have depicted all of the main characters permanently emigrating to Australia ; Bullen said , " One of them [ the characters ] , whose relationship is no more , meets an Australian in England and he comes out here , and the notion is that the others follow . Then one of the others would have a reason for wanting to walk away from his life so he comes out here too . That 's really an excuse to bring everyone out , and the final episode would be a 90 @-@ minute special looking back on their lives up to that point ; because it would be the last episode with these characters . " Having the characters permanently based in Australia opened up the possibility of spin @-@ off series set in the country . The direction of the fourth series , and thus the finale , changed significantly when Helen Baxendale announced that she was pregnant . 
 Bullen wanted the episode to be an ordinary episode of Cold Feet that just happened to be set in Australia . The original script included stereotypical references to Australian culture , such as " prawns on the <unk> " , but these were cut to avoid turning the episode into a travelogue . Bullen told the Sun Herald , " I really wanted to go beyond ' no worries ' and ' she 'll be right mate ' . We 've asked most of the local actors to improvise with their own sayings , to make sure we get it right . " In 2003 , Bullen recalled this episode 's script as the most difficult he had ever written . The collapse of Karen and David 's marriage was a controversial issue among the writer and producers ; two characters had already divorced and Harries wanted to avoid all three of the main relationships failing . After enjoying the quality of the Australian guest stars , Bullen joked to the Sun Herald that he would write a spin @-@ off series featuring Gary Sweet . Eventually , no spin @-@ off series were created . This episode was produced as the final episode of Cold Feet ; Mike Bullen did not believe he could continue writing another series and cast members were eager to take other roles . During production in Australia , Bullen 's interest in the series was renewed , and he decided he would like to write a final run of episodes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was directed by Ciaran Donnelly , who also directed the previous episode . Mike Bullen visited Sydney in March 2001 to scout for locations . He was followed in May by producer Spencer Campbell and production designer Chris Truelove , who made preliminary casting decisions and scouted more locations . They finalised the arrangements in July . Unusually , the production schedule was drawn up without a final script in place . This caused complications as Campbell allocated too much time for filming in Sydney and not enough in Manchester . As a result , some scenes set in Sydney were filmed in Manchester ; the scene where the characters arrive at Sydney Airport was filmed in a hall at the University of Manchester . Campbell rationalised that viewers who had never been to Sydney would not be able to tell the difference . 
 Helen Baxendale was nearing the end of her pregnancy , so could not join the rest of the cast abroad , thus all of her scenes were filmed in Manchester and Salford . The scenes in Rachel and Adam 's hotel room were shot at the Lowry Hotel in Salford and exterior scenes of the hotel were filmed at the <unk> Centre . The taxi that takes Rachel and Adam to the hospital was a Holden car imported to Britain from Australia and altered to look like a taxi . The Loaf bar at Deansgate Locks provided a filming location for some scenes . The final scene of the episode was filmed on an aeroplane set constructed in a studio . Robert Bathurst said , " We shot the scene in the studio because we weren 't allowed to film on a real aircraft . So we had to get sections of a plane 's interior and stick them all together . The bits were flapping all over the place whenever anyone moved . I had to look out the porthole and have a weep . As I was doing that , I looked out and there through the window , standing where the wing should be , was the show 's carpenter trying to hold the set together . " 
 Production in Sydney commenced the week beginning 1 October and lasted for 18 days . The main cast and Sean Pertwee were flown out along with a skeleton crew . Additional staff were drawn from those already working for Granada Australia , the Australian production arm of Granada Productions , as flying a complete British crew overseas would have been prohibitively expensive . Filming locations included Hyde Park , Kirribilli , Double Bay and the Northern Beaches . The scenes of Shawn 's barbecue were filmed in Palm Beach and the facade of a terraced house in Paddington was used for an establishing scene of Lucy 's apartment . The wedding scenes were set in the grounds of Strickland House , Vaucluse . Another scene was filmed on location outside the Sydney Opera House . While preparing for the scene , Hermione Norris and Robert Bathurst were distracted by a group of British tourists yelling that Karen should leave David after David 's affair in Series 3 . The group remained quiet when the scene was being shot . Karen and David 's apartment was filmed at a building near Luna Park in <unk> Point . A stunt team co @-@ ordinated the fight scene between Mark and David but could not convincingly choreograph a headbutt between Mark and David . The stunt co @-@ ordinator and Pertwee , who was already experienced in stunt fighting , agreed Pertwee would get a better reaction from Bathurst by almost headbutting his face for real , instead of " hitting air " . Initially startled by the move , Bathurst conceded that it was better for him to be surprised as he might have flinched if he had known what Pertwee was about to do . Hermione Norris found the scene upsetting insofar as it was unusual to see Robert Bathurst playing David in such an emotional state . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast in an extended 90 @-@ minute commercial timeslot on 10 December 2001 on the ITV network in the United Kingdom ( ITV1 , STV and UTV ) and on TV3 in Ireland . Unofficial overnight ratings recorded an average of 8 @.@ 5 million viewers and a 37 % audience share for the episode in the UK . Final ratings , accounting for PVR viewings , rose to 8 @.@ 95 million ( 38 % share ) , making it the twenty @-@ first most @-@ watched show of the week . The fourth series had been broadcast on ITV on consecutive Sunday and Monday nights , and the Monday ratings had been considerably lower . Episode 8 marked the peak of the Monday night ratings . 
 The episode received mixed reaction from newspaper critics . In the Liverpool Echo , Rachael Tinniswood wrote that the episode " was a fantastic display of everything that has made Cold Feet such a popular drama over the past few years " and that Kimberley Joseph had proved to be " a more than adequate replacement " for Fay Ripley over the course of the fourth series . Tony Purnell wrote in the Daily Mirror that " The fact that the gang ended up in Australia showed just how much the series had lost its way . " Graham Young in the Birmingham Mail wrote that the excursion to Sydney " smacks more of giving the cast a treat after four years , rather than any real necessity of the script " . The Daily Record 's critic wrote " if this is the last @-@ ever episode , we should make the most of what has been a relatively disappointing series " . In a column about <unk> ' the Fat , Scotsman critic Aidan Smith accused the episode — " which somehow managed to squeeze the Harbour Bridge into every shot " — of being the point the series jumped the shark . Times columnist Caitlin Moran described it as " both draining and <unk> " . Moran went on to say that Adam and Rachel had become poorly characterised and suggested that Mike Bullen had come to loathe the characters . The episode was selected as a " pick of the day " in The Sun and The Sunday Times . Writing in the Journal of British Cinema and Television in 2006 , Greg M. Smith analysed the development of the David character over the course of Series 4 , including the fantasy scene in this episode where David imagines living with Karen in Australia , and the scene where David and Karen take off their wedding rings : " Old , exhausted love is traded for new , vibrant love in this single gesture . Karen pursues David as he storms off after the ceremony , shouting his name , undoubtedly ready to alternate once more between pain and partial forgiveness , as they have done throughout their marriage . David turns and says : ' No , Karen . No more ' . " Smith also compared the scene to the wedding scene in the film The Best Years of Our Lives ( William Wyler , 1946 ) . 
 ITV submitted the episode to the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) to represent the series in the Best Drama Series category at the British Academy Television Awards 2002 . The series won , and the award was collected by Mike Bullen , Andy Harries and Spencer Campbell at the BAFTA ceremony in April 2002 . The scene in which Pete meets Rod for the first time was voted " Best Dramatic Moment " at the BBC 's annual TV Moments broadcast in 2002 . 
 The episode was first broadcast in Australia on the Seven Network on 6 June 2002 . Robin Oliver for The Sydney Morning Herald wrote " Unlike any of the other seemingly compulsory Oz adventures to which British TV panders , this one presents a superior storyline while soaking up the views . " Oliver complimented the performances of Gary Sweet and Kimberley Joseph , and Ciaran Donnelly 's direction . The Age 's Debi Enker was critical , decrying the plot as " fairly creaky " and the locations as " a very glossy ad for the sights of Sydney " . She also thought Gary Sweet and James Nesbitt looked bored in their roles . In New Zealand , the episode was broadcast on TV ONE on 17 September 2002 . The New Zealand Herald 's reviewer Michele Hewitson was critical of the clichés in the script , particularly the stereotypical characterisation of Rod Ellison , who she described as " a bit of a bastard " . Hewitson was also critical of Karen 's reaction to David 's attempts to repair their relationship , and concluded by writing , " God only knows why they had to drag the entire cast all the way to Australia . You can take this lot out of Manchester but they 'll still be moaning , angst @-@ ridden and selfish . " 
 = = Home video = = 
 The episode was first released as part of the Cold Feet : The Complete 4th Series DVD and VHS . The set was released in the United Kingdom on 25 November 2002 and in Australia on 3 April 2007 . It was also released on a single disc DVD in 2003 as a promotional venture between the Sunday Mirror and Woolworths . 
 = Girlfight = 
 Girlfight is a 2000 American sports drama film written and directed by Karyn Kusama and starring Michelle Rodriguez in both of their film debuts . It follows Diana Guzman , a troubled teenager from Brooklyn who decides to channel her aggression by training to become a boxer , despite the disapproval of both her father and her prospective trainers and competitors in the male @-@ dominated sport . 
 Kusama wrote the screenplay for Girlfight after learning to box , wanting to make a film about the sport with a female protagonist . Although she struggled to find financiers for the film 's $ 1 million ( U.S. ) budget , the production was eventually funded by John Sayles , Maggie Renzi and the Independent Film Channel . Rodriguez was cast in the lead role , despite having never acted before , and trained for four months to prepare for the role before filming commenced in New York and New Jersey . 
 Girlfight premiered on January 22 , 2000 at the Sundance Film Festival , where it won the Grand Jury Prize . It was released theatrically on September 29 , 2000 and grossed $ 1 @.@ 7 million at the box office . The film was well received by critics , who offered particular praise to Rodriguez for her performance and Kusama for her direction . Both Kusama and Rodriguez received numerous accolades , including two National Board of Review Awards , two Independent Spirit Award nominations , and two Gotham Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Diana Guzman is a Brooklyn teenager whose hot temper gets her into trouble at school as she repeatedly starts fights with other students . Her frustration stems from her unhappy home life ; she lives in a public housing estate with her brother Tiny and their single father , Sandro . Sandro pays for Tiny 's boxing training in hopes of his becoming a professional boxer , although Tiny would prefer to be an artist . After visiting Tiny 's gym and intervening in a spar to defend him , Diana asks the trainers to let her box , too . She is told she can train there , but not compete in actual fights . When she learns that she cannot afford coaching from Tiny 's trainer , Hector Soto , she asks her father for an allowance but he tells her to get a job . She resorts to stealing his money instead and returns to the gym , where Hector begins to teach her the basics of boxing . 
 Diana 's first spar is with Adrian Sturges , whom she later meets again when Hector takes her to a professional fight . Adrian invites Diana to dinner after the fight and kisses her after walking her home . One night after a spar which gave Diana a black eye , Sandro sees Diana and Adrian together and confronts her , assuming that she is in an abusive relationship . She storms out of the apartment and spends the night with Adrian . When he asks about her parents , she reveals that her mother committed suicide several years ago . When Diana returns to her apartment , Tiny offers to give up boxing so that she can use the coaching money he gets from their father . 
 Diana later goes to Hector 's birthday party , but leaves when she sees Adrian getting friendly with his ex @-@ girlfriend . When Diana and Adrian spar at their next session in the gym , he is reluctant to hit her , and she leaves before he can talk to her . Diana 's first amateur match is scheduled against another girl , but when her opponent pulls out she ends up fighting a man , Ray Cortez . Sandro arrives in the middle of the fight to see the match end in Ray 's disqualification for illegal shoving . When Diana arrives home , Sandro berates her for looking like a loser . She retaliates by beating him to the floor and accuses him of abusing her mother to the point of suicide . 
 After weeks of rigorous training , Diana wins another amateur fight , this time against a girl , Ricki Stiles . Although Diana has accepted Adrian 's apology , tensions rise between them again when they learn that they both have advanced to the finals in their division to fight each other . Adrian refuses to fight a girl and Diana struggles to convince him to view her as a legitimate opponent . He turns up for the fight on the day , however , and after an even match , Diana wins with a unanimous decision by the judges . After the fight , Adrian fears that he has lost Diana 's respect , but she tells him she respects him even more for fighting her , and they reconcile . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Michelle Rodriguez as Diana Guzman 
 Jaime <unk> as Hector Soto 
 Paul Calderón as Sandro Guzman 
 Santiago Douglas as Adrian Sturges 
 Ray Santiago as Tiny Guzman 
 Victor Sierra as Ray Cortez 
 Elisa Bocanegra as Marisol 
 Shannon Walker Williams as Veronica 
 Louis Guss as Don 
 Herb Lovelle as Cal 
 = = Production = = 
 Girlfight was written and directed by Karyn Kusama , marking her feature film debut . Her aim was to subvert " the classic boxing story " with a female lead , having taken up boxing herself in 1992 at the famous Gleason 's Gym in Brooklyn . After writing the script , she struggled to persuade production companies to finance the film ; numerous producers suggested that Kusama cast a white woman in the lead role rather than a Latina and felt that having a female protagonist was " unappealing [ and ] unbelievable " . Maggie Renzi , Sarah Green and Martha Griffin eventually agreed to produce the film , and found a financier in 1999 to provide the $ 1 million ( U.S. ) budget . Two days before pre @-@ production on the film was set to begin the financier backed out , but Renzi and her partner John Sayles — an independent filmmaker and Kusama 's former mentor — decided to provide funding for the film 's entire budget themselves . The Independent Film Channel later contributed $ 300 @,@ 000 towards the budget . 
 Kusama initially sought to cast a professional actor to play Diana but felt that many of those who auditioned were overly feminized and " polished " and decided to cast an untrained actor instead . Michelle Rodriguez , who had worked as a film extra but had never auditioned for a speaking role before , attended an open casting call for the lead . Although Kusama described Rodriguez 's audition as " a disaster " , she won the role because out of 350 auditionees Kusama " could not find anyone who could come close to her in physical power " . Since Rodriguez was not a boxer , she trained at Gleason 's Gym five to six days a week for four months in preparation for filming , as did Santiago Douglas , who played Adrian . 
 Girlfight was filmed over 24 days in New York and New Jersey . For scenes inside the gym where Diana and Tiny train , the filmmakers shot in a warehouse in Jersey City . The initial boxing sequences were shot from a spectator 's view outside of the ring but later sequences were filmed more intimately from inside the ring . Cinematographer Patrick Cady used camera rigs that allowed the actors to hit him or the camera itself to mimic the feeling of being hit . 
 = = Release = = 
 Girlfight premiered on January 22 , 2000 at the Sundance Film Festival , where it won the festival 's Grand Jury Prize and the Directing Award in Dramatic Competition . Distribution rights to the film were subsequently purchased by Screen Gems for $ 3 million . 
 It had a limited release in the United States on September 29 , 2000 , opening in 28 theaters . In its debut week , it ranked 30th at the box office , grossing $ 282 @,@ 145 with a per @-@ screen average of $ 10 @,@ 077 . The following week it expanded to 253 theaters , but fell to a per @-@ screen average of $ 2 @,@ 687 , ranking 18th . In its third week , the film 's per @-@ screen average dropped to $ 1 @,@ 156 with a cumulative total gross of $ 1 @,@ 254 @,@ 600 . Girlfight ended its theatrical run after five weeks with a total domestic gross of $ 1 @,@ 565 @,@ 852 . Internationally , it grossed $ 100 @,@ 176 , making a worldwide total of $ 1 @,@ 666 @,@ 028 . 
 The film was released on DVD on March 27 , 2001 . The DVD includes two special features : an audio commentary by Karyn Kusama and a " making of " featurette . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Girlfight was well received by critics upon its release . It has a score of 87 % on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 94 reviews with an average rating of 7 @.@ 3 out of 10 . The consensus states : " Michelle Rodriguez gives a compelling performance , despite lack of a boxing background ; Karyn Kusama packs a punch with this directorial debut . " The film also has a score of 70 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on 34 critics ' reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Numerous reviews praised Rodriguez 's performance in her debut role , with several critics comparing her to Marlon Brando . David Denby of The New Yorker called her " a powerhouse star who could go a long way " , while Variety critic Emanuel Levy described her as " a natural performer who dominates every scene " . In a review for The New York Times , A. O. Scott characterized Rodriguez as " a powerful , extraordinarily gifted young actress ... Remember the name . " The Washington Post 's Desson Howe felt that Rodriguez 's performance was the most memorable aspect of the film , and that she " becomes more appealing , formidable and beautiful by the scene " . 
 Karyn Kusama 's script and direction were also highlighted by critics . The Los Angeles Times 's Kenneth Turan commended her " craft , empathy and respect " and compared her to the character of Diana , writing that Kusama " is her protagonist 's double in terms of drive , commitment and ability " . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly felt that , although the plot was clichéd and unrealistic at times , Kusama 's direction showed " a clear , personal filmmaking style ... and a respect for her characters ' weaknesses as well as their moments of athletic beauty " . James Berardinelli gave the film three and a half stars out of four , calling it " a well crafted and emotionally satisfying debut " and applauding Kusama 's " single @-@ minded determination and a passion for the project " . 
 Roger Ebert , who gave the film three and a half out of four stars in a Chicago Sun @-@ Times review , enjoyed that the story is " always about more than boxing " with its deeper themes " about a girl growing up in a macho society and ... discovering she has a nature probably more macho than the men around her " . On the other hand , the San Francisco Chronicle 's Edward Guthmann opined that Kusama " ultimately undercuts her theme of female self @-@ reliance by having Diana fall for Adrian " and criticized the plot for " tak [ ing ] too much time justifying a woman 's right to be in the ring – instead of celebrating her achievement " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Girlfight was one of the first boxing films to portray women in the sport . Film studies academic Katharina Lindner has argued that Girlfight was responsible for the " influx of female protagonists into the [ boxing film ] genre " of the 2000s , specifically the 2004 films Million Dollar Baby and Die <unk> ( alternatively titled About a Girl ) . 
 The film was responsible for launching Rodriguez and Kusama 's careers in film ; Rodriguez went on to star in numerous major studio films while Kusama later directed Æon Flux ( 2005 ) and Jennifer 's Body ( 2009 ) . 
 = Nice Is Different Than Good = 
 " Nice Is Different Than Good " is the sixth season premiere episode of the American comedy @-@ drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 112th overall episode of the series . It originally aired in the United States on September 27 , 2009 , on ABC . In the episode , Mike ( James Denton ) marries Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) and Angie Bolen ( Drea de Matteo ) and her family move onto Wisteria Lane as they attempt to escape their sordid past . 
 The episode was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by Larry Shaw . It included the introduction of the Angie character , as well as her husband , Nick ( Jeffrey Nordling ) , and their son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) . The Bolen family is the subject of the series ' yearly mystery . " Nice Is Different Than Good " enacted the long @-@ running storylines of Katherine 's ( Dana Delany ) nervous breakdown , Lynette 's ( Felicity Huffman ) attempts to conceal her pregnancy , and the Fairview serial strangler . 
 " Nice Is Different Than Good " received generally positive reviews , with critics raving about the rivalry between Susan and Katherine and the possible connection between the Bolen and serial strangler storylines . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode drew 13 @.@ 6 million viewers , the smallest audience for a Desperate Housewives season premiere until the seventh season premiere on September 26 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents in the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . In recent episodes , Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) married an unidentified bride , who was either Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) , his ex @-@ wife , or Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) , his fiancée and Susan 's close friend . Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) learned that she and her husband , Tom ( Doug Savant ) , are expecting twins , two of what will be six children . Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) and Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) agreed to take in his niece , Ana ( Maiara Walsh ) , and she and Gabrielle began to antagonize one another . Bree Hodge ( Marcia Cross ) sought a divorce from her husband , Orson ( Kyle MacLachlan ) ; however , Orson refused to end their marriage and blackmailed her into staying in the relationship . As a result , Bree began an affair with her divorce lawyer and Susan 's ex @-@ husband , Karl Mayer ( Richard Burgi ) . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 In the eight weeks leading up to her wedding , Susan avoids any contact with Katherine . Katherine begins to resent Susan , even threatening to pour tomato sauce on Susan 's wedding dress . Mike is concerned for Katherine , but Susan is frustrated with her behavior . On the day of the wedding , Katherine demands that Susan apologize to her in public . Susan obliges , expressing her sorrow to Katherine during the wedding ceremony . Katherine tells Susan that the apology does not help mend their friendship . 
 Angie ( Drea de Matteo ) and Nick Bolen ( Jeffrey Nordling ) move into a house on Wisteria Lane with their college @-@ bound son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) . Danny takes interest in Julie Mayer ( Andrea Bowen ) , Susan 's daughter , and asks her to start tutoring him . She agrees , but at Nick 's urging , tells Danny that she is not interested in a relationship . Later , elderly neighbor Karen McCluskey ( Kathryn Joosten ) sees Julie and Danny arguing . On Susan and Mike 's wedding night , Julie is strangled outside of her home by an unidentified attacker , who flees the scene . 
 Lynette grows increasingly weary at the idea of having more children . She confesses to Tom that while she began loving her other children before they were born , she does not have the same feelings for her unborn twins . Tom assures her that she will love them once she is able to hold them in her arms . At Lynette 's request , the couple conceals the pregnancy from their family and friends . Meanwhile , Gabrielle is irritated with Ana 's poor attitude , provocative wardrobe , and disregard for her curfew or other rules . Carlos insists that Gabrielle sign a contract that would make her Ana 's legal guardian , but she refuses . However , when Ana expresses interest in becoming a model , Gabrielle understands that they are more alike than she initially thought and signs the guardianship documents . 
 Bree continues to hide her affair with Karl , but her difficulty with adjusting to the sinful and secretive lifestyle prompt Karl to end the affair . In that time , Orson suggests that they enter marriage counseling , but Bree insists that she no longer sees herself as his wife , but rather his captive . Realizing that guilt is a small price for happiness , Bree reignites her affair with Karl . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Nice Is Different Than Good " was written by series creator and executive producer Marc Cherry and directed by Larry Shaw . It marked the debut of Drea de Matteo as Angie Bolen , the matriarch of an Italian family . While brainstorming ideas for the sixth season , the Desperate Housewives writing staff decided to introduce an Italian New Yorker housewife , as she would be unlike the other title characters . When she was offered the role of Angie , de Matteo was best known for her Emmy Award @-@ winning performance as Adriana La Cerva on The Sopranos , an HBO drama series about the Italian Mafia . She accepted the offer without knowing the character 's name or storyline . Cherry described the Angie character as " a very loving but tough Italian woman who comes [ to Wisteria Lane ] with her husband and her kid ... [ and ] will do what she has to to protect her family . " Jeffrey Nordling and Beau Mirchoff made their series debuts in this episode as well , appearing as Nick , Angie 's landscaper husband , and Danny , their " tightly @-@ wound " son , respectively . Maiara Walsh also joined the cast as a series regular , having made her debut as Ana Solis in a guest starring capacity during season five . 
 " Nice Is Different Than Good " revealed the identity of Mike Delfino 's bride , a mystery which served as the cliffhanger for the fifth season finale . Cherry revealed that he initially intended to have Mike marry Katherine Mayfair rather than Susan Mayer , but fans " were insistent " on having Mike marry Susan . As a result , Cherry decided to change the storyline " as opposed to frustrating the fans for another year by keeping Mike and Susan apart . " The episode also introduced the long @-@ running storyline of Katherine suffering a nervous breakdown after losing Mike to Susan . Cherry commented that it would be " one of the funniest breakdowns you 've ever seen . " Actress Dana Delany , who portrays Katherine , was not informed about the storyline change until a week before the episode began filming . She called the change " brilliant " and was pleased with her character 's new storyline " because happiness is great in life , but it 's kind of [ sic ] boring dramatically . " To keep the identity of Mike 's bride confidential , a stunt actress was used in the season five finale . When filming of the episode took place in July 2009 , both Hatcher and Delany were photographed wearing wedding dresses on set . " Nice Is Different Than Good " also introduced the secondary ongoing mystery of the Fairview strangler . The episode ended with a cliffhanger in which Julie Mayer is strangled by an unknown attacker . Cherry said of the storyline , " I 've come up with my own version of ' Who Shot J.R. ? ' , " referencing the murder mystery plotline surrounding the J. R. Ewing character ( Larry Hagman ) in the popular primetime soap opera Dallas . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 According to Nielsen ratings , " Nice Is Different Than Good " was seen by 13 @.@ 643 million viewers and held an 8 @.@ 6 rating / 13 share on its original American broadcast on September 27 , 2009 . Among viewers between 18 and 49 years of age , the episode drew a 4 @.@ 7 rating . The episode is the least @-@ watched season premiere of Desperate Housewives at the time , with a thirty @-@ five percent decrease in viewers from the fifth season premiere a year earlier . The seventh season premiere drew in lower ratings , with 13 @.@ 056 million viewers and an 8 @.@ 1 rating / 12 share on its September 26 , 2010 broadcast . " Nice Is Different Than Good " was outperformed by the following episode , " Being Alive " , on October 4 , which drew 14 @.@ 641 million viewers and a 9 @.@ 2 rating / 14 share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . Nevertheless , the premiere episode had a higher viewership than the season six average of 12 @.@ 823 million viewers and 4 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic per episode . The episode was outperformed by Sunday Night Football on NBC , which drew 18 @.@ 461 million viewers in the Desperate Housewives timeslot . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received positive critical reviews . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly praised the Julie storyline and expressed sympathy for the Katherine character . Additionally , while he enjoyed the introduction of the Bolen family , he commented that " it 's not even worth speculating [ about the Bolens ] because the family honestly didn 't reveal anything much about themselves . " He also noted the realness of the Lynette story and the comedic relief provided by the Gabrielle and Bree stories . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad also gave the episode a positive review , expressing interest in Katherine 's storyline now that Mike has married Susan . She declared , " Karl and Bree are now my favorite couple on Wisteria Lane . They are twisted , flawed and complex characters , " calling the pair reminiscent of Bree and Orson when the first started dating . She also credited the introduction of the Ana character for making the Gabrielle story " really fun to watch " and complimented Beau Mirchoff 's portrayal of the " extremely weird " Danny Bolen character , speculating that he strangled Julie . 
 USA Today 's Robert Bianco awarded the season premiere three out of four stars , opining that the episode " starts with a bang , ends with a cliffhanger jolt , and offers a good story for each of the wives in between while dropping a possibly worthy new addition in their midst . " He predicted that viewers would be satisfied with the revelation of the mystery bride 's identity and commented : " There 's humor and poignancy in all the stories and good work all around . " Bianco praised Felicity Huffman 's " strong and varied " acting skills , complimented Eva Longoria 's comedic talents , and declared Richard Burgi 's performance as his best in the entire series . He concluded that while the show has declined in quality since its first season , " it remains a very good TV series " and noted that " there 's also the potential for a season that returns this already @-@ solid show to top form . " TV Guide writer Mickey O 'Connor was negative in his review . He criticized the Lynette story as being " an awful development " and said the chemistry between actress de Matteo and her costars " a little off . " However , he was more receptive of Katherine 's reaction to losing Mike , saying " what could have played out as a typical weepy , hos @-@ before @-@ bros make @-@ up session has been elevated to something much richer . " 
 = Matthew Brettingham = 
 Matthew Brettingham ( 1699 – 19 August 1769 ) , sometimes called Matthew Brettingham the Elder , was an 18th @-@ century Englishman who rose from humble origins to supervise the construction of Holkham Hall , and become one of the country 's best @-@ known architects of his generation . Much of his principal work has since been demolished , particularly his work in London , where he revolutionised the design of the grand townhouse . As a result , he is often overlooked today , remembered principally for his Palladian remodelling of numerous country houses , many of them situated in the East Anglia area of Britain . As Brettingham neared the pinnacle of his career , Palladianism began to fall out of fashion and neoclassicism was introduced , championed by the young Robert Adam . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brettingham was born in 1699 , the second son of Launcelot Brettingham ( 1664 – 1727 ) , a bricklayer or stonemason from Norwich , the county town of Norfolk , England . He married Martha Bunn ( c . 1697 – 1783 ) at St. Augustine 's Church , Norwich , on 17 May 1721 and they had nine children together . 
 His early life is little documented , and one of the earliest recorded references to him is in 1719 , when he and his elder brother Robert were admitted to the city of Norwich as freemen bricklayers . A critic of Brettingham 's at this time claimed that his work was so poor that it was not worth the nine shillings a week ( £ 65 in 2016 ) he was paid as a craftsman bricklayer . Whatever the quality of his bricklaying , he soon advanced himself and became a building contractor . 
 = = Local contractor = = 
 During the early eighteenth century , a building contractor had far more responsibilities than the title suggests today . A contractor often designed , built , and oversaw all details of construction to completion . Architects , often called surveyors , were employed only for the grandest and largest of buildings . By 1730 , Brettingham is referred to as a surveyor , working on more important structures than cottages and agricultural buildings . In 1731 , it is recorded that he was paid £ 112 ( £ 16 @,@ 600 in 2016 ) for his work on Norwich Gaol . From then , he appears to have worked regularly as the surveyor to the Justices ( the contemporary local authority ) on public buildings and bridges throughout the 1740s . Projects of his dating from this time include the remodelling of the Shirehouse in Norwich , the construction of <unk> Bridge over the river Wensum , repairs to Norwich Castle and Norwich Cathedral , as well as the rebuilding of much of St. Margaret 's Church , King 's Lynn , which had been severely damaged by the collapse of its spire in 1742 . His work on the Shirehouse , which was in the gothic style and showed a versatility of design rare for Brettingham , was to result in a protracted court case that was to rumble on through a large part of his life , with allegations of financial discrepancies . In 1755 , the case was eventually closed , and Brettingham was left several hundred pounds out of pocket — several tens of thousands , in present @-@ day terms — and with a stain — if only a local one — on his character . Transcripts of the case suggest that it was Brettingham 's brother Robert , to whom he had subcontracted and who was responsible for the flint stonework of the Shirehouse , who may have been the cause of the allegations . Brettingham 's brief flirtation with the Gothic style , in the words of Robin Lucas , indicates " the approach of an engineer rather than an antiquary " and is " now seen as outlandish " . The Shirehouse was demolished in 1822 . 
 = = Architect = = 
 In 1734 , Brettingham had his first great opportunity , when two of the foremost Palladian architects of the day , William Kent and Lord Burlington , were collaboratively designing a grandiose Palladian country palace at Holkham in Norfolk for Thomas Coke , 1st Earl of Leicester . Brettingham was appointed Clerk of Works ( sometimes referred to as executive architect ) , at an annual salary of £ 50 ( £ 7 @,@ 300 per year in 2016 ) . He retained the position until the Earl 's death in 1759 . The illustrious architects were mostly absent ; indeed Burlington was more of an idealist than an architect , thus Brettingham and the patron Lord Leicester were left to work on the project together , with the practical Brettingham interpreting the architects ' plans to Leicester 's requirements . It was at Holkham that Brettingham first worked with the fashionable Palladian style , which was to be his trademark . Holkham was to be Brettingham 's springboard to fame , as it was through his association with it that he came to the attention of other local patrons , and further work at Heydon and <unk> Hall established Brettingham as a local country @-@ house architect . 
 Brettingham was commissioned in 1742 to redesign Langley Hall , a mansion standing in its own parkland in South Norfolk . His design was very much in the Palladian style of Holkham , though much smaller : a large principal central block linked to two flanking secondary wings by short corridors . The corner towers , while similar to those later designed by Brettingham at Euston Hall , were the work of a later owner and architect . The neoclassical entrance lodges were a later addition , by Sir John Soane . In 1743 , Brettingham began work on the construction of Hanworth Hall , Norfolk , also in the Palladian style , with a five @-@ bay facade of brick with the centre three bays projected with a pediment . 
 In 1745 , Brettingham designed Gunton Hall in Norfolk for Sir William Harbord , three years after the former house on the site was gutted by fire . The new house of brick had a principal facade like that of Hanworth Hall , however , this larger house was seven bays deep , and had a large service wing on its western side . His commissions began to come from further afield : Goodwood in Sussex and Marble Hill , Twickenham . 
 In 1750 , now well @-@ known , the architect received an important commission to remodel Euston Hall in East Anglia , the Suffolk country seat of the influential 2nd Duke of Grafton . The original house , built circa 1666 in the French style , was built around a central court with large pavilions at each corner . While keeping the original layout , Brettingham formalised the fenestration and imposed a more classically severe order whereby the pavilions were transformed to towers in the Palladian fashion ( similar to those of Inigo Jones 's at Wilton House ) . The pavilions ' domes were replaced by low pyramid roofs similar to those at Holkham . Brettingham also created the large service courtyard at Euston that now acts as the entrance court to the mansion , which today is only a fraction of its former size . 
 The Euston commission seems to have brought Brettingham firmly to the notice of other wealthy patrons . In 1751 , he began work for the Earl of Egremont at Petworth House , Sussex . He continued work intermittently at Petworth for the next twelve years , including designing a new picture gallery from 1754 . Over the same period his country @-@ house work included alterations at Moor Park , Hertfordshire ; Wortley Hall , Yorkshire ; Wakefield Lodge , Northamptonshire ; and <unk> House , Suffolk . 
 = = London townhouses = = 
 From 1747 , Brettingham operated from London as well as Norwich . This period marks a turning point in his career , as he was now no longer designing country houses and farm buildings just for the local aristocrats and the Norfolk gentry , but for the greater aristocracy based in London . 
 One of Brettingham 's greatest solo commissions came when he was asked to design a town house for the 9th Duke of Norfolk in St. James 's Square , London . Completed in 1756 , the exterior of this mansion was similar to those of many of the great palazzi in Italian cities : bland and featureless , the piano nobile distinguishable only by its tall pedimented windows . This arrangement , devoid of pilasters and a pediment giving prominence to the central bays at roof height , was initially too severe for the English taste , even by the fashionable Palladian standards of the day . Early critics declared the design " insipid " . 
 However , the interior design of Norfolk House was to define the London town house for the next century . The floor plan was based on an adaptation of one of the secondary wings he had built at Holkham Hall . A circuit of reception rooms centred on a grand staircase , with the staircase hall replacing the Italian traditional inner courtyard or two @-@ storey hall . This arrangement of salons allowed guests at large parties to circulate , having been received at the head of the staircase , without doubling back on arriving guests . The second advantage was that while each room had access to the next , it also had access to the central stairs , thus allowing only one or two rooms to be used at a time for smaller functions . Previously , guests in London houses had had to reach the principal salon through a long enfilade of minor reception rooms . In this square and compact way , Brettingham came close to recreating the layout of an original Palladian Villa . He transformed what Andrea Palladio had conceived as a country retreat into a London mansion appropriate for the lifestyle of the British aristocracy , with its reversal of the usual Italian domestic pattern of a large palazzo in town , and a smaller villa in the country . As happened so often in Brettingham 's career , Robert Adam later developed this design concept further , and was credited with its success . However , Brettingham 's plan for Norfolk House was to serve as the prototype for many London mansions over the next few decades . 
 Brettingham 's additional work in London included two more houses in St. James 's Square : No. 5 for the 2nd Earl of Strafford and No. 13 for the 1st Lord Ravensworth . Lord Egremont , for whom Brettingham was working in the country at Petworth , gave Brettingham another opportunity to design a grandiose London mansion — the Egremont family 's town house . Begun in 1759 , this Palladian palace , known at the time as Egremont House , or more modestly as 94 Piccadilly , is one of the few great London town houses still standing . It later came to be known as Cambridge House and was the home of Lord Palmerston , and then of the Naval & Military Club ; as of October 2007 , it is in the process of conversion into a luxury hotel . 
 = = Kedleston Hall = = 
 Sir Nathaniel Curzon , later 1st Baron Scarsdale , commissioned Brettingham in 1759 to design a great country house . Thirty years before a prospective design for a new Kedleston Hall had been drawn up by James Gibbs , one of the leading architects of the day , but Curzon wanted his new house to match the style and taste of Holkham . Lord Leicester , Holkham 's owner and Brettingham 's employer , was a particular hero of Curzon 's . Curzon was a Tory from a very old Derbyshire family , and he wished to create a showpiece to rival the nearby Chatsworth House owned by the Whig Duke of Devonshire , whose family were relative newcomers in the county , having arrived little more than two hundred years earlier . However , the Duke of Devonshire 's influence , wealth , and title were far superior to Curzon 's , and Curzon was unable to complete his house or to match the Devonshires ' influence ( William Cavendish , 4th Duke of Devonshire , had been Prime Minister in the 1750s ) . This commission might have been the ultimate accolade Brettingham was seeking , to recreate Holkham but this time with full credit . Kedleston Hall was designed by Brettingham on a plan by Palladio for the unbuilt Villa Mocenigo . The design by Brettingham , similar to that of Holkham Hall , was for a massive principal central block flanked by four secondary wings , each a miniature country house , themselves linked by quadrant corridors . From the outset of the project , Curzon seems to have presented Brettingham with rivals . In 1759 , while Brettingham was still supervising the construction of the initial phase , the northeast family block , Curzon employed architect James Paine , the most notable architect of the day , to supervise the kitchen block and quadrants . Paine also went on to supervise the construction of Brettingham 's great north front . However , this was a critical moment for architecture in England . Palladianism was being challenged by a new taste for neoclassical designs , one exponent of which was Robert Adam . Curzon had met Adam as early as 1758 , and had been impressed by the young architect newly returned from Rome . He employed Adam to design some garden pavilions for the new Kedleston . So impressed was Curzon by Adam 's work that by April 1760 he had put Adam in sole charge of the design of the new mansion , replacing both Brettingham and Paine . Adam completed the north facade of the mansion much as Brettingham had designed it , only altering Brettingham 's intended portico . The basic layout of the house remained loyal to Brettingham 's original plan , although only two of the proposed four secondary wings were executed . 
 Brettingham moved on to other projects . In the 1760s , he was approached by his most illustrious patron , the Duke of York ( brother of King George III ) , to design one of the greatest mansions in Pall Mall , namely York House . The rectangular mansion that Brettingham designed was built in the Palladian style on two principal floors , with the state rooms as at Norfolk House , arranged in a circuit around the central staircase hall . The house was a mere pastiche of Norfolk House , but for Brettingham it had the kudos of a royal occupant . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Its royal occupant may very well have made York House the pinnacle of Brettingham 's career . Built during the 1760s , it was one of his last grand houses . His last country @-@ house commission was at <unk> Hall , Warwickshire . In 1761 , he published his plans of Holkham Hall , calling himself the architect , which led critics , including Horace Walpole , to decry him as a <unk> of Kent 's designs . Brettingham died in 1769 at his house outside St. Augustine 's Gate , Norwich , and was buried in the aisle of the parish church . Throughout his long career , Brettingham did much to popularise the Palladian movement . His clients included a Royal Duke and at least twenty @-@ one assorted peers and peeresses . He is not a household name today largely because his provincial work was heavily influenced by Kent and Burlington , and unlike his contemporary Giacomo Leoni he did not develop , or was not given the opportunity to develop , a strong personal stamp to his work on country houses . Ultimately , he and many of his contemporary architects were eclipsed by the designs of Robert Adam . Adam remodelled Brettingham 's York House in 1780 and , in addition to Kedleston Hall , went on to replace James Paine as architect at Nostell Priory , Alnwick Castle , and Syon House . In spite of this , Adam and Paine remained great friends ; Brettingham 's relationships with his fellow architects are unrecorded . 
 Brettingham 's principal contribution to architecture is perhaps the design of the grand town house , unremarkable for its exterior but with a circulating plan for reception rooms suitable for entertaining within on a forgotten scale of lavishness . Many of these anachronistic palaces are now long demolished or have been transformed for other uses and are inaccessible for public viewing . Hence , what little remains in London of his work is unknown to the general public . Of Brettingham 's work , only the buildings he remodelled have survived , and for this reason Brettingham now tends to be thought of as an " improver " rather than an architect of country houses . 
 There is no evidence that Brettingham ever formally studied architecture or travelled abroad . Reports of him making two trips to Continental Europe , are the result of confusion with his son , Matthew Brettingham the Younger . That he enjoyed success in his own lifetime is beyond doubt — Robert Adam calculated that when Brettingham sent his son , Matthew , on the Grand Tour ( 1747 ) , he went with a sum of money in his pocket of around £ 15 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 17 million in 2016 ) , an enormous amount at the time . However , part of this sum was probably used to acquire the statuary in Italy ( documented as supplied by Matthew Brettingham the Younger ) for the nearly completed Holkham Hall . Matthew Brettingham the Younger wrote that his father " considered the building of Holkham as the great work of his life " . While the design of that great monumental house , which still stands , cannot truly be accredited to him , it is the building for which Brettingham is best remembered . 
 = Silicon carbide = 
 Silicon carbide ( SiC ) , also known as carborundum / <unk> / , is a compound of silicon and carbon with chemical formula SiC . It occurs in nature as the extremely rare mineral moissanite . Silicon carbide powder has been mass @-@ produced since 1893 for use as an abrasive . Grains of silicon carbide can be bonded together by sintering to form very hard ceramics that are widely used in applications requiring high endurance , such as car brakes , car clutches and ceramic plates in bulletproof vests . Electronic applications of silicon carbide such as light @-@ emitting diodes ( LEDs ) and detectors in early radios were first demonstrated around 1907 . SiC is used in semiconductor electronics devices that operate at high temperatures or high voltages , or both . Large single crystals of silicon carbide can be grown by the Lely method ; they can be cut into gems known as synthetic moissanite . Silicon carbide with high surface area can be produced from SiO2 contained in plant material . 
 = = Discovery and early production = = 
 = = = Early experiments = = = 
 Non @-@ systematic , less @-@ recognized , and often unverified syntheses of silicon carbide include 
 J. J. Berzelius 's reduction of potassium fluorosilicate by potassium ( 1810 ) 
 César @-@ <unk> Despretz 's passing an electric current through a carbon rod embedded in sand ( 1849 ) 
 Robert Sydney Marsden 's dissolution of silica in molten silver in a graphite crucible ( 1881 ) 
 Paul <unk> 's heating of a mixture of silicon and silica in a graphite crucible ( 1881 ) 
 Albert Colson 's heating of silicon under a stream of ethylene ( 1882 ) . 
 = = = Wide @-@ scale production = = = 
 Wide @-@ scale production is credited to Edward Goodrich Acheson in 1890 . Acheson was attempting to prepare artificial diamonds when he heated a mixture of clay ( aluminum silicate ) and powdered coke ( carbon ) in an iron bowl . He called the blue crystals that formed Carborundum , believing it to be a new compound of carbon and aluminum , similar to corundum . In 1893 , Henri Moissan discovered the very rare naturally @-@ occurring SiC mineral while examining rock samples found in the Canyon Diablo meteorite in Arizona . The mineral was named moissanite in his honor . Moissan also synthesized SiC by several routes , including dissolution of carbon in molten silicon , melting a mixture of calcium carbide and silica , and by reducing silica with carbon in an electric furnace . 
 Acheson patented the method for making silicon carbide powder on February 28 , 1893 . Acheson also developed the electric batch furnace by which SiC is still made today and formed the Carborundum Company to manufacture bulk SiC , initially for use as an abrasive . In 1900 the company settled with the Electric Smelting and Aluminum Company when a judge 's decision gave " priority broadly " to its founders " for reducing ores and other substances by the incandescent method " . It is said that Acheson was trying to dissolve carbon in molten corundum ( alumina ) and discovered the presence of hard , blue @-@ black crystals which he believed to be a compound of carbon and corundum : hence carborundum . It may be that he named the material " carborundum " by analogy to corundum , which is another very hard substance ( 9 on the Mohs scale ) . 
 The first use of SiC was as an abrasive . This was followed by electronic applications . In the beginning of the 20th century , silicon carbide was used as a detector in the first radios . In 1907 Henry Joseph Round produced the first LED by applying a voltage to a SiC crystal and observing yellow , green and orange emission at the cathode . Those experiments were later repeated by O. V. Losev in the Soviet Union in 1923 . 
 = = Natural occurrence = = 
 Naturally occurring moissanite is found in only minute quantities in certain types of meteorite and in corundum deposits and kimberlite . Virtually all the silicon carbide sold in the world , including moissanite jewels , is synthetic . Natural moissanite was first found in 1893 as a small component of the Canyon Diablo meteorite in Arizona by Dr. Ferdinand Henri Moissan , after whom the material was named in 1905 . Moissan 's discovery of naturally occurring SiC was initially disputed because his sample may have been contaminated by silicon carbide saw blades that were already on the market at that time . 
 While rare on Earth , silicon carbide is remarkably common in space . It is a common form of stardust found around carbon @-@ rich stars , and examples of this stardust have been found in pristine condition in primitive ( unaltered ) meteorites . The silicon carbide found in space and in meteorites is almost exclusively the beta @-@ polymorph . Analysis of SiC grains found in the Murchison meteorite , a carbonaceous chondrite meteorite , has revealed anomalous isotopic ratios of carbon and silicon , indicating an origin from outside the solar system ; 99 % of these SiC grains originate around carbon @-@ rich asymptotic giant branch stars . SiC is commonly found around these stars as deduced from their infrared spectra . 
 = = Production = = 
 Because of the rarity of natural moissanite , most silicon carbide is synthetic . It is used as an abrasive , and more recently as a semiconductor and diamond simulant of gem quality . The simplest manufacturing process is to combine silica sand and carbon in an Acheson graphite electric resistance furnace at a high temperature , between 1 @,@ 600 ° C ( 2 @,@ 910 ° F ) and 2 @,@ 500 ° C ( 4 @,@ 530 ° F ) . Fine SiO2 particles in plant material ( e.g. rice husks ) can be converted to SiC by heating in the excess carbon from the organic material . The silica fume , which is a byproduct of producing silicon metal and <unk> alloys , also can be converted to SiC by heating with graphite at 1 @,@ 500 ° C ( 2 @,@ 730 ° F ) . 
 The material formed in the Acheson furnace varies in purity , according to its distance from the graphite resistor heat source . Colorless , pale yellow and green crystals have the highest purity and are found closest to the resistor . The color changes to blue and black at greater distance from the resistor , and these darker crystals are less pure . Nitrogen and aluminium are common impurities , and they affect the electrical conductivity of SiC . 
 Pure silicon carbide can be made by the so @-@ called Lely process , in which SiC powder is sublimated into high @-@ temperature species of silicon , carbon , silicon <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> carbide ( <unk> ) in an argon gas ambient at 2500 ° C and redeposited into flake @-@ like single crystals , sized up to 2 × 2 cm , at a slightly colder substrate . This process yields high @-@ quality single crystals , mostly of 6H @-@ SiC phase ( because of high growth temperature ) . A modified Lely process involving induction heating in graphite crucibles yields even larger single crystals of 4 inches ( 10 cm ) in diameter , having a section 81 times larger compared to the conventional Lely process . Cubic SiC is usually grown by the more expensive process of chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) . <unk> and <unk> SiC layers can be grown employing both gas and liquid phase approaches . Pure silicon carbide can also be prepared by the thermal decomposition of a polymer , poly ( <unk> ) , under an inert atmosphere at low temperatures . Relative to the CVD process , the pyrolysis method is advantageous because the polymer can be formed into various shapes prior to <unk> into the ceramic . 
 = = Structure and properties = = 
 Silicon carbide exists in about 250 crystalline forms . The polymorphism of SiC is characterized by a large family of similar crystalline structures called <unk> . They are variations of the same chemical compound that are identical in two dimensions and differ in the third . Thus , they can be viewed as layers stacked in a certain sequence . 
 Alpha silicon carbide ( α @-@ SiC ) is the most commonly encountered polymorph ; it is formed at temperatures greater than 1700 ° C and has a hexagonal crystal structure ( similar to Wurtzite ) . The beta modification ( β @-@ SiC ) , with a zinc blende crystal structure ( similar to diamond ) , is formed at temperatures below 1700 ° C. Until recently , the beta form has had relatively few commercial uses , although there is now increasing interest in its use as a support for heterogeneous catalysts , owing to its higher surface area compared to the alpha form . 
 Pure SiC is colorless . The brown to black color of industrial product results from iron impurities . The rainbow @-@ like luster of the crystals is caused by a passivation layer of silicon dioxide that forms on the surface . 
 The high sublimation temperature of SiC ( approximately 2700 ° C ) makes it useful for bearings and furnace parts . Silicon carbide does not melt at any known pressure . It is also highly inert chemically . There is currently much interest in its use as a semiconductor material in electronics , where its high thermal conductivity , high electric field breakdown strength and high maximum current density make it more promising than silicon for high @-@ powered devices . SiC also has a very low coefficient of thermal expansion ( 4 @.@ 0 × 10 − 6 / K ) and experiences no phase transitions that would cause discontinuities in thermal expansion . 
 = = = Electrical conductivity = = = 
 Silicon carbide is a semiconductor , which can be doped n @-@ type by nitrogen or phosphorus and p @-@ type by beryllium , boron , aluminium , or gallium . Metallic conductivity has been achieved by heavy doping with boron , aluminium or nitrogen . 
 Superconductivity has been detected in 3C @-@ SiC : Al , 3C @-@ SiC : B and 6H @-@ SiC : B at the same temperature of 1 @.@ 5 K. A crucial difference is however observed for the magnetic field behavior between aluminium and boron doping : SiC : Al is type @-@ II , same as Si : B. On the contrary , SiC : B is type @-@ I. In attempt to explain this difference , it was noted that Si sites are more important than carbon sites for superconductivity in SiC . Whereas boron substitutes carbon in SiC , Al substitutes Si sites . Therefore , Al and B " see " different environments that might explain different properties of SiC : Al and SiC : B. 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Abrasive and cutting tools = = = 
 In the arts , silicon carbide is a popular abrasive in modern lapidary due to the durability and low cost of the material . In manufacturing , it is used for its hardness in abrasive machining processes such as grinding , honing , water @-@ jet cutting and sandblasting . Particles of silicon carbide are laminated to paper to create <unk> and the grip tape on skateboards . 
 In 1982 an exceptionally strong composite of aluminium oxide and silicon carbide whiskers was discovered . Development of this laboratory @-@ produced composite to a commercial product took only three years . In 1985 , the first commercial cutting tools made from this alumina and silicon carbide whisker @-@ reinforced composite were introduced to the market . 
 = = = Structural material = = = 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , silicon carbide was studied in several research programs for high @-@ temperature gas turbines in Europe , Japan and the United States . The components were intended to replace nickel superalloy turbine blades or nozzle vanes . However , none of these projects resulted in a production quantity , mainly because of its low impact resistance and its low fracture toughness . 
 Like other hard ceramics ( namely alumina and boron carbide ) , silicon carbide is used in composite armor ( e.g. Chobham armor ) , and in ceramic plates in bulletproof vests . Dragon Skin , which is produced by Pinnacle Armor , uses disks of silicon carbide . 
 Silicon carbide is used as a support and shelving material in high temperature kilns such as for firing ceramics , glass fusing , or glass casting . SiC kiln shelves are considerably lighter and more durable than traditional alumina shelves . 
 In December 2015 , infusion of silicon carbide nano @-@ particles in molten magnesium was mentioned as a way to produce a new strong and plastic alloy suitable for use in aeronautics , aerospace , automobile and micro @-@ electronics . 
 = = = Automobile parts = = = 
 Silicon @-@ infiltrated carbon @-@ carbon composite is used for high performance " ceramic " brake discs , as it is able to withstand extreme temperatures . The silicon reacts with the graphite in the carbon @-@ carbon composite to become carbon @-@ fiber @-@ reinforced silicon carbide ( C / SiC ) . These discs are used on some road @-@ going sports cars , supercars , as well as other performance cars including the Porsche Carrera GT , the Bugatti Veyron , the Chevrolet Corvette <unk> , <unk> , Ferraris , <unk> , some specific high performance Audis , and the McLaren P1 . Silicon carbide is also used in a sintered form for diesel particulate filters . SiC is also used as an oil additive to reduce friction , emissions , and harmonics . 
 = = = Electric systems = = = 
 The earliest electrical application of SiC was in lightning arresters in electric power systems . These devices must exhibit high resistance until the voltage across them reaches a certain threshold VT at which point their resistance must drop to a lower level and maintain this level until the applied voltage drops below VT . 
 It was recognized early on that SiC had such a voltage @-@ dependent resistance , and so columns of SiC pellets were connected between high @-@ voltage power lines and the earth . When a lightning strike to the line raises the line voltage sufficiently , the SiC column will conduct , allowing strike current to pass harmlessly to the earth instead of along the power line . Such SiC columns proved to conduct significantly at normal power @-@ line operating voltages and thus had to be placed in series with a spark gap . This spark gap is ionized and rendered conductive when lightning raises the voltage of the power line conductor , thus effectively connecting the SiC column between the power conductor and the earth . Spark gaps used in lightning arresters are unreliable , either failing to strike an arc when needed or failing to turn off afterwards , in the latter case due to material failure or contamination by dust or salt . Usage of SiC columns was originally intended to eliminate the need for the spark gap in a lightning arrester . <unk> SiC lightning arresters were used as lightning @-@ protection tool and sold under GE and Westinghouse brand names , among others . The gapped SiC arrester has been largely displaced by no @-@ gap varistors that use columns of zinc oxide pellets . 
 = = = Electronic circuit elements = = = 
 = = = = Power electronic devices = = = = 
 Silicon carbide is a semiconductor in research and early mass @-@ production providing advantages for fast , high @-@ temperature and / or high @-@ voltage devices . The first devices available were Schottky diodes , followed by junction @-@ gate FETs and MOSFETs for high @-@ power switching . Bipolar transistors and thyristors are currently developed . A major problem for SiC commercialization has been the elimination of defects : edge dislocations , screw dislocations ( both hollow and closed core ) , triangular defects and basal plane dislocations . As a result , devices made of SiC crystals initially displayed poor reverse blocking performance though researchers have been tentatively finding solutions to improve the breakdown performance . Apart from crystal quality , problems with the interface of SiC with silicon dioxide have hampered the development of SiC @-@ based power MOSFETs and insulated @-@ gate bipolar transistors . Although the mechanism is still unclear , nitridation has dramatically reduced the defects causing the interface problems . In 2008 , the first commercial <unk> rated at 1200 V were introduced to the market , followed in 2011 by the first commercial MOSFETs rated at 1200 V. Beside SiC switches and SiC Schottky diodes ( also Schottky barrier diode , SBD ) in the popular TO @-@ 247 and TO @-@ 220 packages , companies started even earlier to implement the bare chips into their power electronic modules . SiC SBD diodes found wide market spread being used in PFC circuits and IGBT power modules . Conferences such as the International Conference on Integrated Power Electronics Systems ( <unk> ) report regularly about the technological progress of SiC power devices . Major challenges for fully unleashing the capabilities of SiC power devices are : 
 Gate drive : SiC devices often require gate drive voltage levels that are different from their silicon counterparts and may be even <unk> , for example , + 20 V and − 5 V. 
 Packaging : SiC chips may have a higher power density than silicon power devices and are able to handle higher temperatures exceeding the silicon limit of 150 ° C. New die attach technologies such as sintering are required to efficiently get the heat out of the devices and ensure a reliable interconnection . 
 = = = = LEDs = = = = 
 The phenomenon of <unk> was discovered in 1907 using silicon carbide and the first commercial LEDs were again based on SiC . Yellow LEDs made from 3C @-@ SiC were manufactured in the Soviet Union in the 1970s and blue ones ( 6H @-@ SiC ) worldwide in the 1980s . The production was soon stopped because gallium nitride showed 10 – 100 times brighter emission . This difference in efficiency is due to the unfavorable indirect bandgap of SiC , whereas GaN has a direct bandgap which favors light emission . However , SiC is still one of the important LED components – it is a popular substrate for growing GaN devices , and it also serves as a heat spreader in high @-@ power LEDs . 
 = = = Astronomy = = = 
 The low thermal expansion coefficient , high hardness , rigidity and thermal conductivity make silicon carbide a desirable mirror material for astronomical telescopes . The growth technology ( chemical vapor deposition ) has been scaled up to produce disks of polycrystalline silicon carbide up to 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) in diameter , and several telescopes like the Herschel Space Telescope are already equipped with SiC optics . 
 = = = Thin filament <unk> = = = 
 Silicon carbide fibers are used to measure gas temperatures in an optical technique called thin filament <unk> . It involves the placement of a thin filament in a hot gas stream . Radiative emissions from the filament can be correlated with filament temperature . <unk> are SiC fibers with a diameter of 15 micrometers , about one fifth that of a human hair . Because the fibers are so thin , they do little to disturb the flame and their temperature remains close to that of the local gas . Temperatures of about 800 – 2500 K can be measured . 
 = = = Heating elements = = = 
 References to silicon carbide heating elements exist from the early 20th century when they were produced by Acheson 's Carborundum Co. in the U.S. and <unk> in Berlin . Silicon carbide offered increased operating temperatures compared with metallic heaters . Silicon carbide elements are used today in the melting of glass and non @-@ ferrous metal , heat treatment of metals , float glass production , production of ceramics and electronics components , <unk> in pilot lights for gas heaters , etc . 
 = = = Nuclear fuel particles = = = 
 Silicon carbide is an important material in <unk> @-@ coated fuel particles , the type of nuclear fuel found in high temperature gas cooled reactors such as the Pebble Bed Reactor . A layer of silicon carbide gives coated fuel particles structural support and is the main diffusion barrier to the release of fission products . 
 = = = Nuclear fuel cladding = = = 
 Silicon carbide composite material has been investigated for use as a replacement for <unk> cladding in light water reactors . The composite consists of SiC fibers wrapped around a SiC inner layer and surrounded by an SiC outer layer . Problems have been reported with the ability to join the pieces of the SiC composite . 
 = = = Jewelry = = = 
 As a gemstone used in jewelry , silicon carbide is called " synthetic moissanite " or just " moissanite " after the mineral name . Moissanite is similar to diamond in several important respects : it is transparent and hard ( 9 – 9 @.@ 5 on the Mohs scale , compared to 10 for diamond ) , with a refractive index between 2 @.@ 65 and 2 @.@ 69 ( compared to 2 @.@ 42 for diamond ) . Moissanite is somewhat harder than common cubic zirconia . Unlike diamond , moissanite can be strongly birefringent . For this reason , moissanite jewels are cut along the optic axis of the crystal to minimize birefringent effects . It is lighter ( density 3 @.@ 21 g / cm3 vs. 3 @.@ 53 g / cm3 ) , and much more resistant to heat than diamond . This results in a stone of higher luster , sharper facets and good resilience . Loose moissanite stones may be placed directly into wax ring moulds for lost @-@ wax casting , as can diamond , as moissanite remains undamaged by temperatures up to 1800 ° C. Moissanite has become popular as a diamond substitute , and may be misidentified as diamond , since its thermal conductivity is closer to diamond than any other substitute . Many thermal diamond @-@ testing devices cannot distinguish moissanite from diamond , but the gem is distinct in its birefringence and a very slight green or yellow fluorescence under ultraviolet light . Some moissanite stones also have curved , string @-@ like inclusions , which diamonds never have . 
 = = = Steel production = = = 
 Silicon carbide , dissolved in a basic oxygen furnace used for making steel , acts as a fuel . The additional energy liberated allows the furnace to process more scrap with the same charge of hot metal . It can also be used to raise tap temperatures and adjust the carbon and silicon content . Silicon carbide is cheaper than a combination of <unk> and carbon , produces cleaner steel and lower emissions due to low levels of trace elements , has a low gas content , and does not lower the temperature of steel . 
 = = = Catalyst support = = = 
 The natural resistance to oxidation exhibited by silicon carbide , as well as the discovery of new ways to synthesize the cubic β @-@ SiC form , with its larger surface area , has led to significant interest in its use as a heterogeneous catalyst support . This form has already been employed as a catalyst support for the oxidation of hydrocarbons , such as n @-@ butane , to maleic anhydride . 
 = = = Carborundum printmaking = = = 
 Silicon carbide is used in carborundum printmaking – a <unk> printmaking technique . Carborundum grit is applied in a paste to the surface of an aluminium plate . When the paste is dry , ink is applied and trapped in its granular surface , then wiped from the bare areas of the plate . The ink plate is then printed onto paper in a rolling @-@ bed press used for intaglio printmaking . The result is a print of painted marks embossed into the paper . 
 = = = <unk> production = = = 
 Silicon carbide is used to produce epitaxial graphene by <unk> at high temperatures . This is considered as one of the promising methods to synthesize graphene at large scale for practical applications . 
 = Tony Hawk 's Underground = 
 Tony Hawk 's Underground is a skateboarding @-@ adventure video game published by Activision in 2003 , the fifth entry in the Tony Hawk 's series . Neversoft developed the GameCube , PlayStation 2 , Xbox versions , Canadian developer Beenox developed the Microsoft Windows version , which was only released in Australia and New Zealand as a budget release in 2005 , while the Game Boy Advance adaptation was developed by Vicarious Visions and the mobile phone version by <unk> . 
 Underground is built upon the skateboarding formula of previous Tony Hawk 's games : the player explores levels and completes goals while performing tricks . The game features a new focus on customization ; the player , instead of selecting a professional skater , creates a custom character . Underground adds the ability for players to dismount their boards and explore on foot . The plot follows the player character and his or her friend Eric Sparrow as the two become well @-@ known professionals and grow apart . 
 The game was developed with a theme of individuality , which was manifested in the extensive customization options , the presence of a narrative , and the product 's characterization as an adventure game . Real @-@ world professional skateboarders contributed their experiences to the plot . Reviewers praised its wide appeal , soundtrack , customization , multiplayer , and plot . The graphics and the controls for driving vehicles and walking were less well received . Underground 's PlayStation 2 version had sold 2 @.@ 11 million copies in the United States by December 2007 . A sequel , Underground 2 , was released in 2004 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessors in the Tony Hawk 's series , Underground is centered on skateboarding in a series of levels . The player performs tricks via combinations of analog stick and button inputs . For example , the player initiates an <unk> ( a jump trick ) by holding and releasing the jump button . During an <unk> , the player may change the position of the analog stick and press one of two buttons to perform either a flip trick ( such as an impossible or <unk> ) or a grab trick ( such as a <unk> or <unk> ) . The player can grind on certain edges and rails ; different tricks may be performed during a grind based on the position of the analog stick . On quarter pipes , the player may execute lip tricks . While skating on flat surfaces , the player may manual in multiple ways via button combinations . Miscellaneous tricks include acid drops and wall @-@ rides . 
 While a grind , lip , or manual trick is underway , a balance meter appears : unless the player prevents this meter from falling to the left or right , the character will bail and need a few seconds to recover . Bailing can also be caused by falling without one 's board facing downward . Completing tricks in succession without bailing is called a combo . <unk> raises the player 's score and fills up the Special Meter ; when it is full , the player is granted access to more elaborate tricks worth more points , such as the <unk> and 540 Flip . Underground introduces the ability to dismount one 's skateboard , which allows the player to explore levels more carefully and reach new areas . Each level features at least one vehicle , usually a car , that the player can drive . 
 The levels are based on regions of the United States and other countries . In each level , certain tasks that advance the game 's narrative must be completed before the player can move on . These tasks include score attacks , races , item collection , and reaching one of many gaps found in a level . Each level houses one professional skateboarder , who provides a sidequest that unlocks a trick for the Special Meter . On account of the levels ' large sizes and the integration of goals into the story , Underground has been described as an adventure game . Characters can level up their stats — which include jump height and speed — by completing optional goals in a level ; this adds an element of role @-@ playing gameplay . Other gameplay modes include multiplayer minigames — one , a combat mode called " Firefight " , can be played online in the PlayStation 2 version of the game — and a " free skate " mode that lets the player explore levels with no goals or story . 
 Underground features extensive customization . The player creates a custom character for the story mode , and may not play as a pre @-@ made professional skater outside a few contexts : a special scene late in the game , minigames , and the free skate mode . A level editor allows the player to create skate parks with a large array of objects , ranging from traditional skate park elements like <unk> , ramps , <unk> , and grind rails to more outlandish pieces like buildings and sections of elevated freeways . The player can change their park 's time of day and environmental theme . Tricks , skateboards , and level goals may be customized as well . 
 While the console versions of the game are fully three @-@ dimensional , the Game Boy Advance version is rendered in an isometric style that incorporates both 2D sprites and 3D models . This version is a more traditional Tony Hawk 's game , with little attention given to story or customization . The mobile phone version is similarly restricted . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The protagonist and their friend , Eric Sparrow , live in suburban New Jersey and dream of becoming famous skateboarders . The protagonist manages to impress professional skater Chad Muska , in town for a demo , who gives them a new skateboard and informs them that a good way to start a skating career is to gain a sponsorship from a skate shop . The protagonist seeks out Stacy Peralta , but he refuses unless he sees something to set them apart from the other local skaters , so the protagonist travels to Manhattan with Eric , who is on the run from drug dealers after setting their car on fire for stealing from the skate shop . 
 There , the pair shoot a skating video that impresses Stacy , who loans them a van and suggests they enter the Tampa AM , an amateur division skate contest held annually at the Skate Park of Tampa in Tampa , Florida . Eric is arrested for insulting a police officer , and the protagonist does favors for the police to secure his bail . However , when they arrive for the contest , it is revealed that Eric had only completed his own registration form and not the protagonist 's , forcing a dejected protagonist to try and impress competitors in the pro contest in order to gain admission . After impressing Tony Hawk , the protagonist wins the Best Trick event at Tampa AM and is offered deals by major skateboard sponsors , much to Eric 's dismay . The protagonist then heads to San Diego , California to meet Todd , the manager of the team , and completes several photo shoots for a magazine . After a wild celebration party , it is revealed that Eric has been picked up by the same sponsor . 
 The team then flies to Hawaii to film a video , with the protagonist aiming for local spots that skaters have not filmed in before . Finding a tall hotel , the protagonist climbs to the roof and recruits Eric to film a trick video atop it . The police arrive to arrest them for trespassing , but the protagonist uses the opportunity to perform a <unk> over the helicopter and onto the awning of an adjacent hotel , allowing them and an awestruck Eric to evade the police . The team then travels to Vancouver , Canada . After doing favors for locals and finishing their part of the team video , the protagonist attends the video premiere at the Slam City Jam . However , Eric steals the idea and alters the footage , which instead shows him jumping the helicopter and allows Eric to become a professional . After angrily confronting Eric , the protagonist , in payback , enters Eric 's pro contest and wins , becoming a pro as well . 
 After designing their own pro skateboard , the protagonist and Eric embark on a team trip to Moscow , Russia , where they reconcile . However , Eric gets drunk and joyrides in a Russian military tank . The protagonist hops in and attempts to stop the tank , but being unfamiliar with the controls , fails to keep it from crashing . Eric jumps out and runs away , leaving the protagonist , trapped inside , to be arrested by the Russian military . Eric then lies and accuses the protagonist of stealing the tank , stating that he in fact tried to stop them . Unwilling to pay the damages , Todd kicks the protagonist off the team , much to Eric 's delight . The American Embassy bails out the protagonist , leaving them to do favors for locals in order to return to New Jersey . 
 Eric , who now has his own skate company , reveals that he had been planning to betray the protagonist after having long abandoning the idea of " soul skating " ( skating for enjoyment rather than riches ) ; after unsuccessfully trying to exempt them from the Tampa AM , Eric stole the helicopter footage in jealousy before finally getting the protagonist kicked off the skate team by lying back in Moscow . Determined to fight back , the protagonist teams up with Peralta and several professionals to create a soul skating video , creating a new trick in the process . Due to the success of the video , Eric challenges the protagonist to one last skate @-@ off , with the unedited helicopter tape at stake . The protagonist wins by avoiding Eric 's attempts to cheat and walks away with the tape while Eric breaks down in anger . 
 If the story has been completed more than once , an alternate ending occurs , which sees the protagonist punch Eric and knock him unconscious , taking the tape back instead of holding the skate @-@ off . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The game features many real world professional skateboarders including : Tony Hawk , Chad Muska , and Stacy Peralta . Underground also features cameo appearances by Iron Man , <unk> , and Kiss singer Gene Simmons . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox versions of Underground were developed by Neversoft , while the Game Boy Advance version was developed by Vicarious Visions the mobile phone version by <unk> , and the Windows version created by Beenox . Activision , which had acquired Neversoft in 1999 , published all versions of the game . 
 Underground was created with a theme of individuality : it stars an amateur skater in a true story mode , whereas each previous Tony Hawk 's game had starred professional skaters and had lacked a plot . One reason for only allowing the player to use a custom character was that certain criminal acts completed in the plot would not reflect well on real @-@ world skaters . Previous games in the series had included character @-@ creation features as well , but Neversoft expanded customization in Underground by implementing face @-@ scanning for the PlayStation 2 version : if the player emailed a photograph of their face to faces @ <unk> , the company would digitize it for use in the game . Regarding the customization options , especially the park editor , producer Stacey <unk> stated that Neversoft was " trying to create the most customizable game ever " . The developers used storytelling and exploration to distance their product from the plotless , task @-@ based format of previous Tony Hawk 's games , which led Neversoft president Joel Jewett to describe Underground as an adventure game . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Levels in the console versions of Underground were significantly larger than those of earlier Tony Hawk 's games . Neversoft expanded each level until it ceased to run correctly , then shrunk it slightly . Most of the levels were modeled closely after real @-@ world locations ; the designers traveled to locales representative of each city in the game and took photographs and videos as reference . The New Jersey level was a replication of a neighborhood where team artist Henry Ji had grown up as a young skater . Neversoft wanted the player to become familiar with the basic game mechanics quickly and to notice Underground 's differences from previous Tony Hawk 's titles immediately . To accomplish this , they introduced the player to foot travel and the ability to climb along ledges in the first few missions of the game . While Neversoft wanted to keep Underground realistic and relatable for the most part , they added driving missions as an enjoyable diversion and to push the boundaries of freedom in skateboarding games . However , these missions were intended not to take away from the main experience of skateboarding . 
 Pro Skater 4 , Underground 's predecessor in the Tony Hawk 's series , had received criticism for its difficulty : Neversoft had not realized that each game in the series was drawing new fans who were unaccustomed to the demanding tasks . As a result , Neversoft added four difficulty settings to Underground 's story mode , ranging from " Too Easy " to " Sick " . Neversoft wanted players to develop skills for higher difficulty settings on Too Easy while still progressing through the story . The company had included extremely difficult missions in each previous Tony Hawk 's game ; the methods used to create these missions were the inspiration for Underground 's Sick mode . Development of the basic gameplay mechanics and structure began quickly but by the end of August 2003 , only two months before the game 's American release , work was still in progress . 
 While the game 's cutscenes are animated with 3D graphics , the team recorded live @-@ action videos to introduce the real @-@ world skateboarding teams , so that players could better understand each team before selecting one to join . Neversoft interviewed professional skaters about their experiences of becoming known in the skateboarding world , then compiled elements of these stories into the game 's script . Every skater who appears in the plot helped to craft their own scenes and voiced their own character . 
 = = = Promotion and release = = = 
 The game was promoted with a playable demo at Microsoft 's " <unk> " event held at Lollapalooza in July 2003 . Activision stirred up enthusiasm for Underground with the " Tony Hawk 's Face Off Mobile Tour " , a series of promotional events across 29 cities in October 2003 . Attendees could play the game early and compete in it for tickets to Boom Boom Huck Jam 2003 , which the real @-@ world Tony Hawk attended . Activision , which sponsored the October 2003 Gravity Games extreme sports competition , promoted the game at the event and used its rendering engine to model tricks performed by the real @-@ world skaters . The console and Game Boy Advance versions were released on October 28 in the United States , November 14 in Europe , and May 2004 in Japan . The mobile version was released worldwide in January 2004 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The game features 78 songs , 75 of which are immediately playable in the main game ; the other three are unlockable . They range from the late 1970s to the early 2000s by release and are categorized into three genres : rock , punk , and hip hop . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Underground was released to critical acclaim : with scores for the PlayStation 2 at 90 @.@ 58 % on GameRankings , and 90 % on Metacritic . GameZone 's Michael Knutson stated that Underground is " one of the best skating games around " and that players of every skill level would enjoy it . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell concurred : " as a ' pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play ' sort of game , <unk> is endlessly rewarding once you get your head round the basics , and it 's the best entry point for the series to date . " 
 The story was well received . Joel Rybicki of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine celebrated that " for the first time I can remember , an extreme @-@ sports game actually has a real story [ with ] honest @-@ to @-@ goodness characters " . IGN 's Douglas Perry called it " a kick , albeit relatively lightweight in nature " . He especially praised the pervasive sense of humor in the narrative and in the portrayal of real @-@ world skaters . Knutson called the story " unique " and stated , " I really like that Neversoft had the guts to try something this radical and ditch the formula that they know works so well . " Ben Silverman of Game Revolution described the game 's plot as a " silly " cross between those of the 1980s films North Shore and Gleaming the Cube , but he praised it for giving context to the level goals and keeping distance between the skill unlocks . Bramwell called it " hackneyed " . Rybicki found that the plot hurt the game 's replay value and caused missions to be overly simplistic . By contrast , Game Informer 's Justin Leeper thought that " it serves to make some of the less @-@ entertaining goals tolerable , because there ’ s a reason for doing them . " 
 The game 's aesthetics were generally well received . Bramwell called the graphics " unchanged and increasingly antiquated " and criticized the presence of " sharp , angular character models , eerily unrealistic lighting and odd little moments when the player is trying to turn round and ends up banging into a curb " . Knutson , meanwhile , was positive regarding the graphics , art , and animation : he called them " nearly flawless " and praised the realism they brought to the inherently fantastical skateboarding genre . Williams said that " <unk> 's cityscapes are incredibly well designed " and singled out the GameCube version of Underground as exceptionally well rendered . Rybicki called the levels " big and beautiful " . Knutson commended the soundtrack 's large size and the sound effects ' realism . Perry appreciated the " hilariously hurtful " injury sounds and the extensive song list . By contrast , IGN 's Craig Harris praised the graphics of the Game Boy Advance version but was more mixed on the soundtrack . 
 The alternate gameplay modes were received very well . Knutson lauded the game 's high degree of customization ; he summarized that " everything is expounded a hundred fold : from create @-@ a @-@ skater to create @-@ a @-@ park mode , it is simply amazing " . He singled out the level editor as one of the deepest he had ever seen . GameSpy 's Bryn Williams identified the level editor as an " extremely well @-@ designed " feature that contributed to the overall " brilliance " of the full product . Leeper said that each customization mode is " intuitive and user @-@ friendly " , and both he and Rybicki especially enjoyed the trick @-@ creation feature . Reviewers for Famitsu magazine praised the story mode , whose open world format they compared to the Grand Theft Auto series . Knutson and Perry enjoyed the multiplayer , particularly the online Firefight mode . Williams thought similarly and stated that " the most notable disappointment " of the game was the lack of online play for non @-@ PlayStation 2 owners . Harris found the board customization of the Game Boy Advance version to be poorly implemented , though in @-@ depth . Despite his praise for the customization modes , Leeper admitted that his greatest enjoyment still came from " seeking out great lines and beating my scores " . 
 The walking and driving controls were criticized . Bramwell claimed that these modes felt " like they 've been attached with an old stick of glue that 's about as adhesive as baby oil " . Knutson agreed , though he praised the novelty of these diversions . He stated that " the Tony Hawk series has always had exceptional controls " and that Underground , overall , was no exception . Perry felt that the feature increased levels ' replay value . Similarly , Famitsu reviewers noted that , although the game 's fast pace makes it extremely challenging at times , the high difficulty provides a sense of accomplishment when jumps and tricks are performed correctly . Williams found the GameCube version 's controls mediocre , albeit manageable . Damon Brown from GameSpot stated that the mobile version 's restrictive controls — many tricks require three button inputs — were that version 's only caveat . 
 = = = Sales and accolades = = = 
 Underground won Best Sports Game at the 2003 Game Critics Awards hosted by Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) . The 2004 MTV Video Music Awards introduced a new category , Best Video Game Soundtrack , which Underground won . In Europe the week after the game 's release , the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , and GameCube versions were respectively the fifth , sixth , and eighth best selling games for those consoles . It would remain uninterrupted in the top twenty of every week until January 24 , 2004 , for the Xbox and GameCube and February 21 for the PlayStation 2 , inclusive . As of December 2007 , the PlayStation 2 version of the game had sold 2 @.@ 11 million copies in the United States . The GameCube version made Nintendo 's Player 's Choice list by selling 250 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Neversoft and Activision returned for a sequel , Underground 2 . It was released on October 4 , 2004 , for mobile phones , Microsoft Windows , and the GameCube , PlayStation 2 , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and PlayStation Portable consoles . The plot continues that of Underground and focuses on the player character and their team sabotaging an opposing team . The gameplay , structure , and level design are very similar to those of Underground . However , Underground 2 features new tricks and gameplay mechanics , like the Natas spin , the ability to plant customized stickers in levels with the " sticker slap " , a slow @-@ motion " Focus " mode , and the ability to earn points by having a tantrum after bailing . The plot is set entirely in new locations , such as Boston , New Orleans , Berlin , and Barcelona . The game received positive reviews , though less so than its predecessor : its GameRankings scores ranged from 70 @.@ 33 % for the Game Boy Advance to 86 @.@ 20 % for Windows . 
 = The Blind Leading the Blind = 
 The Blind Leading the Blind , Blind , or The Parable of the Blind ( Dutch : De <unk> der <unk> ) is a painting by the Flemish renaissance artist Pieter Bruegel the Elder , completed in 1568 . Executed in distemper on linen canvas , it measures 86 cm × 154 cm ( 34 in × 61 in ) . It depicts the Biblical parable of the blind leading the blind from the Gospel of Matthew 15 : 14 , and is held in the collection of the Museo di Capodimonte in Naples , Italy . 
 The painting reflects Bruegel 's mastery of observation . Each figure has a different eye affliction , including corneal <unk> , atrophy of globe and removed eyes . The men hold their heads aloft to make better use of their other senses . The diagonal composition reinforces the off @-@ kilter motion of the six figures falling in progression . It is considered a masterwork for its accurate detail and composition . Copies include a larger version by Bruegel 's son Pieter Brueghel the Younger , and the work has inspired literature such as poetry by Charles Baudelaire and William Carlos Williams , and a novel by Gert Hofmann . 
 It was painted the year before Bruegel 's death , and has a bitter , sorrowful tone . This may be related to the establishment of the Council of Troubles in 1567 by the government of the Spanish Netherlands . The council ordered mass arrests and executions to enforce Spanish rule and suppress Protestantism . The placement of Sint @-@ Anna Church of the village Sint @-@ Anna @-@ <unk> has led to both pro- and anti @-@ Catholic interpretations , though it is not clear that the painting was meant as a political statement . 
 = = Description = = 
 The painting depicts a procession of six blind , disfigured men . They pass along a path bordered by a river on one side and a village with a church on the other . The leader of the group has fallen on his back into a ditch and , because they are all linked by their staffs , seems about to drag his companions down with him . A cowherd stands in the background . 
 Bruegel based the work on the Biblical parable of the blind leading the blind from Matthew 15 : 14 , in which Christ refers to the Pharisees . According to art critic Margaret Sullivan , Bruegel 's audience was likely as familiar with classical literature as with the Bible . Erasmus had published his Adagia two years before Bruegel 's painting , and it contained the quotation " <unk> <unk> dux " ( " the blind leader of the blind " ) by Roman poet Horace . Bruegel expands the two blind men in the parable to six ; they are well dressed , rather than wearing the peasant clothing that typifies his late work . The first blind man 's face is not visible ; the second twists his head as he falls , perhaps to avoid landing face @-@ first . The <unk> @-@ clad third man , on his toes with knees bent and face to the sky , shares a staff with the second , by which he is being pulled down . The others have yet to stumble , but the same fate seems implied . 
 The faces and bodies of the blind men , and background detail including the church , are rendered in exceptionally fine detail . The backward @-@ falling posture of the guide demonstrates Bruegel 's mastery of foreshortening . Bruegel 's settings tend to be fictional , but that of The Blind Leading the Blind has been identified as the village Sint @-@ Anna @-@ <unk> , and the church as Sint @-@ Anna Church . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 One of four surviving Bruegel paintings in distemper , the work is a <unk> , a type of light painting that uses tempera made from pigment mixed with water @-@ soluble glue . This medium was widely used in painting and manuscript illumination before the advent of oil paint . It is not known from whom Bruegel learnt its use , but amongst those speculated are his mother @-@ in @-@ law , illuminator <unk> Verhulst ; his teacher Pieter <unk> van <unk> ; and painter and illuminator Giulio Clovio , with whom he resided in Italy and whom he helped paint miniatures in distemper . Due to the high <unk> of linen cloth and the solubility of hide glue , <unk> do not preserve well and are difficult to restore . The Blind Leading the Blind is in good condition and has suffered no more than some erosion , such as of a herdsman and some fowl in the middle ground . The grain of the linen canvas is visible beneath the delicate brushstrokes . The work is signed and dated <unk> The painting measures 86 cm × 154 cm ( 34 in × 61 in ) , the largest of 1568 . 
 The austere tone is achieved through pigments in a colour scheme of mostly greys , greens , brownish @-@ reds , and blacks . The diagonal movement of the bodies creates a dramatic tension in the foreground which is divided diagonally from the landscape background . The flat country features are distinctly Flemish , unlike in most of Bruegel 's landscapes , in which he introduced foreign elements such as mountain ranges even into local scenery . 
 In contrast to earlier depictions of the blind as beneficiaries of divine gifts , Bruegel 's men are stumbling and decrepit , and portrayed without sympathy . The <unk> figure would have been interpreted as a man who had suffered punishment for wrongdoing or fighting . 
 Bruegel painted with the empirical objectivity of the Renaissance . In earlier paintings the blind were typically depicted with eyes closed . Here , Bruegel gives each man a different ocular affliction , all painted with a realism that allowed identification of their conditions by later experts , though there is still some diagnostic disagreement . French anatomical pathologist Jean @-@ Martin Charcot and anatomical artist Paul Richer published an early account , Les <unk> et les <unk> dans l 'art ( " The deformed and sick in art " , 1889 ) , and French pathologist Tony @-@ Michel <unk> followed with more research on Bruegel 's figures in 1957 . The first man 's eyes are not visible ; the second has had his eyes removed , along with the eyelids : the third suffers from corneal <unk> ; the fourth atrophy of the globe ; the fifth is either blind with no light perception , or <unk> ; and the sixth has <unk> , or bullous <unk> . Charcot and Richer noted Bruegel 's accuracy in portraying the blind men facing not forward but with their faces raised in the air , as they would have had to rely on their senses of smell and hearing . 
 = = Background = = 
 Sixteenth @-@ century Europe was undergoing many societal changes : the Protestant Reformation and its rejection of public religious imagery ; Renaissance humanism and its emphasis on empiricism at the expense of religious faith ; and the growth of the middle class amidst the rise of mercantilism . It was a time of rapid advances in learning and knowledge , and a move towards the empirical sciences — the age of the heliocentric theory of Copernicus and of Gutenberg 's printing presses . The cartography of Ortelius influenced the painting of landscapes , and the advances Vesalius brought to the study of anatomy via the direct observation of dissected bodies , motivated artists to pay greater attention to the accuracy of the anatomy in their works . 
 Art was now traded in open markets ; artists sought to distinguish themselves with subjects different from traditional noble , mythological , and Biblical ones , and developed new , realistic techniques based on empirical observation . Classical literature provided precedents for dealing with " low " subjects in art . Genre art and its depiction of ordinary people and everyday life emerged against this background . 
 Pieter Bruegel the Elder began his career illustrating landscapes and fantastic scenes in a dense style that earned him a reputation as artistic heir to Hieronymus Bosch . He soon came to follow the example of another master : Pieter <unk> , who had made a name for himself in the 1550s depicting everyday scenes in a highly realistic style , such as the detailed array of meat products that dominate his large Butcher 's Stall of 1551 . Bruegel 's subjects became more quotidian and his style observational . He achieved fame for detailed , accurate and realistic portrayals of peasants , with whom his paintings were popular . He painted on linen canvas and oak panel and avoided scenes of magnificence and portraits of nobility or royalty . The peasants Bruegel at first depicted were featureless and undifferentiated ; as his work matured , their physiognomy became markedly more detailed and expressive . 
 In 1563 , Bruegel and his teacher Pieter <unk> van <unk> 's daughter <unk> were married , and moved to Brussels , the seat of government in the Spanish Netherlands ( 1556 – 1714 ) . In 1567 the governor of the Netherlands , the Duke of Alba , established the Council of Troubles ( popularly called the " Blood Council " ) to suppress non @-@ Catholic religions and enforce Spanish rule , leading to mass arrests and executions . Whether Bruegel had Calvinist sympathies or intended a political message in The Blind is not clear , but the evidence indicates he likely held views critical of the Catholic Church . A bitter , sorrowful tone characterizes his last works , such as The Blind and The Magpie on the Gallows . 
 In ancient Greece the blind were depicted as having received gifts from the gods , and blind singers were held in high regard . In mediaeval Europe , the blind were depicted as the subjects of miracles such as <unk> in the healing the blind near Jericho in Mark 10 : 46 – 52 . With the Reformation , painted depictions of saints and miracles fell out of favour in Protestant areas . In Catholic thought , charitable works of mercy such as giving alms to the blind and poor were good works which , together with faith , helped the salvation of the doer ; but the Protestant doctrine of sola fide rejected the efficacy of works in salvation , which depended on faith alone ( and the complication of God 's predestined will for each individual ) . The status of charity for the poor and infirm diminished , and beggars saw their circumstances deteriorate . In popular literature of the time , the blind were depicted as rogues or targets of pranks . The parable of the blind leading the blind also appears as one of the illustrated proverbs in Bruegel 's Netherlandish Proverbs ( 1559 ) . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Charles <unk> wrote of the tension in Bruegel 's compositional rhythms . The picture is divided into nine equal parts divided by a set of parallel oblique lines . These are divided by another network of lines at constant angles to the first . The composition invites the reader to follow the action rather than dwell on the individual figures . The blind men resemble each other in dress and facial features , and they appear as if they succeed one another in a single movement culminating in a fall , beginning on the left with " rambling , then hesitation , alarm , stumbling , and finally falling " . The succession of heads follows a curve , and the further the succession , the greater the space between heads , suggesting increasing speed . The steep roofs of the background houses contribute to the composition 's feeling of motion . 
 Art historian Gustav <unk> noted incongruities in that the beggars are well @-@ dressed and carry staves and full purses . Academics Kenneth C. Lindsay and Bernard <unk> suggest Bruegel may have implied that the blind men represent false priests who ignored Christ 's admonitions not to carry gold , purses , or staves ; the leader carries a hurdy @-@ gurdy , a musical instrument associated with beggars in Bruegel 's time ; this perhaps implies a false minstrel , one who sings praises not for God . 
 The church in the background , identified as the Sint @-@ Anna Church , at <unk> in modern Belgium , has sparked much commentary . One view holds that the church is evidence of the painting 's moralistic intent — that while the first two blind men stumble and are beyond redemption , the other four are behind the church and thus may be saved . Another interpretation has it that the church , with a withered tree placed before it , is an anti @-@ Catholic symbol , and that those who follow it will fall following a blind leader as do the men in the ditch . Others deny any symbolism in the church , noting that churches frequently appear in Bruegel 's village scenes as they were a common part of the village landscape . Medical researcher <unk> A. <unk> suggests the church represents indifference to the plight of the handicapped . 
 In contrast to the posed , static figures typical of paintings of the period , Bruegel suggests the trajectory of time and space through the accelerated movement of the figures . Critics Charcot and Richer wrote that the concept of visualizing movement was not formulated until the 17th century , and that Bruegel prefigures motion pictures and Duchamp 's Nude Descending a Staircase , No. 2 . <unk> sees the painting as anticipating the 19th @-@ century <unk> of Étienne @-@ Jules Marey . Dutch film director Joris Ivens stated , " If Bruegel were alive today he would be a film director . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Blind Leading the Blind has been considered one of the great masterpieces of painting . Bruegel 's is the earliest surviving painting whose subject is the parable of the blind leading the blind , though there are earlier engravings from the Low Countries known that Bruegel was likely aware of , including one attributed to Bosch , and another by Cornelis <unk> . Bruegel 's paintings have enjoyed worldwide popularity and have been the subjects of scholarly works in disciplines even outside the arts , such as medicine . 
 Bruegel 's depictions of beggars in paintings such as The Blind Leading the Blind left a strong influence on those who followed him , such as David <unk> . Hieronymus <unk> incorporated a copy of The Blind Leading the Blind into the series Twelve Flemish Proverbs . A forgery attributed to Jacob Savery called The Blind appeared c . 1600 bearing a false inscription dating it 1562 . Bruegel 's son Pieter Brueghel the Younger painted a larger copy in c . 1616 with extra details , including a flock of sheep , that hangs in the Louvre ; this copy was in the collection of Ferdinando Gonzaga , Duke of Mantua , patron of Italian Baroque painter Domenico <unk> , who may have been influenced by the painting when he executed his own version of the parable around 1621 – 22 . 
 Paintings inspired by Bruegel 's ' ' The Blind Leading the Blind ' ' 
 The painting has been the subject of poetry , including works by the Germans Josef <unk> and Walter Bauer , and Frenchman Charles Baudelaire 's " The Blind " . American William Carlos Williams wrote a series of poems on Bruegel 's paintings ; his " Parable of the Blind " focuses on the meaning of the The Blind 's composition — a word that appears three times in the poems eight tercets . The figures stumble diagonally downward , and — 
 ... one 
 follows the other stick in 
 hand triumphant to disaster 
 Bruegel 's painting served as a model for Belgian playwright Maurice Maeterlinck 's one @-@ act The Blind . West German writer Gert Hofmann 's 1985 novel The Parable of the Blind features Bruegel and the six blind men : to accomplish a realistic portrayal , Bruegel repeatedly has the men cross a bridge and fall into a creek in midwinter until their expressions achieve the desolation Bruegel believes represents the human condition . A 1987 historical novel Bruegel , or the Workshop of Dreams by Claude @-@ Henri <unk> has Bruegel painting the blind out of fear of losing his own eyesight . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The Blind Leading the Blind and The Misanthrope were discovered in the collection of the Count Giovanni Battista Masi of Parma in 1612 , when Ranuccio I Farnese , Duke of Parma confiscated Masi 's property for his part in a conspiracy against the House of Farnese . How the painting arrived in Italy is uncertain , though it is known that Masi 's father Cosimo returned from the Netherlands in 1595 with a number of Netherlandish paintings . The Farnese art collection came to be one of the largest of the Renaissance era , divided amongst the Farnese residences in Parma and Rome . 
 In the 18th century , Charles III of Spain inherited the collection from his mother , Elisabeth Farnese , heiress of the Duchy of Parma in north Italy , who became Queen consort of Spain . As a younger son , Charles had been made Duke of Parma , then boldly seized the Kingdom of Naples , becoming Charles VII of Naples , before inheriting the Spanish throne . Charles housed the collection in what is now the National Museum of Capodimonte in Naples . The painting hangs in the Capodimonte with The Misanthrope , as part of the Farnese collection . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals = = = = 
 = = = = Other media = = = = 
 = Genesis Nomad = 
 The Genesis Nomad ( also known as Sega Nomad ) is a handheld game console by Sega released in North America in October 1995 . The Nomad is a portable variation of Sega 's home console , the Sega Genesis ( known as the Mega Drive outside North America ) . Designed from the Mega Jet , a portable version of the home console designed for use on airline flights in Japan , Nomad served to succeed the Game Gear and was the last handheld console released by Sega . Unique about the Nomad is its additional functionality as a home console through a video port designed to be used with a television set . Released late in the Genesis era , the Nomad had a short lifespan . 
 Sold exclusively in North America , the Nomad was never officially released worldwide , and employs regional lockout . Because of the timing of Nomad 's release in October 1995 , Nomad released to an active game library of over 500 Genesis titles , but did not include any pack @-@ in titles itself . Sega 's focus on the Sega Saturn left the Nomad <unk> , and the handheld itself was incompatible with several Genesis peripherals , including the Power Base Converter , the Sega CD , and the 32X . 
 = = History = = 
 The Genesis represents Sega 's entry into the 16 @-@ bit era of video game consoles . In Japan , Sega released the Mega Jet , a portable version of the Mega Drive designed for use on Japan Airlines flights . As a condensed version , the Mega Jet requires a connection to a television screen and a power source , and so outside of airline flights it is only useful in cars equipped with a television set and cigarette lighter receptacle . 
 Planning to release a new handheld console as a successor to the Game Gear , Sega originally intended to produce a system which was to feature a touchscreen interface , released two years before the Game.com handheld by Tiger Electronics . However , such technology was very expensive at the time , and the handheld itself was estimated to have a high cost . Instead , Sega chose to suspend the idea and instead release the Genesis Nomad , a handheld version of the Genesis . The codename used during development was " Project Venus . " 
 The Nomad was released in October 1995 in North America only . The release was five years into the market span of the Genesis , with an existing library of more than 500 Genesis games . According to former Sega of America research and development head Joe Miller , the Nomad was not intended to be the Game Gear 's replacement and believes that there was little planning from Sega of Japan for the new handheld . Sega was supporting five different consoles : Saturn , Genesis , Game Gear , Pico , and the Master System , as well as the Sega CD and 32X add @-@ ons . In Japan , the Mega Drive had never been successful and the Saturn was more successful than Sony 's PlayStation , so Sega Enterprises CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to focus on the Saturn . Sega decided to stop focusing on the Genesis in 1999 , by which time the Nomad was being sold at less than a third of its original price . 
 = = Technical specifications = = 
 Similar to the Genesis and the Mega Jet , the Nomad 's main CPU is a Motorola 68000 . Possessing similar memory , graphics , and sound capabilities , the Nomad is nearly identical to the full @-@ size console ; the only variation that is completely self @-@ sufficient . The Nomad has a 3 @.@ 25 inch backlit color screen and also contains an A / V output that allows the Nomad to be played on a television screen — a feature unique to the Nomad . Design elements of the handheld were made similar to the Game Gear , but included six buttons for full compatibility with later Genesis releases . Also included were a red power switch , headphone jack , volume dial , and separate controller input for multiplayer games . The Nomad could be powered by an AC adapter , a rechargeable battery pack known as the Genesis Nomad <unk> , or six AA batteries , which provide a battery life of two to three hours . The Nomad consumed more power ( DC 9V , <unk> ) than Sega 's earlier portable gaming console , the Game Gear ( DC 9V , <unk> ) . The Nomad also lacks a " Reset " button , which makes it impossible to complete certain games , such as the X @-@ Men video game , which require pressing the button to finish certain objectives . 
 The Nomad is fully compatible with several Genesis peripherals , including the Sega Activator , Team Play Adaptor , Mega Mouse , and the Sega Channel and XBAND network add @-@ ons . However , the Nomad is not compatible with the Power Base Converter , Sega CD , or 32X . This means that the Nomad can only play Genesis titles , whereas the standard Genesis can also play Master System , Sega CD , and 32X titles with the respective add @-@ ons . 
 = = Game library = = 
 The Nomad does not have its own game library , but instead plays Genesis games . At the time of its launch , the Nomad had over 500 games available for play . However , no pack @-@ in title was included . The Nomad can boot bootleg , unlicensed , and homebrew games made for the Genesis . Some earlier third @-@ party titles have compatibility issues when played on the Nomad , but can be successfully played through the use of a Game Genie . Likewise , due to its inability to accommodate the use any add @-@ ons , it is unable to play any games for the Sega Master System , Sega CD , or Sega 32X . The Nomad employs regional lockout , but methods have been found to bypass this . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Reception for the Nomad is mixed between its uniqueness and its poor timing into the market . Blake Snow of GamePro listed the Nomad as fifth on his list of the " 10 Worst @-@ Selling Handhelds of All Time , " criticizing its poor timing into the market , inadequate advertising , and poor battery life . Scott Alan Marriott of Allgame placed more than simply timing into reasons for the Nomad 's lack of sales , stating , " The reason for the Nomad 's failure may have very well been a combination of poor timing , company mistrust and the relatively high cost of the machine ( without a pack @-@ in ) . Genesis owners were too skittish to invest in another 16 @-@ bit system . " The staff of Retro Gamer , however , praised the Nomad , saying in a retrospective that Nomad was " the first true 16 @-@ bit handheld " and declared it the best variant of the Genesis . In the same article , Retro Gamer notes the <unk> of the Nomad , due to its low production , and states , " Had Sega cottoned on to the concept of the Nomad before the Mega Drive 2 , and rolled it out as a true successor to the Mega Drive ... then perhaps Sega may have succeeded in its original goal to prolong the life of the Mega Drive in the US . " 
 = Darjeeling = 
 Darjeeling is a town and a municipality in the Indian state of West Bengal . It is located in the Lesser Himalaya at an elevation of 6 @,@ 700 ft ( 2 @,@ 042 @.@ 2 m ) . It is noted for its tea industry , the spectacular views of Kangchenjunga , the world 's third @-@ highest mountain , and the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway , a UNESCO World Heritage Site . Darjeeling is the headquarters of Darjeeling district which has a partially autonomous status within the state of West Bengal . 
 The development of the town dates back to the mid @-@ 19th century , when the colonial British administration set up a sanatorium and a military depot . Subsequently , extensive tea plantations were established in the region , and tea growers developed hybrids of black tea and created new fermentation techniques . The resultant distinctive Darjeeling tea is internationally recognised and ranks among the most popular of the black teas . 
 The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway connects the town with the plains and has one of the few steam locomotives still in service in India . 
 Darjeeling has several British @-@ style public schools , which attract pupils from India and neighbouring countries . The varied culture of the town reflects its diverse demographic milieu consisting of Gorkhas , Bhutia , Lepcha and other mainland Indian ethno @-@ linguistic groups . Darjeeling , with its neighbouring town of Kalimpong , was a centre of the Gorkhaland movement ( Separate State demand within India ) in the 1980s . The town 's fragile ecology has been threatened by a rising demand for environmental resources , stemming from growing tourist traffic and poorly planned urbanisation . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 The word Darjeeling has evolved from the Sanskrit , " <unk> Linga " , means " Shiva of invincible prowess , who rules the Himalayas . " It is also believed that the name Darjeeling also comes from the Tibetan word <unk> , meaning the thunderbolt sceptre of the Hindu deity Indra , and ling , a place or land . " 
 = = History = = 
 The history of Darjeeling is intertwined with that of Sikkim , Nepal , British occupied India and Bhutan . Until the early 19th century , the hilly area around Darjeeling was controlled by the kingdom of Sikkim , while the plains around Siliguri were intermittently occupied by the Kingdom of Nepal , with settlement consisting of a few villages of Lepcha and <unk> people . The Chogyal of Sikkim had been engaged in unsuccessful warfare against the Gorkhas of Nepal . From 1780 , the Gorkhas made several attempts to capture the entire region of Darjeeling . By the beginning of 19th century , they had overrun Sikkim as far eastward as the Teesta River and had conquered and annexed the Terai . In the meantime , the British were engaged in preventing the Gorkhas from overrunning the whole of the northern frontier . The Anglo @-@ Gorkha war broke out in 1814 , which resulted in the defeat of the Gorkhas and subsequently led to the signing of the Sugauli Treaty in 1815 . According to the treaty , Nepal had to cede all those territories which the Gorkhas had annexed from the Chogyal of Sikkim to the British East India Company ( i.e. the area between Mechi River and Teesta River ) . Later in 1817 , through the Treaty of <unk> , the British East India Company reinstated the Chogyal of Sikkim , restored all the tracts of land between the River Mechi and the River Teesta to the Chogyal of Sikkim and guaranteed his sovereignty . 
 In 1828 , a delegation of the British East India Company ( BEIC ) officials on its way to the Nepal @-@ Sikkim border stayed in Darjeeling and decided that the region was a suitable site for a sanatorium for British soldiers . The company negotiated a lease of the area west of the <unk> River from the Chogyal of Sikkim in 1835 . In 1849 , the BEIC director Arthur Campbell and the explorer and botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker were imprisoned in the region by the Sikkim Chogyal . The BEIC sent a force to free them . Continued friction between the BEIC and the Sikkim authorities resulted in the annexation of 640 square miles ( 1 @,@ 700 km2 ) of territory by the British in 1850 . In 1864 , the Bhutanese rulers and the British signed the Treaty of <unk> that ceded the passes leading through the hills and Kalimpong to the British . Further discord between Sikkim and the British resulted in a war , culminating in the signing of a treaty and the annexation by the British of the area east of the Teesta River in 1865 . By 1866 , Darjeeling district had assumed its current shape and size , covering an area of 1 @,@ 234 square miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km2 ) . 
 During the British occupation , Darjeeling 's temperate climate led to its development as a hill station for British residents seeking to escape the summer heat of the plains . The development of Darjeeling as a sanatorium and health resort proceeded briskly . Arthur Campbell , a surgeon with the Company , and Lieutenant Robert Napier were responsible for establishing a hill station there . Campbell 's efforts to develop the station , attract immigrants to cultivate the slopes and stimulate trade resulted in a hundredfold increase in the population of Darjeeling between 1835 and 1849 . The first road connecting the town with the plains was constructed between 1839 and 1842 . In 1848 , a military depot was set up for British soldiers , and the town became a municipality in 1850 . Commercial cultivation of tea in the district began in 1856 , and induced a number of British planters to settle there . Darjeeling became the formal summer capital of the Bengal Presidency after 1864 . Scottish missionaries undertook the construction of schools and welfare centres for the British residents , laying the foundation for Darjeeling 's notability as a centre of education . The opening of the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway in 1881 further hastened the development of the region . In 1899 , Darjeeling was rocked by major landslides that caused severe damage to the town and the native population . 
 Under British occupation , the Darjeeling area was initially a " Non @-@ Regulation District " , a scheme of administration applicable to economically less advanced districts in the British occupation ; acts and regulations of the British Raj did not automatically apply to the district in line with rest of the country . In 1919 , the area was declared a " backward tract " . During the Indian independence movement , the Non @-@ cooperation Movement spread through the tea estates of Darjeeling . There was also a failed assassination attempt by revolutionaries on Sir John Anderson , the Governor of Bengal in 1934 . Subsequently , during the 1940s , Communist activists continued the nationalist movement against the British by mobilising the plantation workers and the peasants of the district . 
 Socio @-@ economic problems of the region that had not been addressed during British occupation continued to linger and were reflected in a representation made to the Constituent Assembly of India in 1947 , which highlighted the issues of regional autonomy and Nepali nationality in Darjeeling and adjacent areas . After the independence of India in 1947 , Darjeeling was merged with the state of West Bengal . A separate district of Darjeeling was established consisting of the hill towns of Darjeeling , Kurseong , Kalimpong and some parts of the Terai region . While the hill population comprised mainly ethnic Nepalis , the plains harboured a large ethnic Bengali population who were refugees from the Partition of India . A cautious and non @-@ receptive response by the West Bengal government to most demands of the ethnic Nepali population led to increased calls , in the 1950s and 1960s , for Darjeeling 's autonomy and for the recognition of the Nepali language ; the state government acceded to the latter demand in 1961 . 
 The creation of a new state of Sikkim in 1975 , along with the reluctance of the Government of India to recognise Nepali as an official language under the Constitution of India , brought the issue of a separate state of Gorkhaland to the forefront . Agitation for a separate state continued through the 1980s , included violent protests during the 1986 – 88 period . The agitation ceased only after an agreement between the government and the Gorkha National Liberation Front ( <unk> ) , resulting in the establishment of an elected body in 1988 called the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council ( DGHC ) , which received autonomy to govern the district . Though Darjeeling became peaceful , the issue of a separate state lingered , fuelled in part by the lack of comprehensive economic development in the region even after the formation of the DGHC . New protests erupted in 2008 – 09 , but both the Union and State governments rejected Gorkha Janmukti Morcha 's ( <unk> ) demand for a separate state . In July 2011 , a pact was signed between <unk> , the Government of West Bengal and the Government of India which includes the formation of a new autonomous , elected Gorkhaland Territorial Administration ( GTA ) , a hill council endowed with more powers than its predecessor Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Darjeeling is the main town of the Sadar subdivision and also the headquarters of the district . It is located at an elevation of 6 @,@ 700 ft ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) in the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region on the Darjeeling @-@ <unk> range that originates in the south from <unk> . The range is Y @-@ shaped with the base resting at <unk> and <unk> and two arms diverging north of the Observatory Hill . The north @-@ eastern arm dips suddenly and ends in the <unk> spur , while the north @-@ western arm passes through North Point and ends in the valley near <unk> Tea Estate . The hills are nestled within higher peaks and the snow @-@ clad Himalayan ranges tower over the town in the distance . Kanchenjunga , the world 's third @-@ highest peak , 8 @,@ 598 m ( 28 @,@ 209 ft ) high , is the most prominent mountain visible . In days clear of clouds , Nepal 's Mount Everest , 29 @,@ 035 ft ( 8 @,@ 850 m ) high , can be seen . 
 The hills of Darjeeling are part of the Mahabharat Range or Lesser Himalaya . The soil is chiefly composed of sandstone and conglomerate formations , which are the solidified and <unk> detritus of the great range of Himalaya . However , the soil is often poorly consolidated ( the permeable sediments of the region do not retain water between rains ) and is not considered suitable for agriculture . The area has steep slopes and loose topsoil , leading to frequent landslides during the monsoons . According to the Bureau of Indian Standards , the town falls under seismic zone @-@ IV , ( on a scale of I to V , in order of increasing proneness to earthquakes ) near the convergent boundary of the Indian and the Eurasian tectonic plates and is subject to frequent earthquakes . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Darjeeling has a temperate climate ( Köppen : Cwb , subtropical highland climate ) with wet summers caused by monsoon rains . The annual mean maximum temperature is 14 @.@ 9 ° C ( 58 @.@ 8 ° F ) while the mean minimum temperature is 8 @.@ 9 ° C ( 48 @.@ 0 ° F ) , with monthly mean temperatures ranging from 6 to 18 ° C ( 43 to 64 ° F ) . The lowest temperature recorded was − 5 ° C ( 23 ° F ) on 11 February 1905 . The average annual precipitation is 309 @.@ 2 cm ( 121 @.@ 7 in ) , with an average of 126 days of rain in a year . The highest rainfall occurs in July . The heavy and concentrated rainfall that is experienced in the region , aggravated by deforestation and haphazard planning , often causes devastating landslides , leading to loss of life and property . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Darjeeling is a part of the Eastern Himalayan zoo @-@ geographic zone . Flora around Darjeeling comprises sal , oak , semi @-@ evergreen , temperate and alpine forests . Dense evergreen forests of sal and oak lie around the town , where a wide variety of rare orchids are found . The Lloyd 's Botanical Garden preserves common and rare species of plants , while the Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park specialises in conserving and breeding endangered Himalayan species . The town of Darjeeling and surrounding region face deforestation due to increasing demand for wood fuel and timber , as well as air pollution from increasing vehicular traffic . 
 Wildlife in the district is protected by the wildlife wing of the West Bengal Forest Department . The fauna found in Darjeeling includes several species of ducks , teals , plovers and gulls that pass Darjeeling while migrating to and from Tibet . Small mammals found in the region include civets , mongooses and badgers . The nearby <unk> National Park consists of semi @-@ evergreen and sal forests . Animals found here include the one @-@ horned rhinoceros , elephant , tiger , leopard and hog deer , while the main bird species include the Bengal <unk> and herons . A conservation centre for red pandas opened at Darjeeling Zoo in 2014 , building on a prior captive breeding program . 
 = = Civic administration = = 
 The Darjeeling urban agglomeration consists of Darjeeling Municipality and the <unk> Tea Garden . Established in 1850 , the Darjeeling municipality maintains the civic administration of the town , covering an area of 10 @.@ 57 km2 ( 4 @.@ 08 sq mi ) . The municipality consists of a board of councillors elected from each of the 32 wards of Darjeeling town as well as a few members nominated by the state government . The board of councillors elects a chairman from among its elected members ; the chairman is the executive head of the municipality . The Gorkha Janmukti Morcha ( <unk> ) holds power in the municipality As of 2011 . 
 From 1988 to 2012 , the Gorkha @-@ dominated hill areas of Darjeeling district were under the jurisdiction of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council ( DGHC ) . In 2012 , the DGHC was replaced by the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration ( GTA ) . The elected members of this body are authorised to manage certain affairs of the hills , including education , health and tourism . Law and order in Darjeeling town comes under the jurisdiction of the district police force , which is a part of the West Bengal Police ; a Deputy Superintendent of Police oversees the town 's security and law affairs . Darjeeling municipality area has two police stations at Darjeeling and <unk> . 
 = = Utilities = = 
 Natural springs in the <unk> Range provide most of Darjeeling 's water supply . Water collected is routed through stone conduits to two lakes that were constructed in 1910 and 1932 , from where it is piped to the town after purification at the <unk> filtration plant . During the dry season , when water supplied by springs is insufficient , water is pumped from Khong <unk> , a nearby small perennial stream . Increasing demand has led to a worsening shortfall in water supply ; just over 50 % of the town 's households are connected to the municipal water supply system . Various efforts made to augment the water supply , including the construction of a third storage reservoir in 1984 , have failed to yield desired results . 
 The town has an underground sewage system , covering about 40 % of the town area , that collects domestic waste and conveys it to septic tanks for disposal . Solid waste is disposed of in a nearby dumping ground , which also houses the town 's crematorium . <unk> collection of garbage and segregation of biodegradable and non @-@ biodegradable waste have been implemented since 2003 . <unk> of vegetable waste is carried out with the help of non @-@ governmental organisations . In June 2009 , in order to reduce waste , the municipality proposed a ban on plastic carrier bags and sachets in the town . 
 Darjeeling got from 1897 up to the early 1990s hydroelectricity from the nearby <unk> <unk> Power Station , such being the first town in India supplied with hydropower . Today , electricity is supplied by the West Bengal State Electricity Board from other places . The town often suffers from power outages and the electrical supply voltage is unstable , making voltage stabilisers popular with many households . Almost all of the primary schools are now maintained by Darjeeling Gorkha Autonomous Hill Council . The total length of all types of roads within the municipal area is around 134 km ( 83 mi ) . The West Bengal Fire Service provides emergency services for the town . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The two most significant contributors to Darjeeling 's economy are tourism and the tea industry . Darjeeling tea , due to the unique agro @-@ climatic conditions of Darjeeling , has a distinctive natural flavour , is internationally reputed and recognised as a geographical indicator . The office of the Darjeeling Indian Tea Association ( <unk> ) is located at Darjeeling . Darjeeling produces 7 % of India 's tea output , approximately 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) every year . The tea industry has faced competition in recent years from tea produced in other parts of India as well as other countries like Nepal . Widespread concerns about labour disputes , worker layoffs and closing of estates have affected investment and production . Several tea estates are being run on a workers ' cooperative model , while others are being planned for conversion into tourist resorts . More than 60 % of workers in the tea gardens are women . Besides tea , the most widely cultivated crops include maize , millets , paddy , cardamom , potato and ginger . 
 Darjeeling had become an important tourist destination as early as 1860 . It is reported to be the only location in eastern India that witnesses large numbers of foreign tourists . It is also a popular filming destination for Bollywood and Bengali cinema . Satyajit Ray shot his film Kanchenjungha ( 1962 ) here , and his Feluda series story , Darjeeling <unk> , was also set in the town . Bollywood movies Aradhana ( 1969 ) , Main Hoon Na ( 2004 ) , and more recently Barfi ! ( 2012 ) have been filmed here . Tourist inflow into Darjeeling had been affected by the political instability in the region , and agitations in the 1980s and 2000s hit the tourism industry hard . However , post 2012 , Darjeeling has once again witnessed a steady inflow of both domestic and international tourists . Presently , around 50 @,@ 000 foreign and 5 lakh domestic tourists visit Darjeeling each year , and its repute as the ' Queen of the Hills ' remains unaltered . According to an India Today survey published on December 23 , 2015 , Darjeeling is the third most googled travel destination among all the tourist spots in India . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Darjeeling can be reached by the 88 km ( 55 mi ) long Darjeeling Himalayan Railway from New Jalpaiguri , or by National Highway 55 , from Siliguri , 77 km ( 48 mi ) away . The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway is a 600 mm ( 2 ft ) narrow @-@ gauge railway that was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1999 for being " an outstanding example of the influence of an innovative transportation system on the social and economic development of a multi @-@ cultural region , which was to serve as a model for similar developments in many parts of the world " , becoming only the second railway in the world to have this honour . Bus services and hired vehicles connect Darjeeling with Siliguri and Darjeeling has road connections with Bagdogra , Gangtok and Kathmandu and the neighbouring towns of Kurseong and Kalimpong . However , road and railway communications often get disrupted in the monsoons because of landslides . The nearest airport is Bagdogra Airport , located 90 km ( 56 mi ) from Darjeeling . Within the town , people usually traverse by walking . Residents also use two @-@ wheelers and hired taxis for travelling short distances . The Darjeeling <unk> , functional since 1968 , was closed in 2003 after an accident killed four tourists . It reopened in February 2012 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to provisional results of 2011 census of India , Darjeeling urban agglomeration has a population of 132 @,@ 016 , out of which 65 @,@ 839 were males and 66 @,@ 177 were females . The sex ratio is 1 @,@ 005 females per 1 @,@ 000 males . The 0 – 6 years population is 7 @,@ 382 . Effective literacy rate for the population older than 6 years is 93 @.@ 17 per cent . 
 According to the 2001 census , the Darjeeling urban agglomeration , with an area of 12 @.@ 77 km2 ( 4 @.@ 93 sq mi ) , had a population of 109 @,@ 163 , while the municipal area had a population of 107 @,@ 530 . The population density of the municipal area was 10 @,@ 173 per km2 . The sex ratio was 1 @,@ 017 females per 1 @,@ 000 males , which was higher than the national average of 933 females per 1000 males . Gorkhas , speaking Nepali as native language , form the majority which includes indigenous ethnic groups such as Limbu , Rai , <unk> , Gurung , Tamangs , Lepchas , Bhutias , Sherpas , <unk> along with <unk> @-@ <unk> Khas . Other communities that inhabit Darjeeling include the Marwaris , Anglo @-@ Indians , Chinese , Biharis , Tibetans and Bengalis . The lingua franca is Nepali , although people speak English . Hindi and Bengali . Dzongkha is spoken by the Bhutias and the Tibetans . 
 Darjeeling has seen a significant growth in its population , its decadal growth rate being 47 % between 1991 and 2001 . The colonial town was designed for a population of only 10 @,@ 000 , and subsequent growth has created extensive infrastructural and environmental problems . The district 's forests and other natural wealth have been adversely affected by an ever @-@ growing population . 
 The official language of West Bengal is Bengali , additional official languages in Darjeeling are English and Nepali . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The predominant religions of Darjeeling are Hinduism and Vajrayana Buddhism , followed by Christianity . Indigenous communities such as the Lepchas and the Kiranti Limbus practice Animism and Shamanism . 
 Dashain , Tihar , Buddha Jayanti , Christmas , Losar , etc. are the main festivals . Besides , the diverse ethnic populace of the town also celebrates several local festivals . Buddhist ethnic groups which include the Lepchas , Bhutias , Sherpas , Yolmos , Gurungs , and Tamangs celebrate their new year called Losar in January / February , <unk> Sankranti , <unk> Duchen and <unk> Lho <unk> Kiranti Rai people ( <unk> ) celebrate their annual <unk> festivals of <unk> and <unk> . <unk> and <unk> are songs performed by men and women , respectively , during the festival of Tihar . All these provide a " regional distinctness " of Darjeeling 's local culture from the rest of India . Darjeeling Carnival , initiated by a civil society movement known as The Darjeeling Initiative , is a ten @-@ day carnival held yearly during the winter with portrayal of the Darjeeling Hill 's musical and cultural heritage as its central theme . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The culture of Darjeeling is diverse and involves a variety of indigenous practices and festivals as mentioned above . The Nepali Hindus as well as the various Buddhist ethnic groups such as the Lepchas , Bhutias , Kiranti Limbus , Tibetans , Yolmos , Gurungs and Tamangs , each have their own distinct language and culture and yet share a harmonious co @-@ existence . A popular food in Darjeeling is the Nepalese and Tibetan momo , a steamed dumpling containing meat cooked in a doughy wrapping and served with clear soup and <unk> . A form of Tibetan noodle called <unk> , served in soup form is also popular . Other commonly eaten dishes include <unk> dum , a potato preparation , and <unk> , Tibetan bread stuffed with meat . Fermented foods and beverages are consumed by a large percentage of the population . Fermented foods include preparations of soybean , bamboo shoots , milk and Sel roti , which is made from rice . Tea is the most popular beverage , the Tibetan version is also drunk . Alcoholic beverages include <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , variations of a local beer made from fermenting finger millet . 
 Colonial architecture characterises many buildings in Darjeeling , exemplified by several mock Tudor residences , Gothic churches , the Raj Bhawan , Planters ' Club and various educational institutions . Buddhist monasteries showcase the pagoda style architecture . Darjeeling is regarded as a centre of music and a niche for musicians and music admirers . Singing and playing musical instruments are common pastimes among the resident population , who take pride in the traditions and role of music in cultural life . 
 Darjeeling also has a Peace Pagoda built in 1992 by the Japanese Buddhist organisation <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are 52 primary schools , 67 high schools and 5 colleges in the town . Darjeeling 's schools are either run by the state government or by private and religious organisations . Schools mainly use English and Nepali as their media of instruction , although there is the option to learn the official language Hindi and the official state language Bengali . The schools are either affiliated with the ICSE , the CBSE , or the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education . Having been a summer retreat for the British in India , Darjeeling became the place of choice for the establishment of public schools on the model of Eton , Harrow and Rugby , allowing the children of British officials to obtain an exclusive education . Institutions such as Mount Hermon School , St. Robert 's H.S. School , St. Joseph 's College ( School Dept . ) , Loreto Convent and St. Paul 's School are renowned as centres of educational excellence . 
 Darjeeling has five colleges — St. Joseph 's College , Southfield College ( earlier known as Loreto College ) , Darjeeling Government College , <unk> @-@ <unk> Degree College and Sri Ramakrishna B.T. College — all affiliated to the University of North Bengal in Siliguri . 
 = Bonaparte Crossing the Alps = 
 Bonaparte Crossing the Alps ( also called Napoleon Crossing the Alps , despite the existence of another , more well @-@ known painting with that name ) is an 1848 – 1850 oil @-@ on @-@ canvas portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte , by French artist Hippolyte Delaroche . The painting depicts Bonaparte leading his army through the Alps on a mule , a journey Napoleon and his army of soldiers made in the spring of 1800 , in an attempt to surprise the Austrian army in Italy . The two main versions of this painting that exist are in the Louvre in Paris and the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool , England . Queen Victoria also obtained a reduced version of it . 
 The work was inspired by Jacques @-@ Louis David 's series of five Napoleon Crossing the Alps paintings ( 1801 – 1805 ) . David 's works also show Napoleon 's journey through the Great St. Bernard Pass , but there are significant stylistic differences between the two conceptions . Delaroche 's Napoleon is cold and downcast , whereas David 's wears a pristine uniform , and is idealized as a hero . Delaroche was commissioned to paint a realistic portrait ; the style of which was emerging at the time . 
 While the painting largely represented — and was one of the pioneers of — an emerging style , the work was criticised by several authorities on the subject . The reasons for this varied from Delaroche 's depiction of the scene to a general disapproval of Delaroche himself . Many of those who were in the latter state of mind felt that Delaroche was trying to match the genius of Napoleon in some way , and had failed miserably in doing so . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 As part of his 1798 campaign during the French Revolutionary Wars , Napoleon prepared to invade and conquer Egypt , which was at the time a province of the Ottoman Empire . Such a military action promised numerous benefits , including securing French trade interests , and inhibiting British access to India . By 1 July 1798 , Napoleon had landed on the shores of Egypt . After a lengthy chain of conflicts with heavy casualties , the campaign resulted in an Ottoman @-@ British victory . Napoleon received news from France that Austrian forces had retaken Italy and he decided to return to Paris . 
 In order to regain the upper hand , he planned to launch a surprise assault on the Austrian army stationed in the Cisalpine Republic . Based on the assumption the Austrians would never expect Napoleon 's large force to be able to traverse the Alps , he chose that as his route . He selected the shortest route through the Alps , the Great St Bernard Pass , which would enable him to reach his destination as quickly as possible . 
 On 15 May 1800 , Napoleon and his army of 40 @,@ 000 — not including the field artillery and baggage trains — ( 35 @,@ 000 light artillery and infantry , 5 @,@ 000 cavalry ) began the arduous journey through the mountains . During the five days spent traversing the pass , Napoleon 's army consumed almost 22 @,@ 000 bottles of wine , more than a tonne and a half of cheese , and around 800 kilograms of meat . 
 Following his crossing of the Alps , Napoleon commenced military operations against the Austrian army . Despite an inauspicious start to the campaign , the Austrian forces were driven back to Marengo after nearly a month . There , a large battle took place on 14 June , which resulted in the Austrian evacuation of Italy . 
 = = = Delaroche = = = 
 Delaroche 's early works had been based on topics from the Bible 's Old Testament , but gradually his interests switched to painting scenes from English and French history . He ' combined colouristic skill with an interest in detailed scenes from history ' <unk> Crossing the Alps , which was painted roughly eight years before Delaroche 's death , exemplifies this phase in Delaroche 's career . 
 The commissioning aside , Delaroche was inspired to create Bonaparte Crossing the Alps because he felt that he both looked like Napoleon , and that his achievements were comparable to Napoleon 's . It is likely that Delaroche 's painting is relatively historically accurate ; details such as Napoleon 's clothes appear to have been researched by Delaroche in an effort at authenticity . 
 = = Painting = = 
 = = = Commissioning of painting = = = 
 The Liverpool painting was commissioned by Arthur George , Third Earl of Onslow , after Delaroche and George reportedly visited the Louvre in Paris , where they saw David 's version of the famous event . It had only recently been re @-@ hung in the museum after a resurgence of interest in Napoleon , nearly 40 years after he was exiled . Agreeing that the painting was unrealistic , George , who owned a sizable collection of Napoleonic paraphernalia , commissioned Delaroche to create a more realistic depiction . Elizabeth <unk> @-@ Walker asserts that in fact the painting that hangs in the Louvre was produced first as it was already in America by 1850 , when the Liverpool painting was produced . Stephen Bann suggests that Arthur George 's meeting with Delaroche may have occurred , but Delaroche chose to produce two works that are almost identical and send one to America . The Liverpool version of the painting is more refined . 
 = = = Contrast to David 's depiction = = = 
 The contrast between Jacques @-@ Louis David 's depiction of the same scene ( of Napoleon traversing the Alps on his way to Italy ) , which was a flattering portrait that the king of Spain requested for Napoleon ( as a gift ) and Delaroche 's depiction in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps is easily apparent . The first and most significant difference is in Napoleon , in his clothing , and in his general stature . David 's version depicts Napoleon , dressed in an immaculate , multi @-@ coloured uniform with a billowing cape . Delaroche 's version , however , sees Napoleon in a fairly ordinary , gray coat with the sole purpose of keeping the cold away , rather than showing him as the symbol he may have represented - that of a gallant and powerful war leader , which is the impression given in David 's version . However , there is another significant difference in Napoleon himself , in the way he holds himself . David 's Napoleon is flamboyant , confident in his leadership of the French army , and in his ability to cross the Alps and defeat the Austrians in Italy . Delaroche 's Napoleon is instead downcast , gaunt and embittered by the harsh cold . His eyes and expressionless face evidence his weariness , his tiredness a result of the long and unstable trek . The last properly significant difference in the two art works ( excluding the actual setting , background , men seen in the distance etc . ) is the difference in the animals that Napoleon rides on . In David 's version , Napoleon rides a large , strong steed with a long mane , and this is one figment of David 's version that is irrefutably untrue - Napoleon is known to have ridden a mule on his journey ( which was borrowed from a local peasant ) , rather than a horse . This presence of a horse rather than a mule was one of the most major grounds for Delaroche 's criticism of David 's version , and is the basis of Delaroche 's claim that Bonaparte Crossing the Alps , which includes a mule , is a more realistic portrayal of the scene . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Napoleon is seen wearing clothing appropriate for his location : over his uniform he wears a long <unk> which is wrapped firmly around him , in which he keeps his <unk> right hand warm . He retains a piece of his dignity in the gold @-@ trimmed black bicorne he wears on his head . The mule Napoleon rides is undernourished , tired from its ordeal in struggling through the Alps . On the left of the mule is his guide , Pierre Nicholas <unk> , who must constantly push himself and the mule forward , and who leans heavily on the shaft of wood he clutches in his left hand to allow himself to continue moving forward . His clothes are weather @-@ beaten , his face ruddy from the cold . He is not allowed the luxury of riding an animal , for he must be able to navigate independently , on the ground . 
 Elements of the cold , harsh environment of the Alps are apparent : distant mountains capped in snow rise up behind Napoleon and his troupe , while a steep cliff face appears on his left , and the path underfoot has a thick layer of ice . More members of Napoleon 's entourage can be seen slightly behind him , their robust figures accentuating Bonaparte 's fragility . 
 Napoleon is shown to be as he would have been high up in the mountains , as a mortal and imperilled man . While this seems in some way demeaning to Napoleon 's figure ( and contrasts in the extreme with David 's version , which shows Napoleon impervious to the cold , and in a heroic light ) , Delaroche 's artwork was not intended to portray him in a hostile or unbecoming way . Delaroche wanted to depict Napoleon as a credible man , who suffered and underwent human hardship too , on his most daring exploits , and felt that making him appear as he really would have been in the situation would by no means debase or diminish Napoleon 's iconic status or legacy , but rather make him a more admirable person . 
 = = = Artistic style = = = 
 Along with the mass of white seen behind Napoleon , the amber sunlight glow , originating from the West of Napoleon 's troupe , is the central source of lighting in the painting . It introduces contrast when coupled with shadow , and , by illumination , highlights key aspects of the scene ; this is particularly seen by the light that falls across Bonaparte 's pigeon chest . Napoleon and the mule he is saddled on are richly textured visually by the contrasting light and shade , as is the guide leading the mule . The ice and snow layers , also , are made whiter by the sunshine from the West , brightening the whole scene . However , the overhanging cliff on the left of Napoleon 's guide and the legs of the mule both cast shadows to balance the lighting scheme of the painting . 
 The textural hues and schemes that Delaroche uses in this painting are quite detailed and well considered , especially in regards to the most important figures ; such aspects of the work were described as being ' ... rendered with a fidelity that has not omitted the plait of a drapery , the shaggy texture of the four @-@ footed animal , nor a detail of the harness on his back ' . The mule , especially its fur , was intensely textured and detailed to make it look visually rough and bristly , and the mule itself weary and worn . The same techniques were applied to the red and yellow adornments draped and hung over the animal . The central detail of Napoleon is applied to his coat , in its ruffles and creases . Much detail and textural diversity is given to the guide too , most particularly to his face , his green , wind @-@ caught tunic , and his leather boots . 
 Delaroche 's attention to detail and literal precision in this painting evidences and demonstrates the slow but steady evolution of realism in art during the 19th century , and how its popularity began to rise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The work , despite its attempt to depict Napoleon realistically , was criticised by several authorities for a variety of reasons . A few disapproved of Delaroche 's choice of painting , while others disapproved of Delaroche himself , saying , in some form , that he sought the genius of Napoleon , to no avail . 
 Soon after its completion , the work was taken to England , and there , in 1850 , it was reviewed by the critic of the Atheneum , a literary magazine . The magazine 's comments on the work indicated that , while they praised the painting for several of its features , they criticised Delaroche , for various reasons : 
 An Officer in a French costume , mounted on a mule , is conducted by a rough peasant through a dangerous pass , whose traces are scarcely discernible through the deep @-@ lying snow ; and his aide @-@ de @-@ camp is just visible in a ravine of the towering Alps . These facts are rendered with a fidelity that has not omitted the plait of a drapery , the shaggy texture of the four @-@ footed animal , nor a detail of the harness on his back . The drifting of the embedded snow , the pendent icicle which a solitary sun @-@ ray in a transient moment has made @-@ all are given with a truth which will be dear to those who exalt the Dutch School for like qualities into the foremost rank of excellence . But the lofty and daring genius that led the humble Lieutenant of Ajaccio to be ruler and arbiter of the destinies of the larger part of Europe will be sought in vain by M. Delaroche . 
 Some were displeased with Delaroche 's work at the time in general , and , in part , Bonaparte Crossing the Alps , criticising what was described as his ' lowered standards in art ' . Such critics included The Gentleman 's Magazine , who wrote the following text about Delaroche : 
 These all reveal a modification in his style , but not a happy one . His more recent works are not calculated to restore him the sympathy he had lost . It must be confessed that Delaroche is an artist of talent rather than a genius . Education and diligent study qualified him to be a painter , but not an artist , in the true sense of that word . For he has failed in the true mission of the artist @-@ that of advancing the education of the masses ; when it was in his power to give an impulse , he yielded to it ; he has been a reflection , but not a light ; and instead of elevating the public to himself , he has lowered himself to the public . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Bitch I 'm Madonna = 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " is a song by American singer Madonna from her thirteenth studio album , Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) , featuring guest vocals from rapper Nicki Minaj . The artists co @-@ wrote the song with MoZella , Toby Gad , Ariel Rechtshaid , Diplo , and Sophie ; the latter two co @-@ produced it with Madonna . It was released as the third single from the album by Interscope Records on June 15 , 2015 , along with a number of remixes commissioned . An EDM and vaporwave song , the lyrics speak about having continuous fun because she is " Madonna " . 
 The song divided music critics , as some called it " energetic " , applauding Minaj 's rap verse and the unusual composition , while others criticized it for being a " desperate to shock " endeavor . In the United States , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " became the first Madonna song to enter the Billboard Hot 100 in three years , peaking at number 84 . The song became Minaj 's 63rd and Madonna 's 57th Hot 100 entry , placing them at positions three and four on the list of women with the most entries on the chart . It also reached number @-@ one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , extending Madonna 's lead as the artist with the most number @-@ ones on the US dance chart . Worldwide , the song has reached the top @-@ thirty in Hungary , and the digital charts of Finland and Sweden . 
 The song 's accompanying video , directed by Jonas Åkerlund , has Minaj and Diplo appearing alongside Madonna . The video also contains cameos from Rita Ora , Chris Rock , Jon Kortajarena , Miley Cyrus , Alexander Wang , Beyoncé , Katy Perry , Kanye West , and Madonna 's two sons , Rocco and David . It was shot at the Standard Hotel in New York City and shows Madonna and her entourage having a party throughout the building , ending at the rooftop . The release of the video to the streaming service , Tidal , was plagued by technical difficulties and was met with a mixed response . Critics complimented the craziness of the clip but panned the absence of the guest stars from the set . Additionally , comparisons ensued with then recently released music video for singer Taylor Swift 's single " Bad Blood " , which had featured similar guest stars . In order to further promote the song , Madonna performed " Bitch I 'm Madonna " during her appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , which was received positively . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In February 2014 , Madonna announced that she had begun working on her thirteenth studio album , saying " I 'm right now in the process of talking to various co @-@ writers and producers and talking about where I want to go with my music " . By the next month she started posting a number of images on social media website Instagram , where she hinted at possible songwriters and collaborators with hashtag captions . Two months later , Madonna posted a selfie where she talked about working with American DJ Diplo . Madonna had invited him to her annual Oscar party , but he was unable to attend . They eventually started talking about music through texts and decided to collaborate on the album . In an interview with Idolator , Diplo explained that Madonna had asked him to provide his " craziest record " for the album . Together they wrote and recorded seven songs and Diplo added that " [ Madonna ] was up for anything . I love when an artist gives a producer the confidence he needs to work with them , and [ she ] was very open @-@ minded to my ideas . Those records are gonna be crazy @-@ sounding . We really pushed the envelope with some of the stuff we were doing . " 
 One of the tracks recorded was confirmed by Diplo as titled " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , which he believed would push his boundaries of songwriting . Madonna explained that the phrase was new to her and was introduced by Diplo , who explained that anyone who could remain cool when faced with criticism was appropriating Madonna , hence it was not just a unique reference to the singer . The origin of the song 's idea was traced back to rapper Lil B 's 2010 song , " Pretty Boy Farmer " , which presented the lyrics " I look like Madonna / Bitch , I 'm a farmer " . Diplo took this idea to Madonna and developed a song which addressed the singer 's detractors , who spoke negatively about her longevity in the music industry , adding " We made this record about , ' Fuck it , bitch , we 're all Madonna ' " . He also insisted that they recruit Trinidadian rapper Nicki Minaj , who had previously worked with Madonna on two songs from her MDNA album . 
 Diplo explained to Interview magazine that the song 's composition happened while they were drinking one night in the studio . There he played Madonna a Japanese pizzicato melody and a drop , which she liked . Since Madonna preferred to start her compositions on guitar , Diplo added guitar sounds over the melody and then progressed with the writing . Another Instagram post by Madonna confirmed Minaj 's involvement in the track , with the photo caption " We go hard or we go home we gon ' do this all night long ! # <unk> " . Madonna commented about her method working with Minaj : 
 Whenever we work together she always sits with me and listens to the song , and says " tell me what this song is about to you . " She 's very methodical in her thinking . We talk about it , she writes down words that I say describing what the song 's about and the sentiment that I 'd like her to get out there , and then she goes away and she works on it . She writes it , she comes back . She does a version of it , we talk about it . It 's a back and forth until she gets it right . It 's a total collaboration . 
 = = Release = = 
 On December 17 , 2014 , Billboard reported that the demo version of " Bitch I 'm Madonna " had leaked onto the Internet , alongside the other twelve demo recordings for Madonna 's then untitled thirteenth studio album . An aggravated Madonna clarified that the songs were demo versions from earlier recordings ; she compared the leak to that of " artistic rape " . She was subsequently criticized for referring to the hack as " terrorism " in the wake of the Peshawar school attack and Sydney hostage crisis . On December 20 , 2014 , the album became available for pre @-@ order on iTunes Store . When ordered , six tracks including " Bitch I 'm Madonna " were available for digital download . Madonna stated that the songs were meant to be " an early Christmas gift " with the final release in March 2015 . 
 Following " Living for Love " and " Ghosttown " , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " was confirmed as the third single from Rebel Heart by Madonna on her Instagram . She also released three remixes of the song on her YouTube and Tidal accounts for streaming . The cover art of the song was also released along with the remixes ; it was created from one of her images on Instagram . The majority of house remixes of " Bitch I 'm Madonna " were produced by Rosabel , Sander Kleinenberg and Oscar G , who posted a message on his Facebook account about the collaboration , " When Madonna calls you , you do exactly what she asks . I am very grateful for this opportunity ! " Another remix by Sick Individuals , which consist of Dutch duo <unk> " Ray " Hofstee and Joep " Jim " <unk> , was released exclusively to Billboard . The remixes were first released on June 15 , 2015 , in Australia and Germany , and the next day in other nations . 
 = = Composition and remixes = = 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Madonna , Diplo , and British electronic musician and PC Music co @-@ <unk> , Sophie , with additional writers including MoZella , Toby Gad , Ariel Rechtshaid and Minaj . Demacio " Demo " Castellon was the audio engineer for the track and also did the audio mixing and recording . Other engineers who worked on the track included Nick Rowe and Aubrey " Big Juice " Delaine , with Zeke <unk> helping with additional recording and Angie Teo working on additional mixing . The song was the first time that PC Music , which generally catered to underground music and artists , was working with a mainstream artist like Madonna . Sophie recalled that it was Madonna who was " calling the final shots " for recording the song and noted that there was no label representative who dictated the process . 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " has musical elements from DJ Snake and Lil Jon 's " Turn Down for What " ( 2013 ) with Madonna 's vocals reminiscent of singer Miley Cyrus ' autotuned rapping . The song has a tearing sound alongside the " bleepy electro " and " churning " dubstep composition . It begins with the sound of acoustic guitar reminiscent of Avicii 's single " Wake Me Up " ( 2012 ) , as Madonna coos in the background , " You 're gonna love this " , but quickly changes into an EDM and vaporwave track . The track deviates from a traditional song structure and hook , instead featuring harsh cuts , synths and Madonna singing in a nasal tone . Minaj raps in the track , asking everybody to " go hard or go home " , while Madonna shouts lyrics like , " I just wanna have fun tonight , I wanna blow up this house tonight " , " alternating between pitch @-@ shifted shrieks of ' Who do you think you are ? ? ' and the sing @-@ songy title taunt . " Regarding her profuse usage of the word " bitch " in the song ( along with another song " Unapologetic Bitch " from Rebel Heart ) , Madonna defended her decision to Billboard , saying : 
 I think that 's bullshit . The word police can fuck off . I don 't want to be policed ! I 'm not interested in political correctness . The word " bitch " means a lot of different things . Everything is about context . When I first moved to England and heard the word " cunt " , I was horrified . People were calling each other cunts ! And then I realized that , in that culture , it was different — they slapped each other on the back and said , " Who 's the cunt , right , you 're my best mate ! " The word " fuck " doesn 't just mean sexual intercourse . I mean , " You 're a stupid fuck , " " Are you going to fuck with me ? " " Fuck off ! " ... Sex has nothing to do with any of those expressions , and the same goes for " bitch " . If I say to you , " I 'm a badass bitch , " I 'm owning myself , I 'm saying , " I 'm strong , I 'm tough , and don 't mess with me . " If I say , " Why are you being such a bitch to me ? , " well , that means something else . 
 Since Madonna had to rush @-@ release the first six songs from Rebel Heart due to the hack and leaks , Diplo clarified that the released version on the album was not his final mixing of the track ; he later posted his intended cut on his SoundCloud account . Three of the house remixes of " Bitch I 'm Madonna " were released as dub versions of the song , with a long drawn @-@ out beat section and minimal vocals from Madonna , as noted by Robbie Daw from Idolator . Kleinenberg 's remix had a completely different sound from the house mixes , although Daw believed all of them to be " cheap " sounding in comparison to the original . According to Sick Individuals , their remix of the song had " hard @-@ hitting " beats and it was also an energetic version , catering to the dance floors . Fedde le Grand 's remix of the song did not use any of the effects present in the album version , and was created as an electro house track with metallic sounds . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received divided opinion from music critics . Sasha Geffen from Chicago Reader gave a positive review of the track , complimenting it for bringing the underground PC Music to the mainstream , adding that " between Diplo 's blocky breakdowns and Sophie 's slippery arpeggios , [ the song i ] s a provocative piece of work [ ... ] The shift from SoundCloud to superstars was always coming — it just so happens that Madonna is the one who carried it over . " Another positive review came from Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph , who elaborated : " [ T ] he track in question fizzes with bright energy , a handclapping rave anthem powered by a fantastically wonky synth line that sounds like a vintage arcade game played on an electronic kazoo , and topped off with a snappy Nicki Minaj rap . Madonna delivers the melody like a playground nursery rhyme , chanting about bad behavior in a butter @-@ wouldn 't @-@ melt sing @-@ song voice . " 
 Dan Weiss from Spin observed that the " most surprising thing about a song that 's actually called ' Bitch , I 'm Madonna ' is that it doesn 't have any surprises " . In contrast , Andrew Unterberger of the same publication enjoyed the track , claiming that " it might not be your favorite Madonna , but it 's unquestionably her , and it 's far more compelling than the anonymous EDM enthusiast she played on MDNA ( 2012 ) " . Unterberger also praised the addition of PC Music " ping @-@ <unk> oddball <unk> " and " Diplo 's block @-@ dropping beats " . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone was also positive , calling it " frenetic " , and praised Minaj 's verse for being " pure fire " , while Anna <unk> of The A.V. Club appreciated the song for being " the right kind of [ track ] ... that 's mindless fun and impossible to take seriously " . In the same vein , Andy Gill of The Independent called it " amusingly abrasive " and praised Minaj for " <unk> [ ing ] her role as Madge 's rapping <unk> " . 
 In spite of noting that Diplo makes Madonna sound fun on the song , Gavin Haynes of NME commented that the song 's composition " showed the gulf between [ Madonna 's ] life and her music is now impossible to ignore " . Calling it " awry " , Alexis Petridis of The Guardian claimed that " Bitch I 'm Madonna " is " a fantastic title in search of a song . In lieu of one , producer Diplo comes up with a kind of hybrid of EDM and happy hardcore and throws Nicki Minaj at her most hyperactive into the mix ; the result genuinely sets your teeth on edge . " Criticizing Rebel Heart for being " overworked " , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine found that " the duality of its title [ is ] muddled by the inclusion of garish party jams like the infuriatingly catchy but lyrically cringe @-@ inducing ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' " . John Murphy of musicOMH remarked that the song " never quite lives up to its fantastic title , and just sounds a bit of a mess , trying to cram in Diplo @-@ produced dance @-@ hall rhythms , a dubstep breakdown and the seemingly now obligatory Nicki Minaj guest rap " . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters opined that the song — and another Rebel Heart track , " Illuminati " — " absolutely reek of desperation , wanting so badly to shock and offend listeners that they fail to resolve as satisfying songs first and foremost " . 
 In their year end ranking of the best songs from 2015 , Entertainment Weekly listed " Bitch I 'm Madonna " at number 27 , saying " She go hard or she go home , she gon do this all night long — [ Madonna ] ' s standout from Rebel Heart has everything you love about her music : hooks , humor , attitude for days " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " debuted on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Songs chart dated January 3 , 2015 , at number 14 with sales of 12 @,@ 000 copies . The song started fluctuating down the chart and exited after four weeks , but following her appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in April 2015 , the sales surged by 748 % to 9 @,@ 000 copies , making the song re @-@ enter the chart at number 21 . The song again started a downward trajectory on the chart until June 2015 , when the music video was released . Sales for that week increased to 13 @,@ 000 copies , enabling the song to reach a peak of number 5 on the chart , becoming Madonna 's second top @-@ ten single there following " Living for Love " . The song debuted at number 26 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart and reached a peak of number @-@ one , her record @-@ extending 46th in total ; it was also Minaj 's fifth number @-@ one . " Bitch I 'm Madonna " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart week of July 4 , 2015 , at number 84 , becoming her first entry on the chart since " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " ( 2012 ) . The entry was aided by a 1 @,@ 454 % gain in streaming activity for the track , with a total of 2 @.@ 6 million US streams up to the week ending June 21 , 2015 . The track became Minaj 's 63rd and Madonna 's 57th Hot 100 entry , placing them at positions three and four on the list of women with the most entries on the chart . The following week , the song fell down by 11 places on the Hot 100 , landing at number 95 , which was its final appearance there . 
 In the United Kingdom , Alan Jones from Music Week reported that following the release of the music video , there was a sales surge for " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , which sold 1 @,@ 667 copies ( up from 148 copies of previous week ) ; however , it was not able to chart within the top 200 positions of the UK Singles Chart . In France , the song debuted at number 90 on the French Singles Chart the week of December 27 , 2014 , following the advanced release of the album 's six tracks for pre @-@ order on iTunes . Later , it fell to number 135 , before dropping off the chart . The song re @-@ entered at number 104 when the music video was released , and fell to number 149 the following week . In Spain , the song also debuted with the advanced release , reaching number 49 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Along with announcing " Bitch I 'm Madonna " as the third single , Madonna also confirmed the release of a music video for the song . She teased in a post on Instagram saying that the video would have many " surprise " guests . A number of people were tagged in the Instagram post , including singers Beyoncé , Katy Perry , Miley Cyrus , and Rita Ora , as well as Minaj and Diplo . Other personnel tagged included costume designer Arianne Phillips , hair stylist Andy Lecompte and fashion designer Jeremy Scott . Comparisons ensued with the recently released music video for singer Taylor Swift 's single " Bad Blood " which had featured similar guest stars . Madonna had also released images from the set previously , showing her with pink hair and in provocative clothing . Another preview came from The Flaming Lips lead singer Wayne Coyne , who had visited the set and uploaded a short video of the shooting . Filming took place on the top floors of the Standard Hotel in New York City , and was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , who explained how he landed the project as follows : 
 <unk> called me about ' Ghosttown ' . We hadn 't worked for a while because of different circumstances so when I heard all the songs [ on Rebel Heart ] , I was very excited about ' Ghosttown ' . I connected to it creatively . And , yeah , we enjoyed working together . I was supposed to start something else right after and that got pushed and she asked me to do ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' . I saw it being so completely different from ' Ghosttown ' , something a little bit less serious , just fun and crazy . 
 The team had a short time for finalizing the different aspects of the shoot , including rehearsing the whole sequence . They also had just one night to complete shooting and due to the casual nature of the song , decided to invite Madonna 's close friends and family to be in it . Contrary to normal shooting schedules , the team had to work fast before the sun came up , since they were portraying a party at night . Following the choreography , every person on set had cues about their position and where their part would come in the shooting . A number of designers contributed clothing for the singer to wear , including Moschino , Discount Universe , <unk> , Chanel , Majesty Black and shoes by Giuseppe Zanotti . According to Amber <unk> from Style.com , various contemporary fashion trends appeared in the video , including candy @-@ colored hairs , black lips , white bows and glitter eye makeup . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The video was confirmed to be released on June 16 , 2015 ; Madonna also released a teaser of it , which showed the aftermath of a party , as the song played slowly in the background . On the release day , a poster was uploaded on Madonna 's Instagram which confirmed that along with the aforementioned personnel , singer Beyoncé would also appear in it . Joe Lynch from Billboard compared the poster to those uploaded during the release of " Bad Blood " but nevertheless believed , " it 's likely that Madge had this project in the works before becoming aware of Taylor 's plans " . However , the video did not arrive on June 16 , instead a second teaser was released , showing Madonna twerking in jeans shorts and high heels , with multi @-@ colored graphics . It ultimately premiered the next day on Tidal , along with a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clip . It was an exclusive release to the streaming site for the first 24 hours , following which it was released on Madonna 's Vevo page . The full list of guest appearances in the video included Beyoncé , Perry , Cyrus , Minaj , Ora , and Diplo along with rapper Kanye West , actor and comedian Chris Rock , designer Alexander Wang , model Jon Kortajarena and Madonna 's sons Rocco and David . However , the video faced problems in Tidal with error messages and freezing in @-@ between , resulting in the company releasing an apology on Twitter : " We apologize to all the fans excited to watch the # <unk> video , we ’ re working on a fix . We 'll have it up and running soon . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with four young girls in outfits inspired by Madonna 's iconic " Like a Virgin " performance at the 1984 MTV Video Music Awards , who mime the opening lines of the song . Madonna is shown exercising alongside , wearing an animal print dress and a studded , pink motorcycle jacket . She finishes and comes out in a colorful hallway , drinks water , kisses a man and walks through the corridor , crossing Diplo at one point . As the chorus starts the scene cuts to four Japanese dancers making choreographed moves in a bathtub and inside a bar as Madonna joins them . Ora and Rock appears mouthing the phrase " Bitch I 'm Madonna " . The second verse starts with Madonna crawling along the hallway , getting entangled in balloons , meeting Diplo again and finally the camera pans away to reveal a number of sock puppets in neon glow swaying together to the song . 
 During the second chorus , Madonna and her dancers go from the hallway to a bar where the singer forcefully makes Kortajarena drink a beverage , dry humps a dancer and continues dancing . The guest appearances start with Cyrus pointing her middle finger towards the camera wearing glitter around her eyes , followed by Wang , Diplo and Rocco in the bar , Beyoncé posing like Madonna 's music video for " Vogue " ( 1990 ) , Perry moving around to the song , and David dancing while Madonna and the others cheer him ; all of them mouth the song name while they appear onscreen . As the chorus ends , a dancer brings a video screen behind them where Minaj appears rapping her part , interspersed by shots of West cheering . Madonna and her dancers continue moving through the room with falling confetti and reach a dance pole . She climbs through a set of dimly lit stairs and reaches the rooftop where the party is taking place . The song nears to an end and Madonna is shown surrounded by her dancers and some partygoers while she lies down ; interspersed scenes show her twerking and dancing alone in a room wearing a cap with Hebrew word " <unk> " ( " Shalom " ) written on it . The video ends with a far away shot of the Standard Hotel 's brightly lit rooftop where the party continues . 
 An alternate ending was present in the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video , showing an exhausted Madonna leaving the party with a male model , as well as aftermath scenes of the party which were released in the first teaser trailer . The parting shot showed Madonna running around the room and posing in front of the windows overlooking New York . Other scenes included Madonna chatting with Ora and Rock in @-@ between takes , sitting in the hallways , plunging towards the neon sock puppets multiple times as well as singing the song with the little girls from the beginning of the video . Another video set to Kleinenberg 's remix featured further footage of Madonna dancing and more casual scenes featuring the guest stars . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Jason Lipshutz from Billboard wrote an article about why the video was an important release for Madonna . He felt that although the Rebel Heart era had received more promotion than the previous MDNA era , the commercial returns had been diminishing . The first two singles , " Living for Love " and " Ghosttown " , failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it the first Madonna album without a Hot 100 single , until " Bitch I 'm Madonna " debuted at number 84 . The video , Lipshutz theorized , was Madonna 's attempt to bring back an audience for the whole era . Joe Lynch from the same magazine called the video an " embarrassment of star power " , adding that it " has everything : Miley 's middle fingers , Madonna kissing a shirtless hunk , topless women in a bathtub , break @-@ dancing , sock puppets singing , Moschino fashion and much more " . Brennan Carly from Spin believed that the " grandeur and ambition " of the clip made it comparable to Madonna 's music videos for " Hung Up " ( 2005 ) and " Living for Love " . 
 Kevin O 'Donnell from Entertainment Weekly said that although " [ a ] <unk> Madonna announces a new video , it 's a global event . And it 's no different with [ ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' ] " , he called it " her most bonkers video in years " . Hicks from the San Jose Mercury News was impressed with the video , but felt Madonna could have done it without the guest appearances . Emilee Linder from MTV News observed that the video was completely different from the one released by Swift , but described it as " action @-@ packed " in a different way , that of portraying a party . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone declared that with the release of " Bitch I 'm Madonna , " The age of blockbuster all @-@ star music videos are upon us " . Both Nolan Feeney from Time and August Brown from Los Angeles Times noted that Madonna was able to successfully bring together her music industry peers in one video . 
 Christopher Rosa from VH1 criticized the fact that none of the female singers ( apart from Rita Ora ) including Minaj , were actually present on set during shooting of the video ; their parts were filmed separately . He added that it was " pretty hilarious . Madge 's clip is called , ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' , but why couldn 't she get these youths to show the eff up ? " Writing for Life & Style magazine , Chantal <unk> was disappointed with the clip , calling it " lackluster " due to the short cameo appearances . Kevin Fallon from The Daily Beast called the video " pathetic and sad " and questioned the inclusion of guest stars like Swift 's video , ultimately describing the whole affair as " absolutely pointless . At worst , it 's desperate . At best , it 's just dumb ... [ The video ] is a fascinating mix of impressive and sad , both aggressively relevant and therefore wholly irrelevant at the same time . " He ended the review with one compliment about the single take in which the video was shot , comparing it to the 2014 black comedy film Birdman . 
 Bernard Zuel from The Sydney Morning Herald spoke about the problems with the release to Tidal , saying " Apologies , embarrassment and another social media fail : is this already a new low water mark for Madonna and Tidal only weeks after it began operating ? " He criticized Madonna 's team for not being able to release the video smoothly , while also noting that negative feedback given to the video included " Madonna 's age , sexually charged performances , [ and ] need to shock " . Tshepo Mokoena from The Guardian considered the cameos as more of " slapdash than slick " , appearing as " flat and glossily detached " . Time magazine listed the music video at number 8 on their ranking of the " Top 10 Pop Music Videos " , describing it as " nuts as its croaking bass drop " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna performed " Bitch I 'm Madonna " during her appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on April 9 , 2015 . She adorned herself in a black jacket covered with gold dollar symbols and a number of gold chains around her neck . The performance began with Madonna in the backstage where she put finishing touches to her make @-@ up , then entered Diplo 's dressing room where he was having a party surrounded by women . Madonna did a dance routine in the hallway where her son Rocco appeared mouthing the chorus . The singer and her troupe then moved into the studio area where the audience was present . Energetic dancing continued with Madonna straddling one member of the audience at one point . Still photos of Minaj were projected on video screens with Diplo DJing on a console . Madonna also climbed atop Fallon 's desk and made him sing the chorus line . The performance ended with another energetic dance routine and <unk> . 
 <unk> Gracie from Idolator gave a positive review to the performance , saying that " Instead of doing her usual bit of either singing ' Living for Love ' or the current single ' Ghosttown ' , the entertainer decided to switch things up a bit — and we 're so glad [ she ] did ! Madge did a wild and super @-@ fun version of ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' . " The Hollywood Reporter listed the performance as one of the top five shocking moments by Madonna in 2015 . Stereogum 's Caitlin White was amazed by Madonna 's performance , saying that " the fact that she can dance like ... this at 56 is practically a superhuman feat , and I was surprised by how much I enjoyed the performance . " Bradley Stern also wrote a similar review for MuuMuse , describing the performance as " one of the most all @-@ out insane television performances of the entire Rebel Heart era ... This was no basic stage performance : Instead , Madonna brought her noisy , bratty and utterly # Unapologetic banger to life . " 
 On the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) , the song was the second performance on the set list , during the first segment . For the first section , inspired by the Rebel Heart album cover art and Joan of Arc , costume designer Arianne Phillips had created a series of costumes referencing liturgical fabrics and a contemporary exhibition of samurai armor at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art . As the theatrical performance of opening number " Iconic " concluded , Madonna was joined onstage by her female dancers wearing geisha inspired costumes . They started performing the song while holding Japanese war fans . Minaj appeared on the backdrops rapping her verses , aided by " shuddering " bass sounds . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Digital download ( Album Version ) 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( featuring Nicki Minaj ) – 3 : 47 
 Digital download ( Clean ) 
 " B * * * * I 'm Madonna " ( featuring Nicki Minaj ) – 3 : 47 
 Digital download ( Remixes ) 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Fedde le Grand Remix ) – 3 : 55 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Rosabel 's Bitch Move Mix ) – 7 : 05 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Sander Kleinenberg Remix ) – 4 : 58 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Junior Sanchez Remix ) – 5 : 10 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Oscar G 305 Dub ) – 8 : 44 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Sick Individuals Remix ) – 5 : 07 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Dirty Pop Remix ) – 5 : 11 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 21 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Oscar G Bitch Beats ) – 8 : 44 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( Rosabel 's Bitch Move Dub ) – 7 : 35 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / Songs Music Publishing , LLC on behalf of " I Like Turtles " Music 
 Songs of SMP ( ASCAP ) / Lion of God Publishing Co . ( ASCAP ) c / o Kobalt Songs Music Publishing / EMI April Music , Inc. and MoZella Mo Music ( ASCAP ) / Atlas Music Publishing on behalf of itself and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) 
 Songs of Universal , Inc . ( BMI ) on behalf of itself and Harajuku Barbie Music ( BMI ) / Brill Building Songs ( ASCAP ) c / o Kobalt Songs Music Publishing 
 Nicki Minaj appears courtesy of Young Money Entertainment / Cash Money Records 
 Personnel 
 Personnel adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Mother ( 1910 film ) = 
 Mother is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is a melodrama that focuses with Will Allen who runs away from home after being violently abused by his stepfather and his mother keeps a candle lit for him to return home . Twenty years later , Will returns home after having become a successful lawyer , but cannot find his parents . Will later takes the case to defend a lady being prosecuted by a client company . After being successful he recognizes the lady as his mother and they are reunited . The film 's cast included Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Carey L. Hastings , but other credits are uncertain . The film was released on September 6 , 1910 , and was met with mixed reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from September 10 , 1910 . It states : " The play deals with Will Allen , a country lad , who is unhappy at home , owing to the fact that he is a studious little chap and prefers his books to farm work , which incurs the displeasure and enmity of his stepfather , a rough and surly farmer , to whom book learning does not appeal . Will runs away from home , and although his mother keeps a light in the window , hoping to guide her boy home , he never returns . Twenty years later , when the boy has made a place for himself in the world as a successful lawyer , he goes back to the farm , only to find that his little mother , who has been left a widow , has gone away , whither , no one knows . The mother , in the meantime , being left alone in the world , goes to the city and there supports herself by dressmaking . While shopping in a department store she is unjustly accused of shoplifting . The only person who believes in her innocence is a salesgirl , who is discharged for her presumption and daring to correct her superiors . The girl , in her efforts to help the friendless old lady , enlists the aid of Will , whom she knows to be a lawyer of great ability . Will is about to refuse the case , as the dry goods company is a client of his , when the girl describes the lonely old lady , and begs him for the sake of his mother to befriend her . Will consents . Will 's clear statement of the case to the judge , together with May 's testimony , frees the mother . When her counsel approaches to offer his congratulations , mutual recognition results . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anna Rosemond 
 Frank H. Crane 
 Carey L. Hastings 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The plot of the production was criticized by a film reviewer The New York Dramatic Mirror because the boy grows up unaware that his stepfather had died or that her mother had moved to the city in search of work . The reviewer states , " One would think that he would have kept in communication with his mother if he loved her so much , but it appears he did not ... " The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast includes both Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane , two early leading actors of the Thanhouser Company . Carey L. Hastings , real name Carey Tidball , was a sister of Gertrude Thanhouser and was an actress that was featured in numerous Thanhouser productions . Hastings first and earliest known work was Thanhouser 's St. Elmo adaptation . Hastings would not have another known credit until 1912 . The Silent Era website states that Harry Benham and Maude <unk> had roles in the production . However , both of these credits are well @-@ before those attributed by Bowers . Harry Benham is known to have joined the Thanhouser Company in 1910 , but the first credit cited by Bowers is The Old Curiosity Shop in January 1911 . Bowers also cites Maude <unk> having made only intermittent appearances with the first being The Early Life of David Copperfield in October 1911 . Other credits amongst the cast are unknown , but most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 975 feet long , was released on September 6 , 1910 . The film was distributed by the Motion Picture Distributing and Sales Company . Once the film was released , it was sometimes listed ambiguously for other productions bearing the same name . One ambiguous listing , most likely for the Thanhouser film , was made by the Crystal Theatre in Hutchinson , Kansas . Known theaters advertising the film , unambiguously , are noted in Indiana and Arizona . A reviewer of The Moving Picture World wrote , " [ The film is a ] little domestic tragedy which shows how boys are sometimes driven from home and what results from it . ... It is a picture that goes direct to the heart and makes one put himself in the place of all the characters . Perhaps that magic word , mother , is the key to the whole situation . " The New York Dramatic Mirror took issue with the depiction of the step father 's violent abuse of the young son and found the melodrama to be one " with an ending that appeals to the sympathies " . 
 = San Marco ( Jacksonville ) = 
 San Marco is a neighborhood of Jacksonville , Florida , located south of Downtown across the St. Johns River . The neighborhood was formerly the independent city of South Jacksonville until it was annexed by Jacksonville in 1932 . The neighborhood is primarily residential , with an integrated commercial sector known as San Marco Square . 
 The South Jacksonville community emerged after the American Civil War and incorporated in 1907 . It saw its greatest growth after the Acosta Bridge was completed in 1921 , connecting the neighborhood to Downtown Jacksonville . This period included the construction of the original San Marco development , which eventually gave its name to the area as a whole . Since the 1990s , the neighborhood has seen several historic preservation and redevelopment projects . It is home to fourteen city parks , several schools and other amenities . 
 = = Geography = = 
 " San Marco " originally designated only one development within South Jacksonville , but the name is now used for much of the former city 's territory , south and east of the St. Johns River across from downtown Jacksonville . The place name " South Jacksonville " or Southside has similarly evolved , and now signifies a much larger area of southeastern Duval County . The neighborhood 's borders are not official and have changed over time . The boundaries used by the San Marco Preservation Society are Interstate 95 to the north , Philips Highway to the east , <unk> Road to the south , and the St. Johns River to the west . The area along the riverbank north of I @-@ 95 , known as the Southbank , was historically part of the community but was designated part of the downtown Jacksonville business district in the 1980s . Notable neighborhoods within San Marco include Colonial Manor and South Riverside . The St. Nicholas neighborhood is immediately to the east of San Marco . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Permanent habitation on this part of the St. Johns River came only during Florida 's British period , when officials established a ferry crossing at the Cow Ford in 1760 . The ferry docked on the river 's southern bank , which was thus populated continuously long before what is now downtown Jacksonville . When the Spanish resumed control of Florida in 1783 they built Fort San Nicolas beside the ferry landing in present @-@ day St. Nicholas . In 1793 the Spanish government issued a land grant for a slave plantation , which was eventually taken over by Isaac Hendricks . By 1850 , Hendricks had married Elizabeth Hudnall , who owned a large adjacent tract , and his daughter Margaret married Albert Gallatin Philips , owner of the nearby Red Bank Plantation ; as a result much of the area was owned by families connected to each other by marriage . 
 After the American Civil War , the plantations were broken up for residential developments . In 1873 Elizabeth Hendricks sold the eastern part of the Hendricks @-@ Hudnall tract to retiring Florida governor Harrison Reed , who moved there and established the original South Jacksonville development . In 1882 , Hendricks developed the western portion of her land as " Oklahoma " . South of Oklahoma , Harrison Reed 's sister Martha Reed Mitchell and her husband Alexander established the vast estate of Alexandria as a winter home . Martha Mitchell became a prominent fixture in Jacksonville society , involved in a number of charities and causes . By 1900 the developments had grown into a community generally known as " South Jacksonville " . 
 = = = South Jacksonville = = = 
 Promoters marketed South Jacksonville as a suburb of Jacksonville , though access to the city across the river was limited to ferries . Following the completion of the FEC Railway Bridge in 1890 , several railways serviced South Jacksonville , contributing to its growth . By 1907 South Jacksonville was a regional transit hub with a population of around 600 , though it still lacked paved streets , sidewalks , and electric lights . Led by businessman John Fletcher White and the Hendricks and Philips families , residents voted to incorporate the town . S. M. Scruggs was appointed its first mayor ; White defeated him in the inaugural election six months after . 
 Growth came rapidly over the next few years as the town saw the construction of a bank , a public school , a city hall , several sizable industries and a series of amusement parks at present @-@ day Treaty Oak Park . In 1910 Atlantic Boulevard opened between South Jacksonville and the Jacksonville Beaches , further cementing South Jacksonville 's place as a hub for car and ferry traffic . By 1917 the town 's population was ten times what it had been when it was incorporated , so local leaders planned the original Acosta Bridge , connecting Jacksonville and South Jacksonville by road for the first time . 
 The bridge opened in 1921 and spurred a new wave of development in South Jacksonville . New subdivisions were platted in Oklahoma and Villa Alexandria , including South Shores , Alexandria Place , River Oaks , and the original San Marco development , while the old Red Bank plantation became South Riverside and Colonial Manor . The 1857 the Red Bank Plantation House became a residence in the Colonial Manor neighborhood that grew around it ; it is Jacksonville 's second oldest residential building still in use . The bridge triggered economic development in South Jacksonville as well , though it greatly reduced the ferry business , which disappeared entirely within twenty years . 
 = = = San Marco development = = = 
 San Marco , which eventually gave its name to the former area of South Jacksonville , broke ground in 1925 as the city 's most ambitious development . It was constructed over 80 acres of the former Villa Alexandria estate , which had deteriorated after Martha Reed Mitchell 's death in 1902 . The developer was Telfair Stockton , who had previously established the exclusive Avondale neighborhood on the other side of the river . San Marco , designed as a fashionable , upscale development in keeping with Villa Alexandria 's reputation , comprised 250 lots and a commercial district . It was remarkably successful from the beginning ; apparently driven by land speculation , San Marco shattered local records by selling every lot within three hours of putting them up for sale , even though very little work had begun . 
 Construction on the first buildings started in 1926 . San Marco was originally planned in the Italian Renaissance revival style , which influenced the name of the development and several of its streets . The commercial district was called " San Marco Square " after Venice 's Piazza San Marco , and featured several Mediterranean buildings and a fountain . Ultimately , however , few of the homes built there kept to the style , which was falling out of favor at the time . Instead , a diverse mix of contemporary architectural styles appeared in the development in the late 1920s . A former clay pit was landscaped into an artificial lake , Lake Marco . 
 Unlike most of Jacksonville 's neighborhoods , San Marco 's momentum and profusion of desirable properties carried it through the collapse of the 1920s Florida land boom and the onset of the Great Depression . While other neighborhoods faltered in the downturn , in 1929 Telfair Stockton formed a company to purchase and develop the remainder of the former Villa Alexandria property as the " First Addition to San Marco " . San Marco grew steadily through the 1930s , with new lots selling into the 1940s . 
 = = = Annexation and later history = = = 
 By 1931 , many Duval County residents were warming to the idea of merging municipal and county governments to reduce bureaucracy , corruption and weak management . As a result , in 1932 , citizens of both cities voted for the annexation of South Jacksonville into Jacksonville . While full city @-@ county consolidation was voted down , the efforts of the 1930s set the stage for further attempts , ultimately resulting in the 1968 Jacksonville Consolidation . 
 In 1937 , Jacksonville annexed the neighborhoods on the old Red Bank property . As development continued to spread south of the city limits , much of the former city of South Jacksonville came to be called " San Marco " . The area was increasingly integrated into Jacksonville 's urban fabric , and in the 1980s the area along the St. Johns River , known as the Southbank , was designated part of the Downtown Jacksonville central business district and was developed primarily for commercial office uses . Meanwhile , the neighborhood began to decline under the pressure of suburban sprawl . In 1975 , the San Marco Preservation Society ( <unk> ) was formed to encourage historic preservation and to revitalize the commercial district . Subsequently , the society and the City of Jacksonville undertook a series of urban renewal projects , including renovating San Marco Square , building a new branch library and park complex , and converting the former South Jacksonville City Hall as the <unk> headquarters . 
 = = San Marco Square = = 
 San Marco Square is the neighborhood 's major commercial district . The triangular district is located at the three @-@ way juncture of Atlantic Boulevard , Hendricks Avenue and San Marco Boulevard ; a tiered fountain at the center of the square originally marked the convergence of these streets . The San Marco Building , a Mediterranean Revival structure completed in 1927 , was the district 's first commercial building and set its architectural tone . Other features of the square include the San Marco Theatre , an art deco single @-@ screen movie theater first opened in 1938 ; and the Little Theatre , home to Theatre Jacksonville , one of the country 's oldest community theater troupes . 
 Designed as the commercial heart of San Marco , the square had declined seriously by the 1970s , with many businesses closing . The original , compass @-@ themed fountain was demolished . In the 1990s the City of Jacksonville undertook a major renovation and streetscaping project , which included restoring the fountain with three lion statues inspired by the Piazza San Marco . Since then , the square has become a popular commercial destination with many shops , restaurants and bars . In 2013 the square underwent another renovation project that rerouted the streets and expanded the small park in the center , named <unk> Park , into a larger pedestrian green space . 
 = = Features = = 
 San Marco has a number of parks of various sizes and purposes ; the San Marco Preservation Society lists fourteen within its boundaries . There are two more in the Southbank : Treaty Oak Park , home of one of Jacksonville 's oldest live oaks , and Friendship Fountain Park . Other amenities on the Southbank include the Museum of Science and History ( MOSH ) and the Southbank Riverwalk . San Marco is served by an elementary school , a middle school , and the Southside Branch Public Library . Two major projects of the San Marco Preservation Society have been the restoration of the former South Jacksonville City Hall as the society 's headquarters and the conversion of the former St. Paul 's Episcopal Church building into Preservation Hall , a <unk> banquet hall . 
 = Newfoundland pony = 
 The Newfoundland pony is a breed of pony originating in Newfoundland , Canada . They are sturdy and muscular ponies , found in many colors , including the relatively rare white coloration . The Newfoundland developed from a mix of English , Irish and Scottish pony breeds brought to Newfoundland by settlers over a period of four centuries . Initially free @-@ roaming , they crossbred to produce the modern type . They were used by settlers as draft and multi @-@ purpose ponies until the mid @-@ 20th century , when they were brought almost to the point of extinction by mechanization and slaughter . The population rebounded slightly after the formation of a breed registry in 1980 , but still remains low . In 1997 , the Newfoundland pony was declared a heritage breed of Newfoundland and Labrador , which afforded it protection under the law , but the breed has not yet been recognized under the Canadian federal Animal Pedigree Act . As of 2008 , there were 248 registered ponies of breeding age , out of a total population of 361 . In 2013 , the widely dispersed breeding population is still estimated at between 200 and 250 animals . 
 = = Physical Characteristics = = 
 Newfoundland ponies are usually 11 to 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 44 to 58 inches , 112 to 147 cm ) tall and weight 400 to 800 pounds ( 180 to 360 kg ) . They are often black , bay or brown in color . Roan , chestnut , gray and dun are also seen . White coloration is occasionally found in the breed , though white in horses is very rare . Gray horses , whose hair coats become white as they age , are much more common . Grays are born dark colored with dark skin and lighten in color as they age , retaining the dark skin . White horses are born and remain white in color , and have pink skin . Pinto color patterns are not eligible for registration . White markings are minimal , and seasonal color changes are often drastic . 
 The head is small , with thickly @-@ furred ears that are small and quite pointed at the tips . Overall , the body is stocky and muscular , with a deep , narrow chest , short back , sloping croup and low @-@ set tail . The coat and mane are thick , especially in winter . In order to be registered with the Newfoundland Pony Society , ponies must " [ have ] a good temperament and [ be ] docile and easy to work with . " They are generally used as family horses for pleasure riding and driving , although they are also seen at horse shows . 
 = = History = = 
 The ancestors of the Newfoundland pony arrived in Newfoundland from the British Isles , brought there by settlers between 1611 and the mid @-@ 1900s . Dartmoor ponies formed the initial shipment , imported by John Guy , the first Proprietary Governor of Newfoundland . Lord Falkland imported additional animals soon after , and these were followed by a spate of pony shipments from England , Ireland and Scotland . Additional breeds found in the shipments included the now @-@ extinct Galloway pony , as well as Connemara , Dartmoor , Exmoor , Fell , Highland and New Forest ponies . Beginning with the first imports , the breeds crossbred , eventually forming the modern Newfoundland pony . 
 In the past , the Newfoundland pony was used for ploughing , assisting with gardens , hauling kelp from the beaches , gathering hay , and carrying wood , and they were also used for transportation . They were successfully used and bred to withstand the hard climate , and by 1935 there were over 9 @,@ 000 ponies on the island . During the mid @-@ 20th century , however , increasing mechanization and a ban on free @-@ roaming ponies contributed to a decline in the population , and increased exports to France for horse meat in the 1970s almost led to the extinction of the breed . 
 Shortly before the breed would have become extinct , several interested breeders came together and formed the Newfoundland Pony Society in 1980 . The group was formed to gather the remaining free @-@ roaming herds , register the horses and breed them in captivity , and was successful in locating around 300 animals . In 1997 , the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador passed the Heritage Animals Act , which made the Newfoundland pony the first ( and , so far , only ) heritage animal of Newfoundland and Labrador . A subsequent order designated the Newfoundland Pony Society as " the group which will maintain the registry of ponies and otherwise act for the preservation of the animal . " In part , this Act required anyone wishing to export ponies from Newfoundland to first acquire a permit ; this ensured that ponies were going to private homes instead of slaughterhouses . Also in 1997 , the Newfoundland Pony Breed Association was formed . This group sought to have the Newfoundland pony recognized under the Canadian Animal Pedigree Act , which may have given it additional protection and recognition . In March 2014 , the Newfoundland Pony Society stated that they believed the breed should not have federal recognition , believing that the " federal act is meant for farm stock and breeding animals " , not heritage breeds . Members of the society also fear that protection of the breed may be lessened under federal law when compared with current provincial regulations . However , the provincial government will make the final decision on whether to move forward with the process for federal recognition . 
 In a study of mitochondrial DNA published in 2012 , the Newfoundland pony and Canadian horse were found to be the most genetically diverse of the Canadian breeds studied , which also included the Sable Island horse and the Lac La Croix pony . When an estimation was made using microsatellite loci , the Newfoundland was found to have high autosomal diversity and a high number of haplotypes , some of which overlapped with the mountain and moorland pony breeds ( historically documented as the ancestors of the Newfoundland ) , Nordic breeds and a feral population at Saint @-@ Pierre et Miquelon . Overlapping haplotypes also suggested a relationship with the Standardbred and Clydesdale , suggesting possible crossbreeding at some point , although previous studies using microsatellite markers had not come to this conclusion . Although the microsatellite loci showed a relationship between the Newfoundland and the Sable Island horse , the study did not find overlapping haplotypes that would support this , possibly due to the population bottleneck in the 1980s that may have resulted in such haplotypes being lost . In order to be registered with the Newfoundland Pony Society , ponies must undergo DNA testing to verify Newfoundland parentage . 
 In 2011 , The Livestock Conservancy ( TLC ) added the Newfoundland pony to their Conservation Priority List in the " study " category , as it worked to verify the breed 's history and population numbers . In 2012 , with studies completed , the breed was moved to the " critical " category , meaning that the breed has a global population of less than 2 @,@ 000 and annual registrations in the US of less than 200 . Rare Breeds Canada also considers the breed critically endangered , with fewer than 15 annual registrations of purebred female breeding stock . As of 2008 , there were 248 registered ponies of breeding age , out of a total registered population of 361 ponies . The largest populations were in the provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador and Ontario , with smaller populations in seven other Canadian provinces and the United States . As of 2013 , TLC estimates that the widely dispersed breeding population consists of between 200 and 250 ponies . 
 = HMS Brilliant ( 1757 ) = 
 HMS Brilliant was a 36 @-@ gun Venus @-@ class fifth @-@ rate frigate of the Royal Navy which saw active service during the Seven Years ' War with France . 
 Designed in 1756 and launched the following year , she was one of the first Royal Navy vessels to be built to a classic frigate design with a single gun deck and an emphasis on speed . Her principal focus was as a hunter of French privateers , capturing eight such vessels and sinking two more during her six years at sea . She also performed well against the regular French Navy in the 1760 Battle of Bishops Court and the 1761 Battle of Cape Finisterre , but was less capable when deployed for bombardment duty off enemy ports . Decommissioned in 1763 , she was sold thirteen years later to the East India Company but was wrecked in the Comoros Islands in 1782 . 
 One naval historian has described Brilliant as one of " the best British fighting cruisers " of her day . However she remained slightly inferior to her French equivalents in both speed and weight of ordinance , and was the last ship to be built to the Venus @-@ class design . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Venus @-@ class of 36 @-@ gun frigates were designed by Thomas Slade , the Surveyor of the Navy and former Master Shipwright at Deptford Dockyard . Alongside their smaller cousin , the 32 @-@ gun Southampton class , the Venus @-@ class represented an experiment in ship design ; fast , medium @-@ sized and heavily @-@ armed , capable of overhauling smaller craft and singlehandedly engaging enemy cruisers or large privateers . As a further innovation , Slade borrowed from contemporary French ship design by removing the lower deck gun ports and locating the ship 's cannons solely on the upper deck . This permitted the carrying of heavier ordinance without a substantial increase in hull size which would have been required to keep the lower gun ports consistently above the waterline . The lower deck was instead used for additional stores , enabling Venus @-@ class frigates to remain at sea for longer periods without resupply . 
 Admiralty approved the Venus class design on 13 July 1756 and three ships were ordered . Brilliant was the last of these , and the only one to be constructed at Plymouth Dockyard . Construction was overseen by Thomas Bucknall , the Navy 's Master Shipwright at Plymouth , and commenced with the laying of the keel on 28 August 1756 . The vessel was formally named Brilliant on 17 March 1757 . A 1755 Admiralty review of Plymouth Dockyard had found it inefficient , poorly staffed and suffering from " notorious neglect , " but work on Brilliant proceeded apace and was completed by early October 1757 . 
 As built , Brilliant was 128 feet 4 inches ( 39 @.@ 12 m ) long at the gundeck and 106 feet 2 @.@ 625 inches ( 32 @.@ 38 m ) at the keel with a beam of 35 feet 8 inches ( 10 @.@ 87 m ) . She was a full @-@ rigged ship and measured 38 ⁄ 94 tons ( bm ) . She was equipped with three ship 's boats , a 23 ft ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) longboat , a 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) pinnace and a 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) yawl . Her crew complement was 240 officers and men . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Brilliant 's principal armament was 26 iron @-@ cast twelve @-@ pound cannons , located along her upper deck . The guns were constructed with shorter barrels as traditional twelve @-@ pound cannons were too long to fit within the frigate 's narrow beam . Each cannon weighed 28 @.@ 5 long cwt ( 3 @,@ 200 lb or 1 @,@ 400 kg ) with a gun barrel length of 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) compared with their 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 59 m ) equivalent in larger Royal Navy vessels . 
 The twelve @-@ pound cannons were supported by ten six @-@ pounder guns , eight on the quarterdeck and two on the forecastle , each weighing 16 @.@ 5 long cwt ( 1 @,@ 800 lb or 800 kg ) with a barrel length of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . Taken together , the twelve @-@ pound and six @-@ pound cannons provided a broadside weight of 189 pounds ( 86 kg ) . She was also equipped with twelve 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ pound swivel guns for anti @-@ personnel use . These swivel guns were mounted in fixed positions on the quarterdeck and forecastle . 
 = = Royal Navy service = = 
 = = = Privateer hunter = = = 
 Brilliant was commissioned in October 1757 under the command of post @-@ captain Hyde Parker and entering Navy service during the early stages of the Seven Years ' War against France . 
 Her first engagement was on 19 December 1757 when , in company with the 24 @-@ gun HMS Coventry , she encountered the French privateer Diamond . A contemporary report described the Quebec @-@ built Diamond as " a very fine vessel " of 200 tons burthen , carrying 14 carriage guns and a cargo of furs . Diamond opened fire on Brilliant as she approached , but before the British could retaliate the French vessel exploded and sank . The detonation was assumed to have been caused by sparks flying back from the privateer 's guns and igniting her powder magazine . Only 24 of Diamond 's 70 crew survived the explosion . These men were hauled aboard Brilliant and Coventry as prisoners of war . 
 On 24 December Brilliant and Coventry encountered their second privateer , the 24 @-@ gun Le Dragon . There was a brief exchange of fire in which four French sailors were killed and up to 12 wounded , against six wounded men aboard Coventry . The vastly outgunned French vessel was then surrendered and her remaining 280 crew taken prisoner . On the following day a third French ship was spotted , a snow @-@ rigged 14 @-@ gun privateer named Intrepid . After a short chase she was brought within range of Brilliant 's guns . The French fired first , wounding one British sailor . The responding broadside from Brilliant capsized Intrepid and killed ten men among her crew of 120 . The survivors were taken prisoner aboard Brilliant and handed over to British authorities at Plymouth . 
 In March 1758 Brilliant captured two more French vessels , the 20 @-@ gun privateer Le Nymphe and the 12 @-@ gun Le Vengeur . On 8 April these two captured vessels were sailed to Plymouth . 
 = = = Coastal raids = = = 
 In late 1758 Brilliant joined a Royal Navy squadron supporting amphibious raids along the French coastline . In company with other frigates she protected fleet transports and bomb vessels and assisted with shore bombardment in the Battle of Saint Cast on 11 September 1758 . The future founder of the Royal Geographic Society , James Rennell , was a midshipman aboard Brilliant during this period and produced his first coastal map while the frigate was stationed off Saint Cast . Overall , Brilliant played an undistinguished role in this engagement as her draught was too deep for her to approach the shore . By the afternoon of the battle she was close enough to the beach for her crew to witness the surrounding and defeat of the British Grenadier Guards , but was too distant to range her guns onto their French assailants . 
 Brilliant resumed her privateer hunting in the spring of 1759 . On 17 April she encountered and forced the surrender of the 22 @-@ gun French vessel Basque around 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) west of Cape Clear . As with previous privateer captures , the captured French ship and her crew were taken to Plymouth and handed over to Navy authorities . 
 Captain Parker left Brilliant in 1759 , having been promoted to the captaincy of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Norfolk . Command of Brilliant temporarily transferred to Captain John <unk> , with the frigate assigned to a squadron under Admiral George Rodney for a coastal raid on Le Havre . The raid took place on 3 July with Brilliant acting to protect the squadron 's bomb vessels and transport ships from some distance offshore . <unk> was subsequently replaced by James Logie , who remained with Brilliant until she was decommissioned in 1763 . 
 = = = Battle of Bishops Court = = = 
 The Battle of Bishops Court was a shift in Brilliant 's focus from capturing French privateers to direct engagement with an enemy naval squadron . Between 21 and 26 February 1760 a force of three French vessels , the 44 @-@ gun Maréchal de Belle @-@ Isle , the 36 @-@ gun Blonde and the 30 @-@ gun Terpsichore , arrived off the coast of Ireland . Under the command of privateer François Thurot , they landed 600 French troops and captured the town of Carrickfergus . Thurot held the town for five days . 
 Brilliant and her sister ship HMS Pallas were in port at Kinsale in southern Ireland , and were sent north to intercept Thurot 's force . While at sea they were joined by HMS Aeolus whose captain , John Elliott , assumed overall command of the squadron . The three Royal Navy frigates reached Dublin on the morning of 26 February but bad weather prevented them from entering Belfast Lough . On the same day , Thurot re @-@ embarked his troops and put to sea , evading the British vessels and seeking to return south to France . 
 After two days of searching , the three Royal Navy frigates encountered Thurot 's forces at 4 a.m. on 28 February between the Mull of Galloway and the Isle of Man . A general chase ensued with Brilliant overhauling the 36 @-@ gun Blonde and engaging her in battle at around 9 a.m. , off shore from <unk> , Isle of Man . Blonde quickly surrendered , as did Terpsichore which had been fired upon by Pallas . Thurot 's flagship Maréchal de Belle @-@ Isle fought on alone against all three Royal Navy vessels , with her crew making repeated attempts to board and seize Aeolus . After ninety minutes of close combat Thurot was killed by a shot through the neck , and Maréchal de Belle @-@ Isle was so battered from cannon fire that she began to sink . Her surviving crew surrendered and were taken prisoner . Brilliant , Pallas and Aeolus then anchored off the Isle of Man to repair damage to their rigging and masts before sailing for Portsmouth with their prizes . 
 The French had suffered 300 casualties in the battle . A further 1000 men were taken prisoner , including both soldiers and crew . British casualties were small with Aeolus suffering four killed and 15 wounded ; Pallas one killed and five wounded and Brilliant escaping with no deaths and 11 men wounded . 
 = = = Battle of Cape Finisterre = = = 
 On 14 August 1761 , Brilliant was accompanying the 74 @-@ gun HMS Bellona from Lisbon to England when they encountered Courageux , a 74 @-@ gun French ship of the line , and two frigates , <unk> and Hermione . After some maneuvering the British and French squadrons finally engaged with each other at 6 @.@ 00 a.m. on the morning of 14 August off shore from Cape Finisterre . 
 Bellona opened fire on <unk> while Brilliant engaged <unk> and Hermione . Through skillful sailing , Logie was able to keep both French frigates at bay and unable to assist Courageux , which surrendered to Bellona after ninety minutes of fighting . At 7 @.@ 30 a.m. <unk> and Hermione made sail and retreated , with Brilliant too damaged to give chase . British losses in the battle numbered six killed and 28 wounded on Bellona and five killed and 16 wounded on Brilliant , while losses on Courageux alone were 240 killed and 110 wounded . Historian William Laird Clowes considered that this discrepancy was probably the result of differences in British and French tactical doctrine , the French trained to fire at the masts and rigging of an enemy ship in order to disable them , while British doctrine trained crews to fire into the hull of enemy ships to kill the crew . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 There were several small victories for Brilliant throughout 1761 , with the capture of the 6 @-@ gun privateers Le <unk> and Le <unk> from St. Malo , and the 8 @-@ gun La <unk> from Bayonne . After a period spent refitting at Portsmouth , in January 1763 Brilliant was sailed to Dublin to assist in clearing stores and transporting crew from the 66 @-@ gun HMS Devonshire , which was in port after being damaged at sea . Later that year she had her final victory at sea , overhauling and forcing the surrender of the small 8 @-@ gun privateer L <unk> . 
 War with France was by now drawing to a close , and in March 1763 Logie brought Brilliant to Deptford Dockyard where she was decommissioned and her crew paid off to join other vessels . 
 = = East India Company = = 
 Brilliant remained at Deptford until 1776 when she was offered for sale as surplus to Navy requirements . She was purchased by Sir William James on 1 November 1776 , for the sum of ₤ 800 . The vessel 's name was retained and she was converted into an East India <unk> in 1781 . Under Captain Charles Mears , Brilliant set sail on her first merchant voyage in 1782 , but her career in private hands was short @-@ lived . She narrowly avoided disaster on 26 January 1782 when she struck and heavily damaged HMS Albemarle which was anchored off the Kentish coast under the command of Captain Horatio Nelson . Seven months later , on 28 August , while transporting troops to India , she struck a rock off Johanna in the Comoro Islands and was lost . The majority of the crew survived the wreck but more than 100 soldiers from the 15th Hanoverian Regiment were drowned , including three officers . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 William Clowes describes Brilliant as one of " the best British fighting cruisers of the days before the accession of George III . " However , throughout her Navy career she remained slightly inferior to her French equivalents in both speed and weight of ordinance and was the last ship to be built in the Venus class . Subsequent generations of Royal Navy frigate preserved Brilliant 's design but with an extended hull to allow for additional gun ports and the carrying of heavier guns including the 18 @-@ pounder cannon . 
 = Irish presidential election , 2011 = 
 The Irish presidential election of 2011 was the thirteenth presidential election to be held in Ireland , and the first to be contested by a record seven candidates . It was held on Thursday , 27 October 2011 . The election was held to elect a successor to Mary McAleese , with the winner scheduled to be inaugurated as the ninth President of Ireland on 11 November 2011 . Two constitutional referendums and a by @-@ election for a vacant Dáil seat in the Dublin West constituency took place on the same day . 
 The seven candidates were Mary Davis , Seán Gallagher , Michael D. Higgins , Martin McGuinness , Gay Mitchell , David Norris and Dana Rosemary Scallon . Davis , Gallagher , Norris and Scallon ( all running as Independents ) , secured their nominations via local authorities . Higgins was put forward by Labour , McGuinness was put forward by Sinn Féin and Mitchell was put forward by Fine Gael . The previously dominant Fianna Fáil party declined to put forward an official candidate following their disastrous general election campaign earlier that year . Norris , a civil rights campaigner credited with helping overthrow Ireland 's laws criminalising homosexuality , was the leading candidate for much of the race , and had more than double the support of the other declared candidates in January 2011 . He withdrew in August 2011 but returned to the race the following month due to his continuing widespread popular appeal . 
 The opening televised debate , Vincent Browne 's Big Presidential Debate on TV3 , saw moderator Vincent Browne challenge Sinn Féin candidate Martin McGuinness on the post @-@ 1974 membership of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) , that McGuinness repeatedly denied , by producing eight books from under his desk that claimed otherwise . Fine Gael candidate Gay Mitchell suffered from lack of recognition by many voters , and suffered heavily for his controversial views on suicide and on Ireland joining the Commonwealth . Labour candidate Michael D. Higgins was pursued by his past links to the unpopular Fianna Fáil and his admission that he had smoked marijuana . Independent candidate Dana Rosemary Scallon interrupted the Prime Time debate , moderated by Miriam O 'Callaghan , to read out a statement condemning a " malicious " and " false " accusation that she had heard had been made against her family . Seán Gallagher , a former member of the Fianna Fáil national executive , was leading the opinion polls ahead of the final televised debate , moderated by Pat Kenny on The Frontline . However , Gallagher 's campaign came undone when he admitted live on air to collecting a € 5 @,@ 000 cheque for a Fianna Fáil fundraiser event from a man he described as a " convicted criminal and fuel smuggler " . 
 Michael D. Higgins was ultimately elected the ninth President of Ireland . Gallagher finished in second place , McGuinness finished in third , while Norris , favourite for much of the race , finished fifth . Gallagher 's sudden demise was compared to Devon Loch 's fall at the winning post in the 1956 Grand National . 
 = = Procedure = = 
 To qualify , candidates had to : 
 be a citizen of Ireland 
 be at least 35 years of age 
 be nominated by : 
 at least twenty of the 226 serving members of the Houses of the Oireachtas ( parliament ) , or 
 at least four of the 34 county or city councils , or 
 him- or herself , in the case of an incumbent or former president who has served one term . 
 Presidential elections are conducted under the Presidential Elections Act 1993 , as amended . Constitutionally , the election must be held not more than 60 days before the ending of the term of office of the incumbent , or within 60 days of the office becoming vacant . On 27 July the government announced that the election would be held on 27 October 2011 . An order was made on 30 August by the Minister for the Environment , Community and Local Government declaring 28 September to be the last day on which nominations could be received . The election was conducted by means of the alternative vote ( also called instant runoff voting ) , which is the single @-@ winner analogue of the single transferable vote used in other Irish elections . Although the constitution calls the system " proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote " , a single @-@ winner election cannot be proportional . All Irish citizens entered on the current electoral register were eligible to vote . 
 = = Nomination campaign = = 
 Following the general election in February 2011 , and the election of the members of the 24th <unk> , only three political parties had the minimum 20 members of Oireachtas to nominate a candidate : Fine Gael ( 76 TDs and 19 senators ) , the Labour Party ( 37 TDs and 13 senators ) and Fianna Fáil ( 19 TDs and 14 senators ) . Sinn Féin , the next largest party in the Dáil Éireann , have 14 TDs and 3 senators . For other candidates to be nominated , support from members of smaller parties , independents ( of which there are currently 14 TDs and 11 senators ) or excess members of the three larger parties was needed , or the support of four local authorities . 
 = = = Fine Gael = = = 
 Gay Mitchell , MEP for the Dublin constituency and former TD for Dublin South @-@ Central was chosen as the Fine Gael candidate at a special convention held on 9 July 2011 . He announced that he would be seeking the party 's nomination in June 2011 , having been contacted by " a large number of senior figures in the party " . Voting was by secret ballot , with an electoral college consisting of the Fine Gael parliamentary party ( TDs , Senators and MEPs ) with 70 % of the vote , county and city councillors ( 20 % ) and the twelve @-@ member executive council ( 10 % ) . 
 Three others sought the nomination : 
 Pat Cox , former President of the European Parliament and former Progressive Democrats / Independent MEP . Early in June 2011 , press reports indicated that Cox , who had stated his desire to stand as an independent candidate , was seeking to join Fine Gael to be eligible for the party 's nomination . His application to join the party was accepted by Fine Gael 's National Executive Committee on 14 June . He launched his campaign for the Fine Gael nomination on 17 June 2011 , describing it as a " one @-@ shot opportunity " and that if he failed to be nominated by the party he would not stand as an independent . Cox was claimed by the Irish Independent to be the preferred choice of Taoiseach Enda Kenny and the Fine Gael leadership . 
 Avril Doyle , former MEP and TD . On 21 June 2011 , she announced her candidacy . She withdrew from the contest on 7 July stating that she realised she was unlikely to receive the nomination . 
 Mairead McGuinness , MEP for the East constituency , former presenter of Ear to the Ground on RTÉ One and former journalist with the Irish Independent . She announced her bid for the Fine Gael nomination in April 2011 . 
 In March 2011 , Fine Gael produced a shortlist of three candidates : John Bruton , Seán Kelly and Mairead McGuinness . Bruton , a former Taoiseach and European Union Ambassador , ruled himself out of the contest on 28 May 2011 . Kelly , an MEP and former President of the Gaelic Athletic Association indicated on 1 June 2011 that he would not be seeking the party 's nomination , and wished to continue serving in the European Parliament . The party approached Nobel laureate poet Seamus Heaney in late 2010 , but Heaney declined to stand unless he was an agreed cross @-@ party candidate . 
 On the announcement that Mitchell had won the nomination , the Sunday Independent stated that Kenny was seen to slump and " could barely contain his disappointment . " When questioned by a journalist on his apparent disappointment , Kenny responded sharply " Am I supposed to be going around grinning like a Cheshire Cat at everything ? " 
 = = = Labour Party = = = 
 The Labour Party candidate was Michael D. Higgins . He was chosen jointly by the party 's National Executive and the Labour Parliamentary Party at a special convention on 19 June 2011 . 
 The former TD and Minister , and current Labour Party president , originally indicated that he was interested in receiving the party 's nomination in September 2010 . Like Higgins , two other candidates put their names forward in late May 2011 : 
 Fergus Finlay , Chief Executive of Barnardo 's children 's charity , announced on 9 September 2010 that he would seek the Labour Party 's nomination for president . 
 Kathleen O 'Meara , former Senator , also put her name forward for the party nomination . 
 = = = Fianna Fáil = = = 
 For the first time in any presidential election , Fianna Fáil neither ran a candidate nor supported the nomination of a candidate . The decision was made at a meeting of the parliamentary party on 31 August 2011 , and was in line with the recommendations of the six @-@ person subcommittee formed by the party leader Micheál Martin to consider the matter . 
 In June 2011 press reports had indicated that the party was unlikely to run a candidate both for financial reasons and also because it was unlikely that a Fianna Fáil nominee could be successful . In early August 2011 there was press speculation that RTÉ broadcaster Gay Byrne might seek a nomination . On 6 August Micheál Martin rang Byrne at his holiday home to indicate that Fianna Fáil Oireachtas members would facilitate his nomination . Byrne indicated that he had yet to make a decision on whether to put his name forward , but said that if he did so he would not run under the Fianna Fáil banner but as an independent , albeit with the assistance of the party 's organisation . " Fianna Fáil are convinced no matter who they put up will be unelectable , so they 're giving me their support " he told the Irish Independent . Éamon Ó Cuív , the party 's deputy leader and member of the committee tasked with deciding on their strategy for the election stated that " I know of no approach to Gay Byrne ... Nobody has discussed the issue with me — good , bad or indifferent . " On 13 August Byrne informed Martin that he would not be going forward for nomination . He stated that the idea of running had been " foisted on him and he had not known anything about it and what it would involve " . This followed unease among Fianna Fáil parliamentary party Oireachtas members , with a number unhappy that a candidate was being imposed by the leadership without discussion . 
 On 16 August 2011 , the Irish Examiner reported that Micheál Martin had moved to pull the party out of the presidential race over the fallout from the approach to Gay Byrne , the cost involved and the slim chance of a candidate being elected . On 24 August , however , the party 's deputy leader Éamon Ó Cuív told Raidió na <unk> that he believed the party should put forward a candidate . Several members had expressed an interest in the a party nomination : 
 Brian Crowley , MEP , said in The Irish Times on 29 September 2008 that he would like to stand for president in 2011 . In July 2011 he wrote to members of the parliamentary party confirming that he wished to contest the election as the Fianna Fáil candidate . On 23 August Crowley indicated that he would not be seeking a nomination . He stated that the party leadership " has demonstrated that it does not want an internal party candidate to contest the upcoming presidential election . So , with much disappointment , I do not now feel free to seek the Fianna Fáil nomination . " 
 Éamon Ó Cuív , TD for Galway West and former minister , expressed an interest in the office once held by his grandfather , Éamon de Valera . 
 Senator Mary White had announced her intention to stand for the Fianna Fáil nomination in 2008 , but in May 2011 said that she would not be seeking the nomination . 
 Mary <unk> also expressed an interest in seeking the nomination . 
 Following the decision by Fianna Fáil not to run their own candidate , there was speculation that some party members might be prepared to nominate an independent candidate . However , on 11 September the party 's chief whip , Seán Ó <unk> , made it clear that individual TDs and senators would not be permitted to sign the nomination papers of independent candidates . He said that if the party decided to support a candidacy it would be done collectively . 
 A meeting of the parliamentary party was held on 15 September at which the issue of the presidential election was raised . Unexpectedly , one of the party 's senators , <unk> Ó <unk> , sought nominations to run as an independent candidate . This was widely seen as a challenge to the authority of Micheál Martin . The extended meeting broke up without agreement . The parliamentary party met again on 20 September . Senator Ó <unk> withdrew his request for a nomination and a motion was passed that the party 's Oireachtas members would not nominate or endorse any candidate . The decision was seen as a severe blow to the attempts to secure a nomination by David Norris and Dana Rosemary Scallon who were expected to need signatures from individual Fianna Fáil members . 
 = = = Sinn Féin = = = 
