 In Venkata Krishnappa Nayaka 's Telugu rendition , Ahalya is depicted as a romantic adulteress . When Brahma creates Ahalya as the most beautiful being , she falls in love with Indra and longs for him , but Brahma grants her to Gautama . After Ahalya 's marriage , Indra too craves for her . He frequently visits her and flirts with her in Gautama 's absence . At one point , Ahalya receives a visit from Indra 's female messenger , who proceeds to mock husbands who avoid sex by saying that it is not the right day for pleasure . Ahalya protests , maintaining that she imagines Gautama to be Indra as they have sex and that a woman should be a stone , forgoing all thought of sexual gratification . That night , when Ahalya longs for conjugal bliss , Gautama refuses her , saying that she is not in her fertile period . Agitated , she wishes that Indra was there to satisfy her . Indra perceives her wish and comes in Gautama 's disguise , but is revealed by his seductive speech . Ignoring the deception , Ahalya joyously makes love to him . 
 = = Curse and redemption = = 
 While most versions agree that Gautama curses Ahalya after discovering the affair , the curse varies from text to text . However , almost all versions describe Rama as the agent of her liberation and redemption . 
 = = = Punishments of Ahalya and Indra = = = 
 The Bala Kanda mentions that Gautama spots Indra , who is still in disguise , and curses him to lose his testicles . Gautama then curses Ahalya to remain invisible to all beings for thousands of years , fast by subsisting only on air , suffer and sleep in ashes and be tormented by guilt . Nevertheless , he assures her that her sin will be expiated once she extends her hospitality to Rama , who will visit the ashram . Thereafter , Gautama abandons the ashram and goes to the Himalayas to practise asceticism . The Ayodhya prince Rama , his brother Lakshmana and their guru , the sage Vishvamitra pass Gautama 's desolate ashram while travelling to King Janaka 's court in Mithila . As they near the ashram , Vishvamitra recounts the tale of Ahalya 's curse and instructs Rama to save Ahalya . Although Ahalya is cursed , Vishvamitra nevertheless describes her as goddess @-@ like and illustrious , repeatedly calling her <unk> , a Sanskrit compound ( maha and <unk> ) translated as " most illustrious and highly distinguished " ; this interpretation contrasts with that of Rambhadracharya , who believes that the word <unk> , in the context of Ahalya 's story , means " extremely unfortunate " ( maha and <unk> ) . Following Vishvamitra , the princes enter the ashram to see Ahalya , who , up till then , had been hidden from the universe . Ahalya is described as glowing from the intensity of her ascetic devotion , but hidden from the world like the Sun obscured by dark clouds , the light of a full moon hidden by mist or a blazing flame masked by smoke . Under the direction of his guru , Rama considers Ahalya pure and unblemished and , accompanied by Lakshamana , gives her obeisance by touching her feet , an act that restores her social status . She greets them , recalling Gautama 's words that Rama would be her redeemer . Ahalya extends her warmest reception , making a " welcome offering " of forest fruits and washing their feet , an act of respect according to the rites of that era . The gods and other celestial beings shower Rama and Ahalya with flowers and bow to Ahalya , who has been purified through her penance . Gautama then returns to his ashram and accepts her . 
 In one instance in the Mahabharata , Indra is said to have been cursed by having his beard turned to gold as he seduces Ahalya , while a curse by Kaushika ( sometimes interpreted as synonymous to Gautama ) is cited as the reason for his castration . In the Uttara Kanda , Indra is cursed to lose his throne and endure captivity and bear half the sin of every rape ever committed , while the innocent Ahalya is cursed to lose her status as the most beautiful woman , as it had prompted Indra 's seduction . Ahalya claims her innocence ( this part is not found in all manuscripts ) , but Gautama agrees to accept her only when she is sanctified by offering Rama hospitality . 
 Ahalya 's defence plea is also found in some of the Puranas . In the Brahma Purana , Ahalya is cursed to become a dried up stream , but pleads her innocence and produces servants , who were also deceived by Indra 's disguise , as witnesses . Gautama reduces the curse on his " faithful wife " and she is redeemed when she joins the Gautami ( Godavari ) river as a stream . Indra is cursed to carry his shame in the form of a thousand vulvae on his body , but the vulvae turn into eyes as he bathes in the Gautami . The Brahma Purana is a rare exception where Rama is dropped from the narrative . Instead , the greatness of the Gautami river is illustrated . The Padma Purana tells that as Indra attempts to flee in the form of a cat , Gautama curses him to lose his genitals and to bear a thousand vulvae on his body . The beguiled Ahalya declares herself blameless , but Gautama considers her impure and curses her to be reduced to a mere skeleton of skin and bones . He decrees that she will regain her beautiful form when Rama laughs at seeing her so afflicted , dried out ( a reminder of the dried stream motif ) , without a body ( the Ramayana curse ) and lying on the path ( an attribute often used to describe a stone ) . When Rama comes , he proclaims her innocence and Indra 's guilt , whereupon Ahalya returns to her heavenly abode and dwells with Gautama . 
 = = = Stone motifs = = = 
 In the popular retelling of the legend in later works , as well as in theatre and electronic media , Ahalya is turned to stone by Gautama 's curse and returns to her human form only after being brushed by Rama 's foot . 
 According to the Brahma Vaivarta Purana , Gautama curses Indra to bear a thousand vulvae , which will turn to eyes when he worships the sun @-@ god Surya . Ahalya , though innocent , is turned to stone for sixty thousand years and destined to be redeemed only by Rama 's touch . Ahalya accepts the verdict without debate . In another version in the same Purana , Gautama catches Indra fleeing as a cat and curses him with castration . Ahalya 's plea of innocence is acknowledged by Gautama , who declares that her mind is pure and she has kept the " vow of chastity and fidelity " , but another man 's seed has defiled her body . Gautama orders her to go to the forest and become a stone until rescued by the touch of Rama 's feet . In Venkata Krishnappa Nayaka 's Telugu rendition , when Indra reluctantly leaves , Gautama arrives and curses Ahalya to become a stone , to be later purified by Rama 's feet . After she is freed from the curse , Gautama and Ahalya are reconciled and they spend their days in bed , exploring sexual techniques . 
 The Skanda Purana tells that when Gautama arrives , Ahalya explains the whole tale truthfully , but is cursed by Gautama to become a stone , because he believes that she acted as a rolling stone , unable to recognise the difference between Indra 's and Gautama 's gestures and movements . The touch of Rama 's feet is prophesied to be her saviour . The terrified Indra escapes as a cat and is cursed with castration . Ahalya 's truthfulness is also observed in the Kathasaritsagara . When Gautama arrives after the act , Indra tries to flee as a cat but is cursed to bear the marks of a thousand vulvae . When asked by Gautama about her visitor , Ahalya wittily answers that it was a <unk> , a word meaning either " cat " or , when split as ma @-@ <unk> , " my lover " . Gautama laughs and curses her to be turned into stone , but decrees that she will be released by Rama since she at least spoke the truth . 
 The petrification motif also appears in non @-@ scriptural works . The Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa ( generally dated 4th century CE ) notes that the wife of Gautama ( unnamed here ) momentarily becomes the wife of Indra . Without explicitly mentioning the curse , it relates further that she regains her beautiful form and casts away her stony appearance , owing to the grace provided by the dust of Rama 's feet , which redeems her . Gautam Patel , author of many works about Kalidasa , credits him as the first person to introduce the petrification motif . In the Ramavataram too , Rama does not have to touch Ahalya with his foot ; the dust from his feet is enough to bring her back to life . As in other versions of the tale , the repentant Ahalya is turned to stone , only to be liberated by Rama , and Indra runs away disguised as a cat but is cursed to bear the marks of a thousand vulvae . The Ramavataram is an example of the Bhakti @-@ era poets who exalt Rama as a saviour . 
 Although opinions differ on whether the Bala Kanda narrative of Ahalya refers to the divinity of Rama , later sources assert Rama 's divine status , portraying Ahalya as a condemned woman rescued by God . The Bhakti @-@ era poets use the episode as an archetypal example to demonstrate God 's saving grace . The main theme of such narratives is her deliverance by Rama , which is seen as proof of his compassion . 
 Most of the fifth chapter of the Bala Kanda Book of the Adhyatma Ramayana ( embedded in the Brahmanda Purana , c . 14th century ) is dedicated to the Ahalya episode . Like most other versions of the story , Ahalya is turned into stone and advised to <unk> herself in meditation of Rama , " the Supreme Lord " . When Rama touches the stone with his foot on Vishvamitra 's advice , Ahalya rises as a beautiful maiden and sings a long panegyric dedicated to Rama . She describes his iconographic form and exalts him as an avatar of Vishnu and source of the universe to whom many divinities pay their respects . After worshipping him , she returns to Gautama . At the end of the narrative , Ahalya 's hymn is prescribed as an ideal benediction for a devotee to gain Rama 's favour . The Awadhi Ramacharitamanasa ( 16th century ) drops the narrative of Indra 's visit to Ahalya . In this epic , Vishvamitra tells Rama that the cursed Ahalya has assumed the form of a rock and is patiently awaiting the dust from Rama 's feet . Ahalya tells Rama that Gautama was right to pronounce the curse , and she deems it as the greatest favour , for as a result , she feasted her eyes on Rama , who liberated her from her worldly existence . As in the Adhyatma Ramayana , Ahalya lauds Rama as the great Lord served by other divinities , asks for the boon of eternal engrossment in his devotion and afterwards leaves for her husband 's abode . The narrative ends with praise for Rama 's compassion . Tulsidas alludes to this episode numerous times in the Ramacharitamanasa while highlighting the significance of Rama 's benevolence . Commenting on this narrative in the Ramacharitamanasa , Rambhadracharya says that Rama destroyed three things : the sin of Ahalya by his sight , the curse by the dust of his feet and the affliction by the touch of his feet , evidenced by the use of the <unk> ( meaning " destroyer of the three " ) metre in the verses which form Ahalya 's panegyric . 
 = = = Other variants = = = 
 In some rare exceptions , the curse is dropped . In an instance in the Mahabharata , where details of the seduction are absent , an agitated Gautama orders his son Chirakari to behead his " polluted " mother and leaves the ashram . However , Chirakari is hesitant to follow the order and later concludes that Ahalya is innocent . Gautama returns and repents his hasty decision , realising that Indra is the guilty party . In the Bhil Ramayana , Gautama attacks and imprisons Indra , who is freed when he promises to shower rain on the crops as the rain god . He must also ensure that one quarter of the crops is dedicated to Gautama . Here , Ahalya is interpreted as dry and burnt land , eager for the rains sent by Indra , who is tamed by the wild cyclonic Gautama . 
 = = Modern renditions = = 
 Ahalya has been examined in a new light by several modern writers , most commonly through short stories or through poetry in various Indian languages . Although Ahalya is a minor character in all ancient sources , " stigmatised and despised by those around her " for violating gender norms , modern Indian writers have elevated her to the status of an epic heroine , rather than an insignificant figure in the saga of Rama . However , in modern devotional Ramayana adaptations where Rama is the hero , the redemption of Ahalya continues to be a supernatural incident in his life . 
 Ahalya 's tale lives on in modern @-@ day poetry , including works by Rabindranath Tagore in Bengali and English ; P. T. <unk> 's 1940 Kannada poetic drama , Ahalya , which weighs <unk> against dharma ( pleasure against duty ) ; and the works of the Sanskrit scholar and poet Chandra Rajan . It is retold numerous times in stage enactments as well as in film and television productions . Ahalya is a popular motif in the Mahari temple @-@ dancer tradition of Odisha . Other works and genres of performance art that have been used to tell her story include the <unk> dance of Kerala ; <unk> , a play by <unk> Nambiar staged in the <unk> tradition ; and Sati Ahalya , a <unk> @-@ <unk> drama from Andhra Pradesh . 
 Early in the 20th century , the old norms were reasserted . Pa . Subramania Mudaliar in his Tamil poem ( 1938 ) describes Ahalya lecturing Indra on chastity , but Indra 's lust compels him to rape her . Gautama turns Ahalya to stone to free her from the trauma . The Tamil writer <unk> portrays an innocent Ahalya , who sleeps with the disguised Indra , overcome with guilt and asking for punishment . <unk> <unk> Sastry 's Telugu version of Ramayana ( 1947 ) , one of the most censored versions of the tale , reduces Ahalya 's contact with Indra to a handshake . 
 Other authors reinterpreted the Ahalya legend from a very different perspective , often depicting Ahalya as a rebel and telling the story from her angle . R. K. Narayan ( 1906 – 2001 ) focuses on the psychological details of the story , reusing the old tale of Indra 's disguise as Gautama , his flight as a cat and Ahalya 's <unk> . The theme of adulterous love is explored in <unk> <unk> 's musical Marathi play Brahma Kumari ( 1933 ) and the Malayalam works of P. V. <unk> ( 1941 ) and M. Parvati Amma ( 1948 ) . The Ahalya of the Tamil short story writer Ku Pa <unk> ( 1902 – 44 ) also secretly longs for Indra and enjoys dalliance with him . Pratibha Ray 's Odia novel <unk> ( 1997 , " Great Lust " ) portrays an independent and nonconformist Ahalya as a tragic heroine , who offers herself to Indra so that he can fulfil his lust and she her womanhood . When Gautama persuades her to lie to society by claiming to have been raped , she debates chastity and freedom of mind with him . 
 Some writers try to imagine Ahalya 's life after the curse and redemption , a denouement which remains undisclosed in the ancient scriptures . Pudhumaipithan 's Tamil story <unk> ( 1943 , " Deliverance from the Curse " ) and K. B. <unk> 's Malayalam language work ( 1990 ) translated as " Woman of Stone " focus on Rama 's " double standard " from a feminist perspective . They ask why Rama frees Ahalya from being cursed for adultery , but punishes his wife Sita over false accusations of adultery with her kidnapper , Ravana . In Pudhumaipithan 's tale , Ahalya turns back into stone after hearing that Sita had to undergo a trial by fire to prove her chastity . <unk> portrays her turning into stone upon learning that Sita was banished from the kingdom on charges of adultery even after proving her chastity through the trial . Pudhumaipithan also narrates how , after the redemption , Ahalya suffers from " post @-@ trauma repetition syndrome " , repeatedly re @-@ experiencing Indra 's seduction and Gautama 's fury , as well as suffering the ire of a conservative society that rejects her . Gautama also suffers from self @-@ recrimination at his hasty decision to curse Ahalya . In another story , Ahalya by Pudhumaipithan , Gautama forgives both Ahalya and Indra . 
 S. <unk> 's 1980 Tamil poem <unk> examines the stone motif in Ahalya 's tale : she marries a husband who is no more interested in her than a stone and briefly encounters joy with Indra , only to end up cursed to become a lifeless stone . The poet asks if it was better for Ahalya to remain physically a stone and retain her dignity rather than return to a stony marriage . <unk> Maga ( " Life @-@ woman " ) by the Tamil poet Na . <unk> ( 1900 – 76 ) presents Ahalya as an allegorical representation of life , with Gautama as the mind and Indra pleasure . The Marxist critic Kovai <unk> , in his poem <unk> , represents Ahalya as the oppressed class and Rama as an ideal future without exploitation . Gautama and Indra represent feudalism and capitalism . The character of Ahalya played by Kamala <unk> in the 1949 movie Sati Ahalya ( " chaste Ahalya " ) was described as still relevant by contemporary film critics due to its portrayal of the predicament of a stained woman . 
 Love , sex and desire become important elements of the plot in Sant Singh <unk> 's Punjabi play <unk> ( 1945 ) , which places the epic drama in the modern age . It depicts Ahalya as a free @-@ spirited woman , who dares to be painted nude by Inder ( Indra ) , a pupil of the art professor , Gautama , and defends her decision against her husband 's criticisms . N. S. Madhavan 's Malayalam story ( April 2006 ) also retells Ahalya 's tale in a modern setting , wherein Ahalya , accused of adultery , is beaten by her husband , leaving her in a coma from which the neurologist , Rama , revives her . The 2015 film Ahalya gives a feminist twist to the tale where the policeman Indra turns into a stone doll , after visiting Ahalya . The tale was also parodied in the Telugu film Attarintiki Daredi . However , the practice of retelling the classical Ahalya – Indra tale in a contemporary setting is not new . The Yoga Vasistha ( 1001 – 1400 ) narrates a tale of two adulterous lovers , Queen Ahalya and the Brahmin Indra . Here , Ahalya and Indra fall in love and continue their affair , despite being punished by Ahalya 's jealous husband . After death , they reunite in their next birth . 
 = = Children = = 
 The Ramayana mentions Ahalya 's son , <unk> ( <unk> ) , the family priest and preceptor of King Janaka of Mithila . In this version , <unk> asks Vishvamitra anxiously about the well @-@ being of his " renowned " mother . By contrast , the Mahabharata mentions two sons : <unk> , born with arrows in his hand , and Chirakari , whose extensive brooding over his actions leads to procrastination . Besides these , an unnamed daughter is also alluded to in the narrative . The Vamana Purana mentions three daughters : Jaya , Jayanti and <unk> . 
 Another legend , generally told in Indian folk tales , states that Aruna , the charioteer of the sun @-@ god Surya , once became a woman named Aruni and entered an assembly of celestial nymphs , where no man except Indra was allowed . Indra fell in love with Aruni and fathered a son named Vali . The next day , at Surya 's request , Aruna again assumed female form , and Surya fathered a son , Sugriva . Both children were given to Ahalya for rearing , but Gautama cursed them , causing them to turn into monkeys , as he did not like them . In the Thai version of the Ramayana , the Ramakien , Vali and Sugriva are described as Ahalya 's children from her liaisons with Indra and Surya . Although Ahalya initially passes them off as sons of Gautama , her daughter by Gautama – Anjani – reveals her mother 's secret to her father . He consequently drives the brothers away and curses them to become monkeys . Enraged , Ahalya curses Anjani to give birth to a monkey too . Anjani bears Hanuman , the monkey @-@ god and helper of Rama . Similar tales are also found in the Malay adaptation , Hikayat Seri Rama , and Punjabi and Gujarati folk tales . However , Anjani is cursed by Gautama in these versions , generally for aiding Indra and Ahalya in concealing the secret . 
 Some Tamil castes trace their ancestry to Ahalya and Indra 's liaison ; the castes are named after Ahalya 's children . Gautama finds the three boys and names them according to their behaviour : <unk> ( derived from " brave " ) , who confronts Gautama , <unk> ( derived from " tree " ) , who climbs a tree and <unk> ( derived from " thief " or " rock " ) , who hides like a thief behind a large rock . A fourth child , <unk> , is added in some versions . In another variant , the liaison is replaced by penance and worship offered by Ahalya to Indra , who gifts her the children as a reward . 
 = = Assessment and remembrance = = 
 A well @-@ known verse about Ahalya runs : 
 Orthodox Hindus , especially Hindu wives , remember the panchakanya , the five virgins or maidens , in this daily morning prayer . One view considers them " exemplary chaste women " or <unk> ( " great chaste women " ) as per the Mahari dance tradition , and worthy as an ideal for " displaying some outstanding quality " . According to this view , Ahalya is the " epitome of the chaste wife , unjustly accused of adultery " , while her " proverbial loyalty to her husband " makes her venerable . Ahalya is often regarded as the leader of the <unk> due to the " nobility of her character , her extraordinary beauty and the fact of her being chronologically the first kanya " . In the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana , Ahalya is included in a list of secondary goddesses , who are " auspicious , glorious and much praiseworthy " , alongside Tara and Mandodari as well as some of the pancha @-@ satis ( " five satis or chaste wives " ) Arundhati and Damayanti . 
 Another view does not regard the panchakanya as ideal women who should be emulated . Bhattacharya , author of Panch @-@ Kanya : The Five Virgins of Indian Epics contrasts the panchakanya with the five satis enlisted in another traditional prayer : Sati , Sita , Savitri , Damayanti and Arundhati . He rhetorically asks , " Are then Ahalya , Draupadi , Kunti , Tara , and Mandodari not chaste wives because each has ' known ' a man , or more than one , other than her husband ? " Because they exhibited sexual behaviours that were non @-@ ideal and even unethical according to traditional norms , Indian social reformer <unk> Chattopadhyay was perplexed by the inclusion of Ahalya and Tara in the panchakanya . Although Ahalya 's transgression blemished her and denied her the high status and reverence accorded to women like Sita and Savitri , this action made her immortal in legend . 
 The place where Ahalya is held to have practised her penance and was redeemed has been celebrated in scriptures as a sacred place called the Ahalya @-@ tirtha . A tirtha is a sacred place with a body of water , where pilgrims generally bathe to purify themselves . The location of the Ahalya @-@ tirtha is disputed : according to some scriptures , it is on the river Godavari , others place it on the river Narmada . Two sites are widely held to be the Ahalya @-@ tirtha . One is located near <unk> Temple in <unk> , on the banks of the Narmada ; another is located in <unk> district , Bihar . The Ahilya Asthan temple in Ahalya @-@ gram ( " Ahalya 's village " ) in the same district is dedicated to Ahalya . For those seeking to attract women and be handsome like the love @-@ god Kamadeva , the Matsya Purana and the Kurma Purana prescribe the worship of Ahalya at the Ahalya @-@ tirtha . This is to be done on the day of Kamadeva , in the Hindu month of Chaitra . According to the texts , he who bathes in the tirtha will enjoy pleasure with the celestial nymphs . 
 For Bhattacharya , Ahalya is the eternal woman who responds to her inner urges and the advances of the divine ruler , a direct contrast to her ascetic husband , who did not satisfy her carnal desire . The author regards Ahalya as an independent woman who makes her own decisions , takes risks and is driven by curiosity to experiment with the extraordinary and then accept the curse imposed on her by patriarchal society . It is this undaunted acceptance of the curse that makes the Ramayana praise and venerate her . V. R. Devika , author of Ahalya : Scarlet Letter , asks , " So is it right to condemn adultery and physical encounters as modern afflictions and against our [ Indian / Hindu ] culture ? Or do we learn from Ahalya who made a conscious choice to fulfil her need and yet has been extolled ? " 
 Like Bhattacharya , Meena Kelkar , author of Subordination of Woman : a New Perspective , feels that Ahalya was made venerable due to her acceptance of gender norms ; she <unk> accepted the curse while acknowledging her need for punishment . However , Kelkar adds that another reason for making Ahalya immortal in scripture could be that her punishment acts as a warning and deterrent to women . Patriarchal society always condemns Ahalya as a fallen woman . In Bhavabhuti 's 8th @-@ century play <unk> , which alludes to Ahalya 's redemption in a verbal spat with Parashurama , <unk> is mocked as the son of Ahalya , the adulteress . Jaya Srinivasan , in her discourses on tales from the Hindu epics , says that though Ahalya 's action was " unpardonable " , she was redeemed by the divine touch of dust from Rama 's feet . Jaya adds that Ahalya 's actions and the resultant curse are a warning that such immoral behaviour leads to doom , although sincere penitence and complete surrender to God can erase the gravest sins . In Hindu Tamil weddings in India and Sri Lanka , Ahalya appears as a symbolic black grinding stone , which the bride touches with her foot while promising not to be like Ahalya . The bride is also shown the star associated with the chaste Arundhati , who is cast as her ideal . The well @-@ known treatise on sexual behaviour , the Kama Sutra ( 301 – 600 ) , also mentions Ahalya and Indra while discussing how lust destroys men . However , it also urges men to seduce women by telling the romantic tales of Ahalya . 
 The right @-@ wing Hindu women 's organisation Rashtra <unk> Samiti considers Ahalya the symbol of " Hindu woman 's ( and Hindu society 's ) rape by the outsider " , especially British colonisers and Muslim invaders , but also Hindu men . The feminist writer Tarabai Shinde ( 1850 – 1910 ) writes that the scriptures , by depicting gods such as Indra who exploit chaste wives such as Ahalya , are responsible for promoting immoral ways ; she asks why so much importance is then given to <unk> dharma , the devotion and fidelity to the husband which is said to be the ultimate duty of a wife . 
 A similar tale of divine seduction appears in Greek mythology , where Zeus , a king @-@ of @-@ the @-@ gods figure akin to Indra , seduces Alcmene by assuming the form of her husband , resulting in the birth of the legendary hero Heracles . Like Ahalya , Alcmene falls victim to Zeus 's trickery in some versions or , recognising his true identity , proceeds with the affair in others . The main difference between the tales is that the raison @-@ d 'être of Alcmene 's seduction is the justification of Heracles 's divine parentage , so she is never condemned as an adulteress or punished ; in contrast , Ahalya faces the ire of the scriptures as her encounter is regarded as purely erotic ( not resulting in procreation ) . 
 = Coronation = 
 A coronation is a ceremony marking the formal investiture of a monarch and / or their consort with regal power , usually involving the ritual placement of a crown upon his or her head and the presentation of other items of regalia . A ceremony without the placement of a crown on one 's head is known as an enthronement . The ceremony may include the taking of special vows by the monarch , acts of homage by the new ruler 's subjects and the performance of other ritual deeds of special significance to the particular nation . Once a vital ritual among the world 's monarchies , coronations have changed over time for a variety of socio @-@ political and religious factors ; most modern monarchies have dispensed with them altogether , preferring simpler enthronement , investiture or benediction ceremonies . Coronations are still observed in the United Kingdom , Tonga , and several Asian and African countries . In common usage today , coronation normally refers to the official investiture or enthronement of the monarch , whether or not an actual crown is bestowed . 
 In addition to investing the monarch with symbols of state , Western @-@ style coronations have often traditionally involve anointing with holy oil , or chrism as it is often called . Wherever a ruler is anointed in this way , as in Great Britain and Tonga , this ritual takes on an overtly religious significance , following examples found in the Bible . Some other lands use bathing or cleansing rites , the drinking of a sacred beverage , or other religious practices to achieve a comparable effect . Such acts symbolise the granting of divine favour to the monarch within the relevant spiritual @-@ religious paradigm of the country . 
 In the past , concepts of royalty , coronation and deity were often inexorably linked . In some ancient cultures , rulers were considered to be divine or partially divine : the Egyptian Pharaoh was believed to be the son of Ra , the sun god , while in Japan , the Emperor was believed to be a descendant of Amaterasu , the sun goddess . Rome promulgated the practice of emperor worship ; in Medieval Europe , monarchs claimed to have a divine right to rule . Coronations were once a direct visual expression of these alleged connections , but recent centuries have seen the lessening of such beliefs due to increasing secularization and democratization . Thus , coronations ( or their religious elements , at least ) have often been discarded altogether or altered to reflect the constitutional nature of the states in which they are held . However , some monarchies still choose to retain an overtly religious dimension to their accession rituals . Others have adopted simpler enthronement or inauguration ceremonies , or even no ceremony at all . 
 = = History and development = = 
 The coronation ceremonies in medieval Christendom , both Western and Eastern , are influenced by the practice of the Roman Emperors as it developed during Late Antiquity , indirectly influenced by Biblical accounts of kings being crowned and anointed . The European coronation ceremonies , perhaps best known in the form they have taken in Great Britain ( the most recent of which occurred in 1953 ) , descend from rites initially created in Byzantium , Visigothic Spain , Carolingian France and the Holy Roman Empire and brought to their apogee during the Medieval era . 
 In non @-@ Christian states , coronation rites evolved from a variety of sources , often related to the religious beliefs of that particular nation . Buddhism , for instance , influenced the coronation rituals of Thailand , Cambodia and Bhutan , while Hindu elements played a significant role in Nepalese rites . The ceremonies used in modern Egypt , Malaysia , Brunei and Iran were shaped by Islam , while Tonga 's ritual combines ancient Polynesian influences with more modern Anglican ones . 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 Coronations , in one form or another , have existed since ancient times . Egyptian records show coronation scenes , such as that of Seti I in 1290 BC . Judeo @-@ Christian scriptures testify to particular rites associated with the conferring of kingship , the most detailed accounts of which are found in II Kings 11 : 12 and II Chronicles 23 : 11 . 
 The corona radiata , the " radiant crown " known best on the Statue of Liberty , and perhaps worn by the Helios that was the Colossus of Rhodes , was worn by Roman emperors as part of the cult of Sol Invictus , part of the imperial cult as it developed during the 3rd century . The origin of the crown is thus religious , comparable to the significance of a halo , marking the sacral nature of kingship , expressing that either the king is himself divine , or ruling by divine right . 
 The precursor to the crown was the <unk> called the diadem , which had been worn by the Achaemenid rulers , was adopted by Constantine I , and was worn by all subsequent rulers of the later Roman Empire . Following the assumption of the diadem by Constantine , Roman and Byzantine emperors continued to wear it as the supreme symbol of their authority . Although no specific coronation ceremony was observed at first , one gradually evolved over the following century . The emperor Julian was hoisted upon a shield and crowned with a gold necklace provided by one of his standard @-@ bearers ; he later wore a jewel @-@ studded diadem . Later emperors were crowned and acclaimed in a similar manner , until the momentous decision was taken to permit the Patriarch of Constantinople to physically place the crown on the emperor 's head . Historians debate when exactly this first took place , but the precedent was clearly established by the reign of Leo II , who was crowned by the Patriarch Acacius in 473 . This ritual included recitation of prayers by the Byzantine prelate over the crown , a further — and extremely vital — development in the liturgical ordo of crowning . After this event , according to the Catholic Encyclopedia , " the ecclesiastical element in the coronation ceremonial rapidly develop [ ed ] " . 
 In some European Celtic or Germanic countries prior to the adoption of Christianity , the ruler upon his election was raised on a shield and , while standing upon it , was borne on the shoulders of several chief men of the nation ( or tribe ) in a procession around his assembled subjects . This was usually performed three times . Following this , the king was given a spear , and a diadem wrought of silk or linen ( not to be confused with a crown ) was bound around his forehead as a token of regal authority . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 According to Adomnan of Iona , the King of Dal Riata Áedán mac Gabráin came to the monastery at Iona in 574 to be crowned as King by St Columba . In 610 , Heraclius arranged a ceremony in Constantinople where he was crowned and acclaimed emperor . In Spain , the Visigothic king <unk> was crowned in 631 , and in 672 , <unk> was the first occidental king to be anointed as well , by the archbishop of Toledo . In England , the Anglo @-@ Saxon king Eardwulf of Northumbria was " consecrated and enthroned " in 796 , and Æthelstan was crowned and anointed in 925 . These practices were nevertheless irregularly used or occurred some considerable time after the rulers had become kings , until their regular adoption by the Carolingian dynasty in France . To legitimate his deposition of the last of the Merovingian kings , Pepin the Short was twice crowned and anointed , at the beginning of his reign in 752 , and for the first time by a pope in 754 in Saint @-@ Denis . The anointing served as a reminder of the baptism of Clovis I in Reims in 496 , where the ceremony was finally transferred in 816 . His son Charlemagne , who was crowned emperor in Rome in 800 , passed as well the ceremony to the Holy Roman Empire , and this tradition acquired a newly constitutive function in England too , with the kings Harold Godwinson and William the Conqueror immediately crowned in Westminster Abbey in 1066 . 
 The European coronation ceremonies of the Middle Ages were essentially a combination of the Christian rite of anointing with additional elements . Following Europe 's conversion to Christianity , crowning ceremonies became more and more ornate , depending on the country in question , and their Christian elements — especially anointing — became the paramount concern . Crowns and sceptres , used in coronations since ancient times , took on a Christian significance together with the orb as symbols of the purported divine order of things , with the monarch as the divinely ordained overlord and protector of his dominion . During the Middle Ages , this rite was considered so vital in some European kingdoms that it was sometimes referred to as an " eighth sacrament " . The anointed ruler was viewed as a mixta persona , part priest and part layman , but never wholly either . This notion persisted into the twentieth century in Imperial Russia , where the Tsar was considered to be " wedded " to his subjects through the Orthodox coronation service . Coronation stones marked the site of some medieval ceremonies , though some alleged stones are later inventions . 
 Crowning ceremonies arose from a worldview in which monarchs were seen as ordained by God to serve not merely as political or military leaders , nor as figureheads or historical symbols — a role played by most royals today — but rather to occupy a vital ( and very real ) spiritual place in their dominions as well . Coronations were created to reflect and enable these alleged connections ; however , the belief systems that gave birth to them have been radically altered in recent centuries by secularism , egalitarianism and the rise of constitutionalism and democracy . During the Protestant Reformation , the idea of divinely ordained monarchs began to be challenged . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The Age of Enlightenment and various revolutions of the last three centuries all helped to further this trend , until the religious dimension of the ceremony has become relatively meaningless in all but a few kingdoms ( mostly in Asia and Oceania ) . Hence , many monarchies — especially in Europe — have dispensed with coronations altogether , or transformed them into simpler inauguration or benediction rites that better reflect the secular nature of those states . Of all European monarchies today , only the United Kingdom still retains its coronation rite , though even this ritual has been altered in the last few centuries . Other nations that still crowning their rulers include Bhutan , Brunei , Cambodia , Lesotho , Swaziland , Thailand , and Tonga , as well as several subnational entities such as the Toro Kingdom . The Papacy retains the option of a coronation , but no pope has used it since 1963 after Pope John Paul I opted for an Inauguration in 1978 . 
 = = = Canonical Coronation = = = 
 A Canonical Coronation ( Latin : <unk> Canonicus ) : is a pious institutional act of the Pope , on behalf of a devotion . This tradition still stands in 2015 , in 2014 Pope Francis crowned Our Lady of Immaculate Conception of <unk> . Since 1989 , the act has been carried out through the authorised decree by the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments . 
 = = Coronations and monarchical power = = 
 In most kingdoms , a monarch succeeding <unk> does not have to undergo a coronation to ascend the throne or exercise the prerogatives of their office . King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom , for example , did not reign long enough to be crowned before he abdicated , yet he was unquestionably the King of the United Kingdom and Emperor of India during his brief reign . This is because in Britain , the law stipulates that the moment one monarch dies , the new one assumes the throne ; thus , there is no point at which the throne is vacant . In France , the new king ascended the throne when the coffin of the previous monarch descended into the vault at Saint Denis Basilica , and the Duke of <unk> proclaimed " Le Roi est mort , vive le Roi " ! In Hungary , on the other hand , no ruler was regarded as being truly legitimate until he was physically crowned with St. Stephen 's Crown , while monarchs of Belgium or Albania were not allowed to succeed or exercise any of their prerogatives until swearing a formal constitutional oath before their respective nations ' parliaments . Following their election , the kings of Poland were permitted to perform a variety of political acts prior to their coronation , but were not allowed to exercise any of their judicial powers prior to being crowned . 
 = = Coronation of heirs apparent = = 
 During the Middle Ages , Capetian Kings of France chose to have their heirs apparent crowned during their own lifetime in order to avoid succession disputes . This practice was later adopted by Angevin Kings of England , Kings of Hungary and other European monarchs . From the moment of their coronation , the heirs were regarded as junior kings ( rex <unk> ) , but they exercised little power and historically were not included in the numbering of monarchs if they predeceased their fathers . The nobility disliked this custom , as it reduced their chances to benefit from a possible succession dispute . 
 The last heir apparent to the French throne to be crowned during his father 's lifetime was the future Philip II of France , while the only crowned heir apparent to the English throne was Henry the Young King , who was first crowned alone and then with his wife , Margaret of France . The practice was eventually abandoned by all kingdoms that had adopted it , as the rules of primogeniture became stronger . The last coronation of an heir apparent , with the exception of the investiture of the current Prince of Wales in 1969 , was the coronation of the future Emperor Ferdinand I of Austria as junior King of Hungary in 1830 . 
 = = In the modern era = = 
 Specific coronation rituals by country , arranged by continent or region , are described in the following articles : 
 Coronations in Africa 
 Coronations in the Americas 
 Coronations in Asia 
 Coronations in Europe 
 Coronations in Oceania 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The term coronation is sometimes used in a semi @-@ ironic sense to refer to uncontested party leadership elections , with all potential party leaders choosing to back a single candidate or to stay silent , rather than stand in an election they are likely to lose . This typically happens where there has been a protracted behind @-@ the @-@ scenes attempt to remove the outgoing leader , leading to a significant amount of time to determine who has the most party support before the election proper . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = 1965 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1965 Atlantic hurricane season was the first to use the modern @-@ day bounds for an Atlantic hurricane season , which are June 1 to November 30 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . It was one of the least active seasons on record , with only 6 tropical cyclones developing and reaching tropical storm intensity . Four of the storms strengthened into hurricanes . One system reached major hurricane intensity – Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . The first system , an unnamed tropical storm , developed during the month of June in the Pacific Ocean , while located south of Guatemala . The storm moved northward across Central America , but caused no known impact in the region . It struck the Florida Panhandle and caused minor impact across much of the Southern United States . Tropical cyclogenesis halted for over two months , until Anna formed on August 21 . The storm remained well away from land in the far North Atlantic Ocean and caused no impact . 
 Hurricane Betsy was the strongest and most devastating storm of the season . Extensive damage from Betsy was reported in The Bahamas , Florida , and Louisiana , particularly the New Orleans area . It was the first hurricane in the history of the United States to result in at least $ 1 billion ( 1965 USD ) in losses . Hurricane Carol meandered in the eastern Atlantic for over two weeks from mid @-@ September to very early October . Impact on land from Carol was minimal . In late September , Tropical Storm Debbie developed in the northwestern Caribbean Sea and moved slowly across the region , before later reaching the Gulf of Mexico . The storm dissipated just offshore of Louisiana , which resulted in only minor impact along the Gulf Coast of the United States . The final tropical cyclone , Hurricane Elena , formed on October 12 . Elena remained at sea for nearly a week and caused no damage on land . Collectively , the storms of the 1965 Atlantic hurricane season caused 76 fatalities and $ 1 @.@ 45 billion in damage , almost entirely due to Hurricane Betsy . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1965 . This was the first Atlantic hurricane season to start on June 1 and end on November 30 , which is the modern @-@ day season bounds . It was a below average season in which six tropical depressions formed . All six of the depressions attained tropical storm status , and four of these attained hurricane status . Furthermore , one storm reached major hurricane status – Category 3 or greater on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Two tropical storms and one hurricane made landfall during the season and caused 76 fatalities and about $ 1 @.@ 45 billion in damage . 
 Season activity began with the development of an unnamed tropical storm on June 11 . However , the season briefly became dormant after the storm dissipated on June 15 , and there were no other tropical cyclones in June or July . The next system , Hurricane Anna , formed on August 21 , more than two months later . Later in August , Hurricane Betsy developed and eventually became the most intense tropical cyclone of the 1965 season . In mid @-@ September , Hurricane Carol formed in the eastern Atlantic and meandered for over two weeks . The next system , Tropical Storm Debbie , developed in the northwestern Caribbean Sea on September 24 . Hurricane Elena , the final tropical cyclone , developed on October 12 and dissipated on October 18 , slightly less than two weeks before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 84 , which was below the 1950 @-@ 2000 average of 96 @.@ 1 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical cyclones with winds exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 A cut @-@ off low pressure area developed from a shear trough in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico on June 9 . The low caused the detachment of a disturbance from the Intertropical convergence zone , which was located near the south coast of Guatemala . At 0600 UTC on June 11 , a tropical depression formed while centered about 95 miles ( 153 km ) south @-@ southwest of Sipacate , Guatemala . Shortly thereafter , it struck Escuintla Department without strengthening . After moving across Guatemala and Mexico , the depression emerged into the Gulf of Mexico on June 13 . The depression intensified on the following day , reaching tropical storm status at 0000 UTC . Operationally , the system was considered a tropical depression for its entire duration , thus , this went unnamed . The storm began curving northeastward , and by early on June 15 , it peaked with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . 
 Later that day at 1200 UTC , the storm made landfall near Santa Rosa Beach , Florida at the same intensity . Inland , the storm continued northeastward and became extratropical over eastern Georgia at 0000 UTC on June 16 . Tides along the coast of the Florida Panhandle were 3 – 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 – 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal . The storm brought sustained winds of 50 to 60 mph ( 85 to 105 km / h ) with gusts up to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) at Alligator Point . Winds blew the roof off of two beach cottages on St. George Island , while tides sank or washed ashore several small boats . The storm also produced rainfall up to 8 @.@ 75 inches ( 222 mm ) in <unk> , but no flooding occurred . Two tornadoes were spawned in the state with one damaging a houses and a mobile home in Live Oak . The storm also brought rainfall to several other states . 
 = = = Hurricane Anna = = = 
 A weak circulation was noted by Television Infrared Observation Satellite ( TIROS ) near Cape Verde on August 16 . During the next five days , the system tracked west @-@ northwestward or northwestward , while conditions gradually became favorable for tropical cyclogenesis . At 0600 UTC on August 21 , it is estimated that the system became Tropical Storm Anna . While Anna was tracking north @-@ northeastward on August 23 , an eye feature appeared on TIROS . After another aircraft reported an eye on its radar , Anna was upgraded to a hurricane later that day . Late on August 24 , Anna reached maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) while accelerating northeastward . Anna began losing tropical characteristics , and early on the following day , it transitioned into an extratropical storm while about halfway between the Azores and Greenland . 
 = = = Hurricane Betsy = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed into a tropical depression on August 27 , while well east of the Windward Islands . It tracked generally west @-@ northward until crossing the Leeward Islands on August 28 . No impact was reported in the islands . After re @-@ curving to the northwest , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Betsy on August 29 . Betsy then rapidly intensified and became a Category 1 hurricane later that day . It executed a small cyclonic loop , before turning west on September 1 . Significant intensification resumed later that day . By late on September 3 , Betsy became a Category 4 hurricane . While northeast of The Bahamas , Betsy moved erratically and executed another cyclonic loop . The storm steadily weakened , and was briefly downgraded to a Category 2 hurricane early on September 6 . However , it promptly re @-@ strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane . Betsy then tracked southwestward and then westward through the Bahamas . The storm produced very strong winds and rough seas in The Bahamas . Damage reached $ 14 million and 1 death occurred in the island chain . 
 By early on September 8 , Betsy made landfall on Key Largo as a Category 3 hurricane . In South Florida , the storm brought strong winds and significant storm surge . In the Upper Florida Keys , water reached several feet in height , which inundated highways and the first floor of buildings . Nearly all of the land south of Homestead Air Force Base and east of U.S. Route 1 was covered by water . There were 8 deaths and $ 120 million in losses , which included both property and agriculture . Betsy entered into the Gulf of Mexico and re @-@ strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane on September 9 . While approaching the Gulf Coast of the United States , Betsy peaked with winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) , slightly below the threshold for Category 5 hurricane status . However , further intensification was halted after Betsy made landfall in Grand Isle , Louisiana later on September 9 . In Louisiana , strong winds and rough seas caused extensive damage . Storm surge inundated the levees in New Orleans , flooding much of the city . Throughout the state , more than 22 @,@ 000 homes and either damage or destroyed , and 168 @,@ 000 people were left without electricity . The storm caused more than 17 @,@ 000 injuries and resulted in 58 deaths . Damage in the state of Louisiana reached $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . Once inland , the storm rapidly weakened , and became extratropical over Ohio on September 12 . Impact in other states ranged from minor to moderate . Overall , Betsy caused about $ 1 @.@ 45 billion in damage and 76 fatalities . Betsy was the first hurricane in the United States to cause at least $ 1 billion in losses . 
 = = = Hurricane Carol = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 15 and developed into a tropical depression by early on the following day . It headed steadily westward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Carol late on September 17 . The storm began curving northwestward by the following day . Operationally , advisories were not initiated until 1900 UTC on September 19 , after winds had already reached 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Carol then slowed and began turning north @-@ northward . Later on September 20 , a Navy reconnaissance flight confirmed a circulation and also measured hurricane @-@ force winds . Thus , Carol was upgraded to a hurricane at 1800 UTC on September 20 . 
 On September 21 , another flight into the storm recorded a minimum pressure of 974 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) , the lowest in relation to Carol . The hurricane accelerated , before slowing in forward motion on September 22 . Between September 24 and September 28 , the storm drifted and executed a small cyclonic loop . Thereafter , Carol re @-@ accelerated and was briefly upgraded to a Category 2 hurricane following an Air Force Reconnaissance report of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) winds . While passing northwest of the Azores , a weather station on Corvo Island reported a sustained wind speed of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) and a gust up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The storm curved east @-@ southeastward , weakened , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located west of Portugal on October 1 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Debbie = = = 
 A low pressure area in the northwestern Caribbean Sea developed into a tropical depression on September 24 . The depression brought locally heavy rainfall to areas of Honduras while tracking northwestward . Despite winds of only 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) , the Miami Weather Bureau prematurely named the depression Debbie at 1600 UTC on September 25 . Several hours later , Debbie struck the northeastern Yucatán Peninsula . After emerging into the Gulf of Mexico early on September 26 , the storm was described as " weaker than before " , as the convective activity indicated no organization . However , Debbie began to strengthen , reaching tropical storm status on September 28 . 
 After peaked at winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) late on September 28 , cooler and drier air caused the storm to weaken . Late on September 29 , Debbie was downgraded to a tropical depression and dissipated just offshore Mississippi about twenty @-@ four hours later . Despite its demise , Debbie brought heavy precipitation , especially in Mobile , Alabama , where a 24 @-@ hour rainfall record was broken after 16 @.@ 85 in ( 428 mm ) fell . Within the city of Mobile , hundreds of cars were flooded , while more than 200 people fled their inundated homes . Many roads and businesses were also closed in the area . Damage in Mobile alone reached $ 25 million . Rainfall was reported in 7 other states , though no significant impact occurred . 
 = = = Hurricane Elena = = = 
 TIROS imagery indicated a very weak circulation near 12 ° N , 40 ° W on October 11 . Ship reports on the following day indicated a somewhat more organized circulation . As a result , it is estimated that the final tropical depression of the season at 1200 UTC on October 12 , while located about midway between Cape Verde and the Leeward Islands . Initially , the depression remained disorganized while tracking northwestward . However , by early on October 14 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Elena . The storm continued to intensify and by early on October 16 , a minimum pressure of 991 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . Therefore , Elena likely reached hurricane status at 0600 UTC that day . Later on October 16 , the storm re @-@ curved to the northeast and began to accelerate . On October 18 , Elena attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 977 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . At 0000 UTC on the following day , the storm merged with an approaching cold front near the Azores . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1965 . The name Betsy was later retired . Carol had been removed from the naming list for 10 years following Hurricane Carol of 1954 . It was then retroactively retired because of the 1954 hurricane , not the storm in 1965 . They were replaced with Blanche and Camille for use in the 1969 season . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Bobby Orr = 
 Robert Gordon " Bobby " Orr , OC ( born March 20 , 1948 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player , widely acknowledged as one of the greatest hockey players of all time . Orr used his ice skating speed , scoring , and play @-@ making abilities to revolutionize the position of defenceman . He played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for 12 seasons , starting with 10 with the Boston Bruins followed by two with the Chicago Black Hawks . Orr remains the only defenceman to have won the league scoring title with two Art Ross Trophies . He holds the record for most points and assists in a single season by a defenceman . Orr won a record eight consecutive Norris Trophies as the NHL 's best defenceman and three consecutive Hart Trophies as the league 's most valuable player ( MVP ) . Orr was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1979 at age 31 , the youngest to be inducted at that time . After his hockey career , he became a well @-@ known scout for many professional teams . He also spends time talking to and mentoring young skaters . 
 Orr started in organized hockey at age five . He first played as a forward , but was moved to defence by his coach , Royce Tennant . Going against the standard practice of the time , Tennant felt Orr 's offensive skills were best suited for a rushing defenceman role and he gave Orr the freedom to play that role despite its inherent risks . With Orr on defence , the Parry Sound Shamrocks had many successes . After Tennant , Bucko MacDonald coached Orr , and Orr continued to excel against small town Ontario provincial competition on defence . At fourteen , Orr joined the Oshawa Generals , the Bruins ' junior hockey affiliate , and he was an all @-@ star for three of his four seasons . 
 In 1966 , Orr joined Boston , a team that had not won a Stanley Cup since 1941 and had not qualified for the playoffs since 1959 . With Orr , the Bruins won the Stanley Cup twice , in 1970 and 1972 , and lost in the 1974 Final . In both victories , Orr scored the clinching goal and was named the playoff MVP . In the final achievement of his career , he was the MVP of the 1976 Canada Cup international hockey tournament . In 1976 , Orr left Boston as a free agent to join the Black Hawks , but repeated injuries had effectively destroyed his left knee , and he retired in 1978 at age 30 . 
 Orr 's first professional contract was one of the first in professional ice hockey to be negotiated by an agent . It made him the highest @-@ paid player in NHL history as a rookie . His second contract was the first million @-@ dollar contract in the NHL . However , after his retirement , Orr learned he was deeply in debt and he had to sell off most of what he owned . Orr broke with his agent Alan Eagleson and sued the Black Hawks to settle his contract . Orr and his family returned to Boston where Orr went into business to rebuild his finances . Orr aided the investigations that led to Eagleson 's fraud convictions and disbarment . Orr also supported the law suit that exposed the corruption of the NHL 's pension plan . 
 Orr entered the player agent business in 1996 and today is president of the Orr Hockey Group agency . As of 2009 , the agency represents over 30 active NHL players . Orr is also active in charitable works and in television commercials . Since 1996 , Orr has coached a team of junior hockey players in the annual CHL Top Prospects Game . Orr was married in 1972 . He is the father of two sons and is a grandfather . 
 = = Hockey career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Orr was born in the town of Parry Sound on the shores of Georgian Bay in Ontario , Canada . His grandfather , Robert Orr , was a top @-@ tier soccer pro player who emigrated from Ballymena , Northern Ireland to Parry Sound early in the 20th century . Orr 's father , Doug Orr , had once been a hockey prospect and was invited to join the Atlantic City Seagulls in 1942 but turned down the offer . Doug Orr instead joined the Royal Canadian Navy , serving during the Second World War . He returned after the war to Parry Sound and Arva Steele , whom he had married before he left for war , and to a job in the <unk> dynamite factory . Doug and Arva had five children together : Patricia , Ronnie , Bobby , Penny and Doug Jr . Bobby was born on March 20 , 1948 at St. Joseph 's Hospital , where his grandmother Elsie Orr was a nurse . Bobby was a sick baby at birth and his survival was tenuous . 
 Bobby Orr displayed his hockey talents from an early age . Orr played his first organized hockey in 1953 at age five , in the " minor squirt " division , a year after getting his first skates and playing shinny . Although he was tiny and somewhat frail , he soon was able to skate faster than anyone his own age , speed he demonstrated in races around the rink and in games . Until he was ten years old , Orr played on the wing , as a forward . His coach , former NHL player Bucko McDonald moved Orr to defence . Although Orr played defence , McDonald encouraged Orr to use his talents as a stickhandler , skater and scorer to make offensive rushes . According to McDonald : " I used to tell Doug the kid was in his natural position when he played defence . You didn 't have to be genius to see that – honest . I don 't think Doug agreed , but he accepted my decision . " Orr would later credit McDonald : " Bucko taught me almost everything I know . " 
 Orr was noticed by the Boston Bruins in the spring of 1961 , playing in a youth hockey tournament in Gananoque , Ontario . The Bruins ' Wren Blair described him as " a combination of Doug Harvey and Eddie Shore . " The Bruins immediately pursued Orr . Blair made regular visits to the family home . In the fall of 1961 , the Bruins invested C $ 1 @,@ 000 ( C $ 8 @,@ 076 in 2016 dollars ) to sponsor his minor hockey team . Although three other NHL teams ( Toronto Maple Leafs , Detroit Red Wings and Montreal Canadiens ) were interested in Orr , he signed in 1962 with the Bruins . Orr explained that he signed with the Bruins because " they 're a team of the future . They 're rebuilding and I want to be part of that building program . " 
 Blair was involved with a plan to start a new Oshawa Generals franchise in a new arena in Oshawa , Ontario . Despite the Bruins already having a junior hockey franchise , the Niagara Falls Flyers , Blair convinced the Bruins to own another . He arranged a deal whereby the Bruins owned 51 % of the franchise . But Orr would have to play for Oshawa . When Orr was fourteen , Blair convinced the Orr family to allow Bobby to attend the Flyers ' tryout camp . When camp ended and it came time to sign with the Bruins , a meeting with Bruins ' owner Weston Adams went sour and Orr headed back to Parry Sound . Blair was able to smooth over the situation and convince Arva Bobby was old enough to leave home . To get the <unk> ' signatures on a " C " Form , committing Bobby to the Bruins at age eighteen , Blair agreed to have Bobby stay in Parry Sound for his schooling , skipping Generals ' practices and only driving south to play games on weekends , a three @-@ hour trip one way . The bonus for signing was C $ 10 @,@ 000 ( C $ 79 @,@ 748 in 2016 dollars ) , a new car and the Bruins would pay to stucco the family home . 
 Orr debuted in junior in the 1962 – 63 season for the new Generals in the new Metro Junior A League . Orr was only fourteen , competing against <unk> , <unk> and twenty @-@ year @-@ olds . The 1963 – 64 season brought further changes as the Metro League folded and Oshawa joined the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) . Orr moved to Oshawa , where he started attending R. S. McLaughlin high school and boarded with a local family . Orr scored 29 goals to set a junior record for goals by a defenceman and was named to the OHA 's First All @-@ Star team . 
 Orr 's goal and point totals increased every year during his junior career , and he was named to the OHA First @-@ All Star team every season he was in the OHA . Orr had his best season in 1965 – 66 , his fourth season of junior . Orr scored 38 goals to increase his goal @-@ scoring record , and finished with 94 points to average two points per game for the Generals . The Generals finished fourth in the league but won the OHA championship , the J. Ross Robertson Cup , by defeating the St. Catharines Black Hawks , the Montreal Junior Canadiens and the Kitchener Rangers . The team defeated the Northern Ontario champions North Bay Trappers and the Quebec champions Shawinigan Bruins to win a berth in the Memorial Cup Final for the junior championship of Canada . 
 Oshawa 's hopes in the Cup Final were damaged when Orr suffered a groin injury against Shawinigan , an injury that is painful and weakens a player 's skating ability . To promote the event , held in Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens , the Generals had advertised it would be the last chance to see Orr in junior and were anxious for him to play . Bruins ' management demanded Orr not play in the Final , not wanting to risk further damage to their property . Orr and his parents , however , were adamant he be allowed to play for the national championship . As he had not signed to the Bruins , they threatened he would never play for Boston if he was held out . Blair decided to defy the Bruins ' ownership and let Orr play . While Orr dressed and played some , he was not a factor and Edmonton defeated Oshawa for the Cup . Oshawa coach Bep Guidolin was fired for letting Orr play , while Blair left the organization of his own accord to join the expansion Minnesota North Stars . 
 = = = Orr and Eagleson = = = 
 By the time Orr turned 16 in 1964 , he was still two years away from playing in the NHL and his father Doug was dissatisfied with the Bruins ' treatment of the prospect . Doug had asked the Bruins ' Blair for more money for Bobby and was turned down . Doug Orr met Toronto lawyer Alan Eagleson at a juvenile fastball tournament dinner in Parry Sound and asked Eagleson to help out with the situation . Eagleson agreed to work with the family for free and continued to do so for the next two years . Bobby and Eagleson developed a relationship Orr would later describe as being like brothers . The two soon became a team , discussing Bobby 's future plans without his father Doug . 
 Eagleson was determined to get Orr a top salary . When Hap Emms , the general manager of the Bruins offered a US $ 5 @,@ 000 ( US $ 36 @,@ 467 in 2016 dollars ) signing bonus and US $ 7 @,@ 000 and US $ 8 @,@ 000 ( US $ 51 @,@ 053 and US $ 56 @,@ 774 in 2016 dollars ) for his first two years in the league , Eagleson countered with US $ 100 @,@ 000 ( US $ 729 @,@ 333 in 2016 dollars ) for the two years. or Orr would refuse to play with the Bruins and play for Canada 's national team instead , like Carl Brewer . Orr wanted desperately to play in the NHL , but he went along with Eagleson 's strategy and was willing to play for the nationals . The Bruins and Orr agreed on a US $ 25 @,@ 000 signing bonus ( US $ 182 @,@ 333 in 2016 dollars ) , and a salary " less than $ 100 @,@ 000 " for the two years , a figure kept secret . Speculation has ranged on an annual salary of US $ 25 @,@ 000 to US $ 40 @,@ 000 ( US $ 182 @,@ 333 to US $ 328 @,@ 200 in 2016 dollars ) at a time when the typical maximum rookie salary was US $ 8 @,@ 000 . ( US $ 58 @,@ 347 in 2016 dollars ) The official signing ceremony was done on Emms ' boat , the Barbara Lynn , where Eagleson and Emms had conferred during negotiations . 
 At the time , it made Orr the highest @-@ paid player in league history . But beyond that , the signing became one of the most important in the history of professional hockey . Until that time , players had been forced to accept whatever NHL management paid in salaries . It was the start of the player 's agent era in professional hockey . For Eagleson , it was the start of his sports business empire . Based on the Orr signing , Eagleson would become the executive director of the new National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) and started on his rise to become one of the most powerful men in the sport and business of ice hockey . 
 = = = Bruins career = = = 
 = = = = 1966 – 67 = = = = 
 Orr joined the Bruins for the 1966 – 67 season , his first as a professional . The Bruins were not convinced Orr belonged on defence , trying him out at centre first . Through the pre @-@ season , Orr was given jersey number 27 . At the season 's start , the Bruins offered him jersey number 5 , that of past Bruins star Dit Clapper , but Orr chose jersey number 4 . Orr made his NHL regular @-@ season debut on October 19 , 1966 , against the Detroit Red Wings , getting one assist . On October 22 , he scored his first NHL goal against the Montreal Canadiens . It was a slap shot past Gump Worsley and the Boston Garden crowd gave Orr a standing ovation . 
 In that first season , Orr was challenged by the veterans , and he earned respect by defeating Montreal tough guy Ted Harris in his first NHL fight . On December 4 , 1966 , Toronto Maple Leafs ' defenceman Marcel Pronovost checked him into the boards , injuring Orr 's knees for the first time in the NHL . He would miss nine games and the Bruins would lose six of them . The team finished with a 17 – 43 – 10 record , leaving the Bruins in last place . However , attendance at Boston Garden increased by forty @-@ one thousand fans . 
 For the season , Orr scored 13 goals and 28 assists , one of the best rookie seasons in NHL history to that point by a defenceman . Orr won the Calder Memorial Trophy as the league 's outstanding rookie and was named to the NHL 's Second All @-@ Star team . New York Rangers defenceman Harry Howell won the Norris Trophy as the league 's best defenceman that year . In accepting the award , Howell said he was glad to win when he did , predicting " Orr will own this trophy from now on . " Orr was runner @-@ up in voting . 
 = = = = 1967 – 68 = = = = 
 In 1967 – 68 , his second season , injuries limited Orr to just 46 games . Prior to the season , Orr had injured his right knee during a charity game in Winnipeg during the summer requiring five weeks in a cast . In December , a Frank Mahovlich check caused a fracture of Orr 's collar bone and a shoulder separation . Orr returned in January in time to play in the NHL All @-@ Star Game , his first of eight appearances overall . Orr had to sit out five games afterwards due to soreness in his left knee . In February , he had to leave a game against Detroit after his left knee went stiff . He would receive the first of his many operations on the knee , repairing ligament and removing cartilage . Orr did return to finish the season , but required an operation during the off @-@ season to remove a bone chip . Despite the injuries , Orr won the first of a record eight consecutive Norris trophies and was named to the NHL 's First All @-@ Star team . 
 After finishing last in 1966 – 67 , the Bruins qualified for the 1968 playoffs , their first appearance in the playoffs since the 1958 – 59 season . In the pre @-@ season , the Bruins added Phil Esposito , Fred Stanfield and Ken Hodge from the Chicago Black Hawks in one of the most famous deals ever . The Bruins also added rookies Glen Sather and Derek Sanderson , developing a more aggressive image that led to the nickname of the ' Big Bad Bruins . ' The Bruins , happy to make the playoffs , were swept by eventual champion Montreal in the first round . 
 = = = = 1968 – 69 = = = = 
 In 1968 – 69 , Orr skipped the pre @-@ season to rest the knee but was in uniform for the season start . He required an ice pack on the knee after every game and missed nine games after he caught a skate in a crack in the ice , twisting his knee . He returned to the lineup and finished the season playing through the pain , sometimes struggling to get up to speed and relying on team @-@ mates instead of making the plays himself . In other games , Orr was outstanding , scoring his first career NHL hat trick on December 14 against Chicago , adding two assists for a five @-@ point night . He scored 21 goals on the season , breaking the goal scoring record for a defenceman , and totalled 64 points to set a new point scoring record for one season for a defenceman . 
 Orr feuded with Toronto rookie defenceman Pat Quinn that season . In a late season game , Orr attempted to knock the puck loose from Maple Leafs goaltender Bruce Gamble and Quinn cross @-@ checked Orr to the ice . Orr kicked Quinn and Quinn kicked Orr . On @-@ ice officials broke it up , but the feud continued into the 1969 playoffs . The Bruins finished second in the NHL 's East Division and drew the Maple Leafs in the first round . In the first game , in Boston , Quinn caught Orr with his head down during a rush , and caught him with an open @-@ ice hit , knocking Orr unconscious . Quinn , assessed five minutes for elbowing , was attacked in the penalty box by a fan and Quinn swung at the fan with his stick , breaking the glass . When Quinn returned , the Boston fans showered garbage onto the ice . Orr was carried out on a stretcher to the dressing room where he revived after the concussion . According to a Boston police officer at the scene , " The fans here don 't like anybody to touch Orr . He 's their Frank <unk> and Jack Armstrong rolled into one . To my thinking , it looked like a clean check . " The game degenerated into a brawl after the score reached 10 – 0 for the Bruins . The Bruins went on to sweep the Maple Leafs before losing in six games to the Montreal Canadiens in the second round . Orr returned for the third game against Toronto , getting two assists as the Bruins won their first games in Toronto since 1965 . 
 = = = = 1969 – 70 = = = = 
 In 1969 – 70 , Orr doubled his scoring total from the previous season , to 120 points , six shy of the league record and led the league in scoring . As of 2014 , Orr is the only defenceman in history to win the Art Ross Trophy as the league 's leading scorer . In addition to the Norris and the Art Ross , Orr captured the first of three consecutive Hart Trophies as regular @-@ season MVP and later won the Conn Smythe Trophy for his playoff performance , becoming the only player in history to win four major NHL awards in one season . 
 Orr went on to lead the Bruins in a march through the 1970 playoffs that culminated on May 10 , 1970 , when he scored one of the most famous goals in hockey history and one that gave Boston its first Stanley Cup since 1941 . The goal came off a give @-@ and @-@ go pass with teammate Derek Sanderson at the 40 @-@ second mark of the first overtime period in the fourth game , helping to complete a sweep of the St. Louis Blues . According to Orr : 
 If it had gone by me , it 's a two @-@ on @-@ one . So I got a little lucky there , but Derek gave me a great pass and when I got the pass I was moving across . As I skated across , Glenn had to move across the crease and had to open his pads a little . I was really trying to get the puck on net , and I did . As I went across , Glenn 's legs opened . I looked back , and I saw it go in , so I jumped . 
 The subsequent photograph by Ray Lussier of a horizontal Orr flying through the air , his arms raised in victory – he had been tripped by Blues ' defenceman Noel Picard after scoring the goal – has become one of the most famous and recognized hockey images of all time — and today is highlighted in the opening sequence of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 's Hockey Night in Canada telecasts . 
 = = = = 1970 – 71 = = = = 
 The following season , the powerhouse Bruins shattered dozens of league offensive records . Orr himself finished second in league scoring while setting records that still stand for points in a season by a defenceman and for plus @-@ minus ( + 124 ) by any position player . Orr 's Bruins were heavy favourites to repeat as Cup champions , but were upset by the Montreal Canadiens and their rookie goaltender Ken Dryden , at one time Bruins ' property , in the first round of the 1971 playoffs . 
 For the season , the Bruins gave Orr a solid gold puck , one of four they gave out to Bruins players – to each of the four Bruins who scored over 100 points that season – Esposito , Orr , Johnny Bucyk and Ken Hodge . Orr later gave his puck to Alan Eagleson . In 2007 , Eagleson sold the puck in an auction of memorabilia for C $ 16 @,@ 500 . 
 = = = = 1971 – 72 = = = = 
 Orr signed a new five @-@ year contract on August 26 , 1971 , for US $ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 168 @,@ 611 in 2016 dollars ) per season – the NHL 's first million dollar contract . In the following 1971 – 72 season , Orr was second in the scoring race to teammate Phil Esposito , and won the Hart and Norris trophies , helping the Bruins to a first @-@ place finish in the East . In the 1972 playoffs , Orr again led the Bruins to the Stanley Cup , leading the scoring in the playoffs and scoring the championship @-@ winning goal against New York . For his performance in the playoffs , he received his second Conn Smythe Trophy as playoff MVP , making him the award 's first two @-@ time winner . Rangers forward Vic Hadfield commented " We played them pretty even , but they had Bobby Orr and we didn 't . " By this time , Orr knew his left knee was deteriorating and he would not have many seasons left . Orr also won the MVP award at the 1972 NHL All @-@ Star Game to win three MVP awards in one season . 
 The 1972 – 73 saw upheaval at the Bruins . Coach Sinden became the general manager . Bruins players Gerry Cheevers , Derek Sanderson and Johnny McKenzie joined the upstart World Hockey Association . Coach Tom Johnson was fired fifty @-@ two games into the season , replaced by Bep Guidolin , who had once coached Orr . The Adams family , which had owned the team since its founding in the 1920s , sold it to Storer Broadcasting . The Bruins ' season came to a premature end in a first @-@ round loss in the 1973 playoffs , losing Esposito to injury in that first round . Orr amassed 101 points during the regular season , but had only two points in the playoff loss . 
 = = = = 1973 – 74 = = = = 
 In 1973 – 74 , Orr led the Bruins to another first @-@ place finish in the regular season . The Bruins made it to the Stanley Cup final , but lost this time to the Philadelphia Flyers . Flyers ' coach Fred Shero commented : " They had Orr and he can do an awful lot . But we 've got 17 good hockey players and every one of them put out . It was 17 against one . " That season , Orr set the record ( since surpassed ) for the most points in a game by a defenceman , scoring 3 goals and 4 assists in a November 15 , 1973 game against the New York Rangers . One goal , a shot from the blue line , broke Rangers ' defenceman Rod Seiling 's stick . 
 = = = = 1974 – 75 = = = = 
 In the 1974 – 75 season , Orr broke his own previous record for goals by a defenceman , scoring 46 goals to go with 89 assists for his sixth straight 100 @-@ point season . He won the league scoring title and the Art Ross Trophy for the second time . 1974 – 75 was his last full season and his last season playing with Phil Esposito . The Bruins placed second in the Adams Division , and lost to the Chicago Black Hawks in the first round of the 1975 playoffs , losing a best @-@ of @-@ three series , two games to one . 
 The 1975 – 76 season was Orr 's final season with the Bruins and it was tumultuous . Orr 's contract was ending after the season , potentially making him a free agent . The Bruins were sold by Storer Broadcasting in August 1975 and the new Jacobs ownership group had to promise to keep Orr as a condition of the purchase . The Bruins and Orr reached a verbal agreement with the Jacobs during the summer of 1975 , including a controversial agreement for Orr to take an 18 @.@ 5 % share of the Bruins after his playing days were over . The agreement was to be checked out as to whether it would be legal for tax reasons and whether or not the league would approve it . 
 Before the season started , however , Orr underwent another surgery on September 20 , 1975 . The Bruins ' contract talks with Orr and Eagleson became difficult . The Bruins ' insurer would not insure a contract with Orr and doctors advised the Bruins that Orr would not be able to play much longer . Orr returned to the lineup on November 8 , 1975 , the day after the Bruins traded Esposito to the New York Rangers . Orr was able to play the next ten games for the team , but had to stop on November 28 due to pain in his knee . The next day , he underwent another knee surgery . Originally expected to only be out for seven to eight weeks , his knee did not respond to therapy and he returned home to Parry Sound . His season was over after ten games and he would not play again for the Bruins . His impending free agency led to speculation that the Bruins would trade him , but despite his injury , they were negotiating to keep him until the end . 
 During his Bruins career , Orr was often the player the press wanted for a post @-@ game interview . Orr instead would hide in the trainer 's room . Teammate Terry O 'Reilly described him as a " very private , very shy guy , who just happened to be the best hockey player in the world . " According to the Bruins public relations director Nate Greenberg " one of my toughest jobs in the day was trying to get Orr to come out of the trainer 's room to talk to the press . The reason he wouldn 't or didn 't all the time was that he really wanted his teammates to get proper accolades , while everybody , all the time wanted him . " As of 2010 , Orr has not authorized a biography of himself , preferring to not be the centre of attention . 
 = = = Free agency , and the move to Chicago = = = 
 In September 1975 , the Bruins and Eagleson had reached a deal that would pay Orr US $ 4 million ( US $ 17 @,@ 590 @,@ 600 in 2016 dollars ) for ten years . But when Orr 's knee required surgery , the Bruins reduced its offer to US $ 295 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 226 @,@ 751 in 2016 dollars ) per season and a payment of US $ 925 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 656 @,@ 573 in 2016 dollars ) or 18 @.@ 6 % of the Bruins in June 1980 . Eagleson turned down the offer and on June 7 , 1976 was quoted in the Toronto Star as saying " Boston offered a five @-@ year deal at US $ 925 @,@ 000 or 18 @.@ 6 percent ownership of the club in 1980 . I didn 't think it would be wise for him to be a player @-@ owner . " On June 9 , 1976 , after Orr had signed with Chicago , Eagleson told the Toronto Globe and Mail that the Bruin offer was " a five @-@ year offer for US $ 295 @,@ 000 a year . In addition , Orr was to receive US $ 925 @,@ 000 in cash payable in June 1980 . That was to be a cash payment or involve Orr 's receiving 18 @.@ 6 percent of the Bruins stock . " According to a famous 1990 story in the Toronto Star by Ellie <unk> , Orr stated that Eagleson never told him of the offer , during negotiations or after . While Eagleson had spoken publicly to reporters of the offer , he had not discussed it with Orr . 
 In 1976 , the Bruins offered Orr US $ 600 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 495 @,@ 088 in 2016 dollars ) per season , but he would have to pass a physical examination at the start of each season 's training camp . Only the first year 's money was guaranteed . Eagleson was quoted at the time as saying , " There is only one way that Bobby Orr will ever be back with the Bruins . And that 's if Jeremy Jacobs asks him for another meeting and straightens out the whole situation . Otherwise he 's gone . " Instead , Orr became a free agent , with Boston to receive compensation . Orr and Eagleson whittled down a list of potential teams to St. Louis and Chicago . Chicago offered a five @-@ year guaranteed contract with the Black Hawks , and on June 8 , 1976 , he officially signed with the Black Hawks . The Bruins ' general manager , Harry Sinden complained of tampering by the Black Hawks , and demanded that Chicago owner Bill Wirtz submit to a lie detector test . According to documents held by Orr , they had a valid case . Orr signed with the Black Hawks at a secret meeting in May 1976 , prior to becoming a free agent . 
 Then @-@ Bruins head coach Don Cherry suggested that the reason Orr never re @-@ signed with the Bruins was Orr 's complete trust in Eagleson at the time ( Orr said that he described Eagleson as a brother ) . Cherry recalled Orr had refused to speak with the Bruins team president directly , allowing Eagleson to mislead or withhold enough details from Boston 's offer . Orr 's departure from the Bruins was acrimonious and he has not held an official role with the Bruins since . Years later , it emerged that Eagleson had very good relations with Black Hawks owner Bill Wirtz and NHL president John Ziegler that colluded to hold back salaries of certain players . Orr disassociated himself from Eagleson in 1980 . 
 Orr 's contract with Chicago , five years in length , was for US $ 3 million , ( US $ 12 @,@ 475 @,@ 439 in 2016 dollars ) , to be paid over 30 years . Spreading out the payments in this way was done to minimize taxes . While a player , he never cashed a Chicago paycheck , stating that he was paid to play hockey and would not accept a salary if he was not playing . 
 = = = 1976 Canada Cup = = = 
 After Orr signed with Chicago , the Black Hawks gave him permission to play for Team Canada in the 1976 Canada Cup tournament . Orr did not play in the 1972 Summit Series against the Soviet Union , and he wanted badly to play for Canada . Orr had been unable to play in the Summit Series due to knee surgery , although he did participate as a non @-@ player . Orr 's participation in the Canada Cup was considered ill @-@ conceived and Eagleson later thought it may have been the ' last straw ' that killed his career . Orr himself said that he knew before the tournament that " I knew I didn 't have much longer . That series didn 't do it . I thought I could get the next season in , but not much after that . I knew , looking at that team , I wouldn 't have to do as much . I wouldn 't have traded it for anything . " 
 Despite his knee , Orr 's performance in the Canada Cup led to him being named to the tournament All @-@ Star team and he was named the overall MVP for the tournament . According to team @-@ mate Bobby Clarke , Orr " would hardly be able to walk on the morning of the game . And he would hardly be able to walk in the afternoon . And then , at night , he would be the best player on one of the greatest teams ever assembled . He was the best player in every game ; he was the best player in the tournament . He couldn 't skate like he used to , but he could still go . " According to team @-@ mate Darryl Sittler , " Bobby Orr was better on one leg , than anybody else was on two . " 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Orr signed with Chicago , but his injuries limited him to only 26 games over the next three seasons . He sat out the entire 1977 – 78 season . By 1978 , Orr had undergone over a dozen knee surgeries , was having trouble walking and barely skated any more . However , in the summer of 1978 , he decided to make a comeback . He played six games of the 1978 – 79 season and came to the conclusion that he could no longer play and informed the Black Hawks that he was retiring . He started a new role as an assistant to Chicago general manager Bob Pulford . He scored his last NHL goal and point against Detroit on October 28 , 1978 , at Detroit 's Olympia Stadium . 
 Orr retired having scored 270 goals and 645 assists for 915 points in 657 games , adding 953 penalty minutes . At the time of his retirement , he was the leading defenceman in league history in goals , assists and points , tenth overall in assists and 19th in points . As of 2013 , the only retired players in league history to have averaged more points per game than Orr are Wayne Gretzky , Mario Lemieux and Mike Bossy , all of them forwards . " Losing Bobby " , said Gordie Howe , " was the greatest blow the National Hockey League has ever suffered " . 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame waived the normal three @-@ year waiting period for induction into the Hall and he was enshrined at age 31 – the youngest player living at the time of his induction in history . Orr was the eighth player to have the three @-@ year period waived , the next two being Mario Lemieux ( 1997 ) and Wayne Gretzky ( 1999 ) , after which the Hall decided that the waiting period would no longer be waived for any player except under " certain humanitarian circumstances " . 
 His number 4 jersey was retired by the Bruins on January 9 , 1979 . At the ceremony , the crowd at Boston Garden would not stop applauding and as a result , most of the evening 's program had to be scrapped at the last second due to the constant cheering . The crowd did not allow Orr to say his thank you speech until he put on a Bruins jersey . The day was proclaimed " Bobby Orr Day " in Boston and the event raised thousands of dollars for charity . He attended the Massachusetts Senate and House of Representatives and was given a five @-@ minute standing ovation . Boston Celtics basketball superstar Larry Bird said in his pre @-@ game inspiration that he always looked up at the rafters of the Garden at Orr 's retired No. 4 , instead of the retired numbers of Celtics stars such as Bill Russell , Bob Cousy , or John Havlicek . 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 Orr inspired the game of hockey with his command of the two @-@ way game . While a few Hall of Fame defencemen , such as Red Kelly , were known for having offensive ability , they were the exception rather than the norm in the NHL before Orr 's arrival . Orr 's offensive style has influenced countless defencemen who followed him . His speed – most notably a rapid acceleration – and his open @-@ ice artistry electrified fans as he set almost every conceivable record for a defenceman . When Orr and the Bruins visited cities , attendance was usually a sell @-@ out . According to long @-@ time Bruins coach and general manager Harry Sinden , " Bobby became a star in the NHL about the time they played the National Anthem for his first game with us " . 
 Former Montreal Canadiens goaltender Ken Dryden described of Orr : " When he began to move ... the sensation was unique : All the Canadiens began <unk> in a small panic , like beachgoers sighting a coming monster wave . He brought others with him ; he wanted them involved . That 's what made him so different : It felt like a five @-@ player stampede moving toward you — and at his pace . He pushed his teammates , [ because ] you 're playing with the best player in the league and he 's giving you the puck and you just can 't mess it up . You had to be better than you 'd ever been . " 
 In contrast to the style of hanging @-@ back defensive play common in the later 1950s and 1960s , Orr was known for his fluid skating and end @-@ to @-@ end rushing . Orr 's rushing enabled him to be where the puck was , allowing him not only to score effectively but also to defend when necessary . According to the Bruins ' Phil Esposito , " No matter how fast an opponent was , Bobby could skate faster than him if he needed to do it in the framework of a play . If he was caught up @-@ ice and the other team had an odd @-@ man rush , that 's when you saw his truly great speed . Very seldom did he not get back to have a hand in breaking up the play . " Orr also benefited from playing most of his career in Boston Garden , which was 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) shorter than the standard NHL rink . This suited his rushing style very well , as he was able to get from one end of the ice to the other faster than in a standard rink . 
 His style of play was hard on his left knee , leading to injuries and surgeries that shortened his career . The left knee took all of the punishment and was operated on " 13 or 14 " times according to Orr . Orr was a left @-@ hand shot who played the right side . He would race down the right wing with the puck and attempt to beat the opposing defenceman using his speed and strength . He ' protected the puck ' , leading with his left knee , and holding his left arm up to fend off opponents . This put him into a position where a hit by the opposing defencemen would often hit the left knee . Also , he would often end up crashing into either the opposing goalie , the net or the end boards . " It was the way I played , " Orr has said . " I liked to carry the puck and if you do that , you 're going to get hit . I wish I 'd played longer , but I don 't regret it . " Orr stated in 2008 . " I had a style — when you play , you play all @-@ out . I tried to do things . I didn 't want to sit back . I wanted to be involved . " 
 His right knee was basically undamaged during his career ; his left knee looks like " a road map of downtown Boston " according to sportswriter Bob McKenzie . His left knee was used in a MasterCard commercial in 2008 , his scar lines used in an animation connecting his many achievements to the year of the individual scar line . According to a 2009 Sports Illustrated article Orr has since had two knee replacement surgeries that have left him pain @-@ free . 
 Orr was also known for his mean streak . Former coach Don Cherry recounts an incident one night in Los Angeles during a game that the Bruins were losing . With a minute to go , Orr pulled one of the Bruins off the ice , left the bench and attacked a Los Angeles Kings player . Asked why , Orr said to Cherry " He was laughing at us . " According to Cherry , he fought a lot . On another occasion in November 1967 , Orr was clipped in the face by a stick from the Toronto Maple Leafs ' Brian Conacher . Boston teammate Johnny McKenzie flattened Conacher from behind and started punching Conacher . Orr , cut and bleeding , got up from the ice , pulled MacKenzie off Conacher and started punching Conacher . Conacher , who was not fighting back , was also sucker @-@ punched by the Bruins ' Ken Hodge . Orr would be booed in Toronto from that date onwards . Orr was frequently compared to Brad Park , who played a similar style to Orr and later succeeded Orr as Boston 's top defenceman , and the two often fought each other on @-@ ice , fueling the bitter rivalry between the Bruins and New York Rangers . Park said " I saw no reason to be upset because I was rated second to Bobby Orr . After all , Orr not only was the top defenceman in the game but he was considered the best player ever to put on a pair of skates . There was nothing insulting about being rated number two to such a super superstar " . 
 = = Post @-@ hockey career = = 
 Shortly after Orr retired , an independent accountant revealed that Orr 's liabilities exceeded his assets , leaving him essentially bankrupt despite being supposedly one of the highest @-@ paid players in the NHL . As well , Orr 's taxes were under review . Eagleson had set up a corporation to receive Orr 's income and pay Orr a salary , but the arrangement was rejected by US and Canadian tax authorities . His assets in July 1980 totalled US $ 456 @,@ 604 ( US $ 1 @,@ 488 @,@ 726 in 2016 dollars ) and his tax , legal and accounting bills totalled US $ 469 @,@ 546 ( US $ 1 @,@ 530 @,@ 922 in 2016 dollars ) . Eagleson , who had once said Orr was ' fixed for life ' , criticized Orr for ' living beyond his means ' and ignoring his investment advice . Orr split with Eagleson on April 1 , 1980 . As part of the legal settlement with Orr , Eagleson agreed to purchase various of Orr 's assets for US $ 620 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 780 @,@ 622 in 2016 dollars ) , including his Orr – Walton Hockey Camp , which paid off US $ 450 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 292 @,@ 387 in 2016 dollars ) of Orr 's bank loans . 
 Orr served briefly as an assistant coach for Chicago , and as a consultant to the NHL and the Hartford Whalers . The Black Hawks balked at paying him the balance of his contract , and Orr took them to court , settling in 1983 for US $ 450 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 069 @,@ 145 in 2016 dollars ) , one @-@ third of the money they owed him . Of this , US $ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 475 @,@ 175 in 2016 dollars ) went to taxes and legal fees . Orr moved back to the Boston area and formed Can @-@ Am Enterprises with partners Tom Kelly and Paul Shanley , which built up a clientele of endorsements for Orr , including <unk> and Standard Brands . Orr did eventually restore his finances , thanks to endorsement contracts and public relations work . 
 Orr later played a role in the exposure of Eagleson 's misconduct over the years . He had once considered Eagleson a " big brother " , but broke with him in 1980 in part because he suspected that Eagleson had not been truthful with him . In addition to misleading his clients about contract terms , Eagleson fraudulently used NHLPA funds to enrich himself . Orr was one of several players who filed a formal complaint of legal misconduct against Eagleson with the Law Society of Upper Canada over Eagleson 's lending of trust monies without the consent or knowledge of his clients . In 1998 , Eagleson was convicted of fraud , embezzlement and racketeering . After the conviction , Orr was one of eighteen former players who threatened to resign from the Hockey Hall of Fame if Eagleson was not removed as a builder . Facing almost certain removal , Eagleson resigned instead . 
 Orr was also involved in the 1991 lawsuit of retired NHL players against the NHL over its control of the players ' pension fund . Eagleson was involved there too , arranging for the players to give up a seat on the trusteeship of the pension fund in 1969 to gain the acceptance of the NHLPA with the NHL owners . Orr and ex @-@ Bruin Dave Forbes discussed the law suit with the sports newspaper The National . Orr : " Our money is being used to pay pensions for current players " . The NHL 's response was to file a notice of libel and slander against Orr and Forbes . Carl Brewer defended Orr in a letter to then @-@ NHL president John Ziegler : " It is regrettable that the NHL and the member clubs would resort to such treatment of one of our game 's icons , Bobby Orr . And isn 't it interesting that baseball players who started their pension plan in 1947 , as did the NHL , have assets in their plan of some US $ 500 million while we , as far as we can understand , have US $ 31 @.@ 9 million . " The pension law suit was finally won by the players in 1994 after two courts ruled against the NHL . The NHL had appealed the case to the Supreme Court of Canada which decided not to hear the case . 
 Orr became an agent representing hockey players in 1996 . Along with investors , Orr purchased the Woolf Associates agency founded by Boston lawyer Bob Woolf . To prevent conflicts of interest , Orr sold an investment in the Lowell Lock Monsters minor pro hockey team and cut his ties with a credit card firm that had a contract with the NHLPA . Orr became a certified agent , although he would not be negotiating with hockey clubs . Player agent Rick Curran merged his agency with Orr 's in 2000 . Curran and Orr along with partner Paul <unk> incorporated the agency as Orr Hockey Group in February 2002 . 
 The group represents such NHL players as Jeff Carter , Steve Downie , Taylor Hall , Nathan Horton , Adam McQuaid , Colton Orr ( no relation ) , Patrick Sharp , Jason Spezza , Eric Staal , Jordan Staal , Marc Staal , and Cam Ward . Spezza , asked to comment on the experience of having Orr as an agent , replied : " I don 't think I have a true feeling for how great he is . I have so much respect for him . I watch him on tapes and it 's just ridiculous how good he was compared to the guys he was playing against . He 's a great guy and you don 't even know it 's Bobby Orr , the way he talks to you . " 
 For a number of years , Orr has coached a team of top Canadian Hockey League junior players against a similar team coached by Don Cherry in the annual CHL Top Prospects Game . Cherry , briefly his former coach in Boston , considers Orr the greatest hockey player who ever lived , noting that Orr was a complete all @-@ around player who could skate , score , fight , and defend . As of 2010 , Orr 's teams have won most of the games , winning seven of the eleven times Orr has coached against Cherry . Orr 's participation was criticized as a conflict @-@ of @-@ interest while he was a player 's agent and he stopped coaching in the series . Organizers of the series convinced Orr to return to coaching in the series . He stepped down again before the 2011 game for the birth of his second grandchild . One of the teams remained named ' Team <unk> 
 On November 3 , 2013 , Orr 's long @-@ awaited autobiography titled Orr : My Story , debuted at the # 8 position on The New York Times best seller list for nonfiction . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While on vacation , Orr met Margaret Louise " Peggy " Wood , a Trenton , Michigan native and speech therapist who worked in Fort Lauderdale , Florida . They became engaged on Christmas Day , 1972 , and married in September 1973 at a ' secret ' ceremony in Parry Sound . They have two sons , Darren and Brent . Son Darren works as a player 's agent at Orr Hockey Group . Orr 's mother Arva died in November 2000 , 18 months after being diagnosed with cancer . Orr 's father Doug died in 2007 . Orr became a grandfather when granddaughter Alexis was born in 2009 . A second grandchild , Robert , was born in January 2011 . 
 Orr has been known to be fiercely loyal to former Bruin personnel and teammates . When Derek Sanderson had alcohol and prescription drug @-@ abuse problems and wound up penniless , Orr spent his own money to ensure that Sanderson successfully completed rehab . Decades later , Orr and Sanderson went into business together managing finances for hockey players . Orr also helped out Bruins trainer John ( Frosty ) Forristall , his roommate during his first years with the Bruins , who had just been fired from the Tampa Bay Lightning for alcoholism in 1994 . Forristall 's drinking put him on bad terms with his brother John , so he returned to Boston jobless and soon afterwards was diagnosed with brain cancer . Orr took Forristall into his home for a year until he died at the age of 51 . Orr was a pallbearer at his funeral . 
 Orr is also well known for his charitable works , although he kept mention of them out of the press . Former Eagle @-@ Tribune writer Russ Conway noted of one occasion when Orr and Conway visited Boston Children 's Hospital , with a box of programs , pennants , pucks , pictures and Boston memorabilia : " We went from room to room , Orr popping in , unannounced to visit the kids . Some couldn 't believe their eyes ; sick as they were , they laughed in astonishment and delight . Bobby Orr ! He talked and joked with every one of them , asking names , rubbing heads , giving everybody a little present from the box , leaving a stick , autographing everything in sight . " Orr made Conway promise to not print a word in the newspaper . Orr was involved in numerous charity fund raisers . In 1980 , Orr was awarded the Multiple Sclerosis Silver Hope Chest Award by the Multiple Sclerosis Society for his " numerous and unselfish contributions to society " . 
 Among other personal interests , Orr has a passion for fishing which he has had since childhood . He has a talent for solving jigsaw puzzles quickly . Orr is also known for his taste in clothes and style of dress . When living as a bachelor with Forristall during his years with the Bruins , Orr was also known for keeping a clean apartment and not drinking or smoking or going night @-@ clubbing . Orr projected a clean image . 
 = = Honours = = 
 In 1979 , Orr was invested as an officer in the Order of Canada . Two buildings in Parry Sound honour Orr . A museum , called the Bobby Orr Hall of Fame , where his Order of Canada medal is on display along with other exhibits . Also named in his honour is The Bobby Orr Community Centre , a multi @-@ purpose entertainment facility located in his hometown of Parry Sound , Ontario . In 1995 , Bobby Orr was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame . Orr has been honoured with a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame in Toronto . In 2004 an Elementary School in South Oshawa named after Orr opened . On November 27 , 2008 , the Oshawa Generals retired Orr 's number 2 jersey ; the Generals had not issued the number since Orr transferred to the NHL in 1966 . Orr thanked all who helped him in the four years he played in Oshawa : " I did a lot of growing up in Oshawa from ages 14 to 18 and I 'll be forever grateful for those people who helped me in that time of my life . " In February 2010 , Orr was one of the eight bearers of the Olympic flag at the Opening Ceremonies of the 2010 Vancouver Olympics . 
 On May 10 , 2010 , the fortieth anniversary of Orr scoring the game @-@ winning goal against the St. Louis Blues in overtime to clinch the 1970 Stanley Cup , the Bruins commemorated the event with a bronze statue of Orr outside the TD Garden , the Bruins ' home rink . The statue depicts Orr sprawled in mid @-@ flight after scoring the goal . The unveiling was attended by many of Orr 's past team @-@ mates . Orr spoke at the unveiling : " This specific moment and time we celebrate with this statue is something we can all now nostalgically remember with fondness , together , each time we enter Boston Garden . To all of you , thank you very much from the bottom of my heart . I 'm honoured . Guys , thank you . " In 2012 , he received the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 Despite playing only twelve seasons and 657 games ( of which only his first nine seasons , totaling 621 games , were full seasons ) , and only playing 47 NHL games after his 27th birthday , Orr accomplished many records and achievements , a number of which still stand today , and are listed below . 
 As of the end of the 2014 – 15 season : 
 First and only defenceman to score nine hat tricks 
 First defenceman to score 30 goals ( 1969 – 70 ) and 40 goals ( 1974 – 75 ) in a season . 
 First player to record 100 assists in a season ( 1970 – 71 ) 
 Only defenceman to win the Art Ross Trophy as league leader in scoring ( 1969 – 70 , 1974 – 75 ) 
 Only player ever to win the Norris Trophy , Art Ross Trophy , Hart Trophy , and Conn Smythe Trophy in one season ( 1969 – 70 ) 
 Highest single season plus @-@ minus rating , + 124 in 1970 @-@ 71 . Second all @-@ time in career plus @-@ minus rating , + 597 . ( retired as the overall leader ; never finished a full season less than + 30 since + / - once it became a statistic beginning with the 1968 – 69 season ) 
 Fourth in league history in career point @-@ per @-@ game average , all @-@ time , ( 1 @.@ 393 ) ( highest among defencemen , minimum 500 career points ) 
 Sixty @-@ second overall in league history in career assists and 97th in career points 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 OHA First All @-@ Star Team – 1964 , 1965 , 1966 
 Awarded the Calder Memorial Trophy ( rookie of the year ) in 1967 , the youngest ever to win the award , and the youngest ever to win a major NHL award up to that time 
 Named to the Second All @-@ Star Team in 1966 – 67 ( his only full season when he did not make the First Team , as a rookie ) 
 Named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team eight times consecutively ( 1968 @-@ 1975 ) 
 Awarded the James Norris Trophy eight times ( from 1968 to 1975 , his last full season ) 
 Played in the NHL All @-@ Star Game eight times ( from 1968 to 1975 ) 
 Won the Art Ross Trophy in 1969 – 70 and 1974 – 75 
 NHL Plus / Minus leader in 1969 , 1970 , 1971 , 1972 , 1974 and 1975 , the most in history 
 Awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy three times consecutively ( 1970 – 1972 ) 
 Awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy in 1970 and 1972 , the first two @-@ time winner of the playoff MVP award 
 Stanley Cup winner in 1970 and 1972 
 Won Lou Marsh Trophy as Canadian athlete of the year in 1970 
 NHL All @-@ Star Game MVP in 1972 
 Received Sports Illustrated magazine 's " Sportsman of the Year " award in 1970 
 Voted the greatest athlete in Boston history in the Boston Globe newspaper 's poll of New Englanders in 1975 , beating out baseball and basketball stars such as Ted Williams , Bill Russell , Carl Yastrzemski and Bob Cousy 
 Awarded the Lester B. Pearson Award in 1975 
 Named the Canada Cup Tournament MVP in 1976 
 Awarded the Lester Patrick Trophy in 1979 
 Inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1979 , with the mandatory three @-@ year waiting period waived , making him the youngest inductee at 31 years of age 
 Voted the second greatest hockey player of all time by an expert committee in 1997 by The Hockey News . Orr is behind only Wayne Gretzky and ahead of Gordie Howe as well as being named the top defenceman of all time . Gretzky said he 'd have voted for Orr , or for his hero , Gordie Howe . 
 Ranked 31 in ESPN 's SportsCentury : 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century in 1999 
 Named the top defenceman of all time in 2010 by The Hockey News 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Most points in one NHL season by a defenceman ( 139 ; 1970 – 71 ) 
 Most assists in one NHL season by a defenceman ( 102 ; 1970 – 71 ) . 
 Highest plus / minus in one NHL season ( + 124 ; 1970 – 71 ) 
 Tied for most assists in one NHL game by a defenceman ( 6 ; tied with Babe Pratt , Pat Stapleton , Ron Stackhouse , Paul Coffey and Gary Suter ) 
 Only player in history to win four major NHL awards in one season ( Hart , Norris , Art Ross , and Conn Smythe in 1970 ) , as well as only player to win the Norris and Art Ross in the same season more than once . 
 Fastest goal from start of overtime to clinch the Stanley Cup - 0 : 40 - 1970 ( game 4 ) 
 Records since surpassed 
 Held record for most assists in one NHL season from 1970 to 1981 ( 87 in 1969 – 70 , which he surpassed in 1970 – 71 with 102 ; broken by Wayne Gretzky and also bettered by Mario Lemieux ) 
 Held record for most goals in one NHL season by a defenceman from 1968 to 1986 ( 21 , in 1967 – 68 , 37 in 1970 – 71 , broke own record in 1974 – 75 with 46 ; broken in 1985 – 86 by Paul Coffey with 48 ) 
 Held record for most points by a defenceman in one game from 1973 until 1977 ( 7 ( 3 goals / 4 assists ) in game November 15 , 1973 ) 
 Held record for longest consecutive point @-@ scoring streak by a defenceman from 1971 until 1984 ( 15 games , set in 1970 – 71 and 1973 – 74 ) 
 Held record for career goal @-@ scoring by a defenceman ( 270 ) until surpassed by Denis Potvin in 1987 . 
 Held record for most consecutive 100 @-@ or @-@ more point seasons from 1974 until 1980 ( 6 , from 1969 – 70 until 1974 – 75 ) 
 Held record for career plus @-@ minus rating from 1978 until 1985 ( + 597 ) 
 Held record for most assists in a season by any player from 1971 until 1981 ( 102 ) 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 Career highs in each statistical category are marked in boldface . 
 Source : <unk> 
 = = International play = = 
 Was named to Canada 's 1972 Summit Series team , but did not play due to injuries . 
 Played for Team Canada in the 1976 Canada Cup . 
 International statistics 
 = Same @-@ sex marriage in Maryland = 
 Same @-@ sex marriage has been legally recognized in Maryland since January 1 , 2013 . In 2012 , the state 's Democratic representatives , led by Governor Martin O 'Malley , began a campaign for its legalization . After much debate , a law permitting same @-@ sex marriage was passed by the General Assembly ( Maryland 's bicameral legislature , composed of the Senate and House of Delegates ) in February 2012 and signed on March 1 , 2012 . The law took effect on January 1 , 2013 after 52 @.@ 4 % of voters approved a statewide referendum held on November 6 , 2012 . The vote was hailed as a watershed moment by gay rights activists and marked the first time marriage rights in the United States have been extended to same @-@ sex couples by popular vote . 
 Upon the rise of the same @-@ sex marriage movement in the early 1970s , Maryland established the first law in the United States that expressly defined marriage to be a union between a man and a woman . Attempts to both ban and legalize same @-@ sex marriage in the 1990s and 2000s failed to gain enough support from central committees of the state legislature . Roman Catholic authorities throughout the state were adamantly opposed to the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage , saying it deeply conflicted with the best interests of society and would threaten religious liberty . The debates produced disputes between individuals who had been traditionally aligned on causes and prompted sharp criticism from African @-@ American religious leaders who said same @-@ sex marriage would " disrupt the fabric of the culture . " 
 Before passage of the Civil Marriage Protection Act , the state recognized same @-@ sex marriages performed in other jurisdictions following the 2010 release of a legal opinion from Attorney General Doug Gansler in his nine @-@ month analysis of comity laws . In 2012 , the Maryland Court of Appeals maintained Gansler 's analysis and issued a unanimous decision in Port v. Cowan finding that a same @-@ sex marriage performed out @-@ of @-@ state must be considered equal and valid under state law , despite its earlier decision in Conaway v. Deane ( 2007 ) in which the court upheld the statutory ban on same @-@ sex marriage as constitutional . 
 = = History = = 
 Maryland holds a unique place in the history of same @-@ sex marriage in the United States . In 1973 , it became the first state in the nation to define marriage as a union between a man and a woman , expressly banning same @-@ sex marriage . The General Assembly passed the law a short time after voters in the state ratified Article 46 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights , commonly referred to as the Equal Rights Amendment , in November 1972 . The constitutional provision prohibited discrimination in equality of rights on the basis of sex . 
 During the 1990s , attempts to both ban and legalize same @-@ sex marriage did not pass through the legislature . After a Maryland House of Delegates committee voted in March 2004 to reject a pair of marriage bills that would have submitted a constitutional amendment against same @-@ sex marriage to voters and invalidated same @-@ sex marriages performed in another state or foreign country , the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) and Equality Maryland filed a lawsuit , Deane & Polyak v. Conaway , to challenge the existing law on behalf of nine same @-@ sex couples and one bereaved man whose partner had died . The lead plaintiffs , from whom the case received its name , were Gita Deane , a learning specialist at Goucher College , and her partner Lisa Polyak , an environmental engineer for the U.S. Army Medical Department . The plaintiffs had applied for marriage licenses in several different Maryland counties but were denied by court officials . In their complaint , the plaintiffs argued that the state 's statutory ban on same @-@ sex marriage violated constitutional protections of due process , equality , and prohibitions against sex discrimination in Articles 24 and 46 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights . 
 In January 2006 , Baltimore Circuit Court Judge M. Brooke Murdock granted summary judgment to the plaintiffs , writing that " Family law § 2 @-@ 201 violates Article 46 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights because it discriminates , based on gender against a suspect class , and is not narrowly tailored to serve any compelling governmental interests . " She added that " tradition and social values alone cannot support adequately a discriminatory statutory classification , " because " when tradition is the guise under which prejudice or animosity hides , it is not a legitimate state interest . " The judge immediately stayed the decision pending an appeal by the Attorney General of Maryland , which occurred later that day . 
 While the decision was favored by the plaintiffs , gay rights groups and their supporters — including more than 100 religious leaders and child welfare advocates across the state who filed amicus briefs — other local religious leaders and evangelical ministers were upset by the decision and looked to state legislators to propose a constitutional ban on same @-@ sex marriage . Such an amendment was favored by then @-@ Governor Bob Ehrlich who said " my politics on this are very clear . We 're going to protect marriage . Traditional marriage . " In February 2006 , the proposed ban was rejected after opponents successfully amended it to legalize civil unions . 
 Consequently , Delegate Don Dwyer introduced a resolution to impeach Judge Murdock in 2006 , alleging " misbehavior in office , [ willful ] neglect of duty , and incompetency " for her trial court decision ; in 2007 , he introduced a law that would ban discussion of same @-@ sex unions in public schools . One lawmaker said " It is a clear attempt to intimidate judges and to make the judiciary subservient to the legislature , " and Michael Conroy , former President of the Maryland State Bar Association , said that " No basis in fact or law exists to support any suggestion to impeach Murdock for her recent decision on same @-@ sex marriage . " David <unk> , an attorney for the ACLU , called the resolution " a frivolous , dangerous and extremist response from the lunatic fringe . " Both of the measures failed to pass through committee . 
 = = = Conaway v. Deane & Polyak = = = 
 The Court of Appeals , Maryland 's highest court , agreed to hear the state 's appeal in 2006 , bypassing the intermediate court . To the surprise of spectators , there were almost no questions from the judges during oral argument , which took place on December 4 , 2006 , causing speculation that the court may have taken the appeal just to reverse the Circuit Court ruling . On September 18 , 2007 , the court issued its decision in Conaway v. Deane , overturning the trial court ruling for the plaintiffs in a 4 – 3 decision , and holding that the statutory ban on same @-@ sex marriage did not violate the Maryland Constitution . 
 Judge Glenn T. Harrell , Jr. wrote that because the statute equally barred both men and women from marrying partners of the same sex , it was not discriminatory on the basis of sex and thus , does not violate the Equal Rights Amendment ( ERA ) as plaintiffs argued . Judge Harrell said that the ERA was intended to prohibit sex discrimination against women and did not apply to this case , which he said was a matter of sexual orientation . Judge Lynne A. Battaglia wrote a dissenting opinion stating that the statutes and ordinances in Maryland barring discrimination based on sexual orientation , in addition to the state 's lack of prohibiting LGBT adoption and its recognition of same @-@ sex couples as co @-@ parents , support the argument that denying committed same @-@ sex couples the full benefits and privileges of marriage is not related to any rational government interest . Judge Battaglia said she would have remanded the case to circuit court for a full trial in order to settle what she deemed a central factual issue : whether the state could demonstrate that it had " broad societal interest " in retaining marriage in the traditional form . The dissenting opinion from Chief Judge Robert M. Bell faulted the majority for not recognizing gay people as a suspect class in need of protection from discrimination . He dismissed the majority view that gays are politically empowered and should not be viewed as constituting such a class . 
 Evan Wolfson , founder of Freedom to Marry , said that the decision was " deeply flawed " because the 4 – 3 majority did not answer the question of how denying marriage to same @-@ sex couples affects the ability of heterosexual couples to procreate . Then – President of the Human Rights Campaign , Joe <unk> , called the decision a " setback " and Ken Choe , the ACLU attorney who argued on behalf of the plaintiffs , expressed hope that , unlike the majority of the bench , the state legislature would be able to see " that lesbian and gay couples form committed relationships and loving families just like heterosexual couples . " 
 = = Recognition of out @-@ of @-@ state marriages = = 
 State Senator Richard <unk> requested in 2009 that the Attorney General answer the question of whether same @-@ sex marriages could be recognized by the state . In February 2010 , Doug Gansler issued an opinion after a nine @-@ month analysis of state laws stating that valid same @-@ sex marriages performed in other states that permit same @-@ sex marriage could be recognized under Maryland law . Gansler stated that the opinion was not binding on the courts and state agencies could begin immediately to recognize out @-@ of @-@ state same @-@ sex marriages . He said that he expected the opinion to be quickly challenged in court . 
 The opinion garnered negative reactions from some Republicans , socially conservative Democrats , and several African @-@ American lawmakers , including delegates Emmett C. Burns , Jr. and Don Dwyer , who spoke out against the opinion and promised to initiate impeachment proceedings against Gansler . " It is not up to the attorney general , and that 's the reason I will be bringing charges of impeachment , " Dwyer said in statement where he described the attorney general as usurping the law . The Roman Catholic archbishops of Washington and Baltimore and the bishop of Wilmington also took " strong exception " to the decision . 
 = = = Port v. Cowan = = = 
 Recognition of same @-@ sex marriages from other states became precedent when the Court of Appeals agreed to hear a case from Prince George 's County , where two women who were legally married in California had been denied a divorce by the circuit court . On May 18 , 2012 , the court published a unanimous ruling in Port v. Cowan that validated the marriage of Jessica Port and Virginia Cowan because it said " no viable decision by the Court had deemed a valid foreign marriage to be ' repugnant ' , " even if the marriage was void or punishable as a crime were it performed in Maryland . The opinion cited conflicts that arose from decisions in Anne Arundel and St. Mary ’ s counties where two same @-@ sex couples had their petitions for divorce granted , and another case in Baltimore City where it was denied . The decision of the court was based on the state 's traditional use of the common law doctrine of comity , which specifies that Maryland " will give effect to laws and judicial decisions of another state or jurisdiction , not as a matter of obligation but out of deference and respect . " 
 = = Legislative action = = 
 After the Court of Appeals upheld the statutory ban on same @-@ sex marriage in 2007 , state senator Gwendolyn Britt of Landover Hills , along with delegates Victor R. Ramirez and Benjamin S. Barnes , sought to sponsor a marriage bill in the legislature . On January 12 , 2008 , Britt died of heart failure . Equality Maryland executive director Dan <unk> , who originally approached Britt to sponsor the legislation , said her death was a " devastating loss , but civil rights struggles are greater than any one person , and as our fight for equality in Maryland continues , her spirit will be with us . " On January 25 , 2008 , the Religious Freedom and Civil Marriage Protection Act was introduced in the House of Delegates . The Senate version of the bill was introduced by senators Richard <unk> and Jamie Raskin the same day . Advocates held a rally in support of the bill on February 11 , 2008 , but it ultimately failed in committee , alongside a constitutional ban introduced by Don Dwyer . 
 = = = Domestic partnerships = = = 
 While early efforts to legalize same @-@ sex marriage failed , the legislature approved two bills in 2008 that granted all unmarried couples certain domestic partnership rights , including the ability to make hospital and nursing home visits , end @-@ of @-@ life choices and other medical decisions , in addition to rights to joint property ownership . Domestic partners must be at least 18 years old and be able to provide an affidavit attesting to their relationship along with two documents , such as joint checking accounts , mortgages or car leases ; coverage on health insurance policies or the designation as a primary beneficiary in a will . The laws went into effect on July 1 , 2008 . 
 = = = Civil Marriage Protection Act = = = 
 The General Assembly first considered the Civil Marriage Protection Act in 2011 . Governor Martin O 'Malley stated that he would sign the bill , despite urges from then @-@ Archbishop of Baltimore Edwin Frederick O 'Brien requesting that he " resist pressure to do so . " O ’ Malley said " I have concluded that discriminating against individuals based on their sexual orientation in the context of civil marital rights is unjust . I have also concluded that treating the children of families headed by same @-@ sex couples with lesser protections under the law than the children of families headed by heterosexual parents , is also unjust . " On February 24 , 2011 , the Senate , which was thought to be the biggest obstacle to passage , approved the bill in a 25 – 21 vote . The House of Delegates proved to be a challenge , where same @-@ sex marriage advocates struggled to gain support from social conservatives from Prince George 's County , southern Maryland , and the Baltimore suburbs who cited religious concerns . 
 The debate highlighted disagreements between openly gay lawmakers and some black lawmakers on whether same @-@ sex marriage is a matter of civil rights . Delegate Emmett C. Burns , Jr. said : " If you want to compare same @-@ sex marriage to civil rights as I know it , show me the Ku Klux Klan that invaded your home . " Delegate <unk> J. Mitchell , Jr . , grandson of NAACP chief lobbyist Clarence M. Mitchell , Jr . , said " It is a civil rights issue when we as a state and a government deny equal protection under the law . " Several delegates who originally co @-@ sponsored the bill began to express doubts after being lobbied by church @-@ going constituents , including Sam Arora and Tiffany Alston , who delayed the bill 's vote in the House committee by skipping the voting session . The bill passed through the committee after its chairman , who rarely votes in committee , voted in favor . The House majority whip opposed the bill . Despite pleas from gay lawmakers , the House of Delegates voted to send the bill back to committee on March 11 , 2011 and would not reconsider it before January 2012 . 
 = = = = Referendum = = = = 
 The Civil Marriage Protection Act was reintroduced to the General Assembly on January 23 , 2012 . The new version of the bill contained provisions that more explicitly protects religious leaders , institutions , and their programs from legal action if they refuse to officiate or provide facilities for a same @-@ sex marriage or couple as a matter of their doctrine . During the legislative process , several high @-@ profile political figures attempted to persuade legislators to vote in favor of the bill , including former President Bill Clinton , former Vice President Dick Cheney , Terry McAuliffe , and Ken Mehlman . The House of Delegates passed the bill with a 72 – 67 vote on February 17 , 2012 and the Senate passed with a 25 – 22 vote on February 23 , 2012 . To secure support from some lawmakers who desired to submit the law to public referendum , the bill was amended to take effect on January 1 , 2013 . 
 Governor O 'Malley signed the bill on March 1 , 2012 . In June 2012 , referendum supporters submitted 109 @,@ 313 valid signatures to the state secretary , more than the 55 @,@ 736 required for a ballot in Maryland . The language of Referendum Question 6 informed voters that the Civil Marriage Protection Act would allow same @-@ sex couples to obtain a civil marriage license , protect clergy from having to perform any particular marriage ceremony in violation of their religious beliefs , and affirm that each religious faith has exclusive control over its own theological doctrine regarding who may marry within that faith . On November 6 , 2012 , the measure passed with 52 @.@ 4 % of the vote . On November 29 , 2012 , the attorney general issued a legal opinion stating that court clerks could accept applications for same @-@ sex marriage licenses immediately and issue them on December 6 , 2012 , as long as the effective date on the licenses specified January 1 , 2013 . 20 out of the 23 counties in Maryland and the city of Baltimore chose to issue the licenses ahead of schedule . The definition of marriage in the state of Maryland is now the following : 
 Only a marriage between two individuals who are not otherwise prohibited from marrying is valid in this State . 
 = = Economic impact = = 
 A study from the University of California , Los Angeles estimated in 2007 that extending marriage rights to same @-@ sex couples would result in a net gain of approximately $ 3 @.@ 2 million each year to the state budget . The study drew on data from the U.S. Census Bureau and Maryland statistical reports . The gain is attributable to savings in expenditures on means @-@ tested public benefit programs and an increase in sales and lodging tax revenue from weddings and wedding @-@ related tourism . 
 Another Williams Institute study conducted in February 2012 estimated that in the first three years after the law takes effect , Maryland same @-@ sex couples will generate between $ 40 and $ 64 million for the state economy , in addition to whatever revenue out @-@ of @-@ state couples bring . Several dozen small employers in the state have also said that same @-@ sex marriage will be good for their businesses , helping to attract and retain talent . 
 = = Marriage statistics = = 
 In 2013 , there were 40 @,@ 456 marriages in Maryland , an increase of 23 % from the year prior thought to be largely attributed to the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage on January 1 . The state has not recorded such a significant increase in the number of marriages since 1970 . 
 = = Public opinion = = 
 = Korean Air Lines Flight 007 = 
 Korean Air Lines Flight 007 ( also known as <unk> and KE007 ) was a scheduled Korean Air Lines flight from New York City to Seoul via Anchorage . On September 1 , 1983 , the airliner serving the flight was shot down by a Soviet Su @-@ 15 interceptor , near Moneron Island west of Sakhalin in the Sea of Japan . The interceptor 's pilot was Major Gennadi Osipovich . All 269 passengers and crew aboard were killed , including Larry McDonald , a Representative from Georgia in the United States House of Representatives . The aircraft was en route from Anchorage , Alaska , to Seoul when it flew through Soviet prohibited airspace around the time of a U.S. aerial reconnaissance mission . 
 The Soviet Union initially denied knowledge of the incident , but later admitted shooting it down , claiming that the aircraft was on a <unk> spy mission . The Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union said it was a deliberate provocation by the United States to test the Soviet Union 's military preparedness , or even to provoke a war . The White House accused the Soviet Union of obstructing search and rescue operations . The Soviet Armed Forces suppressed evidence sought by the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) investigation , such as the flight data recorders , which were released eight years later after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . 
 The incident was one of the most tense moments of the Cold War and resulted in an escalation of anti @-@ Soviet sentiment , particularly in the United States . The opposing points of view on the incident were never fully resolved ; consequently , several groups continue to dispute official reports and offer alternative theories of the event . The subsequent release of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 transcripts and flight recorders by the Russian Federation has clarified some details . 
 As a result of the incident the United States altered tracking procedures for aircraft departing from Alaska . The interface of the autopilot used on airliners was redesigned to make it more ergonomic . In addition , the event was one of the most important single events that prompted the Reagan administration to allow worldwide access to the United States military satellite navigation system <unk> , which was classified at the time . Today this system , and others like it , are known as GPS . 
 = = Details of the flight = = 
 The aircraft flying as Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was a commercial Boeing 747 @-@ <unk> . The jet first flew on January 28 , 1972 and was delivered on March 17 , 1972 with the serial number <unk> / 186 and registration <unk> ( formerly D @-@ <unk> operated by Condor ) . The aircraft departed Gate 15 of John F. Kennedy International Airport , New York City on August 30 , 1983 , bound for Gimpo International Airport in <unk> District , Seoul , 35 minutes behind its scheduled departure time of 23 : 50 EDT ( 03 : 50 UTC , August 31 ) . The flight was carrying 246 passengers and 23 crew members . After refueling at Anchorage International Airport in Anchorage , Alaska , the aircraft , piloted on this leg of the journey by Captain Chun Byung @-@ in , First officer Son Dong @-@ hui and Flight Engineer Kim Eui @-@ dong , departed for Seoul at 04 : 00 <unk> ( 13 : 00 UTC ) on August 31 , 1983 . 
 The aircrew had an unusually high ratio of crew to passengers , as six deadheading crew were on board . Twelve passengers occupied the upper deck first class , while in business almost all of 24 seats were taken ; in economy class , approximately 80 seats did not contain passengers . There were 22 children under the age of 12 years aboard . One hundred and thirty passengers planned to connect to other destinations such as Tokyo , Hong Kong , and Taipei . 
 United States Congressman Larry McDonald from Georgia , who at the time was also the second president of the conservative John Birch Society , was on the flight . Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina , Senator Steve <unk> of Idaho , and Representative Carroll Hubbard of Kentucky were aboard sister flight KAL 015 , which flew 15 minutes behind KAL 007 ; they were headed , along with McDonald on KAL 007 , to Seoul , South Korea , in order to attend the ceremonies for the thirtieth anniversary of the U.S.-South Korea Mutual Defense Treaty . The Soviets contended former U.S. president Richard Nixon was to have been seated next to Larry McDonald on KAL 007 but that the CIA warned him not to go , according to the New York Post and Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union ( TASS ) ; this was denied by Nixon . 
 = = = Flight deviation from assigned route = = = 
 After taking off from Anchorage , the flight was instructed by air traffic control ( ATC ) to turn to a heading of 220 degrees . Approximately 90 seconds later , ATC directed the flight to " proceed direct Bethel when able " . Upon arriving over Bethel , Alaska , flight 007 entered the northernmost of five 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) wide airways , known as the <unk> ( North Pacific ) routes , that bridge the Alaskan and Japanese coasts . KAL 007 's particular airway , R @-@ 20 ( Romeo 20 ) , passes just 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) from what was then Soviet airspace off the coast of the Kamchatka Peninsula . 
 The autopilot system used at the time had four basic control modes : HEADING , VOR / LOC , ILS , and INS . The HEADING mode maintained a constant magnetic course selected by the pilot . The VOR / LOC mode maintained the plane on a specific course , transmitted from a VOR ( VHF omnidirectional range , a type of short @-@ range radio signal transmitted from ground beacons ) or <unk> ( LOC ) beacon selected by the pilot . The ILS ( instrument landing system ) mode caused the plane to track both vertical and lateral course beacons , which led to a specific runway selected by the pilot . The INS ( inertial navigation system ) mode maintained the plane on lateral course lines between selected flight plan waypoints programmed into the INS computer . 
 When the INS navigation systems were properly programmed with the filed flight plan waypoints , the pilot could turn the autopilot mode selector switch to the INS position and the plane would then automatically track the programmed INS course line , provided the plane was headed in the proper direction and within 7 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 13 @.@ 9 km ) of that course line . If , however , the plane was more than 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) from the flight @-@ planned course line when the pilot turned the autopilot mode selector from HEADING to INS , the plane would continue to track the heading selected in HEADING mode as long as the actual position of the plane was more than 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) from the programmed INS course line . The autopilot computer software commanded the INS mode to remain in the " armed " condition until the plane had moved to a position less than 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) from the desired course line . Once that happened , the INS mode would change from " armed " to " capture " and the plane would track the flight @-@ planned course from then on . 
 The HEADING mode of the autopilot would normally be engaged sometime after takeoff to comply with vectors from ATC , and then after receiving appropriate ATC clearance , to guide the plane to intercept the desired INS course line . 
 The Anchorage VOR beacon was not operational because of maintenance . The crew received a NOTAM ( Notice to Airmen ) of this fact , which was not seen as a problem , as the captain could still check his position at the next <unk> beacon at Bethel , 346 miles ( 557 km ) away . The aircraft was required to maintain the assigned heading of 220 degrees , until it could receive the signals from Bethel , then it could fly direct to Bethel , as instructed by ATC , by centering the VOR " to " course deviation indicator ( CDI ) and then engaging the auto pilot in the VOR / LOC mode . Then , when over the Bethel beacon , the flight could start using INS mode to follow the waypoints that make up route Romeo @-@ 20 around the coast of the USSR to Seoul . The INS mode was necessary for this route , since after Bethel the plane would be mostly out of range from VOR stations . 
 At about 10 minutes after take @-@ off , KAL 007 , flying on a heading of 245 degrees , began to deviate to the right ( north ) of its assigned route to Bethel , and continued to fly on this constant heading for the next five and a half hours . 
 International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) simulation and analysis of the flight data recorder determined that this deviation was probably caused by the aircraft 's autopilot system operating in HEADING mode , after the point that it should have been switched to the INS mode . According to the ICAO , the autopilot was not operating in the INS mode either because the crew did not switch the autopilot to the INS mode ( shortly after Cairn Mountain ) , or they did select the INS mode , but the computer did not transition from <unk> <unk> ARMED to INS mode because the aircraft had already deviated off track by more than the 7 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 13 @.@ 9 km ) tolerance permitted by the inertial navigation computer . Whatever the reason , the autopilot remained in the HEADING mode , and the problem was not detected by the crew . 
 At 28 minutes after takeoff , civilian radar at Kenai Peninsula on the eastern shore of Cook Inlet and with radar coverage 175 miles ( 282 km ) west of Anchorage , tracked KAL 007 5 @.@ 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 0 km ) north of where it should have been . 
 When KAL 007 did not reach Bethel at 50 minutes after takeoff , a military radar at King Salmon , Alaska , tracked KAL 007 at 12 @.@ 6 nautical miles ( 23 @.@ 3 km ) north of where it should have been . There is no evidence to indicate that civil air traffic controllers or military radar personnel at Elmendorf Air Force Base ( who were in a position to receive the King Salmon radar output ) were aware of KAL 007 's deviation in real @-@ time , and therefore able to warn the aircraft . It had exceeded its expected maximum deviation sixfold , 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) of error being the maximum expected drift from course if the inertial navigation system was activated . 
 KAL 007 's divergence prevented the aircraft from transmitting its position via shorter range very high frequency radio ( VHF ) . It therefore requested KAL 015 , also en route to Seoul , to relay reports to air traffic control on its behalf . KAL 007 requested KAL 015 to relay its position three times in total . At 14 : 43 UTC , KAL 007 directly transmitted a change of estimated time of arrival for its next waypoint , <unk> , to the international flight service station at Anchorage , but it did so over the longer range high frequency radio ( HF ) rather than VHF . HF transmissions are able to carry a longer distance than VHF , but are vulnerable to electromagnetic interference and static ; VHF is clearer with less interference , and preferred by flight crews . The inability to establish direct radio communications to be able to transmit their position directly did not alert the pilots of KAL 007 of their ever @-@ increasing divergence and was not considered unusual by air traffic controllers . Halfway between Bethel and waypoint <unk> , KAL 007 passed through the southern portion of the North American Aerospace Defense Command buffer zone . This zone is north of Romeo 20 and off @-@ limits to civilian aircraft . 
 Some time after leaving American territorial waters , KAL Flight 007 crossed the International Date Line , where the local date shifted from August 31 , 1983 to September 1 , 1983 . 
 KAL 007 continued its journey , ever increasing its deviation — 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ) off course at waypoint <unk> , 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) off course at waypoint <unk> , and 160 nautical miles ( 300 km ) off course at waypoint <unk> — until it reached the Kamchatka Peninsula . 
 = = = Shootdown = = = 
 In 1983 , Cold War tensions between the United States and Soviet Union had escalated to a level not seen since the Cuban Missile Crisis because of several factors . These included the United States ' Strategic Defense Initiative , its planned deployment of the Pershing II Weapon System in Europe in March and April , and <unk> ' 83 , the largest fleet exercise held to date in the North Pacific . The military hierarchy of the Soviet Union ( particularly the old guard led by Soviet General Secretary Yuri Andropov and Minister of Defence Dmitriy Ustinov ) viewed these actions as bellicose and destabilizing ; they were deeply suspicious of U.S. President Ronald Reagan 's intentions and openly fearful he was planning a pre @-@ emptive nuclear strike against the Soviet Union . These fears culminated in RYAN , the code name for a secret intelligence @-@ gathering program initiated by Andropov to detect a potential nuclear sneak attack which he believed Reagan was plotting . 
 Aircraft from USS Midway and USS Enterprise repeatedly overflew Soviet military installations in the disputed Kuril Islands during <unk> ' 83 , resulting in the dismissal or reprimanding of Soviet military officials who had been unable to shoot them down . On the Soviet side , RYAN was expanded . Lastly , there was a heightened alert around the Kamchatka Peninsula at the time KAL 007 was in the vicinity , because of a Soviet missile test that was scheduled for the same day . A United States Air Force Boeing RC @-@ 135 reconnaissance aircraft flying in the area was monitoring the missile test off the peninsula . 
 At 15 : 51 UTC , according to Soviet sources , KAL 007 entered the restricted airspace of the Kamchatka Peninsula . The buffer zone extended 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) from Kamchatka 's coast and is known as a flight information region ( FIR ) . The 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) radius of the buffer zone nearest to Soviet territory had the additional designation of prohibited airspace . When KAL 007 was about 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) from the Kamchatka coast , four MiG @-@ 23 fighters were scrambled to intercept the Boeing 747 . 
 Significant command and control problems were experienced trying to vector the fast military jets onto the Boeing before they ran out of fuel . In addition , pursuit was made more difficult , according to Soviet Air Force Captain Aleksandr <unk> , who defected to the West in 1989 , because Arctic gales had knocked out Soviet radar ten days before . The unidentified jetliner therefore crossed over the Kamchatka Peninsula back into international airspace over the Sea of Okhotsk without being intercepted . 
 The Commander of the Soviet Far East District Air Defense Forces , General Valery Kamensky , was adamant that KAL 007 was to be destroyed even over neutral waters but only after positive identification showed it not to be a passenger plane . His subordinate , General Anatoly Kornukov , commander of Sokol Air Base and later to become commander of the Russian Air Force , insisted that there was no need to make positive identification as " the intruder " had already flown over the Kamchatka Peninsula . 
 General Kornukov ( to Military District Headquarters @-@ Gen. Kamensky ) : ( 5 : 47 ) " ... simply destroy [ it ] even if it is over neutral waters ? Are the orders to destroy it over neutral waters ? Oh , well . " Kamensky : We must find out , maybe it is some civilian craft or God knows who . " 
 Kornukov : " What civilian ? [ It ] has flown over Kamchatka ! It [ came ] from the ocean without identification . I am giving the order to attack if it crosses the State border . " 
 Units of the Soviet Air Defence Forces that had been tracking the South Korean aircraft for more than an hour while it entered and left Soviet airspace now classified the aircraft as a military target when it reentered their airspace over Sakhalin . After the protracted ground @-@ controlled interception , the three Su @-@ 15 fighters ( from nearby <unk> @-@ Sokol airbase ) and the MiG @-@ 23 ( from Smirnykh Air Base ) managed to make visual contact with the Boeing . The pilot of the lead Su @-@ 15 fighter fired warning shots , but recalled later in 1991 , " I fired four bursts , more than 200 rounds . For all the good it did . After all , I was loaded with armor piercing shells , not incendiary shells . It 's doubtful whether anyone could see them . " 
 At this point , KAL 007 contacted Tokyo Area Control Center , requesting clearance to ascend to a higher flight level for reasons of fuel economy ; the request was granted , so the Boeing started to climb , gradually slowing as it exchanged speed for altitude . The decrease in speed caused the pursuing fighter to overshoot the Boeing , an action that was interpreted by the Soviet pilot as an evasive maneuver . The order to shoot KAL 007 down was given as it was about to leave Soviet airspace for the second time . At around 18 : 26 UTC , under pressure from General Kornukov , and ground controllers who were not to let the aircraft escape into international airspace , the lead fighter was able to move back into a position where it could fire two K @-@ 8 ( NATO reporting name : AA @-@ 3 " <unk> " ) air @-@ to @-@ air missiles at the plane . 
 = = = = Soviet pilot 's recollection of shootdown = = = = 
 In a 1991 interview with Izvestia , Major <unk> Osipovich , pilot of the Su @-@ 15 interceptor that shot the 747 down , spoke about his recollections of the events leading up to the shootdown . Contrary to official Soviet statements at the time , he recalled telling ground controllers that there were " blinking lights " . He continued , saying that " I saw two rows of windows and knew that this was a Boeing . I knew this was a civilian plane . But for me this meant nothing . It is easy to turn a civilian type of plane into one for military use . " He furthermore did not provide a detailed description of the aircraft to his ground controllers : " I did not tell the ground that it was a Boeing @-@ type plane ; they did not ask me . " 
 Commenting on the moment that KAL 007 slowed as it ascended from flight level 330 to flight level 350 , and then on his maneuvering for missile launch , Osipovich said : 
 They [ KAL 007 ] quickly lowered their speed . They were flying at 400 km / h ( 249 mph ) . My speed was more than 400 . I was simply unable to fly slower . In my opinion , the intruder 's intentions were plain . If I did not want to go into a stall , I would be forced to overshoot them . That 's exactly what happened . We had already flown over the island [ Sakhalin ] . It is narrow at that point , the target was about to get away ... Then the ground [ controller ] gave the command : " Destroy the target ... ! " That was easy to say . But how ? With shells ? I had already expended 243 rounds . Ram it ? I had always thought of that as poor taste . Ramming is the last resort . Just in case , I had already completed my turn and was coming down on top of him . Then , I had an idea . I dropped below him about 2 @,@ 000 meters ... afterburners . Switched on the missiles and brought the nose up sharply . Success ! I have a lock on . 
 We shot down the plane legally ... Later we began to lie about small details : the plane was supposedly flying without running lights or strobe light , that tracer bullets were fired , or that I had radio contact with them on the emergency frequency of 121 @.@ 5 megahertz . 
 = = = = Soviet command hierarchy of shootdown = = = = 
 The Soviet real @-@ time military communication transcripts of the shootdown suggest the chain of command from the top general to Major Osipovich , the Su @-@ 15 interceptor pilot who shot down KAL 007 . In reverse order , they are : 
 Major Gennady Osipovich , 
 Captain Titovnin , Combat Control Center – Fighter Division 
 Lt. Colonel <unk> , Smirnykh Air Base Fighter Division Acting Chief of Staff , who confirmed the shootdown order to Titovnin 
 " Titovnin : You confirm the task ? 
 " <unk> : Yes . " 
 Lt. Colonel Gerasimenko , Acting Commander , 41st Fighter Regiment . 
 " Gerasimenko : ( to Kornukov ) Task received . Destroy target 60 – 65 with missile fire . Accept control of fighter from <unk> . " 
 General Anatoly Kornukov , Commander of Sokol Air Base – Sakhalin . 
 " Kornukov : ( to Gerasimenko ) I repeat the task , Fire the missiles , Fire on target 60 – 65 . Destroy target 60 – 65 ... Take control of the MiG 23 from <unk> , call sign 163 , call sign 163 He is behind the target at the moment . Destroy the target ! ... Carry out the task , Destroy it ! " 
 General Valery Kamensky , Commander of Far East Military District Air Defense Forces . 
 " Kornukov : ( To Kamensky ) ... simply destroy [ it ] even if it is over neutral waters ? Are the orders to destroy it over neutral waters ? Oh , well . " 
 Army General Ivan Moiseevich <unk> , Commander of the Far East Military District . 
 " Weapons were used , weapons authorized at the highest level . Ivan Moiseevich authorized it . Hello , hello . " , " Say again . " , " I cannot hear you clearly now . " , " He gave the order . Hello , hello , hello . " , " Yes , yes . " , " Ivan Moiseevich gave the order , <unk> . " , " Roger , <unk> . " , " Weapons were used at his order . " 
 = = = = Post @-@ attack flight = = = = 
 At the time of the attack , the plane had been cruising at an altitude of about 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . Tapes recovered from the airliner 's cockpit voice recorder indicate that the crew were unaware that they were off course and violating Soviet airspace . Immediately after missile detonation , the airliner began a 113 @-@ second arc upward because of a damaged crossover cable between the left inboard and right outboard elevators . 
 At 18 : 26 : 46 UTC , at the apex of the arc at altitude 38 @,@ 250 feet ( 11 @,@ 660 m ) , either the pilot was able to turn off the autopilot or the autopilot tripped and the plane began to descend to 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . From 18 : 27 : 01 until 18 : 27 : 09 , the flight crew reports to Tokyo Radio informing that KAL 007 to " descend to 10 @,@ 000 " [ feet ] . At 18 : 27 : 20 , ICAO graphing of Digital Flight Data Recorder tapes show that after a descent phase and a 10 second " nose @-@ up " , KAL 007 is now leveled out at pre @-@ missile detonation altitude of 35 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , forward acceleration is now back to pre @-@ missile detonation rate of zero acceleration , and air speed has returned to pre @-@ detonation velocity . 
 Yaw ( oscillations ) , begun at the time of missile detonation , continue decreasingly until the end of the minute 44 second portion of the tape . The Boeing did not break up , explode or plummet immediately after the attack ; it continued its gradual descent for four minutes , then leveled off at 16 @,@ 424 feet ( 18 : 30 – 18 : 31 UTC ) , rather than continue descending to 10 @,@ 000 as previously reported to Tokyo Radio , continuing at this altitude for almost five more minutes ( 18 : 35 UTC ) . 
 The last cockpit voice recorder entry occurred at 18 : 27 : 46 while in this phase of the descent . At 18 : 28 UTC , the aircraft was reported turning to the north . ICAO analysis concluded that the flight crew " retained limited control " of the aircraft . Finally , the aircraft began to descend in spirals over Moneron Island before coming down 2 @.@ 6 miles ( 4 @.@ 2 km ) , killing all 269 on board . The aircraft was last seen visually by Osipovich , " somehow descending slowly " over Moneron Island . The aircraft disappeared off long range military radar at Wakkanai , Japan at a height of 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) . 
 KAL 007 was probably attacked in international airspace , with a 1993 Russian report listing the location of the missile firing outside its territory at 46 ° 46 ′ 27 ″ N 141 ° 32 ′ 48 ″ E , although the intercepting pilot stated otherwise in a subsequent interview . Initial reports that the airliner had been forced to land on Sakhalin were soon proved false . One of these reports conveyed via phone by Orville Brockman , the Washington office spokesman of the Federal Aviation Administration to the press secretary of Larry McDonald was that the FAA in Tokyo had been informed by the Japanese Civil Aviation Bureau that " Japanese self @-@ defense force radar confirms that the Hokkaido radar followed Air Korea to a landing in Soviet territory on the island of <unk> and it is confirmed by the manifest that Congressman McDonald is on board " . 
 A Japanese fisherman aboard the 58th Chidori Maru later reported to the Japanese Maritime Safety Agency ( this report was cited by ICAO analysis ) that he had heard a plane at low altitude , but had not seen it . Then he heard " a loud sound followed by a bright flash of light on the horizon , then another dull sound and a less intense flash of light on the horizon " and smelled aviation fuel . 
 = = = = Soviet command response to post @-@ detonation flight = = = = 
 Though the interceptor pilot reported to ground control , " Target destroyed " , the Soviet command , from General on down , indicated surprise and consternation at KAL 007 's continued flight , and ability to regain its altitude and maneuver . This consternation continued through to KAL 007 's subsequent level flight at altitude 16 @,@ 424 ft ( 5 @,@ 006 m ) , and then , after almost 5 minutes , through its spiral descent over Moneron Island ( see Korean Air Lines Flight 007 transcripts from 18 : 26 UTC onwards : " Lt. Col. <unk> : Well , what is happening , what is the matter , who guided him in , he locked on , why didn ’ t he shoot it down ? " ) 
 = = = = Missile damage to plane = = = = 
 The following damage to the aircraft was determined by the ICAO from its analysis of the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder : 
 Hydraulics 
 KAL 007 had four redundant hydraulic systems of which systems one , two , and three were damaged or destroyed . There was no evidence of damage to system four . The hydraulics provided <unk> for all the primary flight controls ; all secondary flight controls except leading edge slats ; and landing gear retraction , extension , gear steering , and wheel braking . Each primary flight control axis received power from all four hydraulic systems . Upon missile detonation , the jumbo jet began to experience oscillations ( yawing ) as the dual channel yaw damper was damaged . <unk> would not have occurred if hydraulic systems one or two were fully operational . The result is that the control column did not thrust forward upon impact ( it should have done so as the plane was on autopilot ) to bring down the plane to its former altitude of 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . This failure of the autopilot to correct the rise in altitude indicates that hydraulic system number three , which operates the autopilot actuator , a system controlling the plane 's elevators , was damaged or out . KAL 007 's airspeed and acceleration rate both began to decrease as the plane began to climb . At twenty seconds after missile detonation a click was heard in the cabin , which is identified as the " automatic pilot disconnect warning " sound . Either the pilot or co @-@ pilot had disconnected the autopilot and was manually thrusting the control column forward in order to bring the plane lower . Though the autopilot had been turned off , manual mode did not begin functioning for another twenty seconds . This failure of the manual system to engage upon command indicates failure in hydraulic systems one and two . With wing flaps up , " control was reduced to the right inboard aileron and the innermost of spoiler section of each side " . 
 Left wing 
 Contrary to Major Osipovich 's statement in 1991 that he had taken off half of KAL 007 's left wing , ICAO analysis found that the wing was intact : " The interceptor pilot stated that the first missile hit near the tail , while the second missile took off half the left wing of the aircraft ... The interceptor 's pilot 's statement that the second missile took off half of the left wing was probably incorrect . The missiles were fired with a two @-@ second interval and would have detonated at an equal interval . The first detonated at 18 : 26 : 02 UTC . The last radio transmissions from KE007 to Tokyo Radio were between 18 : 26 : 57 and 18 : 27 : 15 UTC using HF [ high frequency ] . The HF 1 radio aerial of the aircraft was positioned in the left wing tip suggesting that the left wing tip was intact at this time . Also , the aircraft 's maneuvers after the attack did not indicate extensive damage to the left wing . " 
 Engines 
 The co @-@ pilot reported to Captain Chun twice during the flight after the missile 's detonation , " Engines normal , sir . " 
 Tail section 
 The first missile was radar @-@ controlled and proximity fuzed , and detonated 50 metres ( 160 ft ) behind the aircraft . Sending fragments forward , it either severed or unraveled the crossover cable from the left inboard elevator to the right elevator . This , with damage to one of the four hydraulic systems , caused KAL 007 to ascend from 35 @,@ 000 to 38 @,@ 250 feet ( 10 @,@ 670 to 11 @,@ 660 m ) , at which point the autopilot was disengaged . 
 Fuselage 
 Shrapnel from the proximity fuzed air @-@ to @-@ air missile that detonated 50 metres ( 160 ft ) behind the aircraft , punctured the fuselage and caused rapid decompression of the pressurized cabin . The interval of 11 seconds between the sound of missile detonation picked up by the cockpit voice recorder and the sound of the alarm sounding in the cockpit enabled ICAO analysts to determine that the total size of the ruptures to the pressurized fuselage was 1 @.@ 75 square feet ( 0 @.@ 163 m2 ) ) . 
 = = Search and rescue = = 
 As a result of Cold War tensions , the search and rescue operations of the Soviet Union were not coordinated with those of the United States , South Korea , and Japan . Consequently no information was shared , and each side endeavored to harass or obtain evidence to implicate the other . The flight data recorders were the key pieces of evidence sought by both factions , with the United States insisting that an independent observer from the ICAO be present on one of its search vessels in the event that they were found . International boundaries are not well defined on the open sea , leading to numerous confrontations between the large number of opposing naval ships that were assembled in the area . 
 = = = Soviet search and rescue mission to Moneron Island = = = 
 The Soviets did not acknowledge shooting down the aircraft until September 6 , 1983 . Eight days after the shootdown , Marshal of the Soviet Union and Chief of General Staff Nikolai <unk> denied knowledge of where KAL 007 had gone down , " We could not give the precise answer about the spot where it [ KAL 007 ] fell because we ourselves did not know the spot in the first place . " 
 Nine years later , the Russian Federation handed over transcripts of Soviet military communications that showed that at least two documented search and rescue ( SAR ) missions were ordered within a half @-@ hour of the attack to the last Soviet verified location of the descending jumbo jet , over Moneron Island : The first search was ordered from Smirnykh Air Base in central Sakhalin at 18 : 47 UTC , 9 minutes after KAL 007 had disappeared from Soviet radar screens , and brought rescue helicopters from <unk> Air base , the civilian and military airport at Yuzhno @-@ Sakhalinsk City in southern Sakhalin , and KGB boats to the area . 
 The second search was ordered 8 minutes later by the Deputy Commander of the Far Eastern Military District , Gen. <unk> , and involved civilian trawlers that were in the area around Moneron . " The border guards . What ships do we now have near Moneron Island , if they are civilians , send [ them ] there immediately . " Moneron is just 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) long and 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) wide , located 24 miles ( 39 km ) due west of Sakhalin Island at 46 ° 15 ′ N 141 ° 14 ′ E ; it is the only land mass in the whole Tatar Straits . 
 = = = Search for KAL 007 in international waters = = = 
 Immediately after the shootdown , South Korea , owner of the aircraft and therefore prime <unk> for jurisdiction , designated the United States and Japan as search and salvage agents , thereby making it illegal for the Soviet Union to salvage the aircraft , providing it was found outside Soviet territorial waters . If it did so , the United States would now be legally entitled to use force against the Soviets , if necessary , to prevent retrieval of any part of the plane . 
 On the same day as the shootdown , Rear Admiral William A. <unk> , Commander , Task Force 71 , and a skeleton staff , taken by helicopter from Japan , embarked in USS Badger ( stationed off Vladivostok at time of the flight ) on September 9 for further transfer to the destroyer USS Elliot to assume duties as Officer in Tactical Command ( OTC ) of the Search and Rescue ( SAR ) effort . Surface search began immediately and on into September 13 . U.S. underwater operations began on September 14 . On September 10 , 1983 , with no further hope of finding survivors , Task Force 71 's mission was reclassified from a " Search and Rescue " ( SAR ) operation to a " Search and Salvage " ( SAS ) . 
 On October 17 , Rear Admiral William <unk> was relieved of command of the Task Force and its Search and Salvage mission , and Rear Admiral Walter T. Piotti , Jr . , was placed in command . First to be searched was a 60 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 160 km2 ) " high probability " area . This was unsuccessful . On October 21 , Task Force 71 extended its search within coordinates encompassing , in an arc around the Soviet territorial boundaries north of Moneron Island , an area of 225 square miles ( 583 km2 ) , reaching to the west of Sakhalin Island . This was the " large probability " area . The search areas were outside the 12 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 22 km ) Soviet @-@ claimed territorial boundaries . The northwestern @-@ most point of the search touched the Soviet territorial boundary closest to the naval port of Nevelsk on Sakhalin . Nevelsk was 46 nautical miles ( 85 km ) from Moneron . This larger search was also unsuccessful . 
 The vessels used in the search , for the Soviet side as well as the Allied side ( U.S. , South Korea , Japan ) were both civilian trawlers , especially equipped for both the SAR and SAS operations , and various types of warships and support ships . The Soviet side also employed both civilian and military divers . The Soviet search , beginning on the day of the shootdown and continuing until November 6 , was confined to the 60 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 160 km2 ) " high probability " area in international waters , and within Soviet territorial waters to the north of Moneron Island . The area within Soviet territorial waters was off @-@ limits to the U.S. , South Korean , and Japanese boats . From September 3 to 29 , four ships from South Korea had joined in the search . 
 Rear Admiral Walter T. Piotti Jr , commander of Task Force 71 of 7th Fleet would summarize the U.S. and Allied , and then the Soviets ’ , Search and Salvage operations : 
 “ Not since the search for the hydrogen bomb lost off Palomares , Spain , has the U.S. Navy undertaken a search effort of the magnitude or import of the search for the wreckage of KAL Flight 007 . ” 
 “ Within six days of the downing of KAL 007 , the Soviets had deployed six ships to the general crash site area . Over the next 8 weeks of observation by U.S. naval units this number grew to a daily average of 19 Soviet naval , naval @-@ associated and commercial ( but undoubtedly naval @-@ subordinated ) ships in the Search and Salvage ( SAS ) area . The number of Soviet ships in the SAS area over this period ranged from a minimum of six to a maximum of thirty @-@ two and included at least forty @-@ eight different ships comprising forty different ship classes . ” 
 These missions met with interference by the Soviets , in violation of the 1972 Incident at Sea agreement , and included false flag and fake light signals , sending an armed boarding party to threaten to board a <unk> Japanese auxiliary vessel ( blocked by U.S. warship interposition ) , interfering with a helicopter coming off the USS Elliot ( Sept . 7 ) , attempted ramming of rigs used by the South Koreans in their quadrant search , hazardous maneuvering of the Gavril <unk> and near @-@ collision with the USS Callaghan ( September 15 , 18 ) , removing U.S. sonars , setting false <unk> in deep international waters , sending Backfire bombers armed with air @-@ to @-@ surface nuclear @-@ armed missiles to threaten U.S. naval units , criss @-@ crossing in front of U.S. combatant vessels ( October 26 ) , cutting and attempted cutting of moorings of Japanese auxiliary vessels , particularly the <unk> Maru III , and radar lock @-@ ons by a Soviet Kara @-@ class cruiser , the Petropavlovsk , and a Kashin @-@ class destroyer , the <unk> , targeting U.S. naval Ships and U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Munro . USS Towers , escorting USS <unk> , experienced all of the above interference and was involved in a near @-@ collision with the <unk> ( September 23 – 27 ) . 
 According to the ICAO : " The location of the main wreckage was not determined ... the approximate position was 46 ° 34 ′ N 141 ° 17 ′ E , which was in international waters . " This point is about 41 miles ( 66 km ) from Moneron Island , about 45 miles ( 72 km ) from the shore of Sakhalin and 33 miles ( 53 km ) from the point of attack . 
 Rear Admiral Walter T. Piotti Jr , commander of Task Force 71 of 7th Fleet , believed the search for KAL 007 in international waters to have been a search in the wrong place and assessed : 
 " Had TF [ task force ] 71 been permitted to search without restriction imposed by claimed territorial waters , the aircraft stood a good chance of having been found . No wreckage of KAL 007 was found . However , the operation established , with a 95 % or above confidence level , that the wreckage , or any significant portion of the aircraft , does not lie within the probability area outside the 12 nautical mile area claimed by the Soviets as their territorial limit . " 
 At a hearing of the ICAO on September 15 , 1983 , J. Lynn Helms , the head of the Federal Aviation Administration , stated : " The U.S.S.R. has refused to permit search and rescue units from other countries to enter Soviet territorial waters to search for the remains of KAL 007 . Moreover , the Soviet Union has blocked access to the likely crash site and has refused to cooperate with other interested parties , to ensure prompt recovery of all technical equipment , wreckage and other material . " 
 = = Human remains and artifacts = = 
 = = = Surface finds = = = 
 No body parts were recovered by the Soviet search team from the surface of the sea in their territorial waters , though they would later turn over clothes and shoes to a joint U.S. – Japanese delegation to Nevelsk on Sakhalin . On Monday , September 26 , 1983 , a delegation of seven Japanese and American officials arriving aboard the Japanese patrol boat Tsugaru , had met a six @-@ man Soviet delegation at the port of Nevelsk on Sakhalin Island . KGB Major General A. I. Romanenko , the Commander of the Sakhalin and Kuril Islands frontier guard , headed the Soviet delegation . Romanenko handed over to the Americans and Japanese , among other things , single and paired footwear . With footwear that the Japanese also retrieved , the total came to 213 men 's , women 's and children 's dress shoes , sandals , and sports shoes . The Soviets said that these were all that they had retrieved ; they had found floating in the water or washed up on the shores of Sakhalin and Moneron islands . 
 Family members of KAL 007 passengers later stated that these shoes were worn by their loved ones for the flight . Sonia <unk> had no difficulty recognizing the sneakers of her children , one of Christian age 14 and one of Lisi age 17 , by the intricate way her children laced them . Another mother says , " I recognized them just like that . You see , there are all kinds of inconspicuous marks which strangers do not notice . This is how I recognized them . My daughter loved to wear them . " 
 Another mother , Nan Oldham , identified her son John 's sneakers from a photo in Life magazine of 55 of the 213 shoes — apparently , a random array on display those first days at Chitose Air Force Base in Japan . " We saw photos of his shoes in a magazine , " says Oldham , " We followed up through KAL and a few weeks later , a package arrived . His shoes were inside : size 11 sneakers with cream white paint . " John Oldham had taken his seat in row 31 of KAL 007 wearing those cream white paint @-@ spattered sneakers . 
 Nothing was found by the joint U.S. – Japanese – South Korean search and rescue / salvage operations in international waters at the designated crash site or within the 225 @-@ square @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 770 km2 ) search area . 
 = = = Hokkaido finds = = = 
 Eight days after the shootdown , human remains appeared on the north shore of Hokkaido , Japan . Hokkaido is about 30 miles ( 48 km ) below the southern tip of Sakhalin across the Soya Strait ( the southern tip of Sakhalin is 35 miles ( 56 km ) from Moneron Island which lies to the west of Sakhalin ) . The ICAO concluded that these objects were carried from Soviet waters to the shores of Hokkaido by the southerly current west of Sakhalin Island . All currents of the Strait of Tartary relevant to Moneron Island flow to the north , except this southerly current between Moneron Island and Sakhalin Island . 
 These human remains , including body parts , tissues , and two partial torsos , totaled 13 . All were unidentifiable , but one partial torso was that of a Caucasian woman as indicated by auburn hair on a partial skull , and one partial body was of an Asian child ( with glass embedded ) . There was no luggage recovered . Of the non @-@ human remains that the Japanese recovered were various items including dentures , newspapers , seats , books , eight KAL paper cups , shoes , sandals , and sneakers , a camera case , a " please fasten seat belt " sign , an oxygen mask , a handbag , a bottle of dish washing fluid , several blouses , an identity card belonging to 25 @-@ year @-@ old passenger Mary Jane Hendrie of Sault Ste . Marie , Ontario , Canada , and the business card of passenger Kathy Brown @-@ Spier . These items generally come from the passenger cabin of an aircraft . None of the items found generally come from the cargo hold of a plane , such as suitcases , packing boxes , industrial machinery , instruments , and sports equipment . 
 = = = Soviet diver reports = = = 
 In 1991 , Russian newspaper Izvestia published a series of interviews with Soviet military personnel who had been involved in salvage operations to find and recover parts of the aircraft . After three days of searching using trawlers , side @-@ scan sonar , and diving bells , the aircraft wreckage was located by Soviet searchers at a depth of 174 metres ( 571 ft ) near Moneron Island . Since no human remains or luggage were found on the surface in the impact area , the divers expected to find the remains of passengers who had been trapped in the submerged wreckage of the aircraft on the seabed . When they visited the site two weeks after the shootdown , they found that the wreckage was in small pieces and no bodies : 
 " I had the idea that it would be intact . Well , perhaps a little banged up ... The divers would go inside the aircraft and see everything there was to see . In fact it was completely demolished , scattered about like kindling . The largest things we saw were the braces which are especially strong — they were about one and a half or two meters long and 50 – 60 centimeters wide . As for the rest — broken into tiny pieces ... " 
 According to Izvestia , the divers had only 10 encounters with passenger remains ( tissues and body parts ) in the debris area , including one partial torso . 
 <unk> ll submersible Captain Mikhail Igorevich <unk> ' diary : <unk> 10 October . Aircraft pieces , wing spars , pieces of aircraft skin , wiring , and clothing . But — no people . The impression is that all of this has been dragged here by a trawl rather than falling down from the sky ... ’ 
 Vyacheslav Popov : " I will confess that we felt great relief when we found out that there were no bodies at the bottom . Not only no bodies ; there were also no suitcases or large bags . I did not miss a single dive . I have quite a clear impression : The aircraft was filled with garbage , but there were really no people there . Why ? Usually when an aircraft crashes , even a small one ... As a rule there are suitcases and bags , or at least the handles of the suitcases . " 
 A number of civilian divers , whose first dive was on September 15 , two weeks after the shootdown , state that Soviet military divers and trawls had been at work before them : 
 Diver <unk> Popov : " As we learned then , before us the trawlers had done some ‘ work ’ in the designated quadrant . It is hard to understand what sense the military saw in the trawling operation . First drag everything haphazardly around the bottom by the trawls , and then send in the submersibles ? ... It is clear that things should have been done in the reverse order . ” 
 ICAO also interviewed a number of these divers for its 1993 report : " In addition to the scraps of metal , they observed personal items , such as clothing , documents and wallets . Although some evidence of human remains was noticed by the divers , they found no bodies . " 
 = = Political events = = 
 = = = Initial Soviet denial = = = 
 General Secretary Yuri Andropov , on the advice of Defense Minister Dmitriy Ustinov , but against advice of the Foreign Ministry , initially decided not to make any admission of downing the airliner , on the premise that no one would find out or be able to prove otherwise . Consequently the TASS news agency reported twelve hours after the shootdown only that an unidentified aircraft , flying without lights , had been intercepted by Soviet fighters after it violated Soviet airspace over Sakhalin . The aircraft had allegedly failed to respond to warnings and " continued its flight toward the Sea of Japan " . Some commentators believe that the inept manner in which the political events were handled by the Soviet government was affected by the failing health of Andropov , who was permanently hospitalised in late September or early October 1983 ( Andropov died the following February ) . 
 In a 2015 interview Igor <unk> , the senior Soviet news anchor , said that he was initially given a printed TASS Report to announce over the news on September 1 , which included an " open and honest " admission that the plane was shot down by mistake ( a wrong judgement call by the Far Eastern Air Defence Command ) . However , at the moment the opening credits of the Vremya ' evening news programme rolled in , an editor ran in and snatched the sheet of paper from his hand , handing him another TASS Report which was " completely opposite " to the first one and to the truth . 
 = = = U.S. reaction and further developments = = = 
 The shootdown happened at a very tense time in U.S.-Soviet relations during the Cold War . The U.S. adopted a strategy of releasing a substantial amount of hitherto highly classified intelligence information in order to exploit a major propaganda advantage over the U.S.S.R. Six hours after the plane was downed , the South Korean government issued an announcement that the plane had merely been forced to land abruptly by the Soviets , and that all passengers and crew were safe . 
 Secretary of State George P. Shultz held a press conference about the incident at 10 : 45 on September 1 , during which he divulged some details of intercepted Soviet communications and denounced the actions of the Soviet Union . 
 On September 5 , 1983 , President Reagan condemned the shooting down of the airplane as the " Korean airline massacre " , a " crime against humanity [ that ] must never be forgotten " and an " act of barbarism ... [ and ] inhuman brutality " . The following day , the U.S. ambassador to the UN Jeane Kirkpatrick delivered an audio @-@ visual presentation in the United Nations Security Council , using audio tapes of the Soviet pilots ' radio conversations and a map of Flight 007 's path in depicting its shooting down . Following this presentation , TASS acknowledged for the first time that the aircraft had indeed been shot down after warnings were ignored . The Soviets challenged many of the facts presented by the U.S. , and revealed the previously unknown presence of a USAF RC @-@ 135 surveillance aircraft whose path had crossed that of KAL 007 . 
 On September 7 , Japan and the United States jointly released a transcript of Soviet communications , intercepted by the listening post at Wakkanai , to an emergency session of the United Nations Security Council . Reagan issued a National Security Directive stating that the Soviets were not to be let off the hook , and initiating " a major diplomatic effort to keep international and domestic attention focused on the Soviet action " . The move was seen by the Soviet leadership as confirmation of the West 's bad intentions . 
 A high level U.S.-Soviet summit , the first in nearly a year , was scheduled for September 8 , 1983 , in Madrid . The Shultz – Gromyko meeting went ahead , but was overshadowed by the KAL 007 event . It ended acrimoniously , with Shultz stating : " Foreign Minister Gromyko 's response to me today was even more unsatisfactory than the response he gave in public yesterday . I find it totally unacceptable . " Reagan ordered the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) on September 15 , 1983 , to revoke the license of Aeroflot Soviet Airlines to operate flights to and from the United States . Aeroflot flights to North America were consequently available only through Canadian and Mexican cities , forcing the Soviet foreign minister to cancel his scheduled trip to the UN . Aeroflot service to the U.S. was not restored until April 29 , 1986 . 
 An emergency session of the ICAO was held in Montreal . On September 12 , 1983 , the Soviet Union used its veto to block a United Nations resolution condemning it for shooting down the aircraft . 
 Shortly after the Soviet Union shot down KAL 007 , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , operating the commercial airports around New York City , denied Soviet aircraft landing rights , in violation of the United Nations Charter that required the host nation to allow all member countries access to the UN . In reaction , TASS and some at the UN raised the question of whether the UN should move its headquarters from the United States . Charles Lichenstein , acting U.S. permanent representative to the UN under Ambassador Kirkpatrick , responded , " We will put no impediment in your way . The members of the U.S. mission to the United Nations will be down at the dockside waving you a fond farewell as you sail off into the sunset . " Administration officials were quick to announce that Lichenstein was speaking only for himself . 
 In the Cold War context of Operation RYAN , the Strategic Defence Initiative , Pershing II missile deployment in Europe , and the upcoming Exercise Able Archer , the Soviet Government perceived the incident with the South Korean airliner to be a portent of war . The Soviet hierarchy took the official line that KAL Flight 007 was on a spy mission , as it " flew deep into Soviet territory for several hundred kilometres , without responding to signals and disobeying the orders of interceptor fighter planes " . They claimed its purpose was to probe the air defences of highly sensitive Soviet military sites in the Kamchatka Peninsula and Sakhalin Island . The Soviet government expressed regret over the loss of life , but offered no apology and did not respond to demands for compensation . Instead , the USSR blamed the CIA for this " criminal , provocative act " . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 = = = NTSB = = = 
 Since the aircraft had departed from U.S. soil and U.S. nationals had died in the incident , the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) was legally required to investigate . On the morning of September 1 , the NTSB chief in Alaska , James Michelangelo , received an order from the NTSB in Washington at the behest of the State Department requiring all documents relating to the NTSB investigation to be sent to Washington , and notifying him that the State Department would now conduct the investigation . 
 The U.S. State Department , after closing the NTSB investigation on the grounds that it was not an accident , pursued an ICAO investigation instead . Commentators such as Johnson point out that this action was illegal , and that in deferring the investigation to the ICAO , the Reagan administration effectively precluded any politically or militarily sensitive information from being subpoenaed that might have embarrassed the administration or contradicted its version of events . Unlike the NTSB , ICAO can subpoena neither persons nor documents and is dependent on the governments involved — in this incident , the United States , the Soviet Union , Japan , and South Korea — to supply evidence voluntarily . 
 = = = Initial ICAO investigation ( 1983 ) = = = 
 ICAO had only one experience of investigation of an air disaster prior to the KAL 007 shootdown . This was the incident of February 21 , 1973 , when Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114 was shot down by Israeli F @-@ 4 jets over the Sinai Peninsula . ICAO convention required the state in whose territory the accident had taken place ( the U.S.S.R. ) to conduct an investigation together with the country of registration ( South Korea ) , the country whose air traffic control the aircraft was flying under ( Japan ) , as well as the aircraft 's manufacturer ( Boeing ) . 
 The ICAO investigation , led by <unk> <unk> , did not have the authority to compel the states involved to hand over evidence , instead having to rely on what they voluntarily submitted . Consequently , the investigation did not have access to sensitive evidence such as radar data , intercepts , ATC tapes , or the Flight Data Recorder ( FDR ) and Cockpit Voice Recorder ( CVR ) ( whose discovery the U.S.S.R. had kept secret ) . A number of simulations were conducted with the assistance of Boeing and Litton ( the manufacturer of the navigation system ) . 
 The ICAO released their report December 2 , 1983 , which concluded that the violation of Soviet airspace was accidental : One of two explanations for the aircraft 's deviation was that the autopilot had remained in HEADING hold instead of INS mode after departing Anchorage . They postulated that this inflight navigational error was caused by either the crew 's failure to select INS mode , or the inertial navigation 's not activating when selected , because the aircraft was already too far off track . It was determined that the crew did not notice this error or subsequently perform navigational checks , that would have revealed that the aircraft was diverging further and further from its assigned route . This was later deemed to be caused by a " lack of situational awareness and flight deck coordination " . 
 The report included a statement by the Soviet Government claiming " no remains of the victims , the instruments or their components or the flight recorders have so far been discovered " . This statement was subsequently shown to be untrue by Boris Yeltsin 's release in 1993 of a November 1983 memo from KGB head Viktor Chebrikov and Defence Minister Dmitriy Ustinov to Yuri Andropov . This memo stated " In the third decade of October this year the equipment in question ( the recorder of in @-@ flight parameters and the recorder of voice communications by the flight crew with ground air traffic surveillance stations and between themselves ) was brought aboard a search vessel and forwarded to Moscow by air for decoding and translation at the Air Force Scientific Research Institute . " The Soviet Government statement would further be contradicted by Soviet civilian divers who later recalled that they viewed wreckage of the aircraft on the bottom of sea for the first time on September 15 , two weeks after the plane had been shot down . 
 Following publication of the report , the ICAO adopted a resolution condemning the Soviet Union for the attack . Furthermore , the report led to a unanimous amendment in May 1984 – though not coming into force until October 1 , 1998 – to the Convention on International Civil Aviation that defined the use of force against civilian airliners in more detail . The amendment to section 3 ( d ) reads in part : " The contracting States recognize that every State must refrain from resorting to the use of weapons against civil aircraft in flight and that , in case of interception , the lives of persons on board and the safety of aircraft must not be endangered . " 
 = = = U.S. Air Force radar data = = = 
 It is customary for the Air Force to impound radar trackings involving possible litigation in cases of aviation accidents . In the civil litigation for damages , the United States Department of Justice explained that the tapes from the Air Force radar installation at King Salmon , Alaska pertinent to KAL 007 's flight in the Bethel area had been destroyed and could therefore not be supplied to the plaintiffs . At first Justice Department lawyer Jan Van <unk> stated that they were destroyed 15 days after the shootdown . Later , he said he had " misspoken " and changed the time of destruction to 30 hours after the event . A Pentagon spokesman concurred , saying that the tapes are re @-@ cycled for reuse from 24 – 30 hours afterwards ; the fate of KAL 007 was known inside this timeframe . 
 = = = Interim developments = = = 
 Hans Ephraimson @-@ Abt , whose daughter Alice Ephraimson @-@ Abt had died on the flight , chaired the American Association for Families of KAL 007 Victims . He single @-@ handedly pursued three U.S. administrations for answers about the flight , flying to Washington 250 times and meeting with 149 State Department officials . Following the dissolution of the U.S.S.R. , Ephraimson @-@ Abt persuaded U.S. Senators Ted Kennedy , Sam Nunn , Carl Levin , and Bill Bradley to write to the Soviet President , Mikhail Gorbachev requesting information about the flight . 
 Glasnost reforms in the same year brought about a relaxation of press censorship ; consequently reports started to appear in the Soviet press suggesting that the Soviet military knew the location of the wreckage and had possession of the flight data recorders . On December 10 , 1991 , Senator Jesse Helms of the Committee on Foreign Relations , wrote to Boris Yeltsin requesting information concerning the survival of passengers and crew of KAL 007 including the fate of Congressman Larry McDonald . 
 On June 17 , 1992 President Yeltsin revealed that after the 1991 failed coup attempt concerted attempts were made to locate Soviet @-@ era documents relating to KAL 007 . He mentioned the discovery of " a memorandum from <unk> to the Central Committee of the Communist Party , " stating that a tragedy had taken place and adding that there are documents " which would clarify the entire picture . " Yeltsin said the memo continued to say that " these documents are so well concealed that it is doubtful that our children will be able to find them . " On September 11 , 1992 , Yeltsin officially acknowledged the existence of the recorders , and promised to give the South Korean government a transcript of the flight recorder contents as found in KGB files . 
 In October 1992 , Hans Ephraimson @-@ Abt led a delegation of families and U.S. State Department officials to Moscow at the invitation of President Yeltsin . During a state ceremony at St. Catherine 's Hall in the Kremlin , the KAL family delegation was handed a portfolio containing partial transcripts of the KAL 007 cockpit voice recorder , translated into Russian , and documents of the Politburo pertaining to the tragedy . 
 In November 1992 , President Yeltsin handed the two recorder containers to Korean President Roh Tae @-@ Woo , but not the tapes themselves . The following month , the ICAO voted to reopen the KAL 007 investigation in order to take the newly released information into account . The tapes were handed to ICAO in Paris on January 8 , 1993 . Also handed over at the same time were tapes of the ground to air communications of the Soviet military . The tapes were transcribed by the Bureau d 'Enquêtes et d 'Analyses pour la sécurité de l 'Aviation Civile ( BEA ) in Paris in the presence of representatives from Japan , The Russian Federation , South Korea , and the United States . 
 A 1993 official enquiry by the Russian Federation absolved the Soviet hierarchy of blame , determining that the incident was a case of mistaken identity . On May 28 , 1993 , the ICAO presented its second report to the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations . 
 = = = = Soviet memoranda = = = = 
 In 1992 , Russian president Boris Yeltsin disclosed five top @-@ secret memos dating from a few weeks after the downing of KAL 007 in 1983 . The memos contained Soviet communications ( from KGB Chief Viktor Chebrikov and Defense Minister Dmitriy Ustinov to General Secretary Yury Andropov ) that indicated that they knew the location of KAL 007 's wreckage while they were simulating a search and harassing the American Navy ; they had found the sought @-@ after cockpit voice recorder on October 20 , 1983 ( 50 days after the incident ) , and had decided to keep this knowledge secret , the reason being that the tapes could not unequivocally support their firmly held view that KAL 007 's flight to Soviet territory was a deliberately planned intelligence mission . 
 The third memo acknowledges that analysis of the recorder tapes showed no evidence of the Soviet interceptor attempting to contact KAL 007 via radio nor any indication that the KAL 007 had been given warning shots . 
 " However in case the flight recorders shall become available to the western countries their data may be used for : Confirmation of no attempt by the intercepting aircraft to establish a radio contact with the intruder plane on 121 @.@ 5 MHz and no tracers warning shots in the last section of the flight " 
 That the Soviet search was simulated ( while knowing the wreckage lay elsewhere ) also is suggested by the article of Mikhail <unk> , Deputy Director of the Russian State Archives of Recent History , commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the airplane 's shootdown . Commenting on the Soviet and American searches : " Since the U.S.S.R. , for natural reasons , knew better where the Boeing had been downed ... it was very problematical to retrieve anything , especially as the U.S.S.R. was not particularly interested " . 
 = = = Revised ICAO report ( 1993 ) = = = 
 On November 18 , 1992 , Russian President Boris Yeltsin , in a goodwill gesture to South Korea during a visit to Seoul to ratify a new treaty , released both the flight data recorder ( FDR ) and cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) of KAL 007 . Initial South Korean research showed the FDR to be empty and the CVR to have an unintelligible copy . The Russians then released the recordings to the ICAO Secretary General . The ICAO report continued to support the initial assertion that KAL 007 accidentally flew in Soviet airspace , after listening to the flight crew 's conversations recorded by the CVR , and confirming that either the aircraft had flown on a constant magnetic heading instead of activating the INS and following its assigned waypoints , or , if it had activated the INS , it had been activated when the aircraft had already deviated beyond the 7 ½ <unk> mile Desired Track Envelope within which the waypoints would have been captured . 
 In addition , the Russian Federation released " Transcript of Communications . U.S.S.R. Air Defence Command Centres on Sakhalin Island " transcripts to ICAO — this new evidence triggered the revised ICAO report in 1993 " The Report of the Completion of the Fact Finding Investigation " , and is appended to it . These transcripts ( of two reels of tape , each containing multiple tracks ) are time specified , some to the second , of the communications between the various command posts and other military facilities on Sakhalin from the time of the initial orders for the shootdown and then through the stalking of KAL 007 by Maj. Osipovich in his Sukhoi 15 interceptor , the attack as seen and commented on by General Kornukov , Commander of Sokol Air Base , down the ranks to the Combat Controller Captain Titovnin . 
 The transcripts include the post @-@ attack flight of KAL 007 until it had reached Moneron Island , the descent of KAL 007 over Moneron , the initial Soviet SAR missions to Moneron , the futile search of the support interceptors for KAL 007 on the water , and ending with the debriefing of Osipovich on return to base . Some of the communications are the telephone conversations between superior officers and subordinates and involve commands to them , while other communications involve the recorded responses to what was then being viewed on radar tracking KAL 007 . These multi @-@ track communications from various command posts <unk> at the same minute and seconds as other command posts were communicating provide a " composite " picture of what was taking place . 
 The data from the CVR and the FDR revealed that the recordings broke off after the first minute and 44 seconds of KAL 007 's post missile detonation 12 minute flight . The remaining minutes of flight would be supplied by the Russia 1992 submission to ICAO of the real @-@ time Soviet military communication of the shootdown and aftermath . The fact that both recorder tapes stopped exactly at the same time 1 minute and 44 seconds after missile detonation ( 18 : 38 : 02 UTC ) without the tape portions for the more than 10 minutes of KAL 007 's post detonation flight before it descended below radar tracking ( 18 : 38 UTC ) finds no explanation in the ICAO analysis , " It could not be established why both flight recorders simultaneously ceased to operate 104 seconds after the attack . The power supply cables were fed to the rear of the aircraft in raceways on opposite sides of the fuselage until they came together behind the two recorders . " 
 = = = Passenger pain and suffering = = = 
 Passenger pain and suffering was an important factor in determining the level of compensation that was paid by Korean Air Lines . 
 Fragments from the proximity fused R @-@ 98 medium range air @-@ to @-@ air missile exploding 50 metres ( 160 ft ) behind the tail caused punctures to the pressurized passenger cabin . When one of the flight crew radioed Tokyo Area Control one minute and two seconds after missile detonation his breathing was already " accentuated " , indicating to ICAO analysts that he was speaking through the microphone located in his oxygen mask , " Korean Air 007 ah ... We are ... Rapid compressions . Descend to 10 @,@ 000 . " 
 Two expert witnesses testified at a Court of Appeals trial on the issue of pre @-@ death pain and suffering . Captain James McIntyre , an experienced Boeing 747 pilot and aircraft accident investigator , testified that shrapnel from the missile caused rapid decompression of the cabin , but left the passengers sufficient time to don oxygen masks : " McIntyre testified that , based upon his estimate of the extent of damage the aircraft sustained , all passengers survived the initial impact of the shrapnel from the missile explosion . In McIntyre 's expert opinion , at least 12 minutes elapsed between the impact of the shrapnel and the crash of the plane , and the passengers remained conscious throughout . " 
 = = Alternative hypotheses = = 
 Flight 007 has been the subject of ongoing controversy and has spawned a number of conspiracy theories . Many of these are based on the suppression of evidence such as the flight data recorders , unexplained details such as the role of a USAF RC @-@ 135 surveillance aircraft , the untimely destruction of the U.S. Air Force 's King Salmon radar data , or merely Cold War disinformation and propaganda . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The FAA temporarily closed Airway R @-@ 20 , the air corridor that Korean Air Flight 007 was meant to follow , on September 2 . Airlines fiercely resisted the closure of this popular route , the shortest of five corridors between Alaska and the Far East . It was therefore reopened on October 2 after safety and navigational aids were checked . 
 NATO had decided , under the impetus of the Reagan administration , to deploy Pershing II and cruise missiles in West Germany . This deployment would have placed missiles just 6 – 10 minutes striking distance from Moscow . Support for the deployment was wavering and it looked doubtful that it would be carried out . When the Soviet Union shot down Flight 007 , the U.S. was able to galvanize enough support at home and abroad to enable the deployment to go ahead . 
 The unprecedented disclosure of the communications intercepted by the United States and Japan revealed a considerable amount of information about their intelligence systems and capabilities . National Security Agency director Lincoln D. <unk> commented : " ... as a result of the Korean Air Lines affair , you have already heard more about my business in the past two weeks than I would desire ... For the most part this has not been a matter of unwelcome leaks . It is the result of a conscious , responsible decision to address an otherwise unbelievable horror . " Changes that the Soviets subsequently made to their codes and frequencies reduced the effectiveness of this monitoring by 60 % . 
 The U.S. KAL 007 Victims ' Association , under the leadership of Hans Ephraimson @-@ Abt , successfully lobbied U.S. Congress and the airline industry to accept an agreement that would ensure that future victims of airline incidents would be compensated quickly and fairly by increasing compensation and lowering the burden of proof of airliner misconduct . This legislation has had far reaching effects for the victims of subsequent aircraft disasters . 
 The U.S. decided to utilize military radars to extend air traffic control radar coverage from 200 to 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 320 to 1 @,@ 930 km ) out from Anchorage . The FAA also established a secondary radar system ( <unk> @-@ 5 ) on Saint Paul Island . In 1986 , the United States , Japan and the Soviet Union set up a joint air traffic control system to monitor aircraft over the North Pacific , thereby giving the Soviet Union formal responsibility to monitor civilian air traffic , and setting up direct communication links between the controllers of the three countries . 
 President Reagan announced on September 16 , 1983 , that the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) would be made available for civilian use , free of charge , once completed in order to avert similar navigational errors in future . Furthermore , the interface of the autopilot used on large airliners was modified to make it more obvious whether it is operating in HEADING mode or INS mode . 
 Alvin Snyder , the director of worldwide television for the United States Information Agency , was the producer of the video shown to the U.N. Security Council on September 6 , 1983 . In an article in the Washington Post on September 1 , 1996 , he stated that he had been given only limited access to the transcripts of the Soviet communication when he produced the video in 1983 . When he received full insight into the Soviet transmissions in 1993 , he says he realised that : " The Russians ( sic ) believed the plane to be an RC @-@ 135 reconnaissance plane " and that " Osipovich ( the Soviet fighter pilot ) could not identify the plane " and " That he fired warning cannon shots and tipped his wings , an international signal to force the plane to land " . Some of these statements were contradicted by the pilot in an interview with The New York Times , in which he confirmed that he did fire warning shots , but that they would not have been visible as they were not tracers . 
 In a March 15 , 2001 interview , Valery Kamensky , then Commander of the Soviet Far East Military District Air Defense Force and direct superior to Gen. Kornukov , opined that such a shootdown of a civilian passenger plane could not happen again in view of the changing political conditions and alliances . In this interview , Kamensky stated , “ It is still a mystery what happened to the bodies of the crew and passengers on the plane . According to one theory , right after the rocket ’ s detonation , the nose and tail section of the jumbo fell off and the mid fuselage became a sort of wind tunnel so the people were swept through it and scattered over the surface of the ocean . Yet in this case , some of the bodies were to have been found during the search operations in the area . The question of what actually happened to the people has not been given a distinct answer . ” 
 On September 1 , 2003 , commenting in a 20th anniversary of the shootdown article in RIA Novosti , Mikhail <unk> , Deputy Director of the Russian State Archives of Recent History disclosed that the Soviet naval forces in the search for KAL 007 in international waters , already " knew better where [ it ] had been downed " while conducting their search , and that nothing was found " especially as the USSR was not particularly interested . " 
 In 2015 Japan ’ s Foreign Ministry declassified diplomatic documents revealed that two months after the catastrophe , a high @-@ ranking official of the US administration confidentially informed Japan ’ s diplomats that Soviet Union had mistaken the aircraft with an American reconnaissance plane . 
 Korean Air still flies from New York JFK International Airport to Seoul . However , the flight no longer stops at Anchorage as well as flying to Gimpo International Airport as it now flies to Incheon International Airport . Flight number 007 has been retired since , using flight numbers for two separate flights as 82 and 86 . The separate flights now use an Airbus A380 and a Boeing 747 @-@ 8 . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Two television movies were produced about the incident ; both films were produced before the fall of the Soviet Union allowed access to archives : 
 Shootdown ( 1988 ) , starring Angela Lansbury , John Cullum , and Kyle Secor , was based on the book of the same title by R.W. Johnson , about the efforts of Nan Moore ( Lansbury ) , the mother of a passenger , to get answers from the U.S. and Soviet governments . 
 The British Granada Television documentary drama Coded Hostile , screened on September 7 , 1989 , detailed the U.S. military and governmental investigation , highlighting the likely confusion of Flight 007 with the USAF RC @-@ 135 in the context of routine US SIGINT / <unk> missions in the area . Written by Brian Phelan and directed by David Darlow , it starred Michael Murphy , Michael Moriarty , and Chris Sarandon . It was screened by HBO in the United States under the title Tailspin – Behind the Korean Airliner Tragedy on August 20 , 1989 . An updated version of Coded Hostile was screened in the UK on August 31 , 1993 , incorporating details of the 1992 UN investigation . 
 Lee Greenwood has stated that he wrote the song " God Bless the USA " in response to his feelings about the shooting down of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 . " The song just about wrote itself , " Greenwood said in the book God Bless the USA ( by Greenwood and Gwen <unk> ) . " The words seemed to flow naturally from the music , and came out with total honesty . They were an expression of my feelings of pride . To me , America seemed just like a rookery , a place where we have a chance to grow , unmolested and free . " 
 KGO @-@ TV in San Francisco aired an advertisement in November 1983 for an upcoming news special report titled " Green Street Reds " , about suspicious activities at the Soviet Consulate . In the ad , they depict Santa Claus and all his reindeer being blown out of the sky by a Soviet missile . The advertisement was produced by Davis , Johnson , Mogul & <unk> . Angry parents complained to KGO about the poor impression the image of Santa 's death made upon young children . 
 The incident is used as a plot point in the episode " Brandy Station " of Deutschland 83 . 
 The Gary Moore song " Murder in the Skies " from the album Victims of the Future was written about this incident . 
 = = Maps = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Randy ( 2015 ) . The Cold War , KAL @-@ 007 & Communism : Intelligence Secrets Revealed . USA : Amazon 's CreateSpace . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Brun , Michel ( 1995 ) . Incident at Sakhalin : The True mission of KAL Flight 007 . New York , London : Four Walls Eight Windows . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 054 @-@ 1 . 
 Ball , Desmond ( 1993 ) . Signals Intelligence in the Post @-@ cold War Era : Developments in the Asia @-@ Pacific Region . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies . ISBN 981 @-@ <unk> @-@ 37 @-@ X. 
 Blacker , Coit D. ( 1984 ) . International arms control : issues and agreements . Stanford Arms Control Group . ISBN 0 @-@ 8047 @-@ 1211 @-@ 5 . 
 Report of the completion of the fact finding investigation regarding the shooting down of Korean Airlines Boeing 747 ( Flight KE007 ) On 31 August 1983 . International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) . 1993 . 
 Dallin , Alexander ( 1985 ) . Black Box : KAL 007 and the Superpowers . University of California Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Daniloff , Nicholas ( 2008 ) . Of Spies and Spokesmen . University of Missouri Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ 1804 @-@ 0 . 
 Degani , Asaf ( 2004 ) . Taming HAL : Designing <unk> Beyond 2001 . St. Martin ’ s Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 <unk> , James ; Allardyce , Robert ( 1994 ) . Desired Track . The Tragic Flight of KAL Flight 007 . American Vision Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 01 @-@ 7 . 
 Hersh , Seymour M. ( 1986 ) . The Target is Destroyed . Random House New York . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Johnson , Richard William ( 1986 ) . Shootdown : Flight 007 and the American Connection . Viking . ISBN 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Kilroy , Christopher . " Accident Database – Accident Synopsis – <unk> " . <unk> 
 Kleiner , Jürgen ( 2001 ) . Korea , a Century of Change . World Scientific . ISBN 981 @-@ 02 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Knight , Peter ( 2003 ) . Conspiracy Theories in American History . ABC @-@ <unk> p . 382 . ISBN 1 @-@ 57607 @-@ 812 @-@ 4 . 
 Luck , Edward C. ( 1999 ) . Mixed Messages : American Politics and International Organization , 1919 – 1999 . Brookings Institution Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8157 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , Michael ( 2008 ) . International Air Law and ICAO . Eleven International Publishing . ISBN 90 @-@ <unk> @-@ 54 @-@ 2 . 
 McCormick , Barnes Warnock ; et al . ( 2003 ) . Aircraft Accident Reconstruction and Litigation . Lawyers & Judges Publishing Company . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 61 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , J.G. ( 2005 ) . International Dispute Settlement . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Norris , Guy ; Wagner , Mark ( 1998 ) . Boeing . <unk> , WI : <unk> International . ISBN 0 @-@ 7603 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , Don ( 1998 ) . From the Cold War to a New Era : The United States and the Soviet Union , 1983 – 1991 . JHU Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Pearson , David Eric ( 1987 ) . KAL 007 : The Cover @-@ up . N.Y. : Summit Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Pry , Peter Vincent ( 1999 ) . War Scare : Russia and America on the Nuclear Brink . Greenwood Publishing Group . ISBN 0 @-@ 275 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Jeffrey T. ( 1997 ) . A Century of Spies . Oxford University Press US. p . 385 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Rosenthal , Uriel and Michael T. Charles , Paul ' t Hart ( 1989 ) . Coping with Crises . C.C. Thomas . ISBN 0 @-@ 398 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Ross , Robert S. and Robert Gilpin , Institute of Southeast Asian Studies ( 1995 ) . East Asia in Transition : Toward a New Regional Order . M.E. Sharpe . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 561 @-@ 2 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Shultz , George Pratt ( 1993 ) . Turmoil and Triumph : My Years as Secretary of State . Scribner 's . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Winkler , David F. ( June 2000 ) . Cold War at Sea : High @-@ seas Confrontation Between the United States and the Soviet Union . U.S. Naval Institute Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 55750 @-@ 955 @-@ 7 . Retrieved January 13 , 2009 . 
 Young , Marilyn J ; <unk> , Michael K. ( 1988 ) . Flights of Fancy , Flight of Doom : KAL 007 and Soviet @-@ American Rhetoric . University Press of America . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 Allardyce , Robert W ; <unk> , James ( 2007 ) . " Flight <unk> : The Anatomy of a Cover @-@ up " . Airways Magazine . Retrieved March 7 , 2009 . 
 Andrew , Christopher ( July 1994 ) . " KGB Foreign Intelligence from Brezhnev to the Coup " . Intelligence and National Security ( Routledge ) 8 ( 3 ) : 52 – 67 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4515 @-@ X. Retrieved March 3 , 2008 . 
 Joint Committee on Slavic Studies ( U.S. ) , American Council of Learned Societies , Social Science Research Council ( U.S. ) ( 1986 ) . " The Current digest of the Soviet press " . The Current Digest of the Soviet Press ( American Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies ) . Retrieved January 26 , 2009 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Charles , Dan ( March 9 , 1991 ) . " Cover @-@ up continues over downed Korean plane " . New Scientist ( Washington , DC : IPC Magazines ) 1759 . Retrieved January 13 , 2009 . 
 <unk> , William R ; Ed Magnuson ( September 12 , 1983 ) . " Atrocity In the Skies " . TIME . Retrieved January 10 , 2009 . 
 <unk> , Andrey ( 1992 ) . " The Mystery of the KAL @-@ 007 ( English translation ) " . Izvestia . 
 Walter Isaacson ; Johanna McGeary ; Erik <unk> ( September 26 , 1983 ) . " Salvaging the Remains " . TIME . Retrieved February 11 , 2009 . 
 Maier , Timothy W. ( April 16 , 2001 ) . " KAL 007 Mystery " . Insight Magazine . Retrieved February 17 , 2007 . 
 Oberg , James ( October 1993 ) . " KAL 007 : The Real Story " . American Spectator . Archived from the original on December 11 , 2008 . Retrieved January 19 , 2009 . 
 Pearson , David ; Keppel , John ( August 17 , 1985 ) . " New Pieces in the Puzzle of Flight 007 : Journey into Doubt " . The Nation 421 . Retrieved February 17 , 2007 . 
 " The Truth and Lies about the South Korean Airliner " . Sputnik : A Digest of the Soviet Press ( Novosti Printing House ) . December 1983 . 
 Lee , Robert W. ( September 10 , 1991 ) . " KAL 007 Remembered : The Questions Remain Unanswered " . The New American ( John Birch Society ) . Retrieved February 2 , 2009 . 
 " Backing Down on Flight 007 " . TIME . December 3 , 1984 . Retrieved February 2 , 2009 . 
 = = = Online sources = = = 
 " ASN Aircraft Accident Boeing 747 @-@ <unk> <unk> Sakhalin Okhotsk Sea " . Aviation Safety Database . Retrieved January 22 , 2009 . 
 Degani , Asaf ( September 18 , 2001 ) . " Korean Air Lines Flight 007 : Lessons From the Past and Insights for the Future " ( PDF ) . NASA Ames Research Center : NASA . Retrieved January 10 , 2009 . This article was adapted from a book chapter , entitled " The Crash of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 , " which appeared in Degani , A. ( 2004 ) . Taming HAL : Designing <unk> Beyond 2001 . New York : St. Martin ’ s Press ( Palgrave @-@ Macmillan ) 
 Ephraimson , Hans ( January 20 , 1996 ) . " Korean <unk> <unk> Flight 007 Issues " . The New York Times . Letters to the Editor . Retrieved January 13 , 2009 . 
 Fischer , Benjamin B. ( March 17 , 2007 ) . " A Cold War Conundrum : The 1983 Soviet War Scare " . Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved January 10 , 2009 . 
 Gordon , Michael R. ( December 9 , 1996 ) . " Ex @-@ Soviet Pilot Still <unk> KAL 007 Was Spying " . The New York Times . Retrieved January 13 , 2009 . 
 <unk> , Bernard ( September 12 , 1983 ) . " A New US Transcript Indicates Soviet Pilot Fired ' Cannon Bursts ' " . The New York Times . Retrieved September 1 , 2008 . 
 <unk> , Gennady A ; Shevchenko , George V ( January 12 , 1999 ) . " In situ observations of Tsushima and West Sakhalin currents near La Perouse ( Soya ) Strait " ( PDF ) . North Pacific Marine Science Organization . Retrieved January 8 , 2009 . 
 Pellerin , Cheryl ( February 3 , 2006 ) . " United States Updates Global Positioning System Technology : New GPS satellite ushers in a range of future improvements " . United States Government . Retrieved January 6 , 2009 . 
 Taubman , Philip ( September 17 , 1987 ) . " Khabarovsk Journal ; Keeping the Air Lanes Free : Lessons of a Horror " . New York Times . Retrieved January 8 , 2009 . 
 Wilkes , Donald E Jr ( September 3 , 2003 ) , " The Death Flight of Larry McDonald " , <unk> Magazine , p . 7 . 
 Witkin , Richard ( May 19 , 1991 ) . " Soviet Pilot <unk> Downed Korean Jet Was Spy Plane " . The New York Times . Retrieved January 25 , 2009 . 
 = Something , Something , Something , Dark Side = 
 " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " is a direct @-@ to @-@ video special of the animated series Family Guy which later served as the 20th episode of the show 's eighth season and is part of the series ' Star Wars parody trilogy Laugh It Up , Fuzzball . It originally was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on December 22 , 2009 , and later aired on Fox in the United States on May 23 , 2010 . The episode is a retelling and parody of the film The Empire Strikes Back , recasting characters from Family Guy into roles from the film . 
 The episode was written by Kirker Butler and directed by Dominic Polcino . It received high praise from critics for its accurate depiction of the original film , as well as its inclusion of many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 13 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jon Benjamin , John Bunnell , James Caan , Jackson Douglas , Joe Flaherty , James Greene , Phil LaMarr , Kevin Michael Richardson , George Rogan and James Woods , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the Griffin family is watching television , the power suddenly goes out , leading Peter to retell the story of The Empire Strikes Back . 
 After the " opening crawl " an Imperial Star Destroyer deploys a series of probe droids in search of the Rebel Alliance . One of the probe droids ( Joe ) lands on the ice planet Hoth , where the Rebels have set up a base . Rebel commander Luke Skywalker ( Chris ) is patrolling when he is attacked by a large <unk> ( Cookie Monster ) and taken back to its lair . At the base , Han Solo ( Peter ) announces his intention to leave the Rebellion to Princess Leia ( Lois ) and Carlist <unk> ( Dr. Hartman ) , with Leia objecting to his decision , however she denies it when confronted , saying she would rather kiss George Takei . When he finds out that Luke has not yet returned , Han sets out on his " <unk> " to find him . Luke escapes the <unk> lair and has a vision of his late mentor Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi ( Herbert ) , who tells him to go to the Dagobah system to learn the ways of the Force from Jedi Master Yoda , after offering him a bowl of Zima soup . Han quickly locates Luke , and the two are rescued soon after . 
 Soon after , the Empire discovers the Rebel base , and Darth Vader ( Stewie ) orders an attack . The Imperial fleet exits hyperspace too early , giving the Rebels time to evacuate the base while Luke leads his squadron of <unk> to hold off the Empire 's battalion of Imperial Walkers . Imperial stormtroopers break into the base , forcing Han to escape in the Millennium Falcon with Leia , C @-@ 3PO ( Quagmire ) and Chewbacca ( Brian ) , while Luke escapes in his X @-@ wing with R2 @-@ D2 ( Cleveland ) , stopping to see R2 's niece 's violin recital . The Millennium Falcon enters an asteroid field and Han decides to dock inside a cave to repair the ship . They flee when they discover they have actually landed in the belly of a space slug ( Meg ) . Meanwhile , Luke crash @-@ lands in the swamps of Dagobah and finds Yoda ( Carl ) amid the foggy landscape . Yoda trains Luke , guiding him through a series of training exercises , including watching " sweet @-@ ass DVD releases " , and a training montage that parodies Rocky IV . 
 Darth Vader is ordered by the Emperor ( Carter ) to capture Luke and turn him to the dark side of the Force . Vader recruits bounty hunters to track down and capture Luke 's friends , intending to use them as bait to trap Luke , including Raggedy Andy , whom he orders to leave . With the Millennium Falcon 's hyperdrive broken , Han and company escape by hiding amongst a field of disposed trash , but are tracked by Boba Fett ( Ernie the Giant Chicken ) , after hitting a " space bum " collecting some of the garbage . Luke has a premonition that his friends are in danger and leaves Dagobah to save them , although he has not finished his Jedi training . Yoda initially doesn 't want him to go , but encourages it after Luke suggests Yoda fight Vader himself . 
 Han and the others go to Cloud City on the planet Bespin to obtain help from Han 's friend Lando Calrissian ( Mort ) , " the only black guy in the galaxy " , only to be turned over to Darth Vader . Han willingly reveals the location of Luke and the Rebel base but is tortured by being forced to listen to Paula Cole 's " Where Have All the Cowboys Gone ? " , as punishment for clogging a toilet on the 16th floor of Cloud City , which forced Vader to use the " little pig people 's " bathroom . Han is used to test a carbon freezing chamber Vader intends to use on Luke to take him to the Emperor . Leia professes her love to Han , but Han tells her to fuck off and is then frozen in carbonite for posterity . Lando later double @-@ crosses the Empire , freeing Leia , Chewbacca and C @-@ 3PO , motivating the guards with a pizza party . Despite R2 @-@ D2 having sex with the combination lock , and subsequently being discovered by her husband , to get the door open , they are too late to stop Boba Fett from flying off with Han . Luke arrives at Cloud City and , after being briefly interrupted by Ryan Seacrest on American Idol , engages Vader in a lightsaber duel . Vader cuts off Luke 's right hand . With Luke cornered and defenseless , Vader goads Luke to join the dark side , revealing that he is his father . Luke casts himself into an air shaft and , after discovering that a worker has shoved his severed hand down his pants , ends up hanging on an antenna beneath the city , calling out to Ben , Leia , and Tom Selleck . Leia senses Luke 's call from within the Millennium Falcon and has him rescued . On board a <unk> @-@ B frigate , Luke is fitted with an artificial hand , but told to practice masturbating with a hot dog first , while Lando , dressed in Han 's clothes , sets off with Chewbacca on the Millennium Falcon to rescue Han . Before the story ends , Luke is angry because of the way the story ends . Then he receives a letter from Doc Brown , a reference to the ending of Back to the Future Part II . 
 In the Griffins ' home , the power returns as Peter finishes his story , only to get into another argument with Chris over Robot Chicken . Chris vows to not let Peter get his goat this time , but eventually storms off when Peter brings up Without a Paddle . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by series regular Kirker Butler , before the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , and before his leave from the series in order to become co @-@ executive producer of the Family Guy spinoff series The Cleveland Show . Butler wrote the first draft of the episode in four weeks , under the guidance of series creator Seth MacFarlane . The episode was directed by Dominic Polcino , who had previously directed " Blue Harvest " . This was the last episode in the series to use hand @-@ drawn animatics , before transitioning to computer @-@ designed animatics . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Jon Benjamin reprised his role as Carl , who portrays Yoda , and Sheriff John Bunnell made his second appearance in the series , the first being in the eighth season episode " Quagmire 's Baby " . Actor James Woods , in his third appearance in the series , as an exaggerated version of himself , guest starred . Actors James Caan , Jackson Douglas and Joe Flaherty , along with voice actors James Greene , Phil LaMarr , Kevin Michael Richardson and George Rogan made appearances . Recurring guest voice actors Johnny Brennan , Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , Wally Wingert , writers Kirker Butler , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , John Viener , writer and showrunner Mark Hentemann , and producer Chris Sheridan also made minor appearances in the episode . Live @-@ action clips of actor Dolph Lundgren , actress Brigitte Nielsen and actor Michael Pataki from the film Rocky IV , and actor Tom Selleck from the film Her Alibi were also used in multiple sequences throughout the episode . 
 The DVD release of " Blue Harvest " on January 15 , 2008 , contained an easter egg of a brief read through of bits from " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " , as well as a teaser trailer for the episode as another easter egg . 
 The title of this episode is a reference to a specific line from the season five episode " Barely Legal " , which was used in a cutaway relating to Star Wars . The line is an inside joke relating to the Emperor " figuring out the formula for great dialogue " for Star Wars . While the Emperor talks to a kneeling Darth Vader , he says " Something , something , something , dark side . Something , something , something , complete " . " Barely Legal " was written by Kirker Butler , who also wrote this episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 As the episode opens with a shot of the Griffin family , they are seen sitting in front of the television watching a parody of several Aaron Sorkin shows , including Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , entitled The Kitchen . Once the scene ends , the power unexpectedly goes out , to which Stewie responds by asking " What are we in , Iraq ? " Reminiscent of the previous Star Wars @-@ inspired episode , " Blue Harvest " , Meg insists her father tell another story about Star Wars . Peter then begins to retell the film Black Snake Moan before being interrupted by Stewie and Chris . 
 In the same fashion as the original Star Wars films , the story opens with a large , yellow crawl of text , with the text in this variation calling out 20th Century Fox for their lack of foresight in terms of merchandising rights , thus allowing George Lucas and Lucasfilm to keep all the rights to every film in the Star Wars franchise . The text then addresses the stockholders of 20th Century Fox , and cites Family Guy 's two cancellations as another example of the company 's short @-@ sighted decisions , and spending budget money in a useless manner . As the Imperial Fleet approaches , a Star Destroyer deploys Elroy Jetson , a character from the Hanna @-@ Barbera animated sitcom The Jetsons , along with a series of probe droids . Elroy Jetson proceeds to the Little Dipper School , in imitation of the original intro to The Jetsons . One of the probe droids , portrayed by Joe Swanson , then lands in the snow near Luke Skywalker . Luke mistakes the droid for a meteorite and approaches the device , before being attacked by a snow beast , which looks like Cookie Monster from PBS ' Sesame Street . The character had previously appeared in the fourth season episode " Model <unk> " as a " cookie addict " . 
 Before leaving , Han Solo runs into Princess Leia , who insists on Han staying with her . <unk> to Leia for having to leave her , Han gives her his e @-@ mail address , which is hosted by the nearly defunct company CompuServe at " <unk> @ <unk> " Han Solo then questions why Leia wants him to stay , and suggests that she is afraid that she will not get a " goodbye kiss " before he leaves . Leia then mulls over the thought , and tells him that she would rather kiss Star Trek actor George Takei . Abruptly entering , C @-@ 3PO and R2 @-@ D2 alert Han Solo of Luke Skywalker 's disappearance . Han goes out to look for Luke on his " <unk> " , which has the body of a <unk> , and the head of the late actor Don Knotts . Once Han locates Luke , the late comedian Rodney Dangerfield appears , to which Han responds , " There are way too many elderly comedians out here in the snow . " Before being rescued , Han first appears in a 1980s commercial for the chewing gum Juicy Fruit , with the original audio from the commercial and Juicy Fruit 's current logo . The sequence was originally planned for the fifth season episode " Road to Rupert " , with Stewie and Brian taking the place of Peter . 
 Continuing on their approach to the Hoth system , the Imperial Fleet passes by a mailbox with the surname ' Nimoy ' on it . Darth Vader , as portrayed by Stewie , hits the mailbox with a baseball bat as the ship passes . As the Imperial Walkers , or " robot camels " , begin to approach the rebels , one of the rebels looks through his binoculars at the group of robots and spots one of the Walkers wearing Crocs , a type of shoe reminiscent of the wooden clog but made out of plastic . When Luke 's aircraft is shot down during the battle , he contacts OnStar , a company that provides vehicle security . As Han decides to outrun a series of TIE fighters , Sheriff John Bunnell then begins narrating the chase , in a parody of World 's Wildest Police Videos , which Bunnell hosted from 1998 to 2002 . This is Family Guy 's second reference to the show , as well as Bunnell 's second appearance in the series . His first appearance was in " Quagmire 's Baby " , which first aired shortly before the DVD release of " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " . Han then seemingly goes through an asteroid field , much to Leia 's chagrin . Han responds by stating that it is better than going through the nearby strawberry field , with The Beatles members John Lennon , Paul McCartney , Ringo Starr and George Harrison then appearing . The other Beatles are then seen teasing Paul about Heather Mills having one leg , calling her " Peg " and " Eileen " . After much maneuvering , Han is able to escape the TIE fighters , eventually parking in a handicapped zone , citing vertigo as his medical condition . This leads Leia to question Han 's decision making , and causes Han to film a " video confession " similar to those on the MTV reality show The Real World . 
 While departing Hoth , Luke meets Flash Gordon , the title character to the 1954 television series that inspired Lucas to create Star Wars . When Luke reaches the Dagobah system , he crash lands into a swamp , prompting Allstate spokesperson and actor Dennis Haysbert to appear , in a parody of his commercials . Haysbert was reportedly approached to voice himself , but rejected the offer for unspecified reasons . Later getting out of the crashed ship , R2 @-@ D2 is eaten and spat back out by a swamp monster , prompting R2 to question what else is located beneath the swamp water . The Legion of Doom lair then rises from the swamp , which angers Luke . After Luke meets him , Yoda , as portrayed by Carl , reveals that the secret to mastering the Force is to " check out sweet @-@ ass DVD releases " , and goes on to reference several films , including National Lampoon 's Van Wilder and Iron Man , as well as Iron Man 's director Jon Favreau . A montage depicts Luke performing various athletic feats under Yoda 's guidance , interlaced with clips of Dolph Lundgren as Ivan Drago from the 1985 film Rocky IV . Going on to test Luke 's knowledge of various films , Yoda begins to ask the best and worst " naked chick " scenes , with Luke responding by citing the best as Rebecca De Mornay in Risky Business , and the worst as Kathy Bates in About Schmidt . Yoda then asks about the best scene in the 1985 film Teen Wolf and Luke picks the scene in which Michael J. Fox in wolf make @-@ up opens the bathroom door to see his father is also a werewolf . Yoda says Luke is correct , but that he also would have accepted the end celebration in which an extra allegedly exposes himself . 
 Once the Emperor , portrayed by Carter Pewterschmidt , contacts Darth Vader , he first begins by telling him that he is getting rid of all his CDs because he is " downloading all his music to his new iPod " , then proceeds to list several albums , including singer Natalie Merchant 's 1995 album <unk> , Alanis Morissette 's album Jagged Little Pill , and finally Richard Marx 's single " Hold On to the Nights " , the last of which Darth Vader excitedly agrees to take . Calling upon various bounty hunters , Darth Vader reviews a lineup of auditioning hunters , including Dog the Bounty Hunter , IG @-@ 88 , <unk> , <unk> , Boba Fett as portrayed by the Giant Chicken , and finally Raggedy Andy , who Vader angrily dismisses . During a confrontation with Han , Darth Vader deflects lasers using his gloves and sings the theme song from the Wonder Woman television series . Once Han Solo is captured by Darth Vader , he is tortured into confessing his clogging one of the bathrooms on Cloud City . Vader then forces Han to listen to Paula Cole 's " Where Have All the Cowboys Gone ? " on full blast . When Luke lands on Cloud City to fight Vader , he is first subjected to appearing on the popular reality competition American Idol , with Ryan Seacrest as host of the ensuing " lightsaber battle " before he is quickly killed by Luke . After losing his battle against Darth Vader , Luke falls to the bottom of the floating city and calls out for Leia , along with Obi @-@ Wan and actor Tom Selleck , the last of which is then seen briefly looking up from his book in a real @-@ life cameo from the movie Her Alibi . Sensing this , Leia then orders Chewbacca to turn the ship around , prompting a parody of Vicki Sue Robinson 's single " Turn The Beat Around " , reworded to " Turn the Ship Around " . 
 As the story comes to a close , Luke interrupts the ending sequence and raises the viewer 's awareness to all of the " unanswered questions " that the movie leaves behind . The Western Union postal worker from the 1989 film Back to the Future Part II then appears , and hands Luke a message delivered by Doc Brown from the year 1885 , with the story then ending on the words " To be <unk> " , in the same fashion of Back to the Future . Composer Alan Silvestri allowed the producers to use his Back to the Future theme since he 's a fan of Family Guy . 
 The episode then cuts back to the Griffin family household , with Peter immediately rehashing the argument between him and Chris that first started in " Blue Harvest " , a joke grounded in the fact that Chris ' voice actor , Seth Green , is one of the creators and producers of the stop motion comedy series Robot Chicken . Peter begins by suggesting that Robot Chicken would never be able to top the story he had just told . Hearing this , Chris defends Robot Chicken . Peter continues to poke at Chris and finally states that he " may have more time to tell another story " entitled Without a Paddle , a critically panned movie in which Seth Green starred . Chris then angrily storms off yelling " Fuck you " to Peter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant decrease from the previous episode , " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " was viewed in 6 @.@ 13 million homes in its first half @-@ hour , and 6 @.@ 39 in its second ( previous episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 59 million homes ) . It aired simultaneously with the season finale of The Celebrity Apprentice on NBC , the series finale of Lost on ABC , and Brooks & Dunn – The Last Rodeo on CBS . The episode acquired a 3 @.@ 0 and 3 @.@ 2 rating , in the first and second half @-@ hours respectively , in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode beat the season finales of The Simpsons and The Cleveland Show in both the 18 – 49 demographic and in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the television broadcast were highly positive , praising its close attention to detail in parodying the original film . Jason Hughes of TV Squad found the episode to be " incredibly [ impressive ] , " going on to note , " As much as we fans love the films , we know they 're not perfect , and that they 're downright ridiculous in places . Family Guy managed to point out virtually all of those moments in this parody . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club found the episode to have " a lot of solid laughs " , and admired the show for " throwing itself into these outsized movie parody things " . Critics of the DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc releases gave the episode high praise for its ability to accurately reflect the original film . Cindy White of IGN gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , noting that it " lives up to its predecessor and , like the film it spoofs , arguably exceeds it in some ways " . John Scott Lewinski of Wired praised the faithfulness to the original film , saying that it " becomes clear that MacFarlane and his writers are legit Star Wars fans " . Adam Rosenberg of MTV Movies Blog called the episode " hilarious " and Paul Semel of Metromix praised the episode for featuring " some very ribald humor " , and " [ skewering ] the original movie with some rather insightful moments " . In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Ramsey Isler of IGN listed " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " as being a " pretty entertaining parody , and a safe way to wrap things up . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 On December 22 , 2009 , before the episode first aired , it was released on DVD in Region 1 , and — in a first for the series — the episode was available on Blu @-@ ray Disc . It was released on December 26 , 2009 in Region 2 , and on December 23 , 2009 in Region 4 . As with " Blue Harvest " , a limited edition version is available in the region 2 version , and comes with collectible items , including a T @-@ shirt of The Giant Chicken as Boba Fett . The Blu @-@ ray Disc release features a second disc containing a " digital copy " of the episode . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 With the success of " Blue Harvest " and " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " , a sequel episode , entitled " It 's a Trap ! " and parodying the film Return of the Jedi , aired during the ninth season of Family Guy . The episode was written by David A. Goodman and Cherry Chevapravatdumrong , and directed by Peter Shin , in his first episode since the fourth season . 
 = Shinan District = 
 Shinan District ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> " South City " ) is an urban district ( <unk> ) of Qingdao , Shandong . It has an area of 30 @.@ 01 square kilometres ( 7 @,@ 420 acres ; 11 @.@ 59 sq mi ) and had approximately 527 @,@ 000 inhabitants as of 2007 . Shinan is located in coastal <unk> terrain , and has a temperate monsoon climate . Common features include moderate temperatures , moist air , abundant rainfall , and four distinct seasons . It is notable for its early 20th @-@ century German architecture , unusual in Chinese cities . 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century the European powers forcibly opened China to foreign trade . Germany acquired the Kiautschou Bay concession from China in 1898 , and substantially developed a fishing village they spelled " Tsingtao " ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Qīngdǎo ) . The area built by the Germans falls into the part of Qingdao known today as Shinan District . 
 Shinan is a center for political , business and finance activities , and is home to investment from an increasing number of Fortune 500 companies . To facilitate urban planning , it is divided into a number of areas , including a port and logistics area , tourism area , software / IT area , high @-@ end retail area and financial area . 
 Shinan is home to the Qingdao International Sailing Centre ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Qīngdǎo Àolínpǐkè <unk> Zhōngxīn ) , a world @-@ class sailing marina constructed for the 2008 Summer Olympics . It hosted the Olympic and Paralympic Sailing competitions . It has also hosted a leg of the Clipper Round the World Yacht Race each year since 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 After China 's defeat in the First Opium War , the country was forcibly opened to foreign trade by a number of treaties collectively referred to as the Unequal Treaties . Following the Treaty of Nanjing ( 1842 ) , the British established the first treaty ports . Following China 's concession to the British Empire , other foreign powers including France , the United States , Portugal , Germany , Japan , and Russia won concessions as well . Foreigners , who were centered in foreign sections of the cities , enjoyed legal extraterritoriality as stipulated in the Unequal Treaties . Foreign clubs , racecourses , and churches were established in major treaty ports . Some of these port areas were directly leased by foreign powers , such as the concessions in China , effectively removing them from the control of local governments . 
 = = = German presence in Qingdao = = = 
 In the early 1890s , the German Empire had been considering occupying Jiaozhou Bay ( " Jiaozhou " was formerly romanized as Kiaochow , <unk> or Kiao @-@ Chau in English and Kiautschou in German ) for building its first naval base in East Asia in order to expand into the interior of Shandong . In 1891 the Qing government decided to make Qingdao ( commonly spelled " Tsingtao " until well into the 20th century ) defensible against naval attack and began to improve the existing fortifications of the town . German naval officials observed and reported on this Chinese activity during a formal survey of Jiaozhou Bay in May 1897 . In November 1897 , the German Navy seized Jiaozhou Bay under the pretext of ensuring that reparations were paid for the murder of two German Catholic missionaries in the province . In the spring of 1898 , the German government signed a treaty that allowed the Germans to lease an area of 540 square kilometres ( 130 @,@ 000 acres ; 210 sq mi ) for 99 years , to construct a railway to Jinan , the capital of Shandong province , and to exploit coalfields along the railroad . 
 The Kiautschou Bay concession , as it became known , existed from 1898 to 1914 . With an area of 552 square kilometres ( 136 @,@ 000 acres ; 213 sq mi ) , it was located in the imperial province of Shandong ( alternatively romanized as Shantung or Shan @-@ tung ) on the southern coast of the Shandong Peninsula in northern China . Qingdao was its administrative center . According to Dr. Wilhelm <unk> , of the University of Bonn , " The so @-@ called <unk> ( Market street ) was nothing more than the old main street of the Chinese village of Tsingtao , and the buildings lining it were the former homes of fishermen and farmers . Having sold their property , they resettled their homes and fields in the villages further east . " On gaining control of the area , the Germans outfitted the impoverished fishing village of Tsingtao with wide streets , solid housing areas , government buildings , electrification throughout , a sewer system and a safe drinking water supply . The buildings were built in a European style . The area had the highest density of schools and per capita student enrollment in all of China ; primary , secondary and vocational schools were funded by the Imperial German treasury and Protestant and Roman Catholic missions . This area is what later became Shinan District . 
 During World War 1 the territory was conquered by a joint Anglo @-@ Japanese task force during the 1914 Siege of Tsingtao and the victorious Allies of World War 1 awarded the continuation of the lease to the Empire of Japan over the objections of the Republic of China . The territory reverted to Chinese control in 1922 . 
 = = = World War II and subsequent civil war = = = 
 The Japanese reoccupied Qingdao in January 1938 after the start of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War .. On August 15 , 1945 , Japan surrendered to Allied forces , officially ending World War II , and forces of the Kuomintang entered the city in September , restoring the government of the Republic of China . During the Chinese Civil War , Qingdao served briefly as a port for the United States Navy . 
 On June 2 , 1949 , the Communist @-@ led Red Army entered Qingdao and both the city and Shandong Province have since been under Chinese government control . 
 = = = Under Mao = = = 
 Soon after the Communists assumed control , a combination of assertive nationalism and socialist ideology led to the eradication of the Western presence in China , including Western culture and products . " The denunciation of anything Western as ' capitalist , ' ' bourgeois ' and representative of the ' imperialist world ' reached a peak during the ideological extremism of the Korean War ( 1950 – 1953 ) when the final vestiges of the Western economic and cultural presence were eradicated . " This took the form of expulsion of foreigners and destruction or defacement of foreign property . An example of this in Shinan District was St. Michael 's Cathedral , which was badly damaged during the Cultural Revolution which lasted from 1966 to 1971 . During this time St. Michael 's Cathedral was defaced by the Red Guards . The crosses topping the twin steeples were removed , with two Red Guards falling to their deaths during the removal . 
 = = = After Mao = = = 
 The Chinese government subsequently repudiated the Cultural Revolution . A major document presented at the September 1979 Fourth Plenum of the Eleventh National Party Congress Central Committee , gave a " preliminary assessment " of the entire 30 @-@ year period of Communist rule . At the plenum , party Vice Chairman Ye <unk> declared the Cultural Revolution " an appalling catastrophe " and " the most severe setback to [ the ] socialist cause since [ 1949 ] . " The Chinese government 's condemnation of the Cultural Revolution culminated in the Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People 's Republic of China , adopted by the Sixth Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of China . This stated that " Comrade Mao Zedong was a great Marxist and a great proletarian revolutionary , strategist and theorist . It is true that he made gross mistakes during the " cultural revolution " , but , if we judge his activities as a whole , his contributions to the Chinese revolution far outweigh his mistakes . His merits are primary and his errors secondary . " 
 Since the 1984 inauguration of China 's open @-@ door policy to foreign trade and investment , Qingdao has developed quickly as a modern port city . In 1986 , Qingdao became one of five cities specifically designated in the state plan and granted with provincial level authority over economic administration . In 1994 , Qingdao was elevated to one of China 's 15 sub @-@ provincial cities . 
 = = Terrain , climate and demographics = = 
 Shinan has an area of 30 @.@ 01 km ² and around 527 @,@ 000 inhabitants as of 2007 . It is located in coastal hilly terrain , and has a temperate monsoon climate . Common features include moderate temperatures , moist air , abundant rainfall , and four distinct seasons . In the spring , temperatures tend to rise slowly , a month later than inland . Summers are warm and rainy , winters are windy and dip below freezing . The hottest month is July , with an average temperature of 25 @.@ 3 ° C ( 77 @.@ 5 ° F ) , and the coldest month is December , with an average temperature of − 1 @.@ 9 ° C ( 28 @.@ 6 ° F ) Average rainfall is 42 @.@ 46 centimetres ( 16 @.@ 72 in ) per year . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Shinan " is situated in Qingdao 's downtown area ; it is a centre for political , business and finance activities , and is home to investment from an increasing number of ' Fortune 500 ' companies . " To facilitate urban planning , it is divided into a number of areas , including a port and logistics area , tourism area , software / IT area , high @-@ end retail area and financial area . 
 = = = Foreign investment = = = 
 Shinan 's foreign direct investment utilization reached US $ 188 million in 2006 , a 45 % increase over 2005 . By the end of 2006 , 2 @,@ 282 foreign companies had facilities in Shinan ; 55 of which had invested over USD $ 10 million each , and over 30 being counted in the world 's top 500 companies . 
 According to a report by global consulting firm KPMG , " Ranked according to size of investment , the top five industry sectors for foreign investment in Shinan in 2006 were real estate , professional services ( accounting , legal services ) , logistics , <unk> , retailing and restaurant and tourism ; more than half of this amount was invested in real estate . " 
 = = Culture = = 
 Economic reform has paved the way for rapid development of cultural undertakings in Shinan District , which strives to maintain its coastal culture in the face of major urban development by holding ocean @-@ themed festivals such as " Marine Day " and " Sea of Love " . The 2008 Olympics provided an unprecedented level of cultural exchange in the city . 
 Major outdoor cultural facilities in Shinan include May 4th Square ( pictured at left ) , Music Square , Ba Da Guan Square , <unk> Square , Lao She parks , <unk> Square , and Station Square . 
 Theaters include Red Star Cinema , Chinese Cinema , and <unk> Theater . Conference / exhibition facilities include Qingdao People 's Hall , Qingdao Stadium , and the Qingdao Municipal Conference Center . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Over three @-@ quarters of Qingdao 's tourist resorts are located in Shinan , due to its scenic coast and beaches . 
 = = = Attractions in Shinan = = = 
 Zhan Qiao ( Pier , <unk> ) 
 Little Qingdao Isle ( <unk> ) 
 Tian Hou Temple ( <unk> ) , Qingdao Folk Museum 
 Ba Da Guan ( Eight Great Passes , <unk> ) , an area of Shinan with surviving German and Japanese architecture 
 Lu Xun Park , named after Lu Xun ( <unk> ) , a famous modern Chinese writer and critic , who lived and taught in 1930s 
 Zhongshan Park , named after the style name ' Zhongshan ' of Sun Zhongshan ( <unk> ， <unk> ) , a famous modern Chinese politician 
 Xiao Yu Shan ( Little Fish Hill , <unk> ) 
 Qingdao Botanical Garden 
 The twin @-@ spired , neo @-@ Romanesque St. Michael 's Cathedral , completed in 1934 by German missionaries 
 <unk> Villa ( <unk> ) , a stone mansion in the Ba Da Guan neighborhood built by a Russian aristocrat 
 Qingdao Aquarium 
 Jiaozhou Governor 's Hall ( <unk> ) , office building of former German governors [ <unk> ] and former municipal government 
 Guest House , a classic German Castle 
 Signal Hill ( <unk> ) 
 Astronomical Observatory Hill ( <unk> ) 
 Tuan Dao Shan ( <unk> Peninsula Hill , <unk> ) 
 Qingdao Naval Museum 
 The Protestant Church ( <unk> ) 
 Qingdao Bathing Beaches , 6 well @-@ known beaches with complete facilities . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The Qingdao International Sailing Centre ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Qīngdǎo Àolínpǐkè <unk> Zhōngxīn ) is a sailing marina located on the former site of the Beihai Shipyard on Shinan 's <unk> Bay . It was constructed for the 2008 Summer Olympics . It hosted the Olympic and Paralympic Sailing competitions . Wind conditions vary greatly from very light winds to greater than 15 knots . During the Olympic competitions , fog was also an occasional factor . The sailing centre is now open to the public . 
 Since 2005 , Shinan has hosted a leg of the Clipper Round the World Yacht Race . In May 2008 , the Qingdao International Sailing Centre hosted the 2008 <unk> Qingdao International Regatta In the first quarter of 2009 , the sailing centre hosted sailors from eight teams of the 2008 – 09 Volvo Ocean Race . 
 = = Health , welfare , and education = = 
 Shinan District has 3 @,@ 084 beds and 4 @,@ 560 healthcare personnel in 18 hospitals and health centers as of March 2007 . In 2009 , the Shinan District Red Cross Society was listed as one of the top 10 county @-@ level Red Cross organizations in the People 's Republic of China . 
 In 2008 , a training base for teacher development was founded in Shinan District , the first of its kind in the nation . 
 = Quagmire ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Quagmire " is the twenty @-@ second episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 3 , 1996 . It was written by Kim Newton and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Quagmire " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 2 , being watched by 16 million viewers in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of deaths at a lake in Georgia that Mulder believes were caused by a " sea " monster that the locals have affectionately named Big Blue . 
 Although the episode was written by Newton , noted writer Darin Morgan provided assistance on the script . Because of this , the episode contains several references to previous Morgan @-@ penned episodes , like " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " and " War of the Coprophages " . One specific dialogue scene featuring Mulder and Scully stranded on a small rock was praised by critics and included approximately 10 pages of dialogue . Series co @-@ star Gillian Anderson later recalled that she " loved " the scene . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Millikan County , Georgia , biologists Paul Farraday and William Bailey discuss the decreasing frog population . Bailey goes looking for a missing beeper and ends up getting dragged into the lake by an unseen creature and killed . 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) drive down to Georgia to investigate . Scully is forced to bring her dog Queequeg with them due to the short notice . Mulder tells Scully that a Boy Scout Troop Leader has also disappeared near the lake . Scully soon finds that Mulder believes " Big Blue " — a plesiosaur @-@ like cryptid — is responsible . The agents talk to Dr. Farraday and visit a local bait and tackle shop that sells Big Blue merchandise . Soon afterwards , the half eaten body of the Scout Leader is found . 
 Later that night , the bait and tackle shop owner walks through the swamp in boots , making fake dinosaur tracks . However , he is attacked and killed . Mulder wants the lake to be closed but the local sheriff declines and says that he does not have enough men to cover the 48 miles of shoreline . Two teenagers , previously seen in the episode " War of the Coprophages " , head to the lake to lick toads ; while experimenting , a diver friend of theirs is suddenly attacked underwater and his severed head floats to the surface . Scully , still skeptical about Big Blue being the killer , thinks that a boat propeller was responsible . A photographer named Ansel is also attacked just as he was frantically taking pictures of the creature . After falling into the lake and feeling something in the water , the Sheriff orders the lake closed . While Mulder looks at Ansel 's photographs later that night , Scully takes Queequeg for a walk ; the dog , sensing something in the nearby woods , ends up running off and disappearing ( yelping is heard ) , becoming the latest victim of the attacks and leaving Scully saddened . Mulder realizes that the Big Blue sightings have been occurring closer and closer to shore . 
 Mulder and Scully rent a boat and head out onto the lake ; their boat is quickly struck by something and sinks . The two find a large rock to climb up on and talk for a while about Mulder 's quest to catch Big Blue , and the book Moby @-@ Dick . When Dr. Farraday walks by the two realize they were close to shore all along . Mulder thinks the drop in the frog supply has caused Big Blue to move closer to shore and seek alternative food sources . Farraday is soon attacked but manages to make it out alive . Mulder chases the attacker into the woods and fires at it , revealing it to be an alligator . Mulder is disappointed that the killer ended up being an alligator and not Big Blue . As the agents leave , Big Blue swims nearby in the lake , unnoticed . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Kim Newton wrote the episode , but fellow writer Darin Morgan provided assistance on the script . Several references to previous Morgan @-@ penned episodes make an appearance in " Quagmire " . Scully 's dog Queequeg , which first appeared in the episode " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " was killed in this episode . Story editor Frank Spotnitz stated that the dog was brought back in this episode simply to kill it , seeking to incorporate it in an episode in a grisly fashion . Furthermore , " Stoner " kid ( Tyler Labine ) and hesitant " Chick " ( Nicole Parker ) both first appeared in the episode " War of the Coprophages " . The episode also contained various series in @-@ jokes and pop culture references . Millikan County , where the lake in the episode is located , is named after casting director Rick Millikan . The boat that Mulder and Scully ride on in this episode , the Patricia Rae , is named after the mother of director Kim Manners . Mulder 's discussion about having a wooden leg in this episode is a reference to the book Games People Play . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was filmed around three British Columbian lakes : Buntzen Lake , north of Coquitlam ; Pitt Lake , north of Pitt Meadows ; and Rice Lake , part of the Seymour Demonstration Forest . Buntzen Lake was used for shots of the quagmire reeds . Pitt Lake was used for shots of the boat dock and Ted 's Bait and Tackle Shop . Finally , Rice Lake and the Seymour Demonstration Forest were used for the final scene , featuring a discreet shot of Big Blue . The conversation scene was filmed on a " Rocky Island Set " at B.C. Research Wave Tank . During the day of filming , the artificial rock set was placed in the tank and filled with water . However , the rock set began to float and " an emergency crew of carpenters [ ... ] worked furiously through the night " to reattach the platform . The scene of Big Blue at the end of the episode was originally intended to feature a rubber sea serpent pulled through the water by a boat , but the producers were unhappy with how it turned out . Originally , they tried enhancing the image digitally but were still unhappy with the shot , so the entire scene was scrapped and Big Blue was created entirely by digital effects . 
 Director Kim Manners said of the episode : " Not a great show , but a good one . It 's a lighter show . There is a lot of humor in it , but I think it 's a hit with fans because there is some wonderful Mulder and Scully 's relationship stuff . The entire third act is just the two of them talking , which is actually kind of interesting . The scene where Mulder and Scully talk while stranded on a rock included approximately 10 pages of dialogue . Gillian Anderson said of the scene : " I loved that . That was so much fun , and I think it was written really well ... It was just neat to have us separated from everything and stuck on this island where we could wax philosophical and kind of tell the truth to each other in strange ways . " Character Dr. Paul Farraday was named after English scientist , Michael Faraday , maybe . The lake is Heuvelmans Lake , probably named for Belgian @-@ French zoologist Bernard Heuvelmans , known as the ' father ' of cryptozoology ; he was still alive at the time of first air @-@ date ( October 10 , 1916 – August 22 , 2001 , age 84 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Quagmire " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 3 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by a total of 16 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly positive . Many reviews praised the Moby Dick conversation between Mulder and Scully . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club was positive towards the episode , grading it an A- . He wrote that it " starts off amazingly " and positively noted the way the monster was handled . However , he noted that it was the " linger [ ing ] " conversation scene that " sets ' Quagmire ' apart from all the other standard Monster Of The Week procedurals . " John Keegan of Critical Myth gave the episode an 8 out of 10 rating , noting " Overall , this episode was a strong look into the psychological issues that Mulder and Scully are carrying around this season . The plot of the episode is little more than a tool chosen to pry into the minds of the two agents , revealing just how dependent they are on each other . A rare case of character development taking center stage . " Keegan also wrote positively of the conversation sequence , writing that the " isolation caused by the sinking of the boat [ ... ] forces Mulder and Scully to actually discuss their issues . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , and called " Quagmire " a " delightful little gem " and " something rather magical " . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson praised Anderson and Duchovny 's acting , calling their performances " beautifully played " . Paula Vitaris of Cinefantastique gave the episode a positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She referred to the episode as " part Jaws , part The Lost World , and part Buster Keaton " and noted that the third act was when the episode " becomes truly special , when Mulder and Scully are forced to abandon ship and take refuge on a big rock in the middle of a pitch @-@ black night . " Vitaris , however , was critical of the episode 's closing shot , noting that the " shot destroys the story 's ambiguity . A large ripple in the water would have been much more clever . " 
 Not all reviews were so positive . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a C and was critical of the entry 's monster , writing " hey , the show kinda had to tackle Loch Ness " . Furthermore , the review wrote that the episode was " notable only for Mulder and Scully 's Moby Dick digression " . 
 = Ed , Edd n Eddy = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy is a Canadian @-@ American animated comedy television series created by Danny Antonucci for Cartoon Network , and the sixth of the network 's Cartoon Cartoons . The series revolves around three preteen boys : Ed , Edd " Double D " , and Eddy , collectively known as " the Eds " , who live in a suburban cul @-@ de @-@ sac in the fictional town of Peach Creek . Under the unofficial leadership of Eddy , the trio frequently invent schemes to make money from their peers to purchase their favorite confectionery , jawbreakers . Their plans usually fail , leaving them in various , often humiliating , predicaments . 
 Adult cartoonist Antonucci was dared to create a children 's cartoon ; while designing a commercial , he conceived Ed , Edd n Eddy , designing it to resemble classic cartoons from the 1940s – 70s . He pitched the series to Cartoon Network and Nickelodeon , but the latter demanded creative control , leading to him making a deal with the former and the series premiering on January 4 , 1999 . During the show 's run , several specials and shorts were produced in addition to the regular television series . The series concluded with a TV movie , Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , on November 8 , 2009 . 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy received generally positive reviews from critics and became one of Cartoon Network 's most successful original series . It won a Reuben Award , two Leo Awards and a SOCAN Award , and was also nominated for another four Leo Awards , an Annie Award and two Kids ' Choice Awards . The show attracted an audience of 31 million households , was broadcast in 120 countries , and proved to be popular among children , teenagers , and adults . With a 10 @-@ year run , Ed , Edd n Eddy remains the longest @-@ running Cartoon Network original series and Canadian @-@ made animated series to date , and is also one of the longest @-@ running United States animated series . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy follows the lives of " the Eds " , three preteen boys who all share variations of the name Ed , but differ greatly in their personalities : Ed ( voiced by Matt Hill ) is the strong , dull @-@ witted dogsbody of the group ; Edd ( Samuel Vincent ) , better known as Double D , is an inventor , neat freak , and the most intelligent of the Eds ; and Eddy ( Tony Sampson ) is a devious , quick @-@ tempered , bitter con artist , and self @-@ appointed leader of the Eds . The three devise plans to scam the cul @-@ de @-@ sac kids out of their money , which they want to use to buy jawbreakers . However , problems always ensue , and the Eds ' schemes usually end in failure and humiliation . 
 The cul @-@ de @-@ sac kids mostly hate or show indifference toward the Eds : Jonny 2 × 4 ( David Paul " Buck " Grove ) is a loner whom his peers consider to be a nuisance , and spends most of his time with his imaginary friend , a wooden board named Plank ; Jimmy ( Keenan Christensen ) is a weak , insecure , and accident @-@ prone child , who is most often seen spending his time with Sarah ( Janyse Jaud ) , Ed 's vile , spoiled , and ill @-@ tempered younger sister ; Rolf ( Peter Kelamis ) is an immigrant , who often participates in odd customs and eats strange food ; Kevin ( Kathleen Barr ) is a cynical and sardonic jock who detests the Eds , particularly Eddy ; Nazz ( Tabitha St. Germain ; Jenn Forgie ; Erin Fitzgerald ) , usually seen with Kevin , is a stereotypical dumb blonde and an unattainable love interest for the cul @-@ de @-@ sac kids . All of the cul @-@ de @-@ sac kids share a common fear of the Kanker Sisters , Lee ( Kathleen Barr ) , May ( Erin Fitzgerald ; Jenn Forgie ) , and Marie ( Janyse Jaud ) , three teenage girls who live in a nearby trailer park and are in love with the Eds . 
 Aside from the Eds , the other cul @-@ de @-@ sac kids , and the Kanker Sisters , no other characters appeared in the series until the fifth season , when the silhouettes of other people were occasionally shown , and in one episode the arms of Eddy 's father and Ed 's mother were seen . In the series finale , Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , Eddy 's adult brother ( Terry Klassen ) was seen for the first time , making him the only non @-@ main character , and the only adult character to ever fully appear on the show . 
 The series takes place mostly within the fictional town of Peach Creek , and new locations were rarely introduced . The first four seasons of the show are set during an endless summer vacation , though from the fifth season onwards , the characters are shown attending junior high school in the fall and winter months . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Although cartoonist Danny Antonucci began his career by working as an animator on various children 's series for Hanna @-@ Barbera , his later solo works were edgy and aimed at adult audiences . He gained notoriety with the 1987 short film Lupo the Butcher and then , after founding his own production studio , a.k.a. Cartoon in 1994 , created the series The Brothers Grunt for MTV . It was quickly cancelled , however , upon being met with generally poor reviews . 
 On a dare , Antonucci then decided that he would try producing a children 's animated series of his own . While designing a commercial , he ended up drawing three characters that he felt particularly pleased with . Growing excited over their potential , he named them Ed , Edd , and Eddy and spent the following months developing a show around them . He faxed a one @-@ page concept sheet to Cartoon Network and Nickelodeon in 1996 . Both studios quickly responded , Cartoon Network in only 20 minutes , and were enthusiastic and wanted to see more ; they each demanded creative control , however , and Antonucci refused . After Cartoon Network agreed to let Antonucci have control of the show , conversations between Antonucci and the studio continued . 
 Vice president of programming and production of Cartoon Network , Mike Lazzo , showed high interest in the series and requested a show bible , which came through by fax , a few pages at a time , over a period of the next few months . After an affirmative response from Cartoon Network president Betty Cohen , the legal paperwork and deal @-@ making began , followed by a start @-@ up meeting at the Chateau Marmont Hotel in Los Angeles . A deal was made that Antonucci 's studio , a.k.a. Cartoon , would produce Ed , Edd n Eddy , the first Cartoon Network original series to be produced by an outside production company rather than Cartoon Network 's Hanna @-@ Barbera . The series also entered production and by @-@ passed a seven @-@ minute short ; this marked the first time that one of the studio 's original series had ever done this . 
 According to Antonucci , he based the characters on real people in his life . The personalities of Ed , Double D , and Eddy are based on his own traits , and the activities of his two sons while the cul @-@ de @-@ sac children and the Kanker sisters were all based on children he grew up with . Rolf is based on Antonucci and his cousins , since he was part of an Italian immigrant family , and grew up in a first generation foreign household with different customs and ways of living , compared to those born in Canada . 
 Rolf is me and all of my cousins . My parents were right off the boat so I grew up playing to two worlds , the modern world and the 1950s Italian world . My parents like Rolf 's lived — still live in the past , with strong traditions and strange cooking and having a hard time assimilating to modern life . 
 Jimmy is based on one of his cousins , who was rather feminine and spent most of his time playing with girls rather than with boys . Jonny and Plank are inspired by one of Antonucci 's childhood friends , a loner who spent most of his time outside with his blanket . He stated that he believed it was important to add Plank , a board of wood , to the show , and that he " thought it would be really cool to do the show with Plank taking on a character of his own " and to cause Jonny to do things he would usually never do . Some wanted Plank to be able to talk , smile and blink as if he was alive , but Antonucci insisted that it should be treated as a piece of wood , brought to life by Jonny 's imagination . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Matt Hill , Samuel Vincent , and Tony Sampson were respectively cast as Ed , Double D , and Eddy . David Paul " Buck " Grove and Keenan Christensen played the parts of Jonny 2 × 4 and Jimmy , respectively , while Sarah was voiced by Janyse Jaud . Peter Kelamis voiced Rolf , while Kathleen Barr was cast as Kevin . Nazz was voiced by Tabitha St. Germain in season 1 , Jenn Forgie in season 3 and Erin Fitzgerald in seasons 2 , 4 , 5 and 6 . Fitzgerald also played the part of May , one of the Kanker Sisters , except in season 3 when she was voiced by Jenn Forgie . The other two Kanker sisters , Marie and Lee , were voiced by Kathleen Barr and Janyse Jaud . Eddy 's adult brother is mentioned frequently throughout the series but does not appear until Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , where he is voiced by series voice director Terry Klassen . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Antonucci , an advocate of hand @-@ drawn animation , wanted to ensure Ed , Edd n Eddy was produced in a way similar to cartoons from the 1940s to 1970s . As a result , the series was the last to use cel animation ; the cels were shipped to Korea for creating the initial animation , and then later edited back at Antonucci 's a.k.a. Cartoon studio . The first four seasons were produced traditionally , though the series was forced to switch to digital ink and paint in 2004 , starting with Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Jingle Jingle Jangle . 
 To give the impression of movement , Ed , Edd n Eddy used " boiling lines " , shimmering character outlines which have been compared to Squigglevision . The boiling lines are not as noticeable as those in Dr. Katz , Professional Therapist , but are still visible , and Antonucci likens it to cartoons of the 1930s . The boiling line is created by tracing off a drawing three times through sheets of paper . Antonucci explained that he felt it " helps keep the characters alive " and that he wanted to depart from other Cartoon Network series and pay homage to the classic cartoon era . 
 All the children have multicolored tongues ; Antonucci said that the idea came after he saw his son and his friends with different @-@ colored tongues because of eating different candy while he was working on a storyboard . The characters went through a number of " walking cycles " , a process used to determine how each character should walk or run , turn around , blink , etc. before the crew came up with the final product . 
 = = = Music and title sequence = = = 
 Antonucci showed the theme song to the studios when first pitching the series , thinking it would be better than only looking at drawings . It was inspired by the Bob Crosby and The Big Cats song " Big Noise from Winnetka " , which was whistled , something Antonucci enjoyed doing as a child . Composed by Patric Caird , who created all the music in the series , Antonucci performed the whistling himself . The theme song was featured on the compilation album Cartoon Medley . The title sequence was created by Paul Boyd . 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Although Ed , Edd n Eddy was originally set to premiere on November 7 , 1998 , the pilot , " The Ed @-@ touchables / Nagged to Ed " , aired on January 4 , 1999 , as the sixth Cartoon Cartoon , due to minor post @-@ production delays . During the series ' original run , episodes often aired as a part of Cartoon Network 's weekly programming block " Cartoon Cartoon Fridays " . 
 Cartoon Network ran several marathons for either commercial promotions or special airings of one of their shows . The eight @-@ hour " Boy Girl , Boy Girl " marathon ran on March 7 , 1999 , airing episodes of Ed , Edd n Eddy and The Powerpuff Girls , which had been Cartoon Network 's two newest series at the time . Later that year , Ed , Edd n Eddy was featured with other original Cartoon Network series in the third annual " Cartoon Cartoon Weekend " , a fifty @-@ three @-@ hour marathon , which ran from August 20 to August 22 . In 2002 , the show was included in the similar " Cartoon Cartoon Marathon Weekend " , which ran from August 23 to August 25 . The six @-@ hour " Ed 's Day Off Marathon " aired 22 episodes on January 19 , 2004 , in celebration of Martin Luther King , Jr . Day . 
 " The Best Day <unk> " , in which every episode was shown in chronological order , ran from April 27 to April 28 , 2007 , and ended with the previously unbroadcast season five finale , which was promoted as the " final episode ever " . However , it was quickly followed by " The Eds are Coming , the Eds are Coming " in the next month , as part of a special alien @-@ themed event called " Cartoon Network Invaded " . As of May 2 , 2007 , " The Best Day <unk> " provided Cartoon Network their best ratings of the year . A seven @-@ hour Sunday marathon , which ran before the premiere of Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , posted double @-@ digit delivery gains among children ages 9 – 14 ( up 14 % ) , boys ages 9 – 14 ( up 16 % ) and girls ages 6 – 11 ( up 17 % ) , compared to the same time frame last year , highlighting the network 's weekend performance . 
 The series ' fourth season was originally ordered as the last , but two additional seasons and four specials , including a movie , were ordered as a result of the series ' popularity . The series ' finale movie , Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , aired on November 8 , 2009 , officially ending the series . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Specials = = = 
 Along with an additional fifth and sixth season , Cartoon Network ordered three holiday specials that originally aired in 2004 and 2005 . " Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Jingle Jingle Jangle " , the first , is a Christmas special aired on December 3 , 2004 . Valentine 's Day 's " Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Hanky Panky Hullabaloo " originally aired on February 11 , 2005 . The final , Halloween special , " Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Boo Haw Haw " aired on October 28 , 2005 . Antonucci stated that " Boo Haw Haw " was one of his favorite Ed , Edd n Eddy episodes that he worked on . On May 11 , 2007 , a fourth special , " The Eds are Coming , the Eds are Coming " aired ; however , it was not a holiday special , but an adjunct to other Cartoon Network series Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends , My Gym Partner 's a Monkey , Camp Lazlo , and The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy in the alien @-@ themed mini @-@ series Cartoon Network Invaded that aired all five specials from May 4 to May 28 , 2007 . 
 = = Appearances in other series or works = = 
 Besides their own series , Ed , Double D , and Eddy have also appeared in other cartoon series . They appeared in an episode of Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends and were drawn using that series ' style of animation , and made a short cameo in " The Grim Adventures of the <unk> " , a crossover of The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy and Codename : Kids Next Door . They also appeared on a small crossover poster during its credits entitled Ed , Edd n Mandy . In 2012 , Double D made an appearance in the animated sketch comedy Cartoon Network series Mad episode " Once Upon a Toon " . 
 The show was featured in the 2002 edition of Cartoon Network 's fictional awards program , The 1st 13th Annual Fancy Anvil Awards Show Program Special : Live in Stereo . It won Best Performance by an Inanimate Object in a Dramatic Role for the character of Plank , and Best Performance by a Team in a Cartoon Series for the characters of Ed , Double D , and Eddy . The character of Sarah was nominated for Best Performance by a Female in a Cartoon Series , but lost to Bubbles from The Powerpuff Girls . 
 In 2004 , the Eds appeared in a short series of basketball commercials with NBA All @-@ Star Steve Francis . Ed appeared in the " Cartoon Network Elections 2004 " with Grim from The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy as a team , and they ended up winning , due to the highest number of votes by viewers . 
 = = Reception , legacy , and achievements = = 
 = = = Ratings and run length achievements = = = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy attracted an audience of 31 million households , was broadcast in 120 countries , and was popular among both children and adults . According to Cartoon Network executive Linda Simensky , the first season did " remarkably well " in ratings following its premiere , becoming one of the top @-@ rated series on the network . It was Cartoon Network 's most popular show among boys ages 2 – 11 . In 2005 , it was reported that Ed , Edd n Eddy was the number one rated show on Cartoon Network and basic cable with huge awareness , being known to 79 % of children age 6 – 11 . The series ran for nearly 11 years , making it the longest @-@ running original Cartoon Network series and Canadian ‌ <unk> animated series to date . It is one of the longest @-@ running United States animated series . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy received generally positive reviews from critics . David Cornelius of DVD Talk considered the Eds to be child equivalents of The Three Stooges , believing that " the series revels in the sort of frantic , often gross humor kids love so much , and there 's just enough oddball insanity at play to make adults giggle just as easily . " Cornelius also wrote that the " animation is colorful and intentionally bizarre ; bold lines forming the characters and backgrounds wiggle and morph in a delirious haze . This is animation that 's , well , really animated . " When Netflix offered several Cartoon Network shows to stream on @-@ demand , James Castle , a columnist for the University of Minnesota 's newspaper , The Minnesota Daily , wrote a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek article suggesting that Ed , Edd n Eddy and the other available shows are of such high quality , that he would be unable to focus on his exams , unless he took a lawsuit against the company to have them removed . In his praise of the shows , he wrote , " We do not contend that any person of ordinary will could , or should , resist such classic and well @-@ crafted animations . " 
 Despite this , not all reception of the show was positive . Terrence Briggs of Animation World Magazine considered every second of the show " filler " and lamented that the main characters are drawn as " products from the school of acid @-@ trip caricature . " After Briggs ' review was published , a large number of letters supportive of the show were sent to the magazine , prompting it to " take a second look " at the show . Different reviewers then gave it a positive review , calling it a " fresh show with very different approaches . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 During its run , Ed , Edd n Eddy was nominated for a Reuben Award , six Leo Awards , an Annie Award , two Kids ' Choice Awards and a SOCAN Award , winning the Reuben Award , two Leo Awards and the SOCAN Award . It was ranked seventh on ScrewAttack 's " Top Twenty Cartoon Network Shows " . Desi <unk> of <unk> listed Ed , Edd n Eddy on the website 's list of " 9 Cartoons That Need a Reboot " . Complex included Eddy 's room on their list of " Movie and TV Characters ' Bedrooms You <unk> Were Yours " , and ranked Jimmy 14th on their list of " 15 Artistic Characters We Miss From Our Childhood " . Cracked.com praised the show 's high level of violence , stating that it " set the bar on cartoon violence for anything that was played on Cartoon Network , and thus far , none have surpassed them " . Bob Higgins , head of creative at Wild Brain , considered Ed , Edd n Eddy to be a " landmark in animation " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Shorts = = = 
 Cartoon Network produced short cartoons involving the Eds which were shown during commercial breaks . A short music video was produced with stylized versions of Ed , Edd , Eddy and Sarah , entitled " The Incredible Shrinking Day " ( listed on the Season 2 DVD as " I 'm Not Coming in Anymore " ) , which aired on Cartoon Network in 2002 and 2003 . In the video , Sarah uses a potion to shrink the Eds to a size capable of playing in her dollhouse , with predictable results . Plank starred in a similar video called " My Best Friend Plank " , which aired in 2002 . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The made @-@ for @-@ TV movie Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show served as the series ' finale and premiered in the United States on November 8 , 2009 ; although it had completed production a year earlier and first aired in Scandinavia , Australia , and Southeast Asia . The plot focuses on the Eds ' search for Eddy 's Brother , a character mentioned several times throughout the series , but never seen until the film . He is voiced by series voice director Terry Klassen . The film was directed by Antonucci , who also co @-@ wrote the script with Rachel Connor , Jono Howard , Mike Kubat , and Stacy <unk> . The story was written by Joel Dickie , Steve Garcia , Jim Miller , Raven <unk> , and Scott Underwood , while the score was written by series composer Patric Caird . The film achieved huge ratings success for Cartoon Network with high delivery gains . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Ed , Edd n Eddy was regularly featured in DC Comics ' Cartoon Network Block Party ( originally Cartoon Cartoons , the collective name of original Cartoon Network series from 1995 to 2003 ) comic books , along with other Cartoon Network series . Two books based on the series have been released , both published by Scholastic Inc. in 2005 : Ed , Edd n Eddy : Lots of Laughs , written by Jesse Leon McCann , and Ed , Edd n Eddy : Book of Extreme Excuses , written by Howie Dewin . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Four video games based on the series have been produced . Ed , Edd n Eddy : Jawbreakers ! was released on September 15 , 2003 , for the Game Boy Advance . Ed , Edd n Eddy : Giant Jawbreakers was released on March 4 , 2004 , for mobile phones . Ed , Edd n Eddy : The Mis @-@ <unk> was released in 2005 for the Nintendo GameCube , PlayStation 2 , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and PC . The most recent game , Ed , Edd n Eddy : Scam of the Century , was released for the Nintendo DS on October 26 , 2007 . The games were met with generally mixed reception . 
 Characters and locations from the show appear in other Cartoon Network video games , including 2003 's Cartoon Network : Block Party and Cartoon Network Speedway . All three main characters , and the Kanker sisters , appear as non @-@ playable " Nano " characters in the massively multiplayer online game Cartoon Network Universe : <unk> . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The first two seasons of Ed , Edd n Eddy were released as DVD box sets by Warner Home Video and Madman Entertainment in 2006 and 2007 . The Fools ' Par @-@ Ed @-@ Ise DVD , the box sets of the first two seasons , and several Ed , Edd n Eddy T @-@ shirts are available for purchase on the Cartoon Network Shop . Selected episodes from the series were also featured on various Cartoon Network compilation DVDs . All five seasons of the series , as well as Ed , Edd n Eddy 's Big Picture Show , are available for download on the iTunes Store . The first four seasons are available on Netflix . The third season can be downloaded at Google Play and Amazon . The Eds and Sarah have been free toys in children 's meals for Subway . 
 = Kona Lanes = 
 Kona Lanes was a bowling center in Costa Mesa , California , from 1958 to 2003 . Known for its " Space Age " design , it featured 40 wood @-@ floor bowling lanes , a game room , a lounge , and a coffee shop ( later the Island Grill and finally a Mexican diner ) . Built during the heyday of Googie architecture , its Polynesian Tiki styling extended from the massive roadside neon sign to the building 's " flamboyant neon lights and ostentatious rooflines meant to attract motorists like moths . " 
 Kona Lanes was one of the last remaining examples of the Googie style in the region ; when it was demolished , only Java Lanes in Long Beach remained until it was razed in 2004 . Following a sale of much of the equipment , the building housing Kona Lanes was leveled while the distinctive sign was saved and sent to Cincinnati , Ohio , for inclusion in the American Sign Museum . 
 During public hearings on the future of the site , members of Costa Mesa 's planning commission originally approved a proposal to build a department store . Following public outcry , those plans were scrapped in favor of senior apartments and commercial development . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Kona Lanes opened in 1958 , featuring the Tiki @-@ inspired signage and architecture that became popular following World War II . The building on Harbor Boulevard near Adams Avenue was one of three designed and built around the same time by Powers , Daly , & DeRosa featuring the Googie style ; Kona Lanes and its sister center , Java Lanes , used names that suggested South Pacific island locales . They were " expensive and attractive buildings that screamed , ' Have fun here ' " , and Kona retained much of that old @-@ time feel over the years . Its original neon @-@ lit street sign remained for the life of the building , and Kona was the only bowling establishment in the area to eschew automatic scoring equipment throughout its existence . 
 Kona Lanes hosted the Southern California PBA Open twice , in 1964 ( won by Billy Hardwick ) and 1965 ( won by Jerry Hale ) . Longtime general manager Dick Stoeffler , known at the time as the host of TV Bowling Tournament on KTLA , finished third during the televised finals in his own building in 1964 , behind Hardwick and Bud Horn . When Stoeffler rolled back @-@ to @-@ back 300 games in one league session at Kona in 1968 , he was one of only four men in the country to have managed the feat . 
