 = = = Peak years = = = 
 Numerous champions bowled at Kona Lanes during its 45 @-@ year history , including John <unk> , the one @-@ time Orange County Bowling Hall of Fame inductee who began a stint as Kona 's manager in 1974 ; two @-@ time female Bowling Writers Association of America Bowler of the Year <unk> Sill ; future Michigan Women 's Bowling Association Hall @-@ of @-@ Famer Cora Fiebig ; and Barry Asher , the multiple @-@ Professional Bowlers Association tour champion and Hall of Fame inductee who as of 2014 was running the pro shop at Fountain Bowl in nearby Fountain Valley . Kona Lanes and Tustin Lanes hosted nearly 10 @,@ 000 teams of five players each taking part in the United States Bowling Congress Women 's Championships in 1986 . 
 Under Dick Stoeffler 's " innovative " management , Kona Lanes kept busy 24 hours a day , making him one of the most successful proprietors in the country . Stoeffler met his future wife there , and similar reminiscences were printed in local newspapers . Kona was often so busy that customers would have to make reservations to get a lane during " open " ( non @-@ league ) bowling hours . At its peak , Kona Lanes " was the busiest place in Orange County , averaging more than 80 lines " on each of its 40 lanes . A flier posted in the building in 1993 to promote its 35th anniversary called Kona " ' the place to be ' in Costa Mesa . " 
 Bowling as a participation sport flourished starting in the early 1960s , but its popularity would be diluted due to <unk> — the number of bowling alleys sanctioned by the then @-@ American Bowling Congress peaked at about 11 @,@ 000 by mid @-@ decade , and Kona was one of more than 30 in southern California alone — and to a decline in league bowling starting in the 1980s . One AMF Bowling official argued that the customer base remained steady because an increase in open bowling made up for fewer league bowlers . 
 Jack Mann bought Kona Lanes in 1980 ; he began a renovation that tamed some of the building 's colors and features , and re @-@ branded it New Kona Lanes the following year . Mann 's family owned several bowling centers in the region ; he was behind the creation of Fountain Bowl in 1973 and the short @-@ lived Regal Lanes in Orange in 1974 . He also owned Tustin Lanes before selling it to his youngest son , Alex . Mann bought Kona not because he loved bowling , but because it would continue to pay dividends " even if I were incapacitated . " Mann would later sell Kona to his son Jack Jr . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The center 's lounge , known as the Outrigger Room , hosted numerous local artists over the years . Jazz quintet The Redd Foxx <unk> released four songs recorded there , while Roscoe Holland recorded a set of eight live performances for his album Beyond the Reef . 
 In later years , large portions of the bowlers ' area would be taped off for rock concerts and weekend promotions like Club Crush , which proved popular among teen @-@ agers and also led to album recordings . The idea failed at least once : Kona Lanes was hit with some negative publicity when a planned event featuring a local punk rock group was shut down by the Costa Mesa Police Department . 
 = = = Decline and demolition = = = 
 The waning " nostalgic appeal " took its toll on Kona Lanes over time , despite efforts to maintain relevance and to appeal to a more diverse customer base by hosting local music acts , supporting a Polynesian @-@ themed restaurant called Kona <unk> , and promoting gimmicks like " nude bowling " . Eventually , the property became more valuable than the business . The landowners , C.J. Segerstrom & Sons , gave Jack Mann Jr. a choice : spend US $ 10 – 20 million to update the center , or give it up . Mann chose the latter rather than spend such a sum on a site without a long @-@ term lease . 
 Plans to build a Kohl 's department store on the site occupied by Kona Lanes and the already @-@ demolished Edwards Cinema Center and Ice Capades Chalet were approved by the city 's planning commissioners but met with resistance by neighbors who didn 't think it fit in . Then @-@ mayor Karen Robinson complained that Costa Mesa 's policy @-@ makers had " completely lost sight of play for the quality of life " of city residents , and appealed the commissioners ' decision in February 2003 . By April , the city council had rejected the proposal . Meantime , efforts to save Kona Lanes failed ; it closed for good in May 2003 and was leveled soon thereafter . 
 = = = Rezoning and new use = = = 
 The 7 @.@ 5 acre parcel was rezoned in 2010 for senior housing that was expected to provide a new customer base for the restaurants and retailers already in the area and for commercial developments still to come . By October 2013 , after the lot had sat empty behind a chain @-@ link fence for a decade , construction on the 215 @-@ unit complex was under way ; <unk> at Mesa Verde opened in 2014 . Several dozen palm and eucalyptus trees were saved and replanted on the site . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The loss of Kona Lanes was a repeated topic at political events . One Costa Mesa city council candidate said he made a commitment to public service when the building was torn down , because he " didn 't hear local officials kicking and screaming . " Another would @-@ be council member agreed that " they should have never torn down the bowling alley ! " 
 Kona did see an increase in activity in its final days , due to the nostalgic value of potential keepsakes . Manager Juanita Johnson said people were asking to buy furniture , office equipment , and more . " Some of that is older than I am . " The more substantial items , including the " legendary " original wood lanes , had been sold off prior to demolition , while dumpster divers hit the parking lot each day , looking for anything of interest . The occasional <unk> was still being offered for sale more than ten years later . 
 Nine years after its only remaining bowling center was leveled , Costa Mesa looked to the future : plans to upgrade the retail space known as The Triangle — bordered by Harbor Boulevard , Newport Boulevard and West 19th Street , two miles south of the Kona Lanes site — included a 10 @-@ lane bowling alley that opened in 2014 , answering a long @-@ standing " outcry for an upscale bowling alley in town . " 
 = = = Historic roadside sign = = = 
 The huge , neon @-@ lit <unk> <unk> <unk> sign was featured in such publications as The Book of Tiki and Tiki Road Trip . It inspired professional paintings , an unofficial T @-@ shirt , and an effort led by then @-@ Costa Mesa Planning Commissioner Katrina Foley to save it from the scrap heap . 
 Thanks in part to a private donation , the marquee was trucked 2 @,@ 500 miles to Cincinnati , one of the first 20 signs accepted by the American Sign Museum . The <unk> <unk> portion was refurbished and is now on display ; the larger <unk> section buckled and tore during the unloading process and could not be saved . 
 = Dowse Sod House = 
 The William R. Dowse House , more commonly known as the Dowse Sod House , is a sod house in Custer County in the central portion of the state of Nebraska , in the Great Plains region of the United States . It was built in 1900 and occupied until 1959 . After a long period of neglect , it was restored beginning in about 1981 , and opened as a museum in 1982 . 
 The house is listed in the National Register of Historic Places , as " an excellent example of the sod house phenomenon " , and as one of the few surviving sod houses in Nebraska . 
 = = Sod houses on the Great Plains = = 
 The Homestead Act of 1862 was a major factor in opening the Great Plains to white settlement . Under the provisions of the Act , settlers could obtain title to a quarter @-@ section ( 160 acres , or 65 ha ) of land for a nominal fee , provided that they built a house , made certain improvements , farmed the land , and occupied the site for at least five years . 
 Settlers in the regions east of the Missouri River had found ample trees with which to build log houses . The eastern quarter of Nebraska was also well supplied with timber . However , as settlers moved further west , they encountered the <unk> that had led Major Stephen H. Long , exploring the region in 1820 , to label it the " Great American Desert " . Especially before the arrival of the railroad , the cost of importing building materials was prohibitive ; and many homesteaders had spent all that they had on farming equipment , and could barely afford the filing fees for their land claims . 
 There is no consensus among scholars regarding the origin of sod construction on the Plains . Some maintain that the inspiration came from the earth lodges of the local native peoples , including the Omahas and the Pawnees . However , these earth lodges were circular in cross @-@ section , and built upon heavy timber frameworks . It has also been suggested that the idea of building with sod came from European immigrants , either Russian @-@ Germans , who are known to have built rammed earth dwellings in the Plains , or immigrants from the British Isles , particularly from Ireland , where turf houses were built with stone foundations and frames to support the turf . None of these closely resembled the unframed sod @-@ block houses built in the Midwestern United States ; but they might have engendered the idea of building with earth . 
 A simple sod house could be built in about a week , and for a cost of less than five dollars . Cost was not the only advantage . The thick walls provided insulation against summer heat and winter cold ; the latter was particularly important in light of the dearth of firewood on the plains , which forced the early settlers to burn <unk> , twisted grass , or dried buffalo dung . The walls also withstood prairie winds better than framed walls ; even sod houses struck by tornadoes generally survived with no worse damage than the loss of the roof , leaving the walls standing . Sod houses also provided a safe refuge against prairie fires , especially when surrounded by a plowed and back @-@ burned firebreak . 
 The sod house was not without its disadvantages , however . Initially , at least , most had dirt floors , which had to be sprinkled with water to abate dust . To protect against invasion by rodents , insects , and snakes , the interior walls were often shaved smooth and plastered with lime , or with a mixture of local clay and sand or ashes ; the lower portions of the exterior walls could also be reinforced , with planks or concrete if they were available , or with a second layer of sod to thicken them . Leaky roofs were also a problem ; to protect the inhabitants and the interior furnishings from falling water , dirt , and vermin , it was common to make a ceiling of a white muslin sheet tacked to the walls . Since windows were one of the most expensive elements of a sod house , pioneers on a budget were often forced to make do with windows that were small and few in number ; a light muslin ceiling and plastered walls helped to illuminate the house by reflecting daylight through the interior . 
 Sod houses continued to be occupied and built even after wood for construction became available . A number of contemporary photographs show occupied sod houses adjacent to frame barns and outbuildings . The Dowse house was built in 1900 , although the Burlington and Missouri River Railroad had reached the nearby town of Comstock in 1899 , and a lumber company was available there . During the Great Depression of the 1930s , several Custer County farmers who had lost their homes relocated to vacant land and built sod houses there . As late as 1940 , a sod house was built near Dunning , Nebraska . 
 The sod houses of Custer County are particularly well documented , owing to the efforts of Solomon Butcher . An itinerant photographer , Butcher conceived the idea of creating a photographic history of pioneer life in Nebraska . Between 1886 and 1912 , he produced nearly 3 @,@ 500 glass plate negatives ; over 1 @,@ 800 of these were taken in Custer County , and over 1 @,@ 500 show sod houses . Butcher 's photographs are now owned by the Nebraska State Historical Society . 
 = = = Sod construction = = = 
 In constructing a sod house , a site had to be chosen that was close to good sources of sod . All prairie grasses were not alike for purposes of construction sod ; the best were those with a strong and dense root network to hold the blocks together . Preferred species included buffalo grass ( Bouteloua dactyloides ) , slough grass ( Spartina <unk> ) , and big bluestem ( Andropogon <unk> ) . 
 At the house site , the grass was removed . Often , the soil was excavated one to two feet ( 30 to 60 cm ) below ground level ; this reduced the height of the walls , and thus the amount of sod that had to be cut . The ground that would form the house floor was moistened and then tamped with a <unk> to flatten and harden it . <unk> were rarely laid , due to the cost or unavailability of material . 
 Before the sod blocks were cut , the grass was mown short or burned off . At times , the surface was scored with a cutter or disc ; the blocks could then be removed with a spade . This approach , however , tended to produce rough and non @-@ uniform blocks , which complicated the task of laying them in even courses . Blocks could also be cut with a plow . An ordinary plow could be used , given considerable skill and care on the part of the operator ; however , the mouldboard tended to turn over and break up the blocks ; even if intact blocks were produced , they were generally not of uniform thickness . In the late 19th century , a modified plow designed specifically for sod cutting was invented : this " grasshopper plow " replaced the mouldboard with a set of adjustable rods , which allowed the operator to cut a uniform strip of sod three to six inches ( 7 @.@ 6 to 15 @.@ 2 cm ) deep and 12 to 18 inches ( 30 to 46 cm ) wide . This strip could then be cut into blocks . The dimensions of these depended , among other things , on the strength of the builder — the blocks were dense , and had to be sized so that the builders could lift them . Typical blocks cut with a grasshopper plow might measure four inches ( 10 cm ) deep by 12 inches ( 30 cm ) wide by 24 to 36 inches ( 60 to 90 cm ) long . 
 In building the walls , the sod blocks were laid one course at a time ; each course was completed before the next was begun . Walls were generally two or three wythes thick ; the vertical joints were staggered to avoid creating a direct path through the wall for wind and vermin . To bind the wythes and increase the stability of the wall , every second , third , or fourth course was laid crosswise . 
 Early sod houses were roofed with sod . The weight of the roof helped to keep it from blowing away in strong winds , and the insulating power of such a roof helped to moderate temperatures within the house . However , the sod roof 's weight also posed the risk of collapse if there was insufficient wood support for it , and sod roofs tended to drip water , mud , and insects . In later sod houses , for which the material was more readily available , roofs were shingled or covered with tarpaper , boards , or metal . 
 = = History = = 
 The first homestead established in Custer County was that of Lewis R. and Sarah M. Dowse , who in August 1873 occupied a site on the Middle Loup River . Lewis Dowse was born in 1845 in <unk> , Massachusetts . After service in the Civil War , he moved to Iowa in 1868 . In the following year , he married Sarah Wagner , who was born in 1854 in Auglaize County , Ohio . In 1871 , their oldest child , William R. Dowse , was born . The family moved to Nebraska in 1873 , accompanied by Sarah Dowse 's parents ; the latter remained in Loup City while their daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law established their homestead , then moved to Custer County in 1874 . The <unk> initially occupied a dugout on their claim ; in 1874 , they built a slab house , using material brought from Loup City . There , they raised nine children , including an adopted daughter . 
 = = = Building the house = = = 
 In October 1900 , William Dowse married 18 @-@ year @-@ old Florence Murphy , daughter of John and Leah <unk> Murphy . At the beginning of that year , he was living in a dugout just south of his parent 's farm ; by April 1900 , a sod house was under construction , to be occupied by the couple . John Murphy was an experienced builder of sod houses , and the William Dowse house was built with his aid and that of neighbors and friends . 
 The new house was located northwest of the homestead of the senior <unk> . William Dowse did not homestead the site . The property was originally acquired in 1884 by Kate Prescott , under the provisions of the Timber Culture Act of 1873 ; it is not known whether Prescott had built a dwelling on the parcel . 
 The blocks for the house were cut from bluestem sod , probably obtained from a site very close to the house . The grass was mown to a height of 1 / 4 inch ( 6 mm ) ; the blocks were then cut with a grasshopper plow , to dimensions of about 24 inches ( 60 cm ) long by 16 inches ( 40 cm ) wide by 3 – 4 inches ( 8 – 10 cm ) thick . Blocks were laid with the grass side down , in a one @-@ course common bond ; the walls were battered , measuring 27 inches ( 69 cm ) thick at ground level and 20 inches ( 51 cm ) thick at the top . 
 The plan of the house was L @-@ shaped , with stems projecting to the east and to the south . It occupied a rectangle measuring 29 feet by 31 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 8 m by 9 @.@ 5 m ) ; each stem of the L was approximately 20 feet ( 6 m ) wide . The single @-@ story house was topped with a steeply @-@ pitched wood @-@ shingled hip roof . 
 The interior was divided by wood partition walls into three rooms . A small bedroom occupied the northwest corner , at the angle of the L. The eastward projection contained a large kitchen and hall ; the southward projection , a somewhat smaller parlor and dining room . A steep stairway led up to an unfinished attic . The floors were packed dirt ; the ceiling was muslin tacked beneath boards . The interior of the sod walls was plastered with a mixture of clay , straw , and hog hair . 
 Two east @-@ facing doors led into the house . One , at the end of the eastern projection of the L , led into the kitchen @-@ hall . A second , on the east side of the southern projection , led from the space enclosed by the arms of the L into the parlor @-@ dining room . Two windows faced northward : one from the kitchen @-@ hall , one from the bedroom . Two more faced southward : one from the kitchen @-@ hall and one from the parlor @-@ dining room . A single window faced eastward from the kitchen @-@ hall . Windows were flush with the exterior walls of the house . The window wells were beveled , widening toward the interior of the house ; this admitted more light to the house . The configuration of the west wall is not known , since the wall was removed in 1924 . 
 = = = Living in the house = = = 
 William and Florence Dowse raised five sons , born between 1905 and 1919 : Harold , William Jr . , Philip , Curtis , and Kermit . After occupying a crib in his parents ' bedroom , each son moved up to the attic room , where they slept on straw ticks . 
 As the family expanded , the house was enlarged and improved . In 1915 , the muslin ceiling was replaced with plaster . Two years later , wood tongue @-@ and @-@ groove flooring was installed . In 1924 , two additions were made . The space between the two arms of the L was framed in and covered with a shed roof ; the resulting southeast corner room was left unfinished and used as a laundry room . The west sod wall of the house was removed completely , and a second shed @-@ roofed addition constructed to extend the house to the west . Both additions were clad in wooden shingles . William Dowse , Jr. and his wife Inez occupied the western addition . 
 At some point , the house was wired for electricity . Plumbing was never installed . 
 The last major alteration to the house took place in 1935 , when it was realized that the projection of the eaves was not sufficient to protect the house 's walls from erosion . At that time , concrete was applied to the lower portion of the exterior sod walls : boards were placed against the wall and concrete poured into the space between board and wall , then allowed to dry before the boards were raised and the process repeated . 
 The durability of the house was tested in the early 1940s , when a tornado struck the farmstead . All of the farm 's outbuildings were destroyed ; but the house escaped undamaged , apart from a <unk> blown through one of the windows . 
 William Dowse lived in the house until his death in 1951 . Florence Dowse remained for another two years before moving to Comstock ; she died in 1969 . The final occupants of the house were the family of William Dowse , Jr . , who remained there until 1959 , the year before his death . 
 = = = Restoring the house = = = 
 After the departure of the last occupants , the house stood neglected for over two decades . Fire damaged the roof and shingles were blown off , allowing leakage ; all of the windows and doors were broken or destroyed . With nothing to bar their entrance , cattle passed through the house , leaving a foot ( 30 cm ) of manure on the floors . 
 In about 1981 , descendants of William and Florence Dowse decided to restore the house . The project was spearheaded by two of the Dowse sons , Philip and Curtis , and supported by the Comstock Community Club . In the course of several years , over $ 6 @,@ 000 was raised for the project . A fence was built to exclude cattle from the house . The roof was repaired and <unk> . The exterior walls were reinforced and repaired with new sod blocks , cut with a horse @-@ drawn plow about 600 feet ( 200 m ) from the house ; additional concrete coating was applied in places . The porch walls were re @-@ shingled , and doors and windows were replaced . Inside the house , the manure covering the floors was removed , and the wood flooring repaired ; the plaster on the walls was patched or replaced , up to 20 layers of old wallpaper was removed , and new wallpaper applied in places . Pioneer @-@ era interior furnishings such as a cast @-@ iron stove were installed . In May 1982 , the house was opened as a museum . 
 In 1986 , the house was listed in the National Register of Historic Places , under the name " William R. Dowse House " . In the form nominating it for the register , it was described as " an excellent example of the sod house phenomenon " , and as one of the few surviving sod houses in the state . For their efforts in restoring the house and opening it to the public , Philip and Curtis Dowse received the Nebraska State Historical Society 's Nebraska Preservation Award in 1990 . In the 21st century , the Dowse Sod House is promoted as a tourist destination by the village of Comstock and by the Nebraska Division of Travel and Tourism . 
 = Authentic Science Fiction = 
 Authentic Science Fiction was a British science fiction magazine published in the 1950s that ran for 85 issues under three editors : Gordon Landsborough , H.J. Campbell , and E.C. Tubb . The magazine was published by Hamilton and Co . , and began in 1951 as a series of novels appearing every two weeks ; by the summer it became a monthly magazine , with readers ' letters and an editorial page , though fiction content was still restricted to a single novel . In 1952 short fiction began to appear alongside the novels , and within two more years it completed the transformation into a science fiction magazine . 
 Authentic published little in the way of important or ground @-@ breaking fiction , though it did print Charles L. Harness 's " The Rose " , which later became well @-@ regarded . The poor rates of pay — £ 1 per 1 @,@ 000 words — prevented the magazine from attracting the best writers . During much of its life it competed against three other moderately successful British science fiction magazines , as well as the American science fiction magazine market . Hamilton folded the magazine in October 1957 , because they needed cash to finance an investment in the UK rights to an American best @-@ selling novel . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1950 , science fiction ( sf ) magazines had been published successfully in North America for over twenty years , but little progress had been made in establishing British equivalents . The bulk of British sf was published as paperback books , rather than magazines ; a situation opposite of that in the US . Several short @-@ lived magazines had come and gone , both before and after the war . John Spencer launched four very poor quality juvenile magazines in 1950 , which continued into the mid @-@ 1950s , while one magazine , New Worlds , had survived since 1946 . Since 1939 , Atlas , a British publisher , had been producing a reprint edition of Astounding Science Fiction , one of the most well @-@ regarded American sf magazines . During the war the contents had often been cut severely , and the schedule had not been regular , but it was reputed to sell 40 @,@ 000 copies a month . This was enough to attract the attention of Hamilton & Co . , a British publisher looking for new markets . 
 In 1949 , Hamilton hired Gordon Landsborough as an editor . Landsborough did his best to improve the quality of the science fiction he was publishing , and was allowed to offer £ 1 per 1 @,@ 000 words for selected material . He also was joined at Hamilton by H.J. Campbell , who was hired as a technical editor . Campbell was a London science fiction fan ; he had been brought on by Hulton Press ( publisher of the very successful comic the Eagle ) to create a science fiction magazine , but the project had been abandoned before seeing print . 
 By the start of 1951 , Hamilton 's science fiction titles were being published every two weeks . On 1 January 1951 , Hamilton published Mushroom Men from Mars , by Lee Stanton , which was a pseudonym for Richard Conroy . A banner was added to the base of the cover reading " Authentic Science Fiction Series " ; the same banner appeared on the 15 January novel , <unk> <unk> II , by Jon J. Deegan , also a pseudonym , this time for Robert G. Sharp . With the next book , Roy Sheldon 's Gold Men of Aureus , Landsborough changed the banner to read " Science Fiction Fortnightly No. 3 " , thinking that the caption might help sales . In addition to the banner , a contents page ( including a date and issue number ) , a letter column , an editorial , and an advertisement for subscriptions were inserted . According to Landsborough , the banner was only intended to indicate the publishing schedule to readers , but combined with the other changes the appearance became much more magazine @-@ like . These changes established the sequence in the minds of readers and collectors , and retroactively determined that Mushroom Men from Mars had been the first in the series : the first two issues had carried no issue number . Issue 3 was also the first issue to carry the editors ' names : Landsborough used the pseudonym L.G. Holmes ( " Holmes " was his middle name ) for his editing role on the magazine . 
 The caption did apparently help sales : Landsborough subsequently commented that while Hamilton 's other titles were selling perhaps 15 @,@ 000 copies , Authentic managed to sell 30 @,@ 000 . After the banners were in place , Hamilton proposed launching a monthly sf magazine . Landsborough was concerned about the workload , and also felt it would be difficult to find enough good material ; Hamilton refused to increase the pay rate , which was not high enough to attract the best stories . A compromise was reached , and Authentic was born as a monthly magazine in paperback format , with a single novel and a short editorial feature in each issue , plus an occasional short story . The eighth issue was the last on the fortnightly schedule . Issues 9 – 12 were titled " Science Fiction Monthly " in the footer of the cover . In mid @-@ 1951 , Landsborough left Hamilton , and Campbell replaced him as editor of Authentic with the thirteenth issue , which was also the first one on which the title changed to " Authentic Science Fiction " . 
 Under Campbell Authentic improved somewhat , and continued its metamorphosis into a magazine , with additional non @-@ fiction writing , and short fiction in addition to the main novel in each issue . Hamilton also ran a science fiction paperback imprint , Panther Books , which would go on to become one of the leading British sf houses . By 1953 the British sf market was going through a metamorphosis similar to the one going in the US at the same time : poor quality sf markets were failing , and the result was a reduced but active market , with four magazines : Authentic , New Worlds , Science Fantasy , and Nebula Science Fiction . 
 At the end of 1955 Campbell decided to give up editing in favour of his scientific career as a research chemist . He was replaced from the February 1956 issue by E.C. Tubb , who remained editor to the end of the magazine 's life . Tubb had contributed a great deal of material to the magazine under various pseudonyms , often amounting to more than half of an issue 's fiction , and he later recalled that Campbell 's way of hiring him as editor was to say to him , " As you 're practically writing it , you may as well edit it . " 
 The quality of material submitted to Tubb was " dreadful " , in the words of sf historian Michael Ashley , and included many stories that had previously been rejected by Campbell : he was able to recognize these because Campbell had kept a log of all submissions . One story was rejected that had been plagiarized from one that had appeared twelve years earlier in Astounding Science Fiction . Tubb 's overall acceptance rate was about one in twenty @-@ five submissions . As a result , he found it difficult to keep standards up , often finding himself forced to write material under pseudonyms to fill an issue . 
 In early 1957 , Tubb persuaded Hamilton to switch the magazine from pocket @-@ book to digest size format , in the hope that this would improve the magazine 's visibility on bookstalls . The circulation did indeed rise , to about 14 @,@ 000 copies per month — a surprisingly low figure given Landsborough 's assertion that Authentic had been selling 30 @,@ 000 copies in the early days . However , later that year , Hamilton made the decision to invest a substantial sum in the UK paperback rights of an American best @-@ seller : it is not known for certain which book this was , but it is thought to have been Evan Hunter 's The Blackboard Jungle . Hamilton could no longer afford to have cash tied up in Authentic , and in the summer of 1957 Tubb was given two months to close down the magazine , printing stories that had already been paid for . The last issue was dated October 1957 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 For the first twenty @-@ five issues , Authentic ran a full novel in every issue , but no other fiction , though there were various non @-@ fiction departments such as " Projectiles " ( readers ' letters ) , an editorial , book reviews , fanzine reviews , and science related articles , quizzes , and news columns . In issue 26 , dated October 1952 , the first installment of Frontier Legion , a serial by Sydney J. Bounds , appeared . With issue 29 , the full @-@ length novel , Immortal 's Playthings by William F. Temple , was accompanied by a short story , Ray Bradbury 's " Welcome , Brothers ! " as well as part four of Frontier Legion . The serial was stretched out over six issues by printing scarcely more than a dozen pages in each installment ; it finally completed in issue 31 . 
 With issue 36 ( August 1953 ) , the cover text changed from advertising a " Full @-@ length Novel " to " Full @-@ length Story " ; the " featured story " , as it was called in the contents page , was still the longest piece of fiction in the issue , but was no longer necessarily even close to novel length . Issue 41 , for example , ran Richard deMille 's " The Phoenix Nest " as the lead story , with fewer than forty pages of text . Finally , in issue 60 ( August 1955 ) , the word " feature " was removed from the contents page , and with it the last vestige of the origin of the magazine as a series of novels . 
 The early novels published by Hamilton were of generally poor quality . Michael Ashley , a historian of sf , described the first issue , Lee Stanton 's Mushroom Men of Mars as " of abysmal quality " , and the third , Roy Sheldon 's Gold Men of Aureus as " atrocious " . However , Campbell contributed some better work , beginning with Phantom Moon , under the house name Roy Sheldon , which appeared in issue 6 , dated 15 March 1951 ; his first novel under his own name was World in a Test Tube , which appeared in issue 8 , dated 15 April 1951 . He continued to write for the magazine after he became editor — his work has been described as " enjoyable " , though " not especially sophisticated " . Tubb was also a regular contributor , often under house names , which according to Landsborough were used by Hamilton to prevent authors gaining name recognition under a pseudonym and then taking that name to another publisher . 
 Regulars in the magazine included Sydney J. Bounds , William F. Temple , Bryan Berry , and Ken Bulmer . At the start of 1953 , Authentic began to include material that had been previously published in the US ; this practice ceased later that year , but began again in 1956 , and led to the reprinting of material by well @-@ known names such as Isaac Asimov , whose 1951 story " Ideals Die Hard " was reprinted in issue 78 , dated March 1957 . Other well @-@ known names that appeared in Authentic included Brian Aldiss and John Brunner . Campbell had encouraged science articles during his tenure , but under Tubb 's editorship these were gradually eliminated . 
 Perhaps the most notable story Authentic published was Charles L. Harness 's " The Rose " , which appeared in the March 1953 issue . Other than this , Authentic published little of note : the Nicholls / Clute Encyclopedia of SF commented that it " seldom published stories of the first rank " , specifically excepting Harness 's " The Rose " . David Kyle , in his Pictorial History of Science Fiction , states that Campbell improved the magazine , making it " remarkably good " , and sf expert Donald Tuck 's opinion was that it eventually achieved " a good standard " , but in Michael Ashley 's opinion , the magazine " sadly lacked originality " , and ran fiction that was " stereotyped and forced , frequently because Campbell had to rely on the same small band of regulars to supply the bulk of the fiction " . 
 The cover artwork was initially poor : the very first issue has been described as " British pulp at its most infantile " , but the covers began to improve from mid @-@ 1953 . Josh Kirby , now well known for his Discworld art , contributed seven covers , beginning with issue 61 in September 1955 . There were also many covers on astronomical themes : these were clearly influenced by the US artist Chesley Bonestell , and were fairly successful . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Authentic was pocket book size ( 7 @.@ 25 × 4 @.@ 75 inches ) for most of its life , changing to digest size ( 7 @.@ 5 × 5 @.@ 5 inches ) for the last eight issues . The issue numbering was consecutive from 1 to 85 , with no volume numbers . The first issue had a publication date of 1 January 1951 , and the first eight issues had publication dates of the 1st and 15th of each month . From the ninth issue to the end Authentic maintained a completely regular monthly schedule ; the publication date was given in the magazine as the 15th of each month from issue 9 through issue 73 ; thereafter the date was just given as the month and year . 
 The price began as 1 / 6 ( one shilling and six pence ) ; the price was raised to two shillings with issue 60 , February 1955 , and stayed at that price until the end of the run . Interior artwork was not used for the first issues , which contained no fiction other than a single novel ; illustrations began to appear with issue 29 . Tubb announced in issue 85 , which turned out to be the last issue , that he had dropped all interior artwork . 
 The title of the magazine changed several times : 
 The first six issues were 132 pages , with the page count dropped to 116 for issues 7 through 25 . Issue 26 saw the page count return to 132 . The cover layout for all these issues remained essentially the same , despite title changes . With issue 29 a layout using a yellow inverted " L " to frame the cover picture was introduced , and the page count was increased to 148 . Another cover redesign with issue 39 saw the yellow " L " removed , and the page count went up again to 164 with issue 41 , then back to 148 with issue 47 . The cover design varied further , with different title fonts ; the page count went back to 132 with issue 57 , then returned to 164 from issue 60 through issue 77 , the last in pocket @-@ book format . The eight issues in digest format all had 132 pages . 
 The editors were : 
 L.G. Holmes ( pseudonym for Gordon Landsborough ) , issues 1 – 27 ( 27 issues ) 
 H.J. Campbell , issues 28 – 65 ( 38 issues ) 
 E.C. Tubb , issues 66 – 85 ( 20 issues ) 
 = Elwyn Roy King = 
 Elwyn Roy King , DSO , DFC ( 13 May 1894 – 28 November 1941 ) was a fighter ace in the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) during World War I. He achieved twenty @-@ six victories in aerial combat , making him the fourth highest @-@ scoring Australian pilot of the war , and second only to Harry Cobby in the AFC . A civil pilot and engineer between the wars , he served in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) from 1939 until his death . 
 Born in Bathurst , New South Wales , King initially saw service as a <unk> in Egypt in 1916 . He transferred to the AFC as a mechanic in January 1917 , and was subsequently commissioned as a pilot . Posted to No. 4 Squadron , he saw action on the Western Front flying Sopwith Camels and Snipes . He scored seven of his " kills " in the latter type , more than any other pilot . His exploits earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross , the Distinguished Service Order , and a mention in despatches . Returning to Australia in 1919 , King spent some years in civil aviation before co @-@ founding a successful engineering business . He joined the RAAF following the outbreak of World War II and held several training commands , rising to the rank of group captain shortly before his sudden death in November 1941 at the age of forty @-@ seven . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roy King was born on 13 May 1894 at The Grove , near Bathurst , New South Wales . He was the son of English @-@ born Elizabeth Mary ( Miller ) King and Richard King , an Australian labourer . The youth attended public school , and further educated himself in mechanical engineering via correspondence . Having been employed repairing bicycles , automobiles , and farming equipment , he was living in Forbes and working as a motor mechanic when he joined the Australian Imperial Force under the name Roy King on 20 July 1915 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 On 5 October 1915 , King embarked for Egypt aboard HMAT Themistocles , as part of the reinforcements for the 12th Regiment of the 4th Light Horse Brigade . He joined the 12th Light Horse at Heliopolis in February 1916 , as the unit was reassembling following its service in the Gallipoli Campaign . The regiment was engaged in the defence of the Suez Canal during May , and subsequently undertook patrols and sorties in the Sinai Desert . 
 King transferred to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) on 13 January 1917 , and was posted to Britain to join No. 4 Squadron AFC ( also referred to as No. 71 ( Australian ) Squadron , Royal Flying Corps , by the British ) as an air mechanic on 18 April . He was assigned to a training squadron for flying instruction in August . On 15 October , he gained his wings and officer 's commission . Allocated to No. 4 Squadron in November 1917 , King was posted to France for active duty on 21 March 1918 . The same day , the Germans launched Operation Michael , the opening phase of the Spring Offensive . 
 = = = Fighter ace = = = 
 No. 4 Squadron was operating its Sopwith Camels in hazardous , low @-@ altitude support of Australian ground troops when King arrived in France , and he had little opportunity for air @-@ to @-@ air combat . The burly 6 @-@ foot @-@ 5 @-@ inch ( 196 cm ) King — nicknamed " Bo " , " Beau " , or " Bow " — also had problems landing the Camel ; crammed into its small cockpit , his large frame impeded control stick movement . The resulting rough landings annoyed his commanding officer , Major Wilfred McCloughry , brother of ace Edgar McCloughry . King 's friend and fellow No. 4 Squadron pilot , Harry Cobby , recalled that " there was some speculation that he might go home — but he proved himself an impressive pilot " . Cobby often took King on " special missions " to make mischief with the Germans ; No. 4 Squadron found that two @-@ man patrols were generally able to lure enemy aircraft into a fight , whereas larger formations tended to deter engagements . On 14 May 1918 , King shot down a two @-@ seat German scout that was spotting for artillery between Ypres and Bailleul , but clouds prevented him from confirming its destruction . By 20 May , he had been credited with his first aerial victory , over a Pfalz D.III near Kemmel – Neuve Église . He was promoted to lieutenant on 1 June . On 20 June , he destroyed a German balloon over Estaires ; although vulnerable to attack with incendiary bullets , these large observation platforms were generally well protected by fighters and anti @-@ aircraft defences , and were thus considered a dangerous but valuable target . Later that month he shot down two more aircraft , a Pfalz and a two @-@ seat LVG , in the Lys region . 
 King registered his fifth victory , an LVG , after raiding Armentières on 25 July 1918 . Four days later , he led a flight of six Camels from No. 4 Squadron escorting Airco DH.9 light bombers of the Royal Air Force in another raid on Armentières . In an action that the Australian official history highlighted as an " example of cool and skilful air fighting " , the DH.9s completed their bombing mission while the Camels drove off an attacking force of at least ten German Fokkers , three of the Australians including King claiming victories , without any Allied losses . He destroyed a German two @-@ seater on 3 August and another the following day , sharing the second with Herbert Watson . No. 4 Squadron was heavily engaged in the Allies ' great offensive on the Western Front , launched with the Battle of Amiens on 8 August . King was credited with two victories — a balloon and an LVG — near Estaires during a bombing raid on 10 August . On 12 and 13 August , the Camels of No. 4 Squadron operated in a massed formation over Flanders with the S.E.5s of No. 2 Squadron AFC , the former 's two flights led by Cobby and King , and the latter 's by Adrian Cole and Roy Phillipps . <unk> were scarce and No. 4 Squadron 's only success came on the second day when King and his flight collectively destroyed a two @-@ seat Albatros . 
 On 16 August 1918 , King participated in a major assault against the German airfield at Haubourdin , near Lille , that resulted in thirty @-@ seven enemy aircraft being destroyed on the ground . During the action , described by the official history as a " riot of destruction " , King set on fire a hangar housing four or five German planes . He also , according to No. 2 Squadron pilot Charles Copp , flew down Haubourdin 's main street , waving as he went , his reason being that " the girls in that village must have had a heck of a time with all that bombing and must have been terribly scared so I thought I 'd cheer them up a bit " . By this time the Lille sector was largely clear of German fighters . The official history recorded that on 25 August , " King went out alone as far as Don railway station , bombed it , machine @-@ gunned a train , and returned among the low clouds — all without seeing any enemy " . The only contact around this time was on 30 August , when King , Thomas Baker and another pilot shot down two <unk> near Laventie . On 1 September , King destroyed an observation balloon over Aubers Ridge . Three days later he shot down an LVG after attacking a train near Lille with Cobby . He was recommended for the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) on 8 September . The award , promulgated in The London Gazette on 3 December , cited his " gallant and valuable service in bombing and attacking with machine gun fire enemy billets , trains , troops etc " , during which " he ensure [ d ] success by descending to low altitudes , disregarding personal danger " . On 16 September , following a lull in aerial combat in the region , King destroyed a Fokker biplane over Lille . Around this time he was promoted to captain and flight commander . He took over " A " Flight from Cobby , who had been posted to England . By the end of September , King 's tally was eighteen . He registered his final victory in a Camel on 2 October , when he used bombs to send down his fourth balloon . 
 During October 1918 , King converted with the rest of No. 4 Squadron to the upgraded Sopwith Snipe , whose larger cockpit was a better fit for him . He scored with the Snipe on both 28 and 29 October , the latter over Tournai , in what is frequently described as " one of the greatest air battles of the war " . At Tournai , amid a confrontation involving over seventy @-@ five Allied and German fighters , King evaded five enemy Fokkers that dived on him , before destroying an LVG in a head @-@ on attack . The next day , he downed three Fokker D.VIIs , two without firing a shot . As he zoomed up from shooting one out of control , he cut off another . This second Fokker pulled up to avoid collision and toppled onto a third Fokker . One of the war 's last air battles took place near Leuze on 4 November . King 's destruction of two D.VIIs in the space of five minutes , the latter in flames , capped his combat career . His tally of seven victories with the Snipe in the closing days of the war made him the highest @-@ scoring pilot in this type . 
 King 's final wartime score of twenty @-@ six included six aircraft driven down out of control , thirteen aircraft and four balloons destroyed , and three other aircraft destroyed in victories shared with other airmen . This made him second only to Harry Cobby as the most successful ace in the AFC , as well as the fourth most successful of all the Australian aces in the war ( his top @-@ scoring compatriots , Robert Little and Roderic ( Stan ) Dallas , flew with the British Royal Naval Air Service and Royal Air Force ) . King was recommended for a bar to his DFC , which was upgraded to the Distinguished Service Order and awarded on 3 June 1919 . The recommendation noted his victories in the air and described him as having " proved himself a very brilliant patrol leader " and as " a magnificent example at all times to all pilots in the Squadron by his keenness on the ground and gallantry in the air which was of the highest possible order " . He was also belatedly mentioned in despatches in July 1919 for his wartime service . 
 = = Interbellum and World War II = = 
 Following the end of hostilities , No. 4 Squadron joined the British Army of Occupation at <unk> , near Cologne , Germany , in December 1918 . The unit returned to England in March 1919 , and King sailed with it back to Australia aboard RMS Kaisar @-@ i @-@ Hind on 6 May . He left the AFC on 11 August 1919 in Melbourne , before gaining employment as an air courier for Larkin @-@ Sopwith Aviation Co. of Australasia Ltd , which had been co @-@ founded by fighter ace Herbert Larkin . While working for Larkin @-@ Sopwith , King refused an appointment in the newly established Australian Air Corps ( AAC ) — forerunner of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) — because it had not then offered a commission to Frank McNamara , VC . In a letter to the AAC selection committee on 30 January 1920 , he wrote " I feel I must forfeit my place in favor ( sic ) of this very good and gallant officer " ; McNamara received a commission in the AAC that April . 
 King 's career with Larkin @-@ Sopwith involved many pioneering flights . In 1920 alone , flying a Sopwith <unk> , he was credited with making the first aerial deliveries of mail and newspapers to various cities in eastern Australia , and with making the first aircraft landing at several townships in southern Queensland . He also competed in air races . By April 1922 , working with Larkin @-@ Sopwith 's successor , Larkin Aircraft Supply Co . Ltd , King was reported as having safely flown 2 @,@ 000 passengers and 48 @,@ 000 miles ( 77 @,@ 000 km ) throughout Victoria , New South Wales and Queensland . He soon left the aviation business to go into partnership with another pilot , T.T. Shipman , founding Shipman , King and Co . Pty Ltd . Importing and building machinery , the company was successful and allowed King to take up the restoration and racing of motor vehicles . He married Josephine Livingston , twenty , at St John 's Anglican Church , Camberwell , on 31 March 1925 . The couple had a son and a daughter . 
 In December 1939 , soon after the outbreak of World War II , King joined the RAAF as a squadron leader . Initially considered for general flying duties , he was assigned training commands commencing in the new year . On 2 January 1940 , he became the inaugural commanding officer of No. 3 Elementary Flying Training School ( No. 3 EFTS ) in Essendon , Victoria . Part of Australia 's contribution to the Empire Air Training Scheme , No. 3 EFTS initially comprised a significant civilian presence , many of the aircraft and staff under King 's control being from private airline companies and the Royal Victorian Aero Club ; by July , all private machines had been pressed into RAAF service and the civilian element largely disappeared . King assumed command of No. 5 Elementary Flying Training School at Narromine , New South Wales , on 21 December . Promoted to wing commander , he took over No. 1 Service Flying Training School at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , from Group Captain John McCauley on 7 July 1941 . In October , King was promoted to acting group captain and posted to command the newly established Station Headquarters Point Cook . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 King died unexpectedly of cerebral oedema on 28 November , aged 47 . Survived by his wife and children , he was cremated at Fawkner Crematorium , Melbourne . His funeral service at South Yarra was attended by hundreds of mourners from the military and civil aviation world , including the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , and a representative of the Minister for Air ; the pallbearers included Air Vice Marshal Henry Wrigley , Air Commodore Raymond Brownell , Group Captain Allan Walters , and Wing Commander Henry Winneke . 
 Elwyn Roy King 's name appears on panel 97 in the Commemorative Area of the Australian War Memorial , Canberra . His youngest brother Francis , who served as a flying officer with No. 30 Squadron in New Guinea , died in an aircraft crash on 31 May 1943 . 
 = Via della Conciliazione = 
 Via della Conciliazione ( Road of the Conciliation ) is a street in the <unk> of Borgo within Rome , Italy . Roughly 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in length , it connects Saint Peter 's Square to the Castel Sant 'Angelo on the western bank of the Tiber River . The road was constructed between 1936 and 1950 , and it is the primary access route to the Square . In addition to shops , it is bordered by a number of historical and religious buildings – including the Palazzo Torlonia , the Palazzo dei <unk> and the Palazzo dei Convertendi , and the churches of Santa Maria in Traspontina and Santo Spirito in <unk> . 
 Despite being one of the few major thoroughfares in Rome able to cope with a high volume of traffic without congestion , it is the subject of much ire both within the Roman community and among historical scholars due to the circumstances under which it was constructed . The area around the church was rebuilt several times following the various Sacks of Rome , and again after having deteriorated due to the loss of prosperity resulting from the Papacy 's relocation to Avignon during the 14th century . Through all of these reconstructions , the area in front of the short courtyard of Saint Peter 's Basilica remained a maze of densely packed structures overhanging narrow side @-@ streets and alleyways . 
 = = Previous plans = = 
 Plans were drawn up several times over the years for the construction of a major link between the Vatican City and the centre of Rome ; the number of submissions increasing dramatically with the onset of the Italian Renaissance . The first design was submitted by Leone Battista Alberti during the reign of Pope Nicholas V , and formed one of the two perennial designs proposed for the area . Alberti envisioned an " open " plan , consisting of a single voluminous V @-@ shaped boulevard , widest at St. Peter 's Basilica itself and tapering as it approached the Tiber . The other scheme of designs submitted by architects was a " closed " plan that would consist of two roads arching outwards in an ellipse , with the Tiber and the Square at opposite ends . Proponents of a closed plan would usually suggest that the space between the two causeways be separated by a colonnade , or by a row of inhabited structures whose designs would be scrutinised and approved by architects employed by the Holy See . Variations on both themes were submitted time and time again . Proponents of an " open " plan included such architects as Giovanni Battista <unk> and Cosimo Morelli . A number of other architects , such as Carlo Fontana , and at least one Pope ( Sixtus V ) favoured a " closed " design , with a number of streets radiating from the central square , maintaining the " spina " , or spine , of the structures of Borgo directly between the square and the Tiber . Neither approach moved beyond sketches and blueprints . Both open and closed designs were considered by the Vatican , but were ultimately discarded for reasons of expense . A thorough examination of the costs of constructing a thoroughfare was made by the Vatican @-@ approved St. Peter 's Building Commission in 1651 . Their conclusion was that " the cardinals ' proposal to demolish all the buildings between the Borgo Nuovo and the Borgo Vecchio for a greater and longer vista to the church " would be infeasible due to inordinately high expropriation costs and vested property interests . 
 Further momentum was lost when Gian Lorenzo Bernini was commissioned to redesign the terrace in front of the Basilica in 1656 . After discarding several sketches , Bernini settled on a colossal open space in the shape of an ellipse . With the potential expense of clearing Borgo , Bernini decided instead to make use of the warren of poorly maintained medieval buildings to obscure any view of the Vatican structures from any significant distance . In this way , pilgrims emerged from the relative darkness of the city into the vast open space and grandeur of the Square and its surrounding buildings – a sight calculated to inspire awe in first @-@ time visitors to the Holy See 's seat of power . Bernini had originally planned to demolish a square roughly 100 m to a side directly in front of the square , filling the space with a third colonnade ( or " <unk> braccio " ) to match the two still standing today . This would afford a longer vantage point to allow visitors a better viewing angle of the new Basilica . The death of his patron , Pope Alexander VII , put a halt to Bernini 's work . The third set of columns was abandoned , and Bernini 's piazza remained open @-@ ended and incomplete . 
 From the final major reconstruction of Borgo in the 15th century , the site which the Via della Conciliazione now covers remained occupied by residential , religious , and historical buildings for nearly 500 years . The final impetus behind the road 's construction was primarily political . Borgo , along with the rest of the Papal States outside of the Vatican itself , was taken by the Kingdom of Italy during the Italian unification in the 19th Century – leading to Pope Pius IX 's declaration that he had become a prisoner in the Vatican and the formation of the Roman Question . For the next 59 years , the Popes refused to leave the Vatican , in order to avoid any appearance of accepting the authority wielded by the Italian government over Rome as a whole . Initially , parts of the Italian government welcomed this , expecting the influence of the Papacy to fade to the point that enough political support could be gained to abolish it altogether . However , this failed to come to pass , and eventually a compromise acceptable to both states was reached in the Lateran treaty of 1929 . 
 = = Mussolini and Rome = = 
 Prime Minister Benito Mussolini , who had signed the accord on behalf of the King , resurrected the idea of a grand thoroughfare symbolically connecting the Vatican to the heart of the Italian capital . To fulfil this vision , Mussolini turned to the prominent Fascist architects Marcello <unk> and Attilio <unk> . Drawing inspiration from a number of the designs submitted by Carlo Fontana , <unk> came up with a plan that would preserve the best aspects of both the " open " and " closed " designs – a grand boulevard that would nonetheless obscure the majority of the Vatican buildings per Bernini 's intentions . The vast colonnaded street would require the clearance of the whole " spina " of Borgo placed in between the Basilica and the Castle . Since the facades of the buildings lining this space did not align perfectly , in order to create the illusion of a perfectly straight causeway traffic islands would be erected along both sides , with rows of obelisks leading towards the Square , doubling as lampposts . These were also intended to reduce the effect that the funnel @-@ shaped design would have on perspective when facing the Basilica . The wings of those buildings closest to the square would be preserved to form a propylaea , blocking the greater portion of the Vatican City from approaching visitors and framing the Square and Basilica at the head of a grand open space that would allow for easy vehicular access . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Demolition of the spina of Borgo began with Mussolini 's symbolic strike of the first building with a pickaxe on 29 October 1936 and continued for twelve months . Even at the time , the demolition proved controversial , with many Borgo residents displaced en masse to settlements ( " <unk> " ) outside of the city . Among the buildings dismantled , either totally or in part , and rebuilt in another position , were the Palazzo dei Convertendi , the house of Giacomo Bartolomeo da Brescia , the Church of the <unk> , the palaces Rusticucci @-@ Accoramboni and degli <unk> ( the latter had been already demolished in 1931 ) . Other buildings , like the palace of the <unk> di Borgo and the Churches of San Giacomo Scossacavalli and Sant 'Angelo al <unk> , were destroyed . Facing into the cleared area are five other historical buildings , the Palazzo Giraud Torlonia , the church of Santa Maria in Traspontina , the Palazzo dei <unk> , Palazzo <unk> , and Palazzo Cesi ( which was mutilated ) . 
 The construction of the road was only a small feature in the reconstruction of Rome ordered by Mussolini , which ranged from the restoration of the Castel Sant 'Angelo , the clearance of the Mausoleum of Augustus , to the vastly more complicated site of the Via dell <unk> through Rome 's ancient imperial remains . His plan was to transform Rome into a monument to Italian fascism . 
 In five years , Rome must appear marvellous to all the peoples of the world ; vast , orderly , powerful , as it was in the time of the first empire of Augustus . 
 Benito Mussolini 
 Construction of the road continued long after Mussolini 's death and the abolition of Italian Fascism . The obelisks along the road were installed in time for the Jubilee of 1950 . 
 = = Today = = 
 Since its completion , the road has acted as the primary access point to St. Peter 's Square , and by extension to the Vatican City itself . At times , such as during the funeral of Pope John Paul II , it has acted as an extension to the square itself , allowing a greater number of visitors to attend functions conducted there . 
 = Nigel Gibbs = 
 Nigel James Gibbs ( born 20 November 1965 ) is a former English professional footballer and most recently worked as first @-@ team coach of Millwall . A Watford supporter , as well as a product of their youth system , Gibbs spent his entire professional career as a right back for the club . He was assistant manager of Leeds United after being appointed on 12 April 2013 alongside Brian McDermott , whom he assisted at Reading . He departed from Leeds United in August 2014 . 
 Gibbs made his Watford debut in 1983 , in front of 38 @,@ 000 spectators in a UEFA Cup match against Sparta Prague . In his early career Gibbs also played nine times for the England youth team , and five times for England under @-@ 21s . Under the management of Graham Taylor , Gibbs eventually established himself as a first @-@ team player at Watford , making 100 Football League appearances before the club 's relegation from the First Division in 1988 . Gibbs remained a key player for the team in the Second Division , and was voted Watford F.C. Player of the Season in 1992 . 
 Manager Glenn Roeder appointed Gibbs as club captain for the 1992 – 93 season , but a series of serious injuries restricted him to 33 appearances over the following four seasons . When his contract expired in 1996 , Gibbs considered retirement , but he went on to earn a new contract and make the most appearances of any Watford player in 1996 – 97 . Gibbs featured regularly in Watford 's rise from the Second Division to the Premier League between 1997 and 1999 , and went on to play a further 17 games at the top level of English football . Watford were relegated in 2000 , and Gibbs made eight further appearances before retiring in 2002 . 
 Gibbs remained at Watford as a coach , primarily working with the youth and reserve teams . He took charge of the first team for a week following Ray Lewington 's sacking as manager in 2005 , but in turn was dismissed by incoming manager Aidy Boothroyd just before the start of the following season . After taking a year off to acquire the UEFA Pro Licence , Gibbs joined Reading as youth team manager in 2006 , and became assistant manager in 2009 – 10 . He continued in this role , and in 2011 – 12 Reading won the Football League Championship title , earning promotion to the Premier League . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in the city of St Albans , Hertfordshire , Gibbs attended How Wood primary school , and as a nine @-@ year @-@ old striker helped his team win a district six @-@ a @-@ side competition . Gibbs began training with and supporting Watford from an early age , and was watching from the Main Stand at Vicarage Road as Watford sealed the Fourth Division title in 1978 . Although part of Watford 's youth system , he occasionally played for St Albans City 's youth team due to their close proximity to his home and school . He also played for Hertfordshire schools at under @-@ 14 to under @-@ 16 levels . 
 Although initially a striker , Gibbs switched to the position of right @-@ back as a teenager . Further success came with Watford 's youth teams ; he played in the first leg of the youth team 's 7 – 6 aggregate FA Youth Cup win against Manchester United in 1982 , and in the final as Watford finished runners up in the Southern Junior Floodlit Cup . These performances earned him a callup to England 's youth team , for whom he played nine times . However , after signing as an apprentice in July 1982 , Gibbs played in midfield for the reserves . Due to his height , first team manager Graham Taylor was concerned about Gibbs ' ability to cope with the physicality of being a first @-@ team full back , and placed 17 @-@ year @-@ old Gibbs on a steak and Guinness diet as an attempt to " beef him up . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Turning professional in the First Division = = = 
 Gibbs turned professional on 20 November 1983 . Three days later , he made his Watford debut in a UEFA Cup third round home match against Sparta Prague at the club 's stadium , Vicarage Road . He also played in the away fixture , in front of 38 @,@ 000 spectators . Faced with snowy conditions in Prague , Watford were eliminated 7 – 2 on aggregate . Gibbs made his first Football League appearances in Watford 's final three First Division games of 1983 – 84 , including as a substitute in a 2 – 1 win over Arsenal . However , he was not selected for the 1984 FA Cup final . 
 Gibbs , now 18 , returned to the reserves for much of the following season . Watford 's first @-@ team struggled , failing to win any of their first nine league games . Although his first start of the season ended in an 2 – 0 defeat to Queens Park Rangers , Gibbs retained his place for 10 of the remaining 11 matches , experiencing only one further defeat . Continuing in this vein , 1985 – 86 saw Gibbs establish himself as the team 's first choice right @-@ back . He missed only two games all season , both of which resulted in defeat for Watford . His first goal came on 5 April 1986 in a 4 – 1 home victory over Newcastle United , while he also played in a 5 – 1 win over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on the final day of the season . Gibbs ' consistency helped him to third place in the voting for the club 's Player of the Season award . 
 After suffering a foot injury at the start of 1986 – 87 , Gibbs was restricted to 18 appearances as his team finished the season 9th in the First Division . However , the departure of Graham Taylor and arrival of Dave Bassett the following season signalled a decline in the club 's fortunes . Gibbs lost his place shortly before Bassett 's departure in January , and although he soon returned to the side under Steve Harrison , Watford were relegated in 1988 . At the time of the club 's relegation , Gibbs had made precisely 100 First Division appearances . 
 = = = Second Division = = = 
 Despite the disappointment of relegation , Gibbs started 1988 – 89 strongly . The defender played every minute of Watford 's four opening fixtures , with the team keeping four consecutive clean sheets . During this run , he also scored the only goal of the game against West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns . Playing in all 46 league games , Gibbs finished second in the Player of the Season vote behind Glyn Hodges . Watford finished the season in a play @-@ off position , behind Chelsea , Manchester City and Crystal Palace . The team faced Blackburn Rovers in the semi @-@ finals , drawing both games but being eliminated on the away goals rule . The following season saw Watford slip down to 15th , although they did keep 11 clean sheets in the 41 games that Gibbs played in . Gibbs briefly lost his place in the team following Harrison being replaced by Colin Lee , but regained it before the end of the campaign . 
 An injury sustained on 25 August 1990 kept Gibbs out for two months , and once he had regained full fitness , his team were bottom of the table . His return coincided with a winless run of seven league matches , leaving Watford seven points from safety with nearly half the season gone . Nonetheless , Watford managed to climb to 20th place , and despite missing 14 games , Gibbs was once again shortlisted for the club 's end of season award . In 1991 – 92 Gibbs finally became Player of the Season . Missing only three matches , he rounded off a good season by scoring his first goal in four years in Watford 's last league game , cementing a top @-@ ten finish in the Second Division . 
 = = = Career threatening injury = = = 
 Gibbs was appointed club captain at the start of the 1992 – 93 season . The team started the season with three First Division defeats in their opening six games , keeping just one clean sheet . However , on an individual level the season was to get even worse for Gibbs . He sustained a knee injury against Notts County on 7 September 1992 , putting him out of first team contention for six weeks . During his comeback , at home to Tranmere Rovers , Gibbs aggravated the previous injury , putting him out of action for more than two years . Concern over the injury , coupled with the good form of Gerard Lavin , restricted Gibbs ' opportunities under Glenn Roeder in 1994 – 95 . 
 After making only nine appearances during Watford 's 1995 – 96 relegation season , general manager Graham Taylor released him upon the expiry of his contract , over injury concerns . Gibbs considered retirement . 
 = = = Comeback and return to the top division = = = 
 Despite receiving enquiries from other clubs , he stayed at Vicarage Road for pre @-@ season , in the hope of regaining his match fitness . After proving that he had recovered , Gibbs was offered a short term contract at the club , which was eventually extended . Newly relegated Watford finished 13th of 24 teams in 1996 – 97 . They conceded 38 goals in 46 league matches , the joint @-@ best defensive record in the division . Gibbs missed just one of the club 's 57 fixtures , scoring in a game against Brentford . The defender later noted the irony that having been released as an injury concern , he ended up playing more games the following season than any of his team @-@ mates . 
 Kenny Jackett stood down as manager following Watford 's disappointing season , becoming assistant to Graham Taylor . The effect was immediate ; Watford won six of their first seven league games , eventually becoming 1997 – 98 Second Division champions and earning promotion . Gibbs played part of the season at left @-@ back due to an injury to Paul Robinson , although in turn Gibbs also missed games to injury . He started the 1998 – 99 season as a first @-@ team regular , but sustained an injury in a game against Bolton on 20 October 1998 , and only made two further appearances . Nonetheless , Watford secured promotion via the playoffs in Gibbs ' absence , and when Watford won the play @-@ off final to secure promotion , Gibbs was the first person to celebrate the win with Taylor . 
 = = = Later years and retirement = = = 
 When fit , Gibbs had been Watford 's first choice right @-@ back since 1985 , with the exception of 1994 – 95 , where Gerard Lavin 's form kept a recovering Gibbs in the reserves . A combination of Gibbs ' age , and a desire to acquire more strength in depth for the Premier League , prompted Taylor to sign right @-@ backs Des Lyttle and Neil Cox in 1999 . Despite the competition , Gibbs managed to make 20 appearances in 1999 – 2000 , and his Premier League experience included victories over Chelsea , Coventry City and Southampton , although these were not enough to prevent relegation back to the First Division . By now in his mid thirties , first team opportunities became scarce for Gibbs in 2000 – 01 . He made only seven first team appearances , although Watford managed to avoid defeat in six of those . His final appearance , and only game under Gianluca Vialli , came on 24 April 2002 . An 82nd @-@ minute substitute , Gibbs was unable to prevent a late Gillingham goal , which secured them a 3 – 2 victory . Among Gillingham 's players for Gibbs ' professional swansong was Andy Hessenthaler , the man who became Watford captain after Gibbs ' injury . Gibbs retired as Watford 's second highest all @-@ time appearance maker , although he started more matches than Luther Blissett , the man ahead of him . 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 Considerably shorter than the average footballer at 5 ft <unk> , Gibbs made up for his physical disadvantage with positional play , determination , accurate tackling , and staying on his feet . Although a defender , his lack of goals ( 7 in 491 appearances ) and reluctance to get forward were often remarked upon . Gibbs refuted the suggestion that he didn 't attack enough , while former managers Roeder and Taylor both considered Gibbs to be an excellent crosser of the ball when he did venture forward . He scored his first professional goal during his 59th game . By comparison , Gibbs ' long @-@ term successor at right @-@ back , Lloyd <unk> , scored his first professional goal on his 269th appearance . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 Key 
 = = Managing career = = 
 After retiring , Gibbs served Watford as a coach for three years , initially working with the reserve and youth teams , and later as an assistant manager . During this period he oversaw the development of players such as Ashley Young , Lloyd <unk> and Hamer <unk> , and helped Watford to a Premier Reserve League win in 2002 – 03 . Following Ray Lewington 's sacking in March 2005 , Gibbs briefly managed Watford on a caretaker basis , although his reign did not include a single game . Following the appointment of Aidy Boothroyd , Gibbs left Watford in July . Having had a formal connection with the club since the 1970s , he felt that his departure had been " very poorly handled " . In 2006 , Gibbs received his UEFA Pro Licence , which means he can manage any football club in England on a full @-@ time basis . At the beginning of the 2006 – 07 season , Gibbs joined the management team at Reading , where his initial responsibility was working with the younger players at the club . Further Premier Reserve League success followed in 2007 , and Gibbs was promoted to the role of assistant manager in 2009 – 10 . On the penultimate game of the season , Reading faced Watford at Vicarage Road . A Reading victory would have put their opponents in danger of relegation , but Watford emerged 3 – 0 winners to seal their Championship survival . Gibbs remained at Reading under the management of Brian McDermott , and in 2011 – 12 the team won the Football League Championship , earning promotion to the Premier League . He left Reading on 11 March 2013 following McDermott 's departure as manager . 
 Following the departure of Neil Warnock in April 2013 , Brian McDermott took over as manager of Leeds United on 12 April 2013 on a 3 @-@ year contract , with Nigel Gibbs joining him at the club as Assistant Manager . 
 On the 1st of February 2014 , after the dismissal of Brian McDermott , Gibbs took charge of Leeds United as caretaker manager in the 5 @-@ 1 win over local rivals Huddersfield Town . 
 On 15 December 2014 , Gibbs was appointed first @-@ team coach at Millwall . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gibbs was born into a football family . His father Dennis had played for Hitchin Town , Hemel Hempstead Town and St Albans City , while father @-@ in @-@ law Alan helped form the youth team <unk> Wood Rangers . Although a Watford supporter from childhood , Gibbs is related to supporters of both Watford and Luton Town , despite the rivalry between the two . He maintains a connection with his former club , regularly attending club events and occasionally playing for their masters football team . 
 Among others , Gibbs remains close friends with former teammates Luther Blissett and Kenny Jackett , both of whom coached him after ending their playing careers . Owing to his long association with the club , he is also a friend of Elton John , and once filled in as a backup singer for John on a Watford tour of China . During the " Let 's buy back the Vic " fundraising show at Vicarage Road in 2005 , John dedicated his performance of Electricity to Gibbs ' wedding anniversary . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Watford F.C. Player of the Season 
 Winner : 1991 – 92 
 <unk> : 1985 – 86 , 1988 – 89 , 1990 – 91 , 1996 – 1997 
 Watford F.C. Hall of Fame 
 Inducted : 2010 
 FA Youth Cup 
 Winner : 1981 – 82 
 Football League First Division 
 Promotion : 1998 – 99 
 Football League Second Division 
 Winner : 1997 – 98 
 = Linvoy Primus = 
 Linvoy Stephen Primus MBE ( born 14 September 1973 ) is an English former footballer . 
 Born in Forest Gate , England , to Caribbean @-@ born parents , Primus began his professional career at Charlton Athletic ; where he made four league appearances . Primus moved on a free transfer to Barnet and established himself as a first team regular in the lower divisions of English football before earning a £ 250 @,@ 000 transfer to Reading . 
 A Bosman transfer to Portsmouth followed after three successful seasons at the Berkshire @-@ based club . Initially , Primus struggled to break into the team and had his progress hindered by injuries but the 2002 – 03 season signalled a change in direction as Primus broke into the first team and won Portsmouth fan 's player of the season as well as the PFA Fans ' Player of the Year for his division . For the next three seasons Primus was in and out of the first team and worked under three different managers : Harry Redknapp , Velimir <unk> and Alain Perrin . The 2006 – 07 season was the last injury @-@ free season for Primus as a career threatening knee injury meant he would not make a single appearance the following season . Primus went out on loan to former club Charlton and made 10 appearances and one further appearance for Portsmouth before retiring through injury in December 2009 . The Milton End stand at Fratton Park was renamed the ' Linvoy Primus Community Stand ' because of his outstanding services to the club . 
 Primus , who is married and has three children , is also known for his Christian charity work . He is involved in the Christian charity ' Faith & Football ' and walked the Great Wall of China to raise £ 100 @,@ 000 for their cause . Other charitable causes he has been involved in are the Alpha course , a cinema advertisement about Christianity and the formation of a prayer group at Portsmouth . In 2007 , he released his autobiography , titled " Transformed " , which details his conversion to Christianity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Primus was born the first child of Newton and Pauline Primus in Forest Gate Hospital , Forest Gate , Greater London on 14 September 1973 . His Jamaican @-@ born mother worked as an orderly at <unk> Cross Hospital in nearby Leytonstone . Primus ' father , who was born in St. Vincent and the Grenadines , worked for Thames Water as an engineer . His parents are both practising Christians and took Linvoy to church and Sunday school when he was young . In his autobiography he wrote that church was " a cold unwelcoming place " for him as a child but also that it " instilled in [ him ] a very strong sense of right and wrong " . Primus attributed his desire to become a footballer from watching Ricky Villa 's winning goal for Tottenham Hotspur against Manchester City in the 1981 FA Cup Final Replay . He played his first game of football two years later in a match between two Cub Scout groups and , because of his performance , he was offered a trial with the Newham District Schools under @-@ 11 's by one of the Cub Scout leaders who was also the manager of the Newham team . Primus played as a striker or right winger at this time , also in the team was future Portsmouth team mate Sol Campbell who played in midfield . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In Primus ' early teenage years he played for his local Sunday league football club , Pretoria , based in Canning Town after being introduced by a school friend . Charlton Athletic arranged a friendly match with Pretoria and Primus was offered the chance to join the Charlton associate schoolboys which he took . For the last two years of his school life , Primus travelled to Greenwich twice a week to train with the team , in addition to this he played matches on a Sunday against the schoolboy teams of clubs such as Maidstone United and Dover Athletic . Primus initially struggled to cope ; he cited the " dog eat dog " nature and the " ambitious and aggressive " parents as factors but nevertheless he decided to see it through later remarking that it was a " very strong character building experience " . 
 = = = Charlton Athletic = = = 
 After finishing his GCSEs , where he achieved three A grades , Primus signed a two @-@ year apprenticeship with Charlton . At this time he also received an offer from West Ham United , who were in a higher division , but he rejected this because he felt his first team opportunities would be greater at Charlton . Primus was playing in various positions until the club 's youth team coach , Colin Clarke , decided that he should play as a centre back , " I see you as a centre back , that way you can see everything you want in front of you " . 
 Under the Youth Training Scheme , Primus was earning £ 35 a week while training with the youth and reserve teams as well as having cleaning duties . He also had to study Leisure Management at a nearby college which he disliked . Primus , along with Jermaine Darlington , was chosen to travel to Charlton 's temporary stadium Selhurst Park to lay out the kits and the boots for the senior players and he admitted this may have earned him " Brownie points " with the youth management . Primus began playing in the reserves under manager Alan Curbishley and at the end of his apprenticeship , Primus was offered a one @-@ year professional contract by the new youth team coach John Cartwright . Darlington was the only other apprentice who was offered a contract . 
 Due to injuries to first team centre backs Simon Webster and Darren Pitcher , Primus made his professional debut against Birmingham City . The match took place at their substitute stadium Upton Park in November 1992 and Primus was awarded man of the match for his performance . Primus played the next two matches against Leicester City and Brentford but was disappointed with his performance in both matches . Primus made two further first team appearances in the 1992 – 93 season but soon found himself lower down in the pecking order after other players returned from injury and Primus himself got injured . Primus felt that he had to leave the club : " I really felt as though I wasn 't wanted and that my days were numbered . " Despite this , he signed a one @-@ year extension with the Greenwich @-@ based club . However , he suffered another muscle injury , and with further competition for places in the form of Dean Chandler and Richard Rufus , he failed to make a single appearance for Charlton in the 1993 – 94 season and was released at the end of it . 
 = = = Barnet = = = 
 Primus first rejected a trial with Crewe Alexandra before accepting one with Cardiff City . Just three days before his trial with Cardiff was set to begin Ray Clemence , the Barnet manager , offered Primus a two @-@ year contract with the club . It was later revealed that Clemence was told by his assistant , Terry Harvey , that he should sign him immediately : " Get in now and sign him , if he goes down to Cardiff and sees their stadium he will sign for them . " Primus was determined to prove Charlton wrong and says he " grew from a boy to a man " at Barnet . This was also a time when depression was common for Primus and he became addicted to alcohol and drugs such as ecstasy and LSD . 
 In the second game of the 1994 – 95 season against Leyton Orient , Primus made his debut as a substitute coming on for the injured Mark Newson . His next appearance for Barnet , against Scarborough , was described as the " worst performance of [ his ] career " in his autobiography . He went on to say that he was " weighed down by the burden of expectation " and heard someone say he was the " worst player we 've ever had at Barnet " . He was often nervous before matches and recited the Lord 's Prayer as a way of coping with his anxiety . At the end of the season , Primus was runner @-@ up in the voting for the Player of the Season and was man of the match on several occasions . Barnet had a poor start to the next season and they were at the bottom of the table in mid @-@ September . After beating Northampton Town 2 – 0 , Barnet went on an 11 @-@ game winning streak which ended at Colchester United despite Primus scoring a goal . He would go on to score five goals in the season ; more than any other season in his career . Once again , he was runner @-@ up in the Player of the Season award ; this time to the goalkeeper Maik Taylor . 
 His third season for the club was an unsettled one . The club went through three different managers after the departure of Clemence : Terry Bullivant ( twice ) , Terry Gibson and Alan Mullery . Nevertheless , Barnet narrowly avoided relegation to the Conference and Primus was awarded the Player of the Season and given the captaincy after a season which saw him make 46 league appearances . After Bullivant left for Reading , however , Primus became unsettled and said " [ I was ] hankering after a move to join Terry [ Bullivant ] and <unk> [ Alan Pardew ] at Reading " . 
 = = = Reading = = = 
 Primus was signed for £ 500 @,@ 000 at the start of the 1997 – 98 season although he found himself being sued by the Stellar Sports Agency after the £ 8 @,@ 000 fee was not paid because of difficulties with Primus ' agent . Also joining him in Berkshire was Barnet team mate Lee Hodges . Primus partnered Keith McPherson in defence but Reading started the season poorly with just one point from the first six games despite Primus saying " I played well from the word go " . Due to an injury crisis , Reading lost their penultimate league match at Nottingham Forest and were relegated from Division One . This was Primus ' first experience of relegation . Earlier in the season Primus had scored his first and what turned out be only Reading goal in the home match against Forest . 
 In the next season , Reading finished 10th and faced strong competition from new signing Elroy <unk> , but Primus became disillusioned at the financial situation he was in . He was on £ 1 @,@ 500 a week and commented " [ new signings were ] on twice the wages I was being paid and I had seen the lifestyles they were enjoying " . Primus was promised an improved contract , however no such contract was given to him over the summer . By popular demand , manager Tommy Burns was replaced by Alan Pardew . Fitness problems prevented Primus from getting much first team football at the start of the 1999 – 2000 season until a change of diet helped him regain stamina . As the season progressed , the club offered Primus a new contract which he dismissed as " derisory " saying the club was " taking advantage of [ his ] good nature " . 
 At the end of the season , Primus was free to leave under the Bosman ruling and received an offer from Luton Town which he accepted . Lennie Lawrence , the manager who <unk> for Primus was sacked soon afterwards , however , and the deal was cancelled to the dismay of Primus who said he felt as if " [ his ] whole world had collapsed " . In the aftermath , Pardew put him in contact with Portsmouth manager Tony Pulis and a trial was agreed . 
 = = = Portsmouth = = = 
 After friendly matches with Dorchester Town and Exeter City , Primus signed a contract with Portsmouth although he was disappointed with the low wages in comparison to other players . He did not get his Portsmouth career off to a good start , scoring an own goal on his debut away at Sheffield United . Pulis was sacked early on in the 2000 – 01 season after a poor start and was replaced by fans ' favourite Steve Claridge . Portsmouth were still near the relegation zone after a poor run of form that also saw Primus being sent off for the first time in his career for a foul on Fulham 's Louis Saha . Gilmore 's groin ruled him out of action for five months from November of that season , during which Claridge was replaced by Graham Rix , this was after Primus formed a partnership with Jamaican international Darren Moore . After a defeat to Crystal Palace ( which Primus described as the " lowest point of [ his ] career " ) , Portsmouth needed a victory over Barnsley to stay in Division One and they duly won 3 – 0 with Huddersfield being relegated after their final day defeat . After the conclusion of the season , Primus fell out with Rix as he was unsure about whether Rix thought he had a future at the club . 
 The next season started with the death of goalkeeper Aaron <unk> and the departure of Primus ' close friend Moore to West Bromwich Albion . Primus struggled to get a game under Rix but the appointment of Harry Redknapp in March 2002 gave him a new lease of life and he ended that season with two league goals in games against Bradford City and Barnsley . 
 Despite originally being told by Redknapp he was not of Division One standard , let alone suitable for the Premier League , Primus proved his manager wrong by seizing his chance when other players missed out through injury and suspension . By the end of the 2002 – 03 season he had become a vital member of the side that won the Division One title , winning the Portsmouth fans ' player of the season as well as the PFA accolade for Division One . He scored once that season for Portsmouth in the League Cup against Peterborough United . Primus credits his renaissance to his conversion to Christianity after a friend of his wife 's invited him to church . 
 Despite the previous season 's heroics , Primus was not used regularly in the early part of Portsmouth 's first Premier League season . Harry Redknapp had ditched his 3 – 5 – 2 formation in favour of the more conventional 4 – 4 – 2 and partnered new record signing Dejan Stefanović with Arjan de Zeeuw . During December , Portsmouth were in a terrible run of form and Redknapp decided to bring one of his most reliable players back into his plans for the derby match with Southampton . In spite of a 3 – 0 loss , Primus retained his starting place for the remainder of the season . 
 The following season saw Primus remain a regular member of the Portsmouth team under first Redknapp and then both his successors , Velimir <unk> and Alain Perrin . He scored his first Premier League goal at Crystal Palace on Boxing Day 2004 . He scored again on Boxing Day in 2006 , when grabbing two headed goals against West Ham United . 
 Although Primus was a regular member of Perrin 's team at the end of the 2004 – 05 season and captained the side on occasions during pre @-@ season , he rarely featured until Perrin 's sacking in November . The return of Harry Redknapp , who had been won over by his performances and was now one of his biggest admirers , to Portsmouth lead to Primus ' immediate return to the side , and he was ever present in the side that achieved Premiership survival in the last 10 games of the season . Primus remained a regular in the Portsmouth defence for the 2006 – 07 season , partnering England international Sol Campbell in the centre of defence , and Redknapp hailed him as the unofficial Player of the Season ; the official winner of the award was David James . He failed to make an appearance in 2007 – 08 due to a career threatening knee injury . He was treated with surgery performed by Dr. Richard Steadman who is known to have saved the careers of many footballers , including Alan Shearer and Ronaldo . After the operation , Primus commented " The difference between success and failure is what you do afterwards in your rehabilitation , not necessarily the actual operation . " Despite his injury , he still managed to earn a new one @-@ year deal at Portsmouth in May 2008 . 
 = = = Charlton Athletic loan and Portsmouth return = = = 
 In August 2008 , Primus returned to Charlton Athletic on a loan deal , however the deal almost collapsed as negotiations broke down between Portsmouth manager Harry Redknapp and Charlton manager Alan Pardew . Pardew wanted the centre half for the whole of the 2008 – 09 season , but Redknapp was only happy to loan him out until Christmas of 2008 to gain match fitness , and it appeared the deal would be called off by Portsmouth . Finally Charlton agreed to the terms and Primus move to the Valley on a three @-@ month loan days before the transfer window closed . He scored his first goal for Charlton in a 5 – 2 home defeat to Sheffield United . The result ultimately led to the sacking of manager Alan Pardew . He played 10 matches for the Championship ( new name for Division One ) club before returning to Portsmouth for the rest of the 2008 – 09 season . He was due to play in a crucial match against Derby County , however the match was postponed by Sky until after the expiration of his loan ; much to the anger of Charlton . Primus ' loan had to be rearranged and a deal was agreed by both clubs for the loan to expire after the match against Derby . 
 After a near two @-@ year absence , Primus made a comeback to the Portsmouth first team on 18 May 2009 , the penultimate game of the 2008 – 09 season , as a late substitute appearance against Sunderland at Fratton Park . He received a standing ovation from the home crowd and was cheered each time he touched the ball . 
 Primus signed a one @-@ year extension to his contract with Portsmouth in July 2009 . Primus also agreed to take on an ambassadorial and advisory role to help guide emerging talent at Portsmouth , as well as a playing role . On 8 December 2009 , Primus announced his retirement due to a knee injury . Portsmouth 's chief executive Peter Storrie confirmed that Primus would retain his ambassadorial role . 
 Following his testimonial on 31 July 2010 , Portsmouth announced that the Milton End Stand at Fratton Park would be renamed the ' Linvoy Primus Community Stand ' because of his outstanding services to the club . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 At the age of 17 , Primus met future wife Trish through a mutual friend . Much to the chagrin of Primus ' parents , they decided to have a child after 18 months of the relationship . The footballer himself said in his autobiography , " Up until then I had been the model son and had brought no trouble to their door , but now they were upset at what they saw as my rebellion " . On November 1993 , their first son Nathan was born . They also have a daughter called Atlanta , born in April 1997 . Atlanta is a footballer playing in the Women 's Super League with Yeovil Town Ladies FC and has been picked to represent England at U19 level . Primus and Trish married on 9 June 1999 . Their third child and second son , Cameron , was born in 2002 . 
 In 2007 , he released his autobiography , " Transformed " , which was co @-@ written by Peter Jeffs . The book received generally positive reviews : Christianity Magazine said the book was a " disarmingly honest account of Primus 's triumphs and struggles on and off the pitch " while FourFourTwo described it as " an antidote to the ' me @-@ me @-@ me ' tales that weigh down the shelves " but rival football magazine When Saturday Comes was more critical , pointing out its " sometimes ungrammatical and often ponderous style " and going on to say " [ the ] book is also full of cliches " . 
 = = Charitable and Christian work = = 
 Trish suffered from depression and was introduced to Christianity by stable owners , Keith and Sam , who invited the Primus family to join them at church on a Sunday . Initially , Primus was reluctant but Trish convinced him to accept and Primus remarked that it was a case of " well church is the last place we 'd go , but why not ? " The church was more " laid @-@ back " in comparison to the one that Primus attended as a child and he , along with the rest of his family , became regular churchgoers in 2001 . Trish 's depression was lifted and Primus converted to Christianity later that year , " In my heart I felt whole and complete , and I wanted to read the Bible at every opportunity . " According to his autobiography , Primus is able to speak in tongues . 
 Primus , along with Darren Moore , former footballer Mick Mellows , and former Portsmouth player Joel Ward is involved with the Christian charity ' Faith and Football , and walked the Great Wall of China in summer 2005 to raise £ 100 @,@ 000 for Prospect Children 's School in Ibadan , Nigeria and a new medical centre , school and orphanage for a village in Goa . He was also involved in supporting the Alpha course , which is run all over the world , and are designed to explain Christian beliefs and promote discussion . Primus appeared in a cinema advertisement for the movement , alongside the comedian Lennie Bennett . At his former club Portsmouth , he founded a prayer group which has included teammates such as Nwankwo Kanu , Sean Davis and <unk> . In December 2006 , he took part in a Football Focus feature on faith in the game presented by fellow Christian footballer Gavin Peacock . On 16 April 2013 , Primus will play for Portsmouth in a charity match raising money for the Portsmouth supporters trust . 
 Primus was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the 2015 New Year Honours for services to football and to charity in Portsmouth . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Boston campaign = 
 The Boston campaign was the opening campaign of the American Revolutionary War , taking place primarily in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . The campaign began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19 , 1775 , in which the local colonial militias interdicted a British government attempt to seize military stores and leaders in Concord , Massachusetts . The entire British expedition suffered significant casualties during a running battle back to Charlestown against an ever @-@ growing number of militia . 
 Subsequently , accumulated militia forces surrounded the city of Boston , beginning the Siege of Boston . The main action during the siege , the Battle of Bunker Hill on June 17 , 1775 , was one of the bloodiest encounters of the war , an resulted in a Pyrrhic British victory . There were also numerous skirmishes near Boston and the coastal areas of Boston , resulting in loss of life , military supplies , or both . 
 In July 1775 , George Washington took command of the assembled militia and transformed them into a more coherent army . On March 4 , 1776 , the colonial army fortified Dorchester Heights with cannon capable of reaching Boston and British ships in the harbor . The siege ( and the campaign ) ended on March 17 , 1776 , with the permanent withdrawal of British forces from Boston . To this day , Boston celebrates March 17 as Evacuation Day . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1767 , the British Parliament passed the Townshend Acts , which imposed import duties on paper , glass , paint , and other common items imported into the American colonies . The Sons of Liberty and other Patriot organizations responded with a variety of protest actions . They organized boycotts of the goods subject to the duty , and they harassed and threatened the customs personnel who collected the duties , many of whom were either corrupt or related to Provincial leaders . Francis Bernard , then Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , requested military forces to protect the King 's personnel . In October 1768 , British troops arrived in the city of Boston and occupied the city . Tensions led to the Boston Massacre on March 5 , 1770 , and the Boston Tea Party on December 16 , 1773 . 
 In response to the Tea Party and other protests , Parliament enacted the Intolerable Acts to punish the colonies . With the Massachusetts Government Act of 1774 it effectively abolished the provincial government of Massachusetts . General Thomas Gage , already the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of British troops in North America , was also appointed governor of Massachusetts and was instructed by King George 's government to enforce royal authority in the troublesome colony . However , popular resistance compelled the newly appointed royal officials in Massachusetts to resign or to seek refuge in Boston . Gage commanded four regiments of British regulars ( about 4 @,@ 000 men ) from his headquarters in Boston , but the countryside was largely controlled by Patriot sympathizers . 
 = = War begins = = 
 On September 1 , 1774 , British soldiers removed gunpowder and other military supplies in a surprise raid on a powder magazine near Boston . This expedition alarmed the countryside , and thousands of American Patriots sprang into action , amid rumors that war was at hand . Although it proved to be a false alarm , this event — known as the Powder Alarm — caused all concerned to proceed more carefully in the days ahead , and essentially provided a " dress rehearsal " for events seven months later . Partly in response to this action , the colonists carried off military supplies from several forts in New England and distributed them among the local militias . 
 On the night of April 18 , 1775 , General Gage sent 700 men to seize munitions stored by the colonial militia at Concord . Several riders — including Paul Revere — alerted the countryside , and when the British troops entered Lexington on the morning of April 19 , they found 77 minutemen formed up on the village common . Shots were exchanged , eight Minutemen were killed , the outnumbered colonial militia dispersed , and the British moved on to Concord . At Concord , the troops searched for military supplies , but found relatively little , as the colonists , having received warnings that such an expedition might happen , had taken steps to hide many of the supplies . During the search , there was a confrontation at the North Bridge . A small company of British troops fired on a much larger column of colonial militia , which returned fire , and eventually routed those troops , which returned to the village center and rejoined the other troops there . By the time the " redcoats " or " lobster backs " ( as the British soldiers were called ) began the return march to Boston , several thousand militiamen had gathered along the road . A running fight ensued , and the British detachment suffered heavily before reaching Charlestown . With the Battle of Lexington and Concord — the " shot heard ' round the world " — the war had begun . 
 = = Siege of Boston = = 
 In the aftermath of the failed Concord expedition , the thousands of militiamen that had converged on Boston remained . Over the next few days , more arrived from further afield , including companies from New Hampshire , Connecticut , and Rhode Island . Under the command of Artemas Ward , they surrounded the city , blocking its land approaches and putting the occupied city under siege . The British regulars fortified the high points in the city . 
 = = = Need for supplies = = = 
 While the British were able to resupply the city by sea , supplies in Boston were short . Troops were sent out to some of the islands in Boston Harbor to raid farmers for supplies . In response , the colonials began clearing those islands of supplies useful to the British . One of these actions was contested by the British in the Battle of Chelsea Creek , but it resulted in the loss of two British soldiers and the British ship Diana . The need for building materials and other supplies led Admiral Samuel Graves to authorize a Loyalist merchant to send his ships from Boston to Machias in the District of Maine , accompanied by a Royal Navy schooner . The Machias townspeople rose up , seizing the merchant vessels and then the schooner after a short battle in which its commander was killed . Their resistance and that of other coastal communities led Graves to authorize an expedition of reprisal in October whose sole significant act was the Burning of Falmouth . The outrage in the colonies over this action contributed to the passing of legislation by the Second Continental Congress that established the Continental Navy . 
 The colonial army also had issues with supply , and with command . Its diverse militias needed to be organized , fed , clothed , and armed , and command needed to be coordinated , as each militia leader was responsible to his province 's congress . 
 = = = Bunker Hill = = = 
 Late in May , General Gage received by sea about 2 @,@ 000 reinforcements and a trio of generals who would play a vital role in the war : William Howe , John Burgoyne , and Henry Clinton . They formulated a plan to break out of the city , which was finalized on June 12 . Reports of these plans made their way to the commanders of the besieging forces , who decided that additional defensive steps were necessary . 
 On the night of June 16 – 17 , 1775 , a detachment of the colonial army stealthily marched onto the Charlestown peninsula , which the British had abandoned in April , and fortified Bunker Hill and Breed 's Hill . On June 17 , British forces under General Howe attacked and seized the Charlestown peninsula in the Battle of Bunker Hill . This battle was technically a British victory , but losses ( about 1 / 3 the attacking forces killed or wounded , including a significant fraction of the entire British officer corps in all of North America ) were so heavy that the attack was not followed up . The siege was not broken , and General Gage was recalled to England in September and replaced by General Howe as the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 = = = Formation of the Continental Army = = = 
 The Second Continental Congress , meeting in Philadelphia , had received reports of the situation outside Boston when it began to meet in May 1775 . In response to the confusion over command in the camps there , and in response to the May 10 capture of Fort Ticonderoga , the need for unified military organization became clear . Congress officially adopted the forces outside Boston as the Continental Army on May 26 , and named George Washington its commander @-@ in @-@ chief on June 15 . Washington left Philadelphia for Boston on June 21 , but did not learn of the action at Bunker Hill until he reached New York City . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 Following the Battle of Bunker Hill , the siege was effectively stalemated , as neither side had either a clearly dominant position , or the will and materiel to significantly alter its position . When Washington took command of the army in July , he determined that its size had reduced from 20 @,@ 000 to about 13 @,@ 000 men fit for duty . He also established that the battle had severely depleted the army 's powder stock , which was eventually alleviated by powder shipments from Philadelphia . The British were also busy bringing in reinforcements ; by the time of Washington 's arrival the British had more than 10 @,@ 000 men in the city . 
 Throughout the summer and fall of 1775 , both sides dug in , with occasional skirmishes , but neither side chose to take any significant action . Congress , seeking to take some initiative and to capitalize on the capture of Ticonderoga , authorized an invasion of Canada , after several letters to the inhabitants of Canada were rejected by the French @-@ speaking and British colonists there . In September , Benedict Arnold led 1 @,@ 100 troops on an expedition through the wilderness of Maine , which was drawn from the army assembled outside Boston . 
 Washington faced a personnel crisis toward the end of 1775 , as most of the troops in the army had enlistments that expired at the end of 1775 . He introduced a number of recruitment incentives and was able to keep the army sufficiently large to maintain the siege , although it was by then smaller than the besieged forces . 
 = = Siege ends = = 
 By early March 1776 , heavy cannons that had been captured at Fort Ticonderoga were moved to Boston , a difficult feat engineered by Henry Knox . When the guns were placed on Dorchester Heights in the course of one day , overlooking the British positions , the British situation became untenable . While General Howe planned an attack to reclaim the high ground , a snowstorm prevented its execution . The British , after threatening to burn the city if their departure was hindered , evacuated the city on March 17 , 1776 and sailed for temporary refuge in Halifax , Nova Scotia . The local militias dispersed and , in April , General Washington took most of the Continental Army to fortify New York City and the start of the New York and New Jersey campaign . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The British were essentially driven from New England as a result of this campaign , although there ( as elsewhere in the colonies ) they continued to receive support from local Loyalists , especially in Newport , Rhode Island , from which they drove most of the local Patriots . The campaign , as well as the final result of the war as a whole , were a significant blow to British prestige and confidence in its military . The senior military leaders of the campaign were criticized for their actions ( Clinton , for example , while he went on to command the British forces in North America , would take much of the blame for the British loss of the war ) , and others either saw no more action in the war ( Gage ) , or were ultimately disgraced ( Burgoyne , who surrendered his army at Saratoga ) . While the British continued to control the seas , and had military successes on the ground ( notably in New York , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania ) , their actions that led to these conflicts had the effect of uniting the Thirteen Colonies in opposition to the crown . As a result , they were never able to marshal enough support from Loyalists to regain meaningful political control of the colonies . 
 The colonies , in spite of their differences , united themselves as a consequence of these events , granting the Second Continental Congress ( predecessor to the modern U.S. Congress ) sufficient authority and funding to conduct the revolution as a unified whole , including funding and outfitting the military forces that formed as a result of this campaign . 
 = Nefarious : Merchant of Souls = 
 Nefarious : Merchant of Souls is a 2011 American documentary film about modern human trafficking , specifically sexual slavery . Presented from a Christian worldview , Nefarious covers human trafficking in the United States , Western and Eastern Europe , and Southeast Asia , alternating interviews with re @-@ enactments . Victims of trafficking talk about having been the objects of physical abuse and attempted murder . Several former prostitutes talk about their conversion to Christianity , escape from sexual oppression , and subsequent education or marriage . The film ends with the assertion that only Jesus can completely heal people from the horrors of sexual slavery . 
 Nefarious was written , directed , produced and narrated by Benjamin Nolot , founder and president of Exodus Cry , the film 's distributor . Nolot , who travelled to 19 countries to collect the film 's content , said that the purpose of the film is " to draw people 's attention to the issue , but also to inspire them in terms of what they can be doing … to take a stand against this injustice . " The film was officially released on July 27 , 2011 , with individual grassroots screenings also taking place . Laila Mickelwait , Exodus Cry 's director of awareness and prevention , screened the film in several countries in an attempt to persuade governments to make laws similar to Sweden 's Sex Purchase Act , which criminalizes the purchasing rather than the selling of sex . The film was released on home video on May 1 , 2012 . 
 Interviewees in the film include Canadian journalist Victor Malarek , Jerusalem Institute of Justice founder <unk> Myers , Christian therapist Dan Allender , clinical psychologist Melissa Farley , Piet <unk> , Baptist missionary Lauran Bethell , Agape International Missions founder Don Brewster , anti @-@ trafficking activist Helen Sworn , former prostitute Annie Lobert , and Swedish detective superintendent Kajsa Wahlberg . Ted Baehr of Movieguide , a Christian magazine , called the film " a powerful , compelling and transformational documentary about human trafficking and sex slavery " and commented that it covered the inherently sexual subject matter candidly without displaying nudity . Dan Preston of <unk> Magazine praised Nolot 's writing and directing . Nefarious has won film awards , including the Honolulu Film Award for best screenplay , the Urban <unk> Film Festival best documentary feature award , and the Indie Fest feature documentary award of excellence . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Nefarious : Merchant of Souls documents modern human trafficking , specifically sexual slavery . While there are men and boys who are trafficked around the world , the United States Department of State ( DoS ) estimates that about 80 % of human trafficking victims are female , and the film focuses on them . Information is presented from a Christian worldview — despite the subject matter , there is no profanity or nudity in the film , although there are scenes showing alcohol consumption and women wearing skimpy clothing . 
 Nefarious explores how sex trafficking differs from country to country , and suggests that all the victims are both psychologically and emotionally enslaved . One of the initial assertions in the film is that slavery has not been abolished but is increasing , and that half of this slavery is sexual in nature . Nefarious identifies political corruption and difficult socioeconomic situations as elements that prevent sex slaves from escaping exploitation , and suggests that most victims do not survive for more than seven years after initially being trafficked . While the violent acquisition of sex slaves depicted in the first sequence of the film does occur in reality , Jimmy Stewart of Charisma wrote that most girls who are sexually trafficked in Europe are recruited through a fraudulent offer of employment and an improved lifestyle overseas , neither of which ultimately materializes in the new country . 
 Nefarious asserts that there is a link between the international sex industry and legal prostitution in the Western world , and that those who create the demand for forced prostitution around the world are of a wide variety of ages and are often considered respectable . The film contrasts the secretiveness and brutality of the sex industry in Eastern Europe with the openness of public prostitution in the Netherlands . Nefarious suggests that sex trafficking in Southeast Asia is fuelled largely by the complicity of the victims ' parents , with many in Cambodia grooming and then knowingly selling their daughters into prostitution to pay for luxury goods . The film asserts that 10 % of the population of Moldova has been sexually trafficked . Nefarious contrasts Las Vegas prostitutes with victims of sex trafficking in Europe , depicting the former as drawn into the sex industry by dreams of a glamorous lifestyle , and the latter as made vulnerable by child abandonment and orphanages . 
 The film presents human trafficking statistics and assertions from a variety of sources , prominently departments of the United States government and the United Nations . These include that human trafficking is growing faster than any other criminal industry , that the average age of those forced into prostitution in the U.S. is 13 , that the commercial sexual exploitation of children <unk> almost two million children globally , that 80 % of trafficked women and 50 % of trafficked children are sexually exploited , that 161 UN member states engage in human trafficking , and that modern slavery has an annual revenue of US $ 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 — according to the film , higher than the annual revenues of Major League Baseball , the National Basketball Association , the National Football League and the National Hockey League combined . The film indicates that " trafficking is an exploitation of vulnerability " and expresses the need to " take away the stigma that [ prostitutes ] choose to be there . " Kevin Bales of Free the Slaves is quoted as saying that there are 27 million slaves in the world . The film ends with the assertion that only Jesus can free people from sexual slavery . 
 = = Contents = = 
 = = = Re @-@ enactments and live footage = = = 
 Nefarious covers human trafficking in the United States , Western and Eastern Europe , and Southeast Asia . Interviews are interspersed with re @-@ enactments . The film opens with a re @-@ enactment of a girl being kidnapped by organized criminals . She is confined with other girls in a dark room , lit by a flickering lightbulb . Men order the girls to remove their clothes , and then examine them and shout commands and threats at them , causing them to cry from fear . One girl is dragged into another room . A victim of ordeals such as these , speaking in voiceover , explains that , in this situation , girls are often taken into a separate room to have their sexual performance tested . Identifying these events as taking place near Belgrade , Serbia , the film then tracks the fictional girls through Croatia to Amsterdam 's red @-@ light district De Wallen , and to sex markets in Berlin and Las Vegas . The film states that this slavery goes unnoticed in cities where prostitution is legal . Slaves are depicted in confinement , at their places of work , and as they are sold . Many of the girls are orphans , and all are either kidnapped or tricked into forced prostitution . Traffickers in the film use hard drugs , brainwashing and sexual and physical abuse to keep the girls under control . 
 One of the scenes in Southeast Asia takes place near a karaoke club , and depicts groups of girls , apparently ranging in age from early to late teens , offering sexual services to customers . Benjamin Nolot interviews a police officer , who says that the bar 's owner recently bought eight other similar clubs and controls around 2 @,@ 000 girls . Another Southeast Asian scene shows Nolot and his crew chasing an American man out of a town where he was trying to purchase sex with a child . 
 = = = Interviews = = = 
 The interviewees in Nefarious include former traffickers , international humanitarian workers , social workers , psychologists , human rights experts , and former victims of human trafficking . Interviewees include Canadian journalist Victor Malarek , Jerusalem Institute of Justice founder <unk> Myers , Christian therapist Dan Allender , clinical psychologist Melissa Farley , Amsterdam police official Piet <unk> , Baptist missionary Lauran Bethell , Agape International Missions founder Don Brewster , anti @-@ trafficking activist Helen Sworn , former prostitute Annie Lobert , and Swedish Detective Superintendent Kajsa Wahlberg . 
 The film includes an interview with a man referring to himself as " Vlad " , who formerly trafficked in humans and drugs in Europe for eleven years . Vlad explains that traffickers control their victims by drugging them , physically abusing them , or threatening to abuse them . He claims that traffickers consider themselves most successful when the exploited girls start responding immediately to shouted , one @-@ word commands . Vlad describes beating girls who tried to run away and says that he felt little remorse after such incidents ; the large sums of money involved made him indifferent to the girls ' fate . Vlad surmises that the reason global sex trafficking has expanded is that girls can be sold for sex repeatedly , while drugs can only be sold once . When asked how sex trafficking can function on an international scale , Vlad states that the two major contributory factors are organized crime and political corruption . 
 Another interview features an Amsterdam pimp , " Slim " , who owns a business allowing passers @-@ by to view scantily clad girls in a display window ; they can have sex with them on a mattress in a back room . He initially says that the display window women are not in any danger while with a client in the back room , but later clarifies that the girls should " keep a hand close to the panic button " located on the wall . When asked by Nolot if these activities are financed by organized crime , Slim hesitates , then says no . 
 A female human trafficking victim is interviewed with her face hidden . She describes how she and other human trafficking victims in Eastern Europe were held in buildings with security cameras , where they were forced to walk naked down a runway before a group of men who watched under the guise of attending a fashion show . She then describes being auctioned off to the audience members , who she says examined her off the runway as one might examine cattle . 
 A 55 @-@ year @-@ old woman from England tells the story of how she was first prostituted in Boscombe , near Bournemouth in Dorset , after being raped as a child in the council houses where she grew up . She describes running away , being raped again at the age of 13 and then being locked in a wardrobe in Manchester , and says that she found this situation normal at the time as it was the only life she knew . She eventually became addicted to heroin . She then describes a vision of Jesus that she says gave her the strength to escape sexual trafficking at the age of 40 and heroin six years later . Other victims of trafficking speak about having been the objects of physical abuse and attempted murder . Nevada prostitutes describe having gone into prostitution in Las Vegas after watching the film Pretty Woman . Several former prostitutes talk about their conversion to Christianity , escape from sexual oppression , and subsequent education or marriage . Some of them cry while telling their stories . Lobert calls prostitution " the greatest acting job " , explaining that prostitutes have to constantly feign enjoyment while actually feeling none . Before Nefarious was completed , one of the former prostitutes interviewed for the film returned to prostitution , a fact acknowledged in the film . 
 In her interview , Swedish Detective Superintendent Kajsa Wahlberg describes purchasing sex from a prostitute as paying to masturbate into someone . The leader of an organization working to rescue girls from prostitution in Cambodia says that it is not the poorest parents who sell their children into sexual slavery but rather the parents who are looking to buy luxury goods . He therefore argues that sex trafficking is a spiritual and moral issue that cannot be solved by education or money . In another interview , a man purchasing sex in Thailand says that he believes the girls are happy to be working as prostitutes . Another interview features an American man who had been a sex tourist in Asia . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Nefarious was written , directed , produced , and narrated by Benjamin Nolot , founder and president of Exodus Cry . Exodus Cry , which distributed the film , is headquartered in Grandview , Missouri and is an organization that opposes human trafficking by raising awareness , by reintegrating victims back into society , and by prayer . Nolot founded Exodus Cry in 2007 after a woman he did not know gave him US $ 10 @,@ 000 , saying that God told her to do so in order that Nolot might found an anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking organization . This was founded at a prayer meeting later that year where attendees prayed for human trafficking victims . The organization claims that this prayer meeting occurred on the day before the announcement of the 2007 international child pornography investigation , which involved approximately 2 @,@ 400 human @-@ trafficking @-@ related arrests in 77 countries . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming of Nefarious was started in 2007 , marking Nolot 's film debut . The initial plan was to create a short film , but the project was expanded when Exodus Cry realized the scope of the issue they were documenting . Nolot , a leader in Mike Bickle 's International House of Prayer , travelled to 19 countries to collect material for the film . These filming locations included countries in the Middle East , Europe , North America , and Asia . Nolot attested to having found it difficult to produce the film due to the subject matter ; he stated that " there is not a day that goes by that I am not mindful of the horrific tragedies we uncovered . " He further said that he did not make the film for money or for fame but did so in order to rouse people to action against human trafficking , an issue that he feels to be of great importance . Nolot said that the purpose of the film is " to draw people 's attention to the issue , but also to inspire them in terms of what they can be doing … to take a stand against this injustice . " Steve Willis and Matthew Dickey were the film 's cinematographers . Willis , founder of <unk> Photography , also served as photographer while Dickey filled the roles of associate producer and editor , also directing the re @-@ enactment scenes . Actors in these re @-@ enactment scenes included Bill Oberst Jr . , Christian Simpson ( as Christian J. Simpson ) , Allison Weissman , Sarah <unk> , and Jess Allen . John Samuel Hanson composed the film score for Nefarious after having worked on such other projects as 16 Blocks , Constantine , The Book of Eli , and Lost . As of January 2012 , Nolot was producing two sequels to Nefarious . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Official release and grassroots screenings = = = 
 The film was officially released on July 27 , 2011 , with individual grassroots screenings also taking place . Nolot appeared at a screening in Appleton , Wisconsin , and afterwards led a question and answer session with a local police officer . During this time , Nolot promoted the Red Light Campaign , wherein drivers waiting at red lights pray for sex trafficking to end . Texas State representative Todd Ames Hunter attended a screening at the Summit Church in Corpus Christi , saying that human trafficking " is a critical issue to the state of Texas that needs education and attention . " The Justice Alliance , a Christian nonprofit organization that raises awareness about human trafficking , hosted a screening in the auditorium of El Dorado Middle School in Kansas . Florida Abolitionist , a non @-@ governmental organization that also opposes human trafficking , sponsored a screening at the Full Sail University in Orlando , Florida . Most of the attendees were Christians . The Australian Christian Lobby ( ACL ) hosted two screenings of the film in 2012 , one of which took place before the Parliament of Tasmania . The Government of Tasmania was considering reforms to the Tasmanian sex industry at the time and the ACL was disappointed because the only politicians who showed up to the screening were four members of the Liberal Party . The ACL planned screenings in the rest of the states of Australia as well , hoping to convince legislators that the criminalization of the purchase of sex is the only effective way of combatting sexual slavery . Another screening was held at United Nations headquarters in New York City in March 2012 during that year 's session of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women . 
 = = = Home video release and subsequent screenings = = = 
 Nefarious was released on home video on May 1 , 2012 . On June 26 , the film made its British premiere , following which an interactive panel was held in which the audience was encouraged to fight human trafficking by donating funds , raising awareness , and praying . In September , the film was screened at The Rome International Film Festival in Rome , Georgia , the Midwest Christian @-@ Inspirational Indie Film Festival in Chicago , Illinois , and the Atlanta International Documentary Film Festival in Atlanta , Georgia . Nefarious was screened at Oaxaca FilmFest two months later . The Rose Marine Theater in Fort Worth , Texas hosted a screening in celebration of Human Rights Day in December . Other screenings have taken place in South Korea , Hong Kong , Bermuda , and Canada . The Hong Kong premiere was attended by such people as Clement Cheng , Lori Chow , Cathy Leung , Pamela Peck , Nancy Sit , and Grace Wong , and the subsequent three weeks of screenings were all sold out . In May 2013 , Katarina MacLeod , a former sex slave , spoke at a screening in Peterborough , Ontario hosted by Canadian Baptist Women of Ontario and Quebec . Laila Mickelwait , Exodus Cry 's Director of Awareness and Prevention , screened the film in several countries in an attempt to persuade governments to make laws similar to Sweden 's Sex Purchase Act , which criminalizes the purchasing rather than the selling of sex . Because Sweden now has the lowest human trafficking rate in the European Union , Mickelwait argued that such laws decrease the demand for commercial sex and effectively combat related organized crime . At some screenings , Exodus Cry solicited funds for the halfway houses it runs in Moldova called <unk> , where victims of sex trafficking are given help . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Both Jim Uttley of Indian Life Newspaper and Pastor Jamie Bagley of The News of Cumberland County called Nefarious " hard @-@ hitting " . Uttley further asserted that Nefarious " is not an easy film to watch because it deals with a subject that most of us would rather ignore " , and he went on to highly recommend the film . Jimmy Stewart of Charisma reported that the film gives a human face to trafficking statistics and instils a desire in the viewer to put an end to such criminal activity . Ted Baehr of Movieguide , a Christian magazine , called the film " a powerful , compelling and transformational documentary about human trafficking and sex slavery " and wrote that it was amazing that the film covered an inherently sexual topic both honestly and without nudity . Baehr praised the cinematography , editing , and filmmaking , but criticized some portions of the film as being repetitive and <unk> . The Movieguide review ends by comparing the film 's opposition to modern slavery to the death of Saint Telemachus , which put an end to gladiatorial games in ancient Rome . Erica <unk> of Star News Daily called the film " controversial " . 
 In News Weekly , Babette Francis called Nefarious a " ground @-@ breaking documentary " . Tiffany Owens of World , a Christian magazine , praised the film , describing its storytelling as compelling and vivid . Jamie Rake of The Phantom Tollbooth called the film " an engrossing , sometimes appropriately gross , exposé [ that ] sounds a clarion cry against … modern slavery " . Rake praises the re @-@ enactments for being appropriately ominous , and for demonstrating the dehumanization and abuse that characterize sexual trafficking . He suggests that the film is a modern version of This Is the Life , a Christian television series that dealt with social issues , and that , if Nolot applied for a Motion Picture Association of America film rating , it would be given a PG @-@ 13 rating . Dan Preston of <unk> Magazine called the film " a hands @-@ on , grimy , honest , explorative piece of journalism " . Preston praised Nolot 's writing and directing . Jennifer Cheng of the South China Morning Post called the film " unnerving " and wrote that it " offers a glimpse into how organized crime , abuse , greed , lust and humiliation intertwine to make human trafficking possible . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 † Seahorse Awards are given to male writers , composers , and filmmakers . 
 = Dunrobin Castle = 
 Dunrobin Castle is a stately home in Sutherland , in the Highland area of Scotland , and the family seat of the Earl of Sutherland and the Clan Sutherland . It is located 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of <unk> , and approximately 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south of <unk> , overlooking the Dornoch Firth . 
 Dunrobin 's origins lie in the Middle Ages , but most of the present building and the gardens were added by Sir Charles Barry between 1835 and 1850 . Some of the original building is visible in the interior courtyard , despite a number of expansions and alterations that made it the largest house in the north of Scotland . After being used as a boarding school for seven years , it is now open to the public . 
 = = History = = 
 The lands of Sutherland were acquired before 1211 , by Hugh , Lord of Duffus , grandson of the Flemish nobleman <unk> . The Earldom of Sutherland was created around 1235 for Hugh 's son , William , surmised to have descended from the House of Moray by the female line . The castle may have been built on the site of an early medieval fort , but the oldest surviving portion , with an iron yett , is first mentioned in 1401 . The earliest castle was a square keep with walls over 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick . Unusually , the ceilings of each floor were formed by stone vaults rather than being timber . The castle is thought to be named after Robert , the 6th Earl of Sutherland ( <unk> ) . 
 Dunrobin Castle was built in the midst of a tribal society , with Norse and Gaelic in use at the time . Robert the Bruce planted the Gordons , who supported his claim to the crown , at Huntly in Aberdeenshire , and they were created Earls of Huntly in 1445 . The Earldom passed to the Gordon family in the 16th century when the 8th Earl of Sutherland gave his daughter Elizabeth in marriage to Adam Gordon . After the 8th Earl died in 1508 , Elizabeth 's elder brother was declared heir to the title , but a <unk> ( writ ) of idiocy brought against him and his younger brother by the Gordons meant that the possession of the estate went to Adam Gordon in 1512 . 
 In 1518 , in the absence of Adam Gordon , the castle was captured by Alexander Sutherland , the legitimate heir to the Earldom of Sutherland . The Gordons quickly retook the castle , captured Alexander and placed his head on a spear on top of the castle tower . Alexander 's son John made an attempt on the castle in 1550 , but was killed in the castle garden . During the more peaceful 17th century , the keep was extended with the addition of a large house , built around a courtyard to the south @-@ west . 
 During the Jacobite Rising of 1745 , the Jacobites under Charles Edward Stuart stormed Dunrobin Castle without warning , because the Clan Sutherland supported the British government . The 17th Earl of Sutherland , who had changed his surname from Gordon to Sutherland , narrowly escaped them , exiting through a back door . He sailed for Aberdeen where he joined the Duke of Cumberland 's army . On the death of the 18th Earl in 1766 , the house passed to his daughter , Elizabeth , who married the politician George Leveson @-@ Gower , later created 1st Duke of Sutherland . In 1785 , the house was altered and extended again . 
 Between 1835 and 1850 , Sir Charles Barry remodelled the castle in the Scottish Baronial style for the 2nd Duke of Sutherland . Barry had been the architect for the Palace of Westminster , home to the House of Commons , and was much in demand . The 14th @-@ century tower , and the 17th @-@ century and 18th @-@ century extensions , were retained , and survive within Barry 's 19th @-@ century work . 
 Dunrobin Castle railway station , on the Far North Line , was opened in 1870 , as a private station for the castle . The present waiting room was constructed in 1902 , and is a category B listed building . 
 In 1915 , the building was in use as a naval hospital when fire damaged much of the interior , but was confined to the newer additions by Barry . Scottish architect Sir Robert Lorimer was engaged to renovate the house following the First World War . When the 5th Duke died in 1963 , the Earldom and the house went to his niece , the current Countess of Sutherland , while the Dukedom had to pass to a male heir and went to John Egerton , Earl of Ellesmere . Between 1965 and 1972 , the house became a boarding school for boys , taking on forty boys and five teachers in its first year . Since 1973 , the house and grounds have been open to the public , with private accommodation retained for the use of the Sutherland family . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 There are 189 rooms within the castle , making it the largest in the northern Highlands . Much of Barry 's interior was destroyed by the fire of 1915 , leading to the restoration by Sir Robert Lorimer , although he incorporated surviving 17th @-@ century and 18th @-@ century work , including wood carvings attributed to Grinling Gibbons . Externally , the castle has elements inspired by the work of the French architect Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc , such as the pyramidal roof over the main entrance . 
 The portion built by Barry uses freestone in broadly the same style as the turreted parts from the 16th and 17th centuries , but borrows significant elements from the Château style . A large quadrangular pile of four stories , with towers at each corner , connects to the older castle by a building of three stories and containing the stately apartments . The tallest tower , containing the entrance , is 135 feet ( 41 m ) high , the round towers being 115 feet ( 35 m ) high and the clock tower 125 feet ( 38 m ) . 
 St. John 's Well , in the courtyard of the oldest portion of the castle , is one of the deepest draw wells in Scotland , at 92 feet ( 28 m ) . There is no indication as to the origin of the name . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 In the entrance hall is a frieze of the armorials used by past earls of Sutherland . The main stairway , decorated with portraits of the Leveson @-@ Gower family , is around 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide and 50 feet ( 15 m ) high . The panelled dining room , 40 feet ( 12 m ) long and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide , has a wall @-@ top Italian <unk> frieze and a <unk> carpet , as well as chairs containing the needlework of the 5th Duke 's wife . The drawing room , made from two previous rooms by Lorimer during his restoration of the castle , looks out over the gardens and sea , and contains large <unk> and 18th @-@ century tapestries , as well as portraits by Hoppner and Reynolds . Housing over 10 @,@ 000 books , the library features a painting by Philip de László of Duchess Eileen , as well as a mahogany Chippendale table . 
 = = = Gardens = = = 
 The French influence extends into the gardens , completed in 1850 , with Barry taking inspiration from the French formal style of the Gardens of Versailles . Each parterre is set around a circular pool with a fountain , with the essential layout the same since it was created in around 1848 . The total landscaped area is 1 @,@ 379 acres ( 558 ha ) . 
 = = = Museum = = = 
 A museum displays the trophy heads of animals shot by family members on safari , ethnographic items from around the world and an important collection of archaeological artifacts . The museum retains its Victorian @-@ Edwardian arrangement , and is housed in an 18th @-@ century summer @-@ house adjoining the formal gardens . Historically , the castle is a category A listed building , and the gardens are included in the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland . 
 The castle is open to visitors between April and October each year . Falconry displays are held in the castle 's gardens by a resident Falconer . 
 = Underoath = 
 Underoath ( stylized as <unk> or <unk> ) is an American Christian post @-@ hardcore band from Tampa , Florida . Founded by Dallas Taylor and Luke Morton on November 30 , 1997 , in Ocala , Florida , subsequently its additional members were from Tampa , Florida . 
 They released Act of Depression , Cries of the Past , and The Changing of Times with the band 's original vocalist Dallas Taylor . Following his departure , Spencer Chamberlain became lead vocalist . The band then released They 're Only Chasing Safety and Define the Great Line , gaining a certified gold rating for both . These two albums have given them more mainstream and commercial success . 
 They have received two Grammy nominations in 2007 and 2010 respectively and have recorded a live CD / DVD box set entitled Survive , Kaleidoscope , which was released on May 27 , 2008 . From late February to early May the band recorded their sixth studio album entitled Lost in the Sound of Separation , which was released on September 2 , 2008 , and peaked at number 8 on the Billboard 200 . Their last album Ø ( Disambiguation ) was released on November 9 , 2010 , and is the first without the band 's last original member , drummer and vocalist Aaron Gillespie after parting ways with the band earlier in the year . 
 On October 2 , 2012 , Underoath announced that they would be disbanding in 2013 . However , they announced their reunion on August 17 , 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Act of Depression ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 On November 30 , 1997 , Underoath formed with Dallas Taylor , and guitarist Luke Morton , in Ocala , Florida . Morton devised the name Underoath " from somewhere in the Bible . " Drummer Aaron Gillespie , who attended Morton 's church , was then asked to play with them . Gillespie agreed , and the group recruited guitarist Corey Steger and bassist Octavio Fernandez ; the band members were all in high school . 
 After a year of playing at festivals and touring the area around Florida , Underoath signed to Alabama 's <unk> Records in 1999 . Around this time Luke Morton had left the band without appearing on any of their formal recordings . They released their debut Act of Depression , which sold over 2 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Cries of the Past and The Changing of Times ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , keyboardist Christopher Dudley joined Underoath , and the five @-@ song , forty @-@ minute long record , Cries of the Past was released , quickly selling 3 @,@ 000 copies . In 2001 , <unk> Records was bought out by Seattle 's Tooth & Nail Records and Underoath was subsequently signed to the label 's subsidiary , Solid State Records . In January 2002 , bassist Grant <unk> joined Underoath . The band then began working on their Solid State debut , The Changing of Times , with Cries of the Past producer James Paul Wisner . The album was released on February 26 , 2002 , and produced one single titled " When the Sun Sleeps " . Dallas Taylor explained that the lyrics on The Changing of Times were about " people playing with other people 's emotions and how it can leave you bitter " and " struggling through life 's hardships and trying to find God in all of it . " The band was criticized by critics and long @-@ time fans for the album 's style because it had changed from the sound of their previous releases . However , The Changing of Times went on to outsell both of their earlier releases combined . 
 In 2003 , Underoath supported the album 's release with their first inclusion on Warped Tour , however their participation in the tour came to an end when Taylor ( under controversial conditions ) was asked to leave the band . Keyboardist , Chris Dudley explained at that time that Taylor could no longer tour with Underoath for various reasons and left on his own decision . Under speculation of a potential break up , the band then went on a supporting tour with Atreyu in August 2003 with Matt <unk> as the temporary lead vocalist , while at the time being a part of Winter Solstice . In October 2003 , at the CMJ Fest in New York City , the band reappeared with Spencer Chamberlain , formerly of the band This Runs Through , as the new lead vocalist . Chamberlain had toured with Underoath when fronting his former band and at one time was roommates with Dudley ; their previous friendship with Chamberlain was considered when making him lead vocalist . Gillespie explained that before Chamberlain had been in the band , the group members " didn 't really get along " , however , after Chamberlain joined " everything was just normal , we clicked " . After Chamberlain became a permanent member , Underoath discussed the possibility of changing the name and becoming a new band . Ultimately , the members decided to remain as Underoath . 
 = = = They 're Only Chasing Safety ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 After taking the end of 2003 off from touring to begin working on an album , the band scheduled time in February 2004 to begin recording . 
 During the early months of 2004 , Underoath returned to the studio with Chamberlain as lead vocalist and producer James Paul Wisner . They 're Only Chasing Safety was released on June 15 , 2004 , and proved to be a more commercial success for the band , going onto outsell the previous three albums combined . The album sold close to 100 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release and was certified gold by the end of 2005 , selling more than 487 @,@ 000 copies . With Gillespie being the only original member , They 're Only Chasing Safety had been a vast change in sound and rhythm from what they performed earlier on . " Reinventing Your Exit " and " It 's Dangerous Business Walking out Your Front Door " were released as the album 's two singles and both songs spawned music videos that received frequent airplay on MTV2 and Fuse . 
 In March 2005 , Underoath participated in the inaugural Taste of Chaos tour , and shortly after , embarked on their first headlining tour . The band premiered two brand @-@ new songs during the length of the tour . They played a part of the Warped Tour , but declined to perform for the entirety of the tour in order to take time to record another album . Underoath made their first covers of national magazines appearing on CCM Magazine in July 2005 and then Alternative Press in September , and in October , They 're Only Chasing Safety was re @-@ released in a two @-@ disc set with four formerly unreleased songs . Also included was re @-@ mastered album artwork by Jacob Bannon of Converge , and a DVD with over two hours of footage of the band touring in support of the album . As of 2005 , They 're Only Chasing Safety has sold more than 218 @,@ 000 copies , with the re @-@ release selling an additional 279 @,@ 000 copies , making a combined sales of more than 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US alone . 
 = = = Define the Great Line ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 In January 2006 , Underoath entered the studio to record their fifth album , Define the Great Line ; the title is presented upon the theory of an individual having " to find that line and that way to live your life . " The band had been writing for the album two weeks after the release of They 're Only Chasing Safety . Matt Goldman , who produced albums for Copeland and Norma Jean , and Adam Dutkiewicz , guitarist for Killswitch Engage , enlisted as producers . Chamberlain noted that the vocals for the album would sound less like an imitation of former vocalist Taylor , but more like the vocals of Chamberlain 's former band . The lyrics were also meaningful to Chamberlain because they had been written about " things that have molded him into who he is today " . 
 An unfinished version of the album was leaked onto BitTorrent websites and P2P services months before the release date . Drummer Aaron Gillespie , during the short time after the recording of Define the Great Line , recorded the debut album for his side @-@ project The Almost , which was produced by Seattle producer Aaron Sprinkle and was released April 3 , 2007 . In April 2006 , the band had been courted by several major record labels , instead re @-@ signing with Tooth & Nail Records because they felt that major labels " don 't get heavy bands " and " we don 't really agree with a lot of the business practices major labels employ sometimes . " On April 21 , Underoath flew to Sweden to work with <unk> Films , to create music videos for " In Regards to Myself " and " Writing on the Walls " ; the latter was chosen as the lead single for the album and was later nominated for the 2007 Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video . Dudley commented that the videos were " high @-@ energy videos and more intricate than any video we 've ever done . " 
 Released on June 20 , 2006 , Define the Great Line sold 98 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted on the Billboard 200 Chart at number 2 , the highest debut for a Christian album since 1997 . With the debut of Define the Great Line , Underoath simultaneously released a special edition version of the album featuring special artwork and a DVD that includes another behind @-@ the @-@ scenes movie and a " making of " video . Define the Great Line was certified Gold by the RIAA on November 11 , 2006 , representing 500 @,@ 000 shipped units of the album . The album was also released on vinyl however , this edition was limited to only 3 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The band was scheduled to spend June and July 2006 on the main stage of the Warped Tour , but on July 28 , 2006 , it was announced that Underoath was dropping off the remaining dates of the tour . A statement from the band stated that the members " felt it necessary to take some immediate time to focus on our friendship , as that 's more important than risking it for the sake of touring at this time . " In an Alternative Press cover story on Underoath , Michael " Fat Mike " Burkett told the magazine that Chamberlain had confided in him that Underoath 's band members had been " having a lot of arguments over their religious beliefs . " Burkett admitted to Punknews.org that he had poked fun at the band for their beliefs , but emphasized that he befriended Underoath 's band members at the start of the tour and had a personal policy of not making jokes on @-@ stage about anyone he was not friends with or did not like personally . It was also spread that the band 's withdrawal from the tour was due to Chamberlain 's rumored drug problems and time spent in rehabilitation , to which Gillespie responded , " If there was something serious going on like that and he was in rehab , we 'd have to tell the press . But it 's just not true . " Underoath toured extensively throughout Europe , Australia and Asia in the late 2006 , from February to April in 2007 toured with Taking Back Sunday and Armor for Sleep . 
 Underoath shot videos for the songs " You 're Ever So Inviting " and " A Moment Suspended in Time " in February 2007 ; both videos have been released and " You 're Ever So Inviting " won MTV 's Battle of the Videos on May 23 , 2007 . Underoath performed a Canadian tour followed by the Taste of Chaos World Tour , and also played at the 2007 Cornerstone Festival . On July 17 , 2007 , Underoath released a DVD entitled 777 to the US market . Underoath also played the Warped Tour 2007 from July 24 to August 9 , and in August 2007 , toured Australia and East Asia . During a tour with <unk> and the Sons of Disaster , Poison the Well , and Every Time I Die , Gillespie went through emergency surgery on an infection in his hand . Instead of cancelling shows , Underoath recruited Kenny <unk> , the drummer of Gillespie 's band , The Almost . Underoath lead vocalist Spencer Chamberlain was featured on the cover of the Warped Tour 2008 Tour Compilation album . 
 = = = Lost in the Sound of Separation ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = 
 During the September 2007 tour , Chamberlain stated various times that the band will release a new album in mid @-@ 2008 . It was later confirmed that it would be released on September 2 , 2008 . Recording for the album began in March 2008 and ended in April 2008 . <unk> said that the album , Lost in the Sound of Separation , would be considerably heavier than Define the Great Line . 
 In October 2007 , Underoath had begun filming their third person documentary Survive , Kaleidoscope . " The Audible Diversion Group " , a small film team , shot footage of the band as they followed Underoath on their September tour and the entirety of the " We Believe in Dino @-@ Tours " . The film was shot in 720p high definition 16 : 9 widescreen format . Underoath released the Survive , Kaleidoscope live CD / DVD on May 27 , 2008 . The album reached No. 81 on the Billboard 200 . The band recorded the concert footage at a performance in Philadelphia at the Electric Factory in October 2007 . 
 During mid @-@ 2008 , Underoath joined the 30 @-@ city Rockstar Energy Mayhem Tour with bands such as Slipknot , Disturbed , Mastodon , and DragonForce . The tour began on July 9 , 2008 , and concluded in Buffalo , New York , on August 19 , with Underoath headlining the tour 's stop at the Hot Topic venue . After the release of Lost in the Sound of Separation on September 2 , 2008 , Underoath began headlining tour in support of the album , along with <unk> and The Devil Wears Prada , and in various markets , <unk> , Person L , and The Famine . 
 In its first week , Lost in the Sound of Separation debuted at No. 8 on the Billboard 200 charts , selling around 56 @,@ 000 copies in the US alone . In December 2008 , Underoath won Best Hardcore / <unk> Artist at the Rock on Request Awards and embarked on their first South American Tour . The band played six concerts in Brazil , Argentina , Chile and Colombia , and played at Warped Tour 2009 . On international tours in 2009 , Underoath began writing pieces of new songs for their fifth studio release . The songs " Desperate Times , Desperate Measures " and " Too Bright to See , Too Loud to Hear " were released as the two singles from the album . 
 = = = Departure of Aaron Gillespie and Ø ( Disambiguation ) ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = 
 During a late 2009 interview , guitarist Timothy <unk> stated that the band had " just started writing songs that may be included on the next record " , and that they are hoping to enter the studio late summer or early fall 2010 . Underoath is set to release their live album Live at Koko exclusively to their UK audience via their UK merchandise site . On February 25 , 2010 , Underoath stated they were finishing writing their new album . 
 On April 5 , 2010 , the band announced the departure of their final founding member , drummer and vocalist , Aaron Gillespie . Due to this occurrence , none of the band 's original members remain . Aaron played his final show with the band in Milan , Italy , on April 6 . 
 On May 10 , 2010 through their official MySpace blog , Underoath announced that they will be entering the studio on May 24 to record their follow up to Lost in the Sound of Separation , which was aimed to be released later that year , with producers Matt Goldman ( Lost in the Sound of Separation and Define the Great Line ) and Jeremy SH Griffith . Following the departure of Gillespie , Underoath recruited ex @-@ Norma Jean drummer Daniel Davison for the recording of their new album . Davison 's first tour with the band was " The Cool Tour " featuring As I Lay Dying and Blessthefall . The new album , titled Ø ( Disambiguation ) , will be released on November 9 , 2010 , through Tooth & Nail Records . On September 9 , 2010 , it was announced that Underoath had signed to Roadrunner Records for worldwide distribution outside of the US and Canada . 
 On September 14 , 2010 , the band held a listening party for Ø ( Disambiguation ) at <unk> Studios in Los Angeles . Danny Sugimoto of <unk> remarked that the album " feels darker and more chaotic than ones prior , yet with a tasteful sense of calm mixed within . " 
 Underoath embarked on their headlining November tour on the 2nd of the month . On November 23 , vocalist , Spencer Chamberlain began to suffer from foodborne disease . His position in Underoath was substituted by Tyler " Telle " Smith of The Word Alive for the show scheduled that day . 
 In October 18 , 2011 , a compilation , Play Your Old Stuff , was released , containing three previously @-@ released albums : The Changing of Times , They 're Only Chasing Safety and Define the Great Line , along with new artwork . 
 = = = Anthology , breakup , and farewell tour ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On October 2 , 2012 , the band announced through their Twitter account that they would be disbanding in 2013 . In addition , the band released a career @-@ spanning compilation album , Anthology : 1999 – 2013 on November 6 , 2012 . 
 On October 9 , 2012 , they announced their farewell tour with mewithoutYou , As Cities Burn , and letlive. as opening acts . 
 On January 26 , 2013 , Underoath played their final show at <unk> Live in St. Petersburg , Florida . Aaron Gillespie also performed on the songs " Emergency Broadcast : : The End is Near " and " Reinventing Your Exit . " 
 = = = Post @-@ break @-@ up activities and reunion ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 In January 2015 , the band and launched a campaign to finalize production of documentary film about their farewell tour of 12 shows , posting two trailers on that subject to their YouTube channel . 
 In July 2015 , Underoath began teasing the phrase " rebirth is coming " and an accompanying cryptic video across their social media accounts . The audio portion to the cryptic video , when played backwards , turned out to be the chorus for " It 's Dangerous Business Walking Out Your Front Door " off the band 's 2004 album They 're Only Chasing Safety , and later a countdown timer ending on August 24 , 2015 later appeared on the band 's website . 
 On August 17 , 2015 , the band 's first show since disbanding in 2013 was announced , headlining the Self Help Fest in San Bernardino , California on March 19 , 2016 , along with A Day to Remember . In an interview article for Alternative Press , Chamberlain and Gillespie confirmed that the band was reuniting . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 = = = Christianity = = = 
 Underoath 's members are Christian and have stated that they are a Christian band . However , as vocalist Spencer Chamberlain explains , " [ We are Christian but ] in a different way . We 're not like your average Christian band . " He explains that Christianity is the " backbone of our lives , especially in the way that we handle certain things , but it 's not so much the backbone of our lyrics . It 's not like every song is a lesson from the Bible or something . It 's just normal life struggles . " Keyboardist Christopher Dudley stated that a majority of Underoath 's audience is not Christian , nor are the bands with whom they would often tour . Though the band has been noted for " setting precedent in both Christian rock and beyond " , only a portion of their albums are sold in the Christian marketplace . Chamberlain said , " I look at us as just another band in the secular market like with all these other hardcore bands and we just happen to be a Christian band that has different beliefs . " However , in an interview with Alternative Press , Drummer Aaron Gillespie stated that " I 'm definitely a Christian , but I don 't think Underoath should be a ' Christian band ' " 
 = = = Genre = = = 
 Underoath have been labeled as a Christian metal and metalcore band , but have also been described as hardcore , post @-@ hardcore , emo , and screamo . The band 's style has changed over the years , as explained by Allmusic : " since their inception , Florida 's Underoath have evolved from a run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill Christian metalcore band into a fluid , dynamic , and energized rock group that adeptly blends emotive melody , charged punk rock rhythms , and a chunky , engaging bottom end . " Jesus Freak Hideout also took notice of this , mentioning in a review that " Underoath 's sound has evolved a lot - from metal to emocore to straight @-@ up hardcore . " 
 As demonstrated on their first release , Act of Depression , Underoath initially played a combination of hardcore and metalcore mixed with black metal and death metal . The band kept a similar sound on their second album , Cries of the Past , featuring occasional traces of black metal , but the band later moved away from this style to embrace a more melodic @-@ leaning post @-@ hardcore sound . On the follow up release , Underoath stood " at the heavy metal crossroads on The Changing of Times , a hardcore album that parallels classic arena rock . " The band experimented with electronic elements , with Casey Boland of Alternative Press noting that the album " was an Olympic pole vault @-@ like leap forward for Underoath , " and that the band was " welcoming the process of evolution . " He also noted the addition of Aaron Gillespie 's clean singing , which offered " a compelling counterpoint and presaged a swarm of bands adopting the sing @-@ scream dichotomy that would become the hallmark of ' screamo . ' " Cross Rhythms noted the growing popularity of the band , and described them as playing " an interesting mix of hardcore and indie rock , utilising loops , keyboards , acoustic guitars and melodic vocal harmonies , amongst the onslaught of heavy guitars and screeching hardcore vocals . " 
 Underoath underwent an extreme overhaul preceding their fourth release , They 're Only Chasing Safety , with Dallas Taylor and Octavio Fernandez leaving the band and Spencer Chamberlain taking over lead vocal duties . This marked a radical shift for Underoath , " as the band ditched its formerly metal leanings for the decidedly friendly confines of screamo , " a change with ignited a debate over which was better , " old " or " new " Underoath . A review by Alex Henderson of Allmusic classifies the album under an alternative rock style which could be described as screamo , post @-@ hardcore , or melodic hardcore , and which differed from full @-@ out metalcore . In another review , Andrew Segal of Cross Rhythms described the album as nu metal , and said that , while on the heavier side of the rock scale , the album is well produced and " shows more signs of intelligence than the [ nu @-@ metal ] genre is often credited with . " 
 For their fifth album , Define the Great Line , Underoath abandoned the pop choruses of the previous album and instead demonstrated a heavier and more eclectic style , updating their sound with " weird " time changes and ambient post @-@ metal passages . According to Sputnikmusic , while the album is basically a modern metalcore recording , it incorporated other influences including post @-@ metal guitar leads on several tracks and ambient electronica on tracks such as " <unk> . " Allmusic stated that the band found the " delicate middle ground between throat @-@ shredding grindcore and My Chemical Romance / From Autumn to Ashes @-@ style emo @-@ punk , " and Cross Rhythms described the album as " an impressively versatile project where metal riffs and emo breakdowns , screamo noise and memorable hooks collide in a veritable sonic feast . " Underoath 's sixth album , Lost in the Sound of Separation , established Spencer Chamberlain as the front @-@ man , and saw the band incorporating some industrial elements . With the departure of the last original member of Underoath , Aaron Gillespie , the band underwent their " biggest shift in sound for the band in a long time . " On their latest release , Ø ( Disambiguation ) , Underoath featured a darker and more immersive approach than their previous albums , and used a heavy atmospheric and ambient sound and also utilized groove sections on some tracks . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Bassist Grant <unk> has explained that Underoath 's music has been influenced by various bands such as Refused , At the Drive @-@ In , Apple Not Asteroid , Jimmy Eat World , Isis and Radiohead . When Taylor left Underoath following the release of The Changing of Times , an album that somewhat foreshadowed the changes to come for the band , the group 's style took a considerable change as new vocalist Chamberlain joined . With Chamberlain , the writing dynamic change in the band – now Gillespie and Chamberlain wrote the lyrics they sang – and Underoath released They 're Only Chasing Safety . Then Define the Great Line was released in which Chamberlain noted that his vocals sounded less like himself imitating Taylor 's vocals , and more similar to the vocals of his previous band , This Runs Through . Alternative Press stated , " [ Chamberlain 's ] bellow [ is ] more carnal and guttural , [ and ] his high end more tuneful than whiny . " 
 = = Band members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Act of Depression ( 1999 ) 
 Cries of the Past ( 2000 ) 
 The Changing of Times ( 2002 ) 
 They 're Only Chasing Safety ( 2004 ) 
 Define the Great Line ( 2006 ) 
 Lost in the Sound of Separation ( 2008 ) 
 Ø ( Disambiguation ) ( 2010 ) 
 = PRR 4876 = 
 PRR 4876 is a GG1 @-@ class electric locomotive located at the B & O Railroad Museum in Baltimore , Maryland , United States . It was built in 1939 and was involved in the only accident to befall a GG1 . In 1953 , the locomotive overran the buffer stop and crashed into Union Station in Washington , D.C. after its brakes failed . A temporary concourse floor was erected over 4876 ( which had broken through the original ) for the upcoming inauguration of Dwight D. Eisenhower . After the inauguration it was shipped back to Altoona , Pennsylvania , for repairs and placed back into service . 
 = = Background = = 
 The GG1 was developed in the 1930s by General Electric as the replacement for the Pennsylvania Railroad 's then standard electric locomotive , the <unk> , and was based largely on the New Haven EP3 . The GG1 was capable of a top speed of 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , powered by its twelve 385 horsepower ( 287 kW ) traction motors . The prototype GG1 , PRR 4800 , was tested against Westinghouse 's submission , the R1 . The Pennsylvania selected the GG1 over the R1 , as the R1 was not articulated and the GG1 's traction motors were similar to ones already in use . An order for the first 57 of a total 139 GG1s was placed in November 1934 , with delivery starting in April 1935 . 
 = = History = = 
 4876 was built in 1939 at the Pennsylvania Railroad 's Altoona Works in Altoona , Pennsylvania , and was the 77th locomotive in its class . It operated between New York City , Philadelphia and Washington , D.C. on the electrified Northeast Corridor . 
 At 8 : 38 AM on the morning of January 15 , 1953 , 4876 was the subject of a wreck , the only one to involve a GG1 , while pulling southbound Federal Express # 173 from Boston , Massachusetts , to Washington , D.C. Upon nearing an " Approach " signal about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) outside of Washington , the engineer applied the brakes to slow the train down from 70 to 60 miles per hour ( 113 to 97 km / h ) . Noting that the train still was not slowing after passing the signal , the engineer engaged the emergency brake and sounded the locomotive 's horn . Also observing the excessive speed of 4876 was an assistant train director in Interlocking Tower ' C ' , who radioed ahead to Tower ' K ' . The train director in Tower ' K ' had the switches changed to allow 4876 to enter Union Station on Track 16 , its regularly assigned track . Having insufficient time to switch the runaway on to another track , the director alerted the station master 's office which was situated at the end of Track 16 . Still traveling at around 35 to 40 miles per hour ( 56 to 64 km / h ) , 4876 rammed the buffer stop and continued into the concourse of Union Station , before partially falling through the floor into the baggage room below . 
 An investigation by the Interstate Commerce Commission discovered a design flaw on a style of passenger car used by the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad in which the handle of an angle cock , a valve used to close the brake pipe when the car is the last one in the train , came into contact with a bottom <unk> of the coupler pocket . The angle cock would become closed , rendering the brakes on all the trailing cars inoperable . The third car behind 4876 , New Haven <unk> , was of this design , but the fourth car had a slightly different style of coupler . The difference between the two cars increased the frequency and the intensity of which the angle cock at the rear of <unk> would hit the <unk> . Earlier in the morning , the train was stopped outside of Kingston , Rhode Island , because the brakes on the final two cars were " sticking " and could not be released from the locomotive . Upon inspection , the angle cock on <unk> was found to be closed and was reopened by the engineer , but , after a locomotive and shift change , the matter was forgotten . 
 With the inauguration of Dwight D. Eisenhower set to occur on January 20 , the passenger cars were re @-@ railed and 4876 was lowered the rest of the way into the baggage room . A temporary floor was erected over the locomotive so as to not impede the crowds traveling to Washington , D.C. for the inauguration . After the inauguration , 4876 was cut into 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) sections , hoisted from the baggage room , and reassembled in the Altoona shops . The insurance company deemed it less expensive to reassemble 4876 than to replace it with a new locomotive . 
 Ten months later , 4876 was returned to service , repainted in Tuscan red . It stayed in service until 1983 when she was retired and donated for preservation . Originally planned for donation to the Smithsonian Institution , it was ultimately donated to the B & O Railroad Museum in Baltimore , Maryland . Initially , the museum planned on restoring 4876 and putting it on display , however , these plans were placed on hold indefinitely when the museum 's roundhouse roof collapsed in 2003 , and the museum is currently focusing its efforts on restoring the equipment damaged by the collapse . The locomotive has been stored outside since it was acquired by the museum , has become defaced with graffiti and parts of its steel body are corroded . 
 = Jesse Hubbard = 
 Jesse Hubbard ( born September 18 , 1975 ) is a former professional lacrosse player who played professional box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) and professional field lacrosse in the Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hubbard starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1995 through 1998 , where he earned Ivy League Player of the Year , Ivy League Rookie of the Year , three All @-@ American recognitions from the United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) , four Ivy League championships , and three national championships . He holds Princeton 's lacrosse scoring records for both career and single @-@ season goals . In high school , he had set the Interstate Athletic Conference ( IAC ) scoring record , while playing for St. Albans School and becoming The Washington Post boy 's lacrosse player of the year . 
 As a professional , he was the MLL 's leading goal scorer for its first three seasons and its all @-@ time goal leader as recently as the 2010 MLL season . His 54 goals in 2002 continue to be a league single @-@ season record . He is a five @-@ time Major League Lacrosse All @-@ Star . In August 2010 , he was selected to the MLL 10th Anniversary team . He has represented Team USA in the World Lacrosse Championships and is an ambassador of the sport both through service with Warrior Sports and his own annual youth camps . 
 Hubbard got his first lacrosse stick when he was 11 or 12 years old . Hubbard played middle and high school lacrosse at St. Albans School in Washington , DC , where he was a captain and earned All @-@ Metropolitan and All @-@ American honors . The Washington Post named Hubbard to the 1993 All @-@ Met Boys Lacrosse First Team as a midfielder after he led the IAC in goals with 59 as a junior . Then , when as a senior Hubbard became the All @-@ time IAC goal scorer with 217 , they named him the 1994 All @-@ Met Boys Lacrosse Team Player of the Year . 
 = = College career = = 
 When Hubbard went to Princeton , he was expected to be one of the key incoming midfielders . Hubbard became was part of a trio of revered attackmen who were Princeton classmates along with Jon Hess and Chris Massey . As starters , the trio of All @-@ Americans , which retired second ( Hess ) , third ( Hubbard ) and fourth ( Massey ) in career points at Princeton , had a 43 – 2 record and combined for 618 points . He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 1996 and 1998 and second team selection in 1997 . He was also first team All @-@ Ivy League in 1996 ( when he was Ivy League Player of the Year ) , 1997 and 1998 and a second team selection in 1995 ( when he was named Ivy League Rookie of the Year ) . The 1995 team , which earned the school 's sixth consecutive NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitation , was Ivy League co @-@ champion , while the 1996 – 1998 teams were 6 – 0 undefeated outright conference champions . These undefeated league champions won the 1996 , 1997 and 1998 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championships , becoming the first team to threepeat since Syracuse from 1988 – 90 and the first to be recognized to have done so without an NCAA scandal since Johns Hopkins from 1978 – 80 . 
 In 1996 , he earned co @-@ Ivy League Player of the year by recording six or more goals four times during the regular season . In the 1996 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament quarterfinals 22 – 6 victory over Towson State , Hubbard again scored six goals . Hubbard added three more goals in the championship game against Virginia including the first goal and the final goal in overtime of the 13 – 12 victory . In the 1997 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament quarterfinals , he again scored six goals in an 11 – 9 victory over the UMass . He scored in the semifinal 10 – 9 victory over Duke , and he scored four goals in the 19 – 7 championship victory against Maryland . The 1997 team is regarded as the best in school history with a record number of wins during its 15 – 0 season . He served as co @-@ captain of the 1998 team . He scored three goals in the 1998 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament 11 – 10 semifinal victory over Syracuse . He also scored four goals and added six assists in the 15 – 5 championship game victory over Maryland . 
 When Hubbard was on the field , the Princeton offense was explosive . Hubbard holds the Princeton University single @-@ season ( 53 , 1996 ) and career ( 163 , 1995 – 98 ) goals records . He also broke Kevin Lowe 's school single @-@ season points record of 69 in 1996 by three , but Hess broke the record in 1997 with 76 points . Hubbard 's 23 goals as a freshman was a Princeton freshman record until B. J. Prager posted 25 in 1999 . Hubbard threatened the Ivy League record for career goals in conference games needing just eight in his final two games , but as of 2010 , Jon Reese 's 1990 record remained on the books . He was named number 11 of the top 20 athletes in Princeton Tiger history by the Daily Princetonian . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Hubbard represented Team USA in the 1998 World Lacrosse Championship . Hubbard also played in the National Lacrosse League for the Baltimore Thunder ( 1999 ) , Pittsburgh <unk> ( 2000 ) and Washington Power ( 2001 ) . In 1999 , he was named NLL Rookie of the Year . In the 1999 World Cup , Hubbard scored a goal to give Team USA and 8 – 7 lead over Team Canada in a 20 – 10 victory to sweep the event . 
 Hubbard was a member of the New Jersey Pride from 2001 until 2007 . Prior to the 2008 MLL season , Hubbard was traded to the Los Angeles Riptide in exchange for a first round 2009 MLL Collegiate Draft pick . Hubbard played for the Los Angeles Riptide during the 2008 season . After the 2008 season , Hubbard was assigned to the Washington Bayhawks ( now Chesapeake Bayhawks ) . Prior to the start of the 2009 season with the Bayhawks , Hubbard suffered a herniated disc and was unable to play the 2009 season . Hubbard has not played in the MLL since . 
 In 2000 , the MLL organized a Major League Lacrosse Summer Showcase , which was a seven @-@ game promotional series to introduce the first outdoor professional lacrosse league set to begin play the following year . Hubbard was one of the 40 players selected to promote the league . When the MLL began its first season in 2001 , Hubbard was instrumental in marketing the league looking to showcase premium talent . Hubbard led the MLL in scoring each season from 2001 to 2003 , and was named to the MLL All @-@ Star Team 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2005 , 2006 . In the 2002 All @-@ Star game he scored a goal to break a 16 – 16 tie in a 21 – 16 victory for the National Division All @-@ Stars over the American Division All @-@ Stars . When he surpassed his 2001 total of 44 goals with 54 at the end of the 2002 season , it established a league single @-@ season goals record that continues to survive through the 2010 MLL season and his 2003 season total of 50 goals continues to be the only other 50 @-@ goal season in league history . The MLL schedule was reduced from 14 games to 12 in 2003 , meaning that Hubbard 's 50 goals is the record for a 12 game season . The closest anyone has come to his single @-@ season goal scoring record was John Grant 's 47 @-@ goal 2008 season . As a result of having been the goals scored leader for the MLL 's first three season , he built up a career goals scored lead that stood up until during the 2005 season when Mark Millon took a 206 – 193 lead in career goals scored . However , Millon only scored five goals in 2007 when his career came to an end . In July 2008 , Hubbard surpassed Millon 's career total of 239 by reaching 247 . On August 1 , 2010 , Tim <unk> surpassed Hubbard with his 246th , 247th and 248th career goals . In August 2010 , Hubbard was selected to the MLL 10th anniversary team . 
 Hubbard is a spokesman for Warrior Sports and annually runs the Jesse Hubbard Experience , a youth lacrosse camp for boys ages 9 – 17 held each summer at George Mason University . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Hubbard has an older brother named Andy . Andy was a midfielder on the 1992 and 1994 teams that earned Princeton 's first two NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championships . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = NLL = = = 
 = = = MLL = = = 
 = = = Princeton University = = = 
 = French destroyer Espingole = 
 Espingole was a Durandal @-@ class destroyer built for the French Navy in the late 1890s . Commissioned in 1900 , she saw only a few years of service before running aground and sinking in 1903 off the Côte d 'Azur . Her captain was acquitted at his court @-@ martial seven years later . Multiple salvage attempts failed and a legal dispute arising from the last attempt was not settled until 1926 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Espingole had an overall length of 57 @.@ 64 meters ( 189 ft 1 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 3 meters ( 20 ft 8 in ) , and a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 2 meters ( 10 ft 6 in ) . She displaced 311 metric tons ( 306 long tons ) at deep load . The two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , were designed to produce 5 @,@ 200 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 825 kW ) , using steam provided by two water @-@ tube boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) , but Espingole reached 27 @.@ 41 knots ( 50 @.@ 76 km / h ; 31 @.@ 54 mph ) during her sea trials in August and September 1900 . The ship carried 37 @.@ 6 metric tons ( 37 @.@ 0 long tons ) of coal , enough to give her a range of 2 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 600 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her hull was subdivided by nine watertight transverse bulkheads . She had a crew of four officers and sixty enlisted men . 
 Espingole carried a single 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) gun forward of the bridge . The gun had a maximum range of 9 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 yd ) and a rate of fire of five rounds per minute . The ship carried 375 rounds for the gun . She also mounted six 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns , three on each broadside . The guns had a sustained rate of fire of seven rounds per minute and a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) . She carried a total of 2 @,@ 850 rounds of 47 mm ammunition . Espingole mounted two single 381 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes : one between the funnels and the other on the stern . Two reload torpedoes were also carried ; their air flasks , however , had to be charged before they could be used , a process that took several hours . The Modèle 1887 torpedo that they used had a warhead weight of 42 kilograms ( 93 lb ) . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was laid down in 1896 – 97 by Normand at their Le Havre shipyard , as the last of the four Durandal @-@ class destroyers . She was named after a French type of blunderbuss ; all of the ships in her class were named after weapons . Espingole was launched on 28 June 1900 and completed around September when she ran her speed trials . Construction costs were 1 @,@ 690 @,@ 994 francs . She was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet in December and made a number of port visits in France , Corsica and French North Africa throughout 1901 . Her rudder was damaged after striking the bottom off Golfe @-@ Juan and Espingole was under repair 3 – 27 September . 
 In October 1901 , the 1st Battleship Division , under the command of Rear Admiral ( contre @-@ amiral ) Leonce Caillard , consisting of the battleships Gaulois and Charlemagne , the armored cruiser Pothuau , and escorted by Espingole and the destroyer <unk> , was ordered to proceed to the port of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos , then part by the Ottoman Empire . After Caillard landed two companies of marines that occupied the major ports of the island on 7 November , Sultan Abdul Hamid II agreed to enforce contracts made with French companies and to repay loans made by French banks . The ships made a number of port visits while they were in the Aegean , including the islands of Milos , Syros , and Tinos , in addition to the ports of Smyrna and Piraeus . The 1st Division returned to Toulon on 12 December . The ship was refitted from 3 to 17 April 1902 before she resumed her normal routine of port visits . Lieutenant ( Lieutenant de vaisseau ( LV ) ) Marcotte de Sainte @-@ Marie relieved LV <unk> in June and Espingole was refitted again from 13 November to 2 December . She made a port visit in early 1903 at Rochefort before resuming training . 
 The ship struck a rock in <unk> Bay , off <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Mer , on 4 February 1903 after straying outside the channel , and ripped a hole 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 2 in – 9 ft 10 in ) in the bottom of the hull . Coal , ammunition , and two 47 mm guns were thrown overboard to lighten the ship and her sister ship Hallebarde attempted to pull her off . The hawser broke after only moving Espingole roughly 5 – 6 meters ( 16 ft 5 in – 19 ft 8 in ) , injuring two of Hallebarde 's crewmen . Hallebarde then rescued Espingole 's 62 @-@ man crew before the ship sank at coordinates 43 ° 09 ′ 20 ″ N 06 ° 36 ′ 30 ″ E. LV Marcotte de Sainte @-@ Marie was finally acquitted at his court @-@ martial seven years after his ship ran aground . 
 The initial salvage attempts were unsuccessful and the Espingole was struck off the naval register on 16 September . The navy sold her wreck at auction in December 1909 and decided to offer an escalating series of bonuses if the winner could refloat the ship and deliver it intact . The salvage company was no more successful and abandoned the effort after five months of work . The company claimed that the navy had disturbed the wreck and sued for 60 @,@ 000 francs plus damages . The dispute was not settled until 3 March 1926 . 
 = External morphology of Lepidoptera = 
 The external morphology of Lepidoptera is the physiological structure of the bodies of insects belonging to the order Lepidoptera , also known as butterflies and moths . Lepidoptera are distinguished from other orders by the presence of scales on the external parts of the body and appendages , especially the wings . Butterflies and moths vary in size from microlepidoptera only a few millimetres long , to a wingspan of many inches such as the Atlas moth . Comprising over 160 @,@ 000 described species , the Lepidoptera possess variations of the basic body structure which has evolved to gain advantages in adaptation and distribution . 
 Lepidopterans undergo complete metamorphosis , going through a four @-@ stage life cycle : egg ; larva or caterpillar ; pupa or chrysalis ; and imago ( plural : imagines ) / adult . The larvae – caterpillars – have a toughened ( sclerotised ) head capsule , chewing mouthparts , and a soft body , that may have hair @-@ like or other projections , 3 pairs of true legs , and up to 5 pairs of prolegs . Most caterpillars are herbivores , but a few are carnivores ( some eat ants , aphids or other caterpillars ) or detritivores . Larvae are the feeding and growing stages and periodically undergo hormone @-@ induced ecdysis , developing further with each instar , until they undergo the final larval – pupal moult . The larvae of many lepidopteran species will either make a spun casing of silk called a cocoon and pupate inside it , or will pupate in a cell under the ground . In many butterflies , the pupa is suspended from a cremaster and is called a chrysalis . 
 The adult body has a hardened exoskeleton , except for the abdomen which is less sclerotised . The head is shaped like a capsule with appendages arising from it . Adult mouthparts include a prominent proboscis formed from maxillary galeae , and are adapted for sucking nectar . Some species do not feed as adults , and may have reduced mouthparts , while others have them modified for piercing and suck blood or fruit juices . Mandibles are absent in all except the Micropterigidae which have chewing mouthparts . Adult Lepidoptera have two immobile , multi @-@ faceted compound eyes , and only two simple eyes or ocelli , which may be reduced . The three segments of the thorax are fused together . Antennae are prominent and besides the faculty of smell , act as olfactory radar , and also aid navigation , orientation and balance during flight . In moths , males frequently have more feathery antennae than females , for detecting the female pheromones at a distance . There are two pairs of membranous wings which arise from the <unk> ( middle ) and metathoracic ( third ) segments ; they are usually completely covered by minute scales . The two wings on each side act as one by virtue of wing @-@ locking mechanisms . In some groups , the females are flightless and have reduced wings . The abdomen has ten segments connected with movable inter @-@ segmental membranes . The last segments of the abdomen form the external genitalia . The genitalia are complex and provide the basis for family identification and species discrimination . 
 The wings , head parts of thorax and abdomen of Lepidoptera are covered with minute scales , from which feature the order ' Lepidoptera ' derives its names , the word " lepidos " in Ancient Greek meaning ' scale ' . Most scales are lamellar ( blade @-@ like ) and attached with a pedicel , while other forms may be hair @-@ like or specialised as secondary sexual characteristics . The lumen , or surface of the lamella , has a complex structure . It gives colour either due to the pigments contained within it or through its three @-@ dimensional structure . Scales provide a number of functions , which include insulation , thermoregulation and aiding gliding flight , amongst others , the most important of which is the large diversity of vivid or indistinct patterns they provide which help the organism protect itself by camouflage , mimicry , and to seek mates . 
 = = External morphology = = 
 In common with other members of the superorder <unk> , Lepidoptera undergo complete metamorphosis , going through a four @-@ stage life cycle : egg , larva / caterpillar , pupa / chrysalis , and imago ( plural : imagines ) / adult . 
 Lepidopterans range in size from a few millimetres in length , such as in the case of microlepidoptera , to a wingspan of many inches , such as the Atlas moth and the world 's largest butterfly Queen Alexandra 's <unk> . 
 = = = General body plan = = = 
 The body of an adult butterfly or moth ( imago ) has three distinct divisions , called tagmata , connected at constrictions ; these tagmata are the head , thorax and abdomen . Adult lepidopterans have four wings : a forewing and a hindwing on both the left and the right side of the thorax and , like all insects , have three pairs of legs . 
 The morphological characteristics which distinguish the order Lepidoptera from other insect orders are : 
 Head : The head has large compound eyes and if mouthparts are present , they are almost always a drinking straw @-@ like proboscis . 
 Scales : Scales cover the external surface of the body and appendages . 
 Thorax : The prothorax is usually reduced . 
 Wings : Two pairs of wings are present in almost all taxa . The wings have very few cross @-@ veins . 
 Abdomen : The posterior abdominal segments are extensively modified for reproduction . Cerci are absent . 
 Larva : Lepidoptera larvae are known as caterpillars , and have a well @-@ developed head and mandibles . They can have from 0 to 5 pairs of prolegs , usually 4 . 
 Pupa : The pupae in most species are <unk> ( with no functional mandibles in the pupal state ) and obtect ( with appendages fused or glued to the body ) , while others are <unk> ( with functional mandibles present in the pupal state ) and exarate ( having the antennae , legs , and wings free ) . 
 = = = Distinguishing taxonomic features = = = 
 The chief characteristics used to classify lepidopteran species , genera and families are : 
 the mouthparts 
 the shape and venation of the wings 
 whether the wings are <unk> ( the venation of the forewings and hind wings alike ) or <unk> ( forewings and hind wings different ) 
 whether the wings are aculeate ( more or less covered with specialized bristles called <unk> ) or <unk> 
 the type of wing coupling ( jugate or <unk> ) 
 the anatomy of the reproductive organs 
 the structure of larva and position of primary setae 
 whether the pupa is exarate or obtect 
 The morphological characteristics of caterpillars and pupae used for classification are completely different from that of adults ; different classification schemes are sometimes provided separately for classifying adults , larvae and pupae . The characteristics of immature stages are increasingly used for taxonomic purposes as they provide insights into systematics and phylogenies of Lepidoptera that are not apparent from examination of adults . 
 = = Head = = 
 Like all animal heads , the head of a butterfly or moth contains the feeding organs and the major sense organs . The head typically consists of two antennae , two compound eyes , two palpi and a proboscis . Lepidoptera have ocelli which may or may not be visible . They also have sensory structures called <unk> , the functions of which are largely unknown . The head is filled largely by the brain , the sucking pump and its associated muscle bundles . Unlike the adults , the larvae have one @-@ segmented mandibles . 
 The head capsule is well sclerotised and has a number of sclerites or plates , separated by sutures . The sclerites are difficult to distinguish from sulci ( singular – sulcus ) which are secondary thickenings . The regions of the head have been divided into a number of areas which act as a topographical guide for description by lepidopterists but cannot be discriminated in terms of their development . The head is covered by hair @-@ like or lamellar scales and found either as tufts on the frons or vertex ( referred to as rough @-@ scaled ) or pressed close to the head ( referred to as smooth @-@ scaled ) . 
 The sensory organs and structures on the head show great variety , and the shape and form of these structures , as also their presence or absence , are important taxonomic indicators for classifying taxa into families . 
 = = = Antennae = = = 
 Antennae are prominent paired appendages that project forwards between the animal 's eyes and consist of a number of segments . In the case of butterflies , their length varies from half the length of the forewing to three @-@ quarters of the length of the forewing . The antennae of butterflies are either slender and knobbed at the tip and , in the case of the Hesperiidae , are hooked at the tip . In some butterfly genera such as <unk> and <unk> the knob is hollowed underneath . Moth antennae are either filiform ( thread @-@ like ) , <unk> ( comb @-@ like ) , bipectinate ( feather @-@ like ) , hooked , clubbed or thickened . Some moths have knobbed antennae akin to those of butterflies , including the families <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Antennae are the primary organs of olfaction ( smell ) in Lepidoptera . The antenna surface is covered with large numbers of olfactory scales , hairs or pits ; as many as 1 @,@ 370 @,@ 000 are found on the antennae of a Monarch . Antennae are extremely sensitive ; the feathered antennae of male moths from the Saturniidae , Lasiocampidae and many other families are so sensitive that they can detect the pheromones of female moths from distances of up to 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . Lepidoptera antennae can be angled in many positions . They help the insect in locating the scent and can be considered to act as a kind of ' olfactory radar ' . In moths , males frequently have antennae which are more feathery than those of the females , for detecting the female pheromones at a distance . Since females do not need to detect the males , they have simpler antennae . Antennae have also been found to play a role in the time @-@ compensated sun compass orientation in migratory Monarch butterflies . 
 = = = Eyes = = = 
 Lepidoptera have two large , immovable compound eyes which consist of a large number of facets or lenses , each connected to a lens @-@ like cylinder which is attached to a nerve leading to the brain . Each eye may have up to 17 @,@ 000 individual light receptors ( ommatidia ) which in combination provide a broad mosaic view of the surrounding area . One tropical Asian family , the <unk> , has compound eyes divided into two distinct segments . The eyes are usually smooth but may be covered by minute hairs . The eyes of butterflies are usually brown , golden @-@ brown or even red as in the case of some species of skippers . 
 While most insects have three simple eyes , or ocelli , only two ocelli are present in all species of Lepidoptera , except a few moths , one on each side of the head near the edge of the compound eye . On some species , sense organs called <unk> are found near the ocelli . The ocelli are not homologous to the simple eyes of caterpillars which are differently named as stemmata . The ocelli of Lepidoptera are reduced externally in some families ; where present , they are <unk> , unlike stemmata of larvae which are fully focussed . The utility of ocelli is not understood at present . 
 Butterflies and moths are able to see ultra @-@ violet ( UV ) light , and wing colours and patterns are principally observed by Lepidoptera in this region . The patterns seen on their wing under UV light differ considerably from those seen in normal light . The UV patterns act as visual cues which help differentiate between species for the purpose of mating . Studies have been carried out on Lepidoptera ( mostly butterflies ) wing patterns illuminated by UV light . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Typically , the labial palpi are prominent , 3 @-@ segmented , springing from under the head and curving up in front of the face . There is great variation in morphology of labial palpi in different families of Lepidoptera ; sometimes the palpi are separate and sometimes they are <unk> and form a beak , but they are always independently movable . In other cases , the labial palpi may not be erect but ' <unk> ' ( projecting forward horizontally ) . <unk> consist of a short basal segment , a comparatively long central segment and a narrow terminal portion . The first two segments are densely scaled and may be hirsute ; the terminal segment is bare . The terminal segment may be blunt or pointed ; it may project straight or at an angle from the second segment inside which it may be concealed . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 While mandibles or ' jaws ' ( chewing mouthparts ) are only present in the caterpillar stage , the mouthparts of most adult Lepidoptera mainly consist of the sucking kind ; this part is known as the proboscis or ' <unk> ' . A few Lepidoptera species have reduced mouthparts and therefore do not feed in the adult state . Others , such as the basal family Micropterigidae , have mouthparts of the chewing kind . 
 The proboscis ( plural – proboscises ) is formed from maxillary galeae and is adapted for sucking nectar . It consists of two tubes held together by hooks and separable for cleaning . Each tube is inwardly concave , thus forming a central tube up which moisture is sucked . Suction is effected through the contraction and expansion of a sac in the head . The proboscis is coiled under the head when the insect is at rest and extended only when feeding . The maxillary palpi are reduced and even vestigial . They are conspicuous and 5 @-@ segmented in some of the more basal families and are often folded . 
 The shape and dimensions of the proboscis have evolved to give different species a wider and therefore more advantageous diet . There is an allometric scaling relationship between body mass of Lepidoptera and length of proboscis from which an interesting adaptive departure is the unusually long @-@ tongued hawk moth Xanthopan morgani praedicta . Charles Darwin predicted the existence and proboscis length of this moth before its discovery based on his knowledge of the long @-@ spurred Madagascan star orchid Angraecum sesquipedale . 
 There are primarily two feeding guilds in Lepidoptera – the nectarivorous who obtain the majority of their nutritional requirements from floral nectar and those of the frugivorous guild who feed primarily on juices of rotting fruit or fermenting tree sap . There are substantial differences between the morphology of the proboscises of both feeding guilds . <unk> ( family Sphingidae ) have elongated proboscises which enable them to feed on and pollinate flowers with long tubular <unk> . Besides this , a number of taxa ( especially noctuid moths ) have evolved different proboscis morphologies . Certain noctuid species have developed piercing mouthparts ; the proboscis has sclerotised scales on the tip which to pierce and suck blood or fruit juices . <unk> in some Heliconius species have evolved to consume solids such as pollen . Some other moths , mostly noctuids , have modified proboscises to suit their mode of nutrition – <unk> ( feeding on tears of sleeping birds ) . The proboscises often have sharp apices as well as a host of barbs and spurs on the stem . 
 = = Thorax = = 
 The thorax , which develops from segments 2 , 3 and 4 of the larva , consists of three invisibly divided segments , namely prothorax , metathorax and mesothorax . The organs of insect locomotion – the legs and wings – are borne on the thorax . The forelegs spring from the prothorax , the forewings and middle pair of legs are borne on the mesothorax , and the hindwings and hindlegs arise from the metathorax . In some cases , the wings are vestigial . 
 The upper and lower parts of the thorax ( sterna and terga respectively ) are composed of segmental and <unk> sclerites which display secondary <unk> and considerable modification in the Lepidoptera . The prothorax is the simplest and smallest of the three segments while the mesothorax is the most developed . 
 Between the head and thorax is the membranous neck or cervix . It comprises a pair of lateral cervical sclerites and is composed of both cephalic and thoracic elements . Between the head and the thorax is a tufted scale called the pronotum . On either side is a shield @-@ like scale called a scapula . In the Noctuoidea , the metathorax is modified with a pair of tympanal organs . 
 = = = Leg = = = 
 Fore @-@ legs in the Papilionoidea exhibit reduction of various forms : the butterfly family Nymphalidae , or brush @-@ footed butterflies as they are commonly known , have only the rear two pairs of legs fully functional with the forward pair strongly reduced and not capable of walking or perching . In the Lycaenidae , the tarsus is unsegmented , as the <unk> are fused , and , tarsal claws are absent . The <unk> pad ( a pad projecting between the tarsal claws of some insects ) and <unk> ( singular : <unk> , a pad or lobe beneath each tarsal claw ) are reduced or absent in the Papilionidae . The tarsal claws are also absent in the <unk> . 
 In Lepidoptera , the three pairs of legs are covered with scales . Lepidoptera also have olfactory organs on their feet which aid in " tasting " or " smelling " food plants . 
 = = = Wings = = = 
 See glossary for terms used 
 Adult Lepidoptera have two pairs of membranous wings covered , usually completely , by minute scales . A wing consists of an upper and lower membrane which are connected by minute fibres and strengthened by a system of thickened hollow ribs , popularly but incorrectly referred to as ' veins ' , as they may also contain tracheae , nerve fibres and blood vessels . The membranes are covered with minute scales which have jagged ends or hairs and are attached by hooks . The wings are moved by the rapid muscular contraction and expansion of the thorax . 
 The wings arise from the meso- and meta @-@ thoracic segments and are similar in size in the basal groups . In more derived groups , the meso @-@ thoracic wings are larger with more powerful musculature at their bases and more rigid vein structures on the costal edge . 
 Besides providing the primary function of flight , wings also have secondary functions of self @-@ defence , camouflage and thermoregulation . In some Lepidoptera families such as the <unk> and <unk> , the wings are reduced or even absent ( often in the female but not the male ) . 
 = = = = Shape = = = = 
 The shape of wings exhibits great variety in Lepidoptera . In the case of the Papilionoidea , the costa may be straight or highly arched . It is sometimes concave on the hindwing . It is occasionally serrate or minutely saw @-@ toothed on the forewing . The apex may be rounded , pointed or falcate ( produced , and concave below ) . The termen tends to be straight or concave on the forewing while it is usually more or less convex on the hindwing . The termen is often crenulate or dentate , i.e. produced at each vein and concave in between them . The dorsum is normally straight but may be concave . 
 The hindwing is frequently caudate , i.e. the veins near the end of the <unk> have one or more tails . The <unk> itself being often produced and frequently lobed . Along the hindwing termen there are tightly @-@ packed scales in a double row . The underside of the scales project and form a regular narrow fringe referred to as cilia . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Tubular veins run through the two @-@ layered membranous wing . Veins are connected to the haemocoel and in theory allow haemolymph to flow through them . In addition , a nerve and trachea may pass through the veins . 
 Lepidopteran venation is simple in that there are few crossbars . The wing venation in Lepidoptera is a diagnostic for distinguishing between the taxa as also the genera and families . The terminology is based on the Comstock @-@ Needham system which gives the morphological description of insect wing venation . In the basal Lepidoptera , the venation of the forewing is similar to that of the hindwing ; a condition referred to as " <unk> " . The Micropterigidae ( <unk> ) have venation that resembles the most primitive caddisflies ( Trichoptera ) . All other Lepidoptera , the vast majority ( around 98 % ) , are " <unk> " , the venation of the hindwing differing from that from the forewing and being sometimes reduced . Moths of the families Nepticulidae , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , amongst others , often have greatly reduced venation in both wings . <unk> moths tend to have the " jugum " form of wing @-@ coupling as opposed to the " frenulum – retinaculum " arrangement in the case of more advanced families . 
 = = = = Wing coupling = = = = 
 The Lepidoptera have developed a wide variety of morphological wing @-@ coupling mechanisms in the imago which render these taxa " functionally <unk> " . All but the most basal forms exhibit this wing coupling . There are three different types of mechanisms – jugal , <unk> – <unk> and <unk> . 
 The more primitive groups have an enlarged lobe @-@ like area near the basal posterior margin ( i.e. at the base of the forewing ) called a jugum , that folds under the hindwing during flight . Other groups have a frenulum on the hindwing that hooks under a retinaculum on the forewing . 
 In all butterflies ( with the exception of male <unk> ) and in Bombycoidea moths ( with the exception of the Sphingidae ) , there is no arrangement of frenulum and retinaculum to couple the wings . Instead , an enlarged humeral area of the hindwing is broadly overlapped by the forewing . Despite the absence of a specific mechanical connection , the wings overlap and operate in phase . The power stroke of the forewing pushes down the hindwing in unison . This type of coupling is a variation of <unk> type but where the frenulum and retinaculum are completely lost . 
 = = Scales = = 
 The wings of Lepidoptera are minutely scaled , which gives the name to this order ; the name ' Lepidoptera ' was coined in 1735 by Carl Linnaeus for the group of " insects with four scaly wings " . It is derived from Ancient Greek lepidos or <unk> ( scale ) , itself originating from the Greek lepis ( female genitive singular form lepidos ) meaning " ( fish ) scale " ( and related to <unk> " to peel " ) and pteron or πτερόν ( wing ) . 
 Scales also cover the head , parts of the thorax and abdomen as well as parts of the genitalia . The morphology of scales has been studied by Downey & Allyn ( 1975 ) and scales have been classified into three groups , namely hair @-@ like , or <unk> , blade @-@ like , or lamellar and other variable forms . 
 Primitive moths ( non @-@ Glossata and <unk> ) have ' solid ' scales which are imperforate , i.e. , they lack a lumen . 
 A few taxa of the Trichoptera ( caddisflies ) , which are the sister group to the Lepidoptera , have hair @-@ like scales , but always on the wings and never on the body or other parts of the insect . Caddisflies also possess caudal cerci on the abdomen , a feature absent in the Lepidoptera . According to <unk> ( 2005 ) , " morphologically , scales are macrotrichia , and thus homologous with the large hairs ( and scales ) that cover the wings of Trichoptera ( caddisflies ) " . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Although there is great diversity in scale form , they all share a similar structure . Scales , like other <unk> , arise from special <unk> ( hair @-@ producing ) cells and have a socket which is enclosed in a special ' <unk> ' cell ; this arrangement provides a stalk or pedicel by which scales are attached to the substrate . Scales may be <unk> ( hairlike ) or flattened . The body or ' blade ' of a typical flattened scale consists of an upper and lower lamella with an air @-@ space in between . The surface towards the body is smooth and known as the inferior lamella . The upper surface , or superior lamella , has transverse and longitudinal ridges and ribs . The lamellae are held apart by struts called <unk> and contain pigments which give colour . The scales cling somewhat loosely to the wing and come off easily without harming the butterfly . 
 = = = Colour = = = 
 The scales on butterfly wings are pigmented with melanins that can produce the colours black and brown . The white colour in the butterfly family Pieridae is a derivative of uric acid , an excretory product . Bright blues , greens , reds and iridescence are usually created not by pigments but through the microstructure of the scales . This structural coloration is the result of coherent scattering of light by the photonic crystal nature of the scales . The specialised scales that provide structural colours to reflected light mostly produce ultra @-@ violet patterns which are discernible in that part of the ultra @-@ violet spectrum that Lepidopteran eyes can see . The structural colour seen is often dependent upon the angle of view . For example , in Morpho <unk> , the colour from the front is a bright blue but when seen from an angle changes very quickly to black . 
 The iridescent structural coloration on the wings of many lycaenid and <unk> species , such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> imperialis , and <unk> such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , has been studied . They manifest the most complex photonic scale architectures known – regular three @-@ dimensional periodic lattices , that occur within the lumen of some scales . In the case of the Kaiser @-@ i @-@ Hind ( <unk> imperialis ) , the three @-@ dimensional photonic structure has been examined by transmission electron tomography and computer modelling to reveal naturally occurring " chiral tetrahedral repeating units packed in a <unk> lattice " , the cause of the iridescence . 
 = = = Function = = = 
 Scales play an important part in the natural history of Lepidoptera . Scales enable the development of vivid or indistinct patterns which help the organism protect itself by camouflage , mimicry and warning . Besides providing insulation , dark patterns on wings allow sunlight to be absorbed and are probably involved in thermoregulation . Bright and distinctive colour patterns in butterflies which are distasteful to predators help communicate their toxicity or inedibility , thus preventing predation . In Batesian mimicry , wing colour patterns help edible Lepidopterans mimic inedible models , while in Müllerian mimicry , inedible butterflies resemble each other to reduce the numbers of individuals sampled by inexperienced predators . 
 Scales may have evolved initially for providing insulation . Scales on the thorax and other parts of the body may contribute to maintaining the high body temperatures required during flight . The ' solid ' scales of basal moths are however not as efficient as those of their more advanced relatives as the presence of a lumen adds air layers and increases the insulation value . Scales also help increase the lift to drag ratio in gliding flight . 
 For newly emerged adults of most myrmecophilous Lycaenidae , deciduous waxy scales provide some protection from predators as they emerge from the nest . In the case of the Moth butterfly ( <unk> <unk> ) , the caterpillars are unwelcome guests in nests of tree ants , feeding on ant larvae . The adults emerging from pupae are covered with soft , loose adhesive scales which rub off and stick on the ants as they make their way out of the nest after hatching . 
 = = = = Androconia = = = = 
 Male Lepidoptera possess special scales , called androconia ( singular – <unk> ) , which have evolved as a result of sexual selection for the purposes of disseminating pheromones for attracting suitable mates . Androconia may be dispersed on the wings , body , or legs or occur in patches , referred to as " brands " , " sex brands " or " stigmata " on the wings , usually in <unk> of the upper surface of the forewings , sometimes concealed by other scales . Androconia are also known to occur in the folds of wings . These brands sometimes consist of hairlike tufts which facilitate the diffusion of the pheromone . The role of androconia in the courtship of <unk> and <unk> butterflies , such as <unk> <unk> , has been proven experimentally . 
 Successive close @-@ ups of the scales of a Peacock wing 
 = = Abdomen = = 
 The abdomen or body is composed of nine segments . In the larva it ranges from segments 5 to 13 . The eleventh segment of the larva holds a pair of anal claspers , which <unk> in some taxa and represent the genitalia . 
 Many families of moths have special organs to help detect bat echolocation . These organs are known as tympana ( singular – <unk> ) . The <unk> and almost all <unk> have tympana located on the anterior sternite of the abdomen . The Noctuoidea also have tympana , but in their case , the tympana are located on the underside of the metathorax , the structure and position of which are unique and a taxonomic distinguishing feature of the superfamily . 
 The females of some moths have a scent @-@ emitting organ located at the tip of the abdomen . 
 = = = Genitalia = = = 
 The genitalia are complex and provide the basis for species discrimination in most families and also in family identification . The genitalia arise from the tenth or most distal segment of the abdomen . Lepidoptera have some of the most complex genital structures of all insects , with a wide variety of complex spines , setae , scales and tufts in males , claspers of different shapes and different modifications of the ductus bursae in females , through which stored sperm is transferred within the female directly , or indirectly , to the vagina for fertilisation . 
 The arrangement of genitalia is important in courtship and mating as they prevent cross @-@ specific mating and hybridisation . The uniqueness of a species ' genitalia led to the use of the morphological study of genitalia as one of the most important keys in taxonomic identification of taxa below family level . With the advent of DNA analysis , the study of genitalia has now become just one of the techniques used in taxonomy . 
 There are three basic configurations of genitalia in the majority of the Lepidoptera based on how the arrangement in females of openings for copulation , fertilisation and egg @-@ laying has evolved : 
 <unk> : Hepialidae and related families have an external groove that carries sperm from the copulatory opening ( gonopore ) to the ( ovipore ) and are termed <unk> . 
 <unk> : Primitive groups have a single genital aperture near the end of the abdomen through which both copulation and egg laying occur . This character is used to designate the <unk> . 
 <unk> : The remaining groups have an internal duct that carry sperm and form the Ditrysia , with separate openings for copulation and egg @-@ laying . 
 The genitalia of the male and female in any particular species are adapted to fit each other like a lock ( male ) and key ( female ) . In males , the ninth abdominal segment is divided into a dorsal ' <unk> ' and ventral ' <unk> ' . They form a ring @-@ like structure for the attachment of genital parts and a pair of lateral clasping organs ( claspers or ' <unk> ' ) . The male has a median tubular organ ( called the aedeagus ) which is extended through an eversible sheath ( or ' vesica ' ) to inseminate the female . The males have paired sperm ducts in all lepidopterans ; the paired testes are separate in basal taxa and fused in advanced forms . 
 While the layout of internal genital ducts and openings of the female genitalia depends upon the taxonomic group that insect belongs to , the internal female reproductive system of all lepidopterans consists of paired ovaries and accessory glands which produce the yolks and shells of the eggs . Female insects have a system of receptacles and ducts in which sperm is received , transported and stored . The oviducts of the female join together to form a common duct ( called the ' <unk> communis ' ) which leads to the vagina . 
 When copulation takes place , the male butterfly or moth places a capsule of sperm ( spermatophore ) in a receptacle of the female ( called the corpus bursae ) . The sperm , when released from the capsule , swims directly into or via a small tube into a special seminal receptacle ( spermatheca ) , where the sperm is stored until it is released into the vagina for fertilisation during egg laying , which may occur hours , days , or months after mating . The eggs pass through the ovipore . The ovipore may be at the end of a modified ovipositor or surrounded by a pair of broad setose anal papillae . 
 Butterflies of the <unk> ( Family Papilionidae ) and some <unk> ( Family Nymphalidae ) add a post @-@ copulatory plug , called the <unk> , to the abdomen of the female after copulation preventing her from mating again . 
 The males of many species of Papilionoidea are furnished with secondary sexual characteristics . These consist of scent @-@ producing organs , brushes , and brands or pouches of specialised scales . These presumably meet the function of convincing the female that she is mating with a male of the correct species . 
 Tree species of hawkmoth have been recorded to emit ultrasound clicks by rubbing their genitalia ; males produce by rubbing rigid scales on the exterior of the claspers while females produce sound by contracting their genitalia which causes rubbing of scales against the abdomen . The function of this noise @-@ making is not clear and suggestions put forward include the jamming of bat echo @-@ location , and , advertising that the bat 's prey are prickly and excellent fliers . 
 = = Development = = 
 The fertilised egg matures and hatches to give a caterpillar . The caterpillar is the feeding stage of the Lepidopteran life @-@ cycle . The caterpillar needs to be able to feed and to avoid being eaten and much of its morphology has evolved to facilitate these two functions . After growth and ecdysis , the caterpillar enters into a sessile developmental stage called a pupa ( or chrysalis ) around which it may form a casing . The insect develops into the adult in the pupa stage ; when ready the pupa hatches and the adult stage or imago of a butterfly or moth arises . 
 = = = Egg = = = 
 Like most insects , the Lepidoptera are oviparous or ' egg @-@ layers ' . Lepidopteran eggs , like those of other insects , are <unk> in that the eggs have a central yolk surrounded by cytoplasm . The yolk provides the liquid nourishment for the embryo caterpillar until it escapes from the shell . The cytoplasm is enclosed by the <unk> envelope and a proteinaceous membrane called the chorion protects the egg externally . The zygote nucleus is located posteriorly . 
 In some species of Lepidoptera , a waxy layer is present inside the chorion adjacent to the <unk> layer which is thought to have evolved to prevent desiccation . In insects , the chorion has a layer of air @-@ pores in the otherwise solid material which provides very limited capability for respiratory function . In Lepidoptera , the chorion layer above this air pore layer is lamellar with successive sheets of protein arranged in a particular direction and stepped so as to form a helical arrangement . 
 The top of the egg is depressed and forms a small central cavity called micropyle through which the egg is fertilised . The micropyle is situated on top in eggs which are globular , conical , or cylindrical ; in those eggs which are flattened or lenticular , the micropyle is located on the outer margin or rim . 
 The eggs of Lepidoptera are usually rounded and small ( 1 mm ) though they may be as large as 4 mm in the case of Sphingidae and Saturniidae . They are generally quite plain in colour , white , pale green , bluish @-@ green , or brown . Butterfly and moth eggs come in various shapes ; some are spherical , others hemispherical , conical , cylindrical or lenticular ( lens @-@ shaped ) . Some are barrel @-@ shaped or pancake @-@ shaped , while others are turban or cheese @-@ shaped . They may be angled or depressed at both ends , ridged or ornamented , spotted or blemished . 
 The eggs are deposited singly , in small clusters , or in a mass , and invariably on or near the food source . Captive moths have been known to lay eggs in the cages they have been sequestered in . Egg size in the Lepidoptera is affected by a number of factors . Lepidoptera species which overwinter in the egg stage usually have larger eggs than the species that do not . Similarly , species feeding on woody plants in larval stage have larger eggs than those species feeding on herbaceous plants . Eggs laid by older females of a few butterfly species have been noted to be smaller in size than their younger counterparts . In the absence of adequate nutrition , the females of the corn @-@ borer moth ( <unk> spp . ) have been recorded to lay clutches with egg sizes below normal . 
 While escaping , the newly hatched larvae of many species sometimes eat the chorion to emerge . Alternatively , the egg shell may have a line of weakness around the cap which gives way allowing the larva to emerge . The egg shell and a small amount of yolk trapped in the amniotic membranes forms the first food for most lepidopteran larvae . 
 = = = Caterpillar = = = 
 Caterpillars , are " characteristic <unk> larvae with cylindrical bodies , short thoracic legs and abdominal prolegs ( pseudopods ) " . They have a toughened ( sclerotised ) head capsule , mandibles ( mouthparts ) for chewing , and a soft tubular , segmented body , that may have hair @-@ like or other projections , 3 pairs of true legs , and additional prolegs ( up to 5 pairs ) . The body consists of 13 segments , of which 3 are thoracic ( T1 , T2 and T3 ) and 10 are abdominal ( A1 to A10 ) . 
 All true caterpillars have an upside @-@ down Y @-@ shaped line that runs from the top of the head downward . In between the Y @-@ shaped line lies the frontal triangle or frons . The clypeus , located below the frons , lies between the two antennae . The labrum is found below the clypeus . There is a small notch in the centre of the labrum with which the leaf edge engages when the caterpillar eats . 
 The larvae have silk glands which are located on the labium . These glands are modified salivary glands . They use these silk glands to make silk for cocoons and shelters . Located below the labrum are the mandibles . On each side of the head there are usually six stemmata just above the mandibles . These stemmata are arranged in a semicircle . Below the stemmata there is a small pair of antennae , one on each side . 
 The thorax bears three pairs of legs , one pair on each segment . The prothorax ( T1 ) has a functional spiracle which is actually derived from the mesothorax ( T2 ) while the metathorax has a reduced spiracle which is not externally open and lies beneath the cuticle . The thoracic legs consist of coxa , trochanter , femur , tarsus and claw and are constant in form throughout the order . However they are reduced in the case of certain leaf @-@ miners and elongated in certain <unk> . In Micropterigidae , the legs are three @-@ segmented , as the coxa , trochanter and femur are fused . 
 Abdominal segments 3 – 6 and 10 each bear a pair of legs that are more fleshy . The thoracic legs are known as true legs and the abdominal legs are called prolegs . The true legs vary little in the Lepidoptera except for reduction in certain leaf @-@ miners and elongation in the family <unk> . The prolegs contain a number of small hooks on the tip , which are known as crochets . The families of Lepidoptera differ in the number and positioning of their prolegs . Some larvae such as inchworms ( Geometridae ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) have five pairs of prolegs or less , while others like Lycaenidae and slug caterpillars ( Limacodidae ) lack prolegs altogether . In some leaf @-@ mining caterpillars there are crochets present on the abdominal wall which are reduced prolegs , while other leaf @-@ mining species lack the crochets entirely . The abdominal spiracles are located on each side of the body on the first eight abdominal segments . 
 Caterpillars have different types of projections ; setae ( hairs ) , spines , warts , tubercles , and horns . The hairs come in an assortment of colours and may be long or short ; single , in clusters , or in tufts ; thinner at the point or clubbed at the end . A spine may either be a <unk> ( having a single point ) or a <unk> ( having multiple points ) . The warts may either be small bumps or short projections on the body . The tubercles are fleshy body projections that are either short and bump @-@ like or long and filament @-@ like . They usually occur in pairs or in a cluster on one or more segments . The horns are short , fleshy , and are drawn to a point . They are usually found on the eighth abdominal segment . 
 A large number of species of families Saturniidae , Limacodidae and <unk> have stinging caterpillars which have poisonous setae , also called urticating hairs , and in the case of <unk> – a Brazilian <unk> genus – can kill a human due to its potent anticoagulant poison . Caterpillars of many taxa that have sequestered toxic chemicals from host @-@ plants or have sharp urticating hair or spines , display aposematic colouration and markings . 
 Caterpillars undergo ecdysis and have a number of larval instars , usually five but varying between species . The new cuticle is soft and allows the increase in size and development of the caterpillar before becoming hard and inelastic . In the last ecdysis , the old cuticle splits and curls up into a small ball at the posterior end of the pupa and is known as the larval exuvia . 
 = = = Chrysalis or pupa = = = 
 A cocoon is a casing spun of silk by many moth caterpillars , and numerous other holometabolous insect larvae as a protective covering for the pupa . Most Lepidoptera larvae will either make a cocoon and pupate inside them or will pupate in a cell under the ground , with the exception of butterflies and advanced moths such as noctuids , whose pupae are exposed . The pupae of moths are usually brown and smooth whereas butterfly pupae are often colourful and their shape varies greatly . In butterflies , the exposed pupa is often referred to as a chrysalis , derived from the Greek term " chrysalis " : <unk> ( <unk> ) for gold , referring to the golden colour of some pupae . 
 The caterpillars of many butterflies attach themselves by a button of silk to the underside of a branch or stone or other projecting surface . They remain attached to the silk pad by a hook @-@ like process called a cremaster . Most <unk> hang head downward , but in the families Papilionidae , Pieridae , and Lycaenidae , the chrysalis is held in a more upright position by a silk girdle around the middle of the chrysalis . 
 The pupae of most Lepidoptera are obtect , with appendages fused or glued to the body , while the rest have exarate pupae , having the antennae , legs , and wings free and not glued to the body . 
 During the pupal stage , the morphology of the adult is developed through elaboration from larval structures . The general aspect of the adult is visible before the outer surface hardens – the head , resting on the thorax , the eyes , antennae ( brought forward over the head ) , the wings brought over the thorax and the six legs between the wings and the abdomen . Among the features discernible in the head region of a pupa are sclerites , sutures , <unk> , mandibles , eye @-@ pieces , antennae , palpi and the maxillae . The pupal thorax displays the three thoracic segments , legs , wings , tegulae , <unk> furrows and axillary tubercles . The pupal abdomen exhibits the ten segments , spines , setae , scars of larval prolegs and tubercles , anal and genital openings , as well as spiracles . The pupa of borers display the flange @-@ plates while those of specialised Lepidoptera exhibit the cremaster . 
 While the pupa is generally stationary and immobile , those of the primitive moth families Micropterigidae , Agathiphagidae and Heterobathmiidae have fully functional mandibles . These serve principally to allow the adult to escape from the cocoon . Besides this , all appendages and the body are separate from the pupal skin and enjoy a degree of independent motion . All other superfamilies of the Lepidoptera are more specialised , have non @-@ functional mandibles , appendages and body attached to the pupal skin , and lose a degree of independent movement . 
 The pupae of some moths are able to wriggle their abdomen . The three caudal segments of the pupal abdomen ( segments 8 – 10 ) are fixed ; the other segments are movable to some degree . While the more evolved Lepidoptera can wriggle only the last two @-@ three segments at the end of the abdomen , more basal taxa such as the Micropterigidae can wriggle the remaining seven segments of the abdomen ; this presumably helps them to protrude the anterior end from the pupal case before eclosion . The pupae of Hepialidae are able to move back and forth in the larval tunnel by wriggling , aided by projections on the back in addition to spines . Abdominal wriggling is considered to be of startle value and discouraging to predators . In the case of a few hawk moths , such as <unk> <unk> , the wriggling of the abdomens is accompanied by a rattling or clicking sound which adds to the startle effect . 
 In some species , such as Heliconius <unk> , mating can occur inside the pupa of females by males . 
 = = Defense and predation = = 
 Lepidopterans are soft bodied , fragile and almost defenseless while the immature stages move slowly or are immobile , hence all stages are exposed to predation by birds , small mammals , lizards , amphibians , invertebrate predators ( notably parasitoid and parasitic wasps and flies ) as well as fungi and bacteria . To combat this , Lepidoptera have developed a number of strategies for defense and protection which include camouflage , aposematism , mimicry , and the development of threat patterns and displays . 
 Camouflage is an important defense strategy enabled by changes in body shape , colour and markings . Some lepidopterans blend with the surroundings , making them difficult to be spotted by predators . Caterpillars can be shades of green that match their host plant . Others resemble inedible objects , such as twigs or leaves . The larvae of some species , such as the Common Mormon and the Western Tiger <unk> look like bird droppings . 
 Some species of Lepidoptera sequester or manufacture toxins which are stored in their body tissue , rendering them poisonous to predators ; examples include the Monarch butterfly in the Americas and <unk> species in Asia . Predators that eat poisonous lepidopterans may become sick and vomit violently , and so learn to avoid those species . A predator who has previously eaten a poisonous lepidopteran may avoid other species with similar markings in the future , thus saving many other species as well . Toxic butterflies and larvae tend to develop bright colours and striking patterns as an indicator to predators about their toxicity . This phenomenon is known as aposematism . 
 Aposematism has also led to the development of mimicry complexes of Batesian mimicry , where edible species mimic aposematic taxa , and Müllerian mimicry , where inedible species , often of related taxa , have evolved to resemble each other , so as to benefit from reduced sampling rates by predators during learning . Similarly , adult Sesiidae species ( also known as clearwing moths ) have a general appearance that is sufficiently similar to a wasp or hornet to make it likely that the moths gain a reduction in predation by Batesian mimicry . 
 <unk> are a type of automimicry used by some lepidopterans . In butterflies , the spots are composed of concentric rings of scales of different colours . The proposed role of the eyespots is to deflect predators ' attention . Their resemblance to eyes provokes the predator 's instinct to attack these wing patterns . The role of filamentous tails in Lycaenidae has been suggested as confusing predators as to the real location of the head , giving them a better chance of escaping alive and relatively unscathed . 
 Some caterpillars , especially members of Papilionidae , contain an <unk> , a Y @-@ shaped protrusible gland found in the <unk> segment of the larvae . When threatened , the caterpillar emits unpleasant smells from the organ to ward off the predators . 
 = Vlastimil Koubek = 
 Vlastimil Koubek ( March 17 , 1927 – February 15 , 2003 ) was a Czech American architect who designed more than 100 buildings , most of them in the Washington , D.C. , metropolitan area . When he died , he had designed buildings worth more than $ 2 billion . Most of his work is Modernist in style , although he developed a few structures in other vernaculars . He created the site plan for the redevelopment of Rosslyn , Virginia , and his Ames Center anchored the area 's economic recovery . He also designed the World Building in Silver Spring , Maryland , which sparked redevelopment of that town 's downtown and the L 'Enfant Plaza Hotel in Washington , D.C. amongst many other buildings . In 1985 , Washingtonian magazine considered him to be one of 20 people " who in the past 20 years had the greatest impact on the way we live and who forever altered the look of Washington . " In 1988 , The Washington Post newspaper said his Willard Hotel renovation was one of 28 projects in the area which made a signal contribution to the " feel " and look of Washington , D.C. 
 = = Early life = = 
 Vlastimil Koubek was born in Brno , Czechoslovakia and received his degree in architecture from the Faculty of Architecture at Czech Technical University . After graduation , he worked for several Czech architecture firms , designing office buildings . 
 Because he and his father held strong anti @-@ communist beliefs , Koubek decided to flee Czechoslovakia after the Communist coup d 'état of February 1948 . He tried to cross the border into the American Zone of Occupation of Allied @-@ occupied Germany , and failed . A second attempt in July succeeded . Koubek emigrated to the United Kingdom in October 1948 , where he worked in a brickyard , as a draftsman for the city of Gloucester and county of Gloucestershire , a draftsman for the Ministry of Works , and announcer for the Czech language news service of the BBC . He encountered his future wife , Eva , in a bookstore in London . Eva was born in Prague , the daughter of a Czech Army officer . Her brother , whom she later rescued , was imprisoned in a concentration camp in Nazi Germany during World War II . 
 The couple emigrated to the United States via Ellis Island on February 8 , 1952 and initially lived in New York City . When they arrived they had $ 6 in their pockets . They married in New York City on August 9 , 1952 , with Eva ( the only one with any funds ) paying the $ 2 marriage license fee . He worked as a draftsman for the architectural firm of Emery Roth and Sons , the city 's largest architectural firm and a noted designer of office buildings , for a year . In 1953 , Koubek entered the United States Army , where he worked for the Army Exhibit Unit ( a unit which creates displays and presentations about Army history , organization , and culture for the public ) . Koubek and his wife became naturalized United States citizens , relocated to Washington , DC , and later had a daughter , Jana . He briefly worked for the D.C.-based Edward <unk> architectural firm . 
 = = Career = = 
 Vlastimil Koubek passed his architectural exam and established Koubek Architects in 1957 . One of his first commissions to be built was Southern Maryland Medical Center ( now Southern Maryland Hospital Center ) in Clinton , Maryland . His first major commission in the area was for 1701 Pennsylvania Avenue NW , a 13 @-@ story building with a facade of gold @-@ anodized aluminum and white marble . But the United States Commission of Fine Arts , which had design approval authority over all private buildings adjacent to federal buildings in the city , objected to this facade . Koubek submitted a revised design which utilized larger , octagonal window designs of marble with recessed ribs of bronze aluminum , which not only was accepted but highly praised by influential architect Frederick <unk> as pushing District architectural design " forward 10 years . " A similar design was created for the facade of One Farragut Square South , which began construction in November 1960 . A more Modernist glass @-@ wall building was planned in October 1961 for 1666 Connecticut Avenue NW ( the southwest corner of Connecticut Avenue NW and R Street NW ) . 
 = = = Rosslyn = = = 
 Koubek was instrumental in helping to redevelop Rosslyn , Virginia , an unincorporated area of Arlington County directly across the Potomac River from the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington , D.C. In 1960 , Rosslyn was a seedy area of bars , pawn shops , small industry , and used car lots . But land values in Rosslyn had been significantly revalued upward , and in order to take advantage of the building boom they believed was coming , Arlington County county planners required site plans that emphasized tall , free @-@ standing buildings . In 1961 , Koubek drafted a site plan for the 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) site around the proposed Ames Center ( an area which represented about half the total acreage in the Rosslyn area ) . Koubek also was the architect for the Ames Center itself , a complex which included a 13 @-@ story office building , bank , church , and civic auditorium located at 1820 N. Fort Myer Drive . 
 The construction of the Ames Center and approval of a site plan for the area around it led to the wholesale economic and architectural redevelopment of Rosslyn , Koubek also developed the site plan for the area bounded by Wilson Boulevard , North Arlington Ridge Road , 19th Street North , and North Kent Street . This included the London House and Normandy House apartment complexes . Although it also proposed constructing two apartment complexes in the center of the area , three office buildings were built instead . London House opened in January 1965 . 
 = = = Other works in the 1960s = = = 
 Numerous commissions came his way throughout the 1960s . His Jefferson Building ( 1225 19th Street NW ) , built in 1963 , was an eight @-@ story glass @-@ and @-@ marble clad structure that was the first skyscraper in the city to feature a <unk> interior . It became home to the upscale The Palm steak restaurant in December 1972 , although building 's exterior reflecting pool and numerous fountains were replaced by a mundane garden and short trees . Later that year , he designed a sister building across the street ( 1234 19th Street NW ) which incorporated solarized glass windows , dark bronze panels , and dark brown aluminum ribbing . He was the chief architect of the World Building ( <unk> Georgia Avenue ) in Silver Spring , Maryland , The World Building helped revitalize the long @-@ blighted Silver Spring downtown business district , and became home to long @-@ time home of top @-@ rated radio stations WWRC and <unk> . One of Koubek 's less notable efforts , however , was the 1963 five @-@ story Del Ray Building ( <unk> Del Ray Avenue ) in Bethesda , Maryland , a bland office building with penthouse clad in grey brick . In 1964 , Koubek received his first commission from outside the District of Columbia and its immediate suburbs . This was Horizon House ( 1101 N. Calvert Street ) in Baltimore , Maryland , an 18 @-@ story apartment building with rooftop pool and ground @-@ floor retail area in the historic Mount Vernon neighborhood . 
 In March 1963 , he created a design for 1050 31st Street NW , a spare , Federalist @-@ style red brick building — the first such non @-@ Modernist structure he designed . He had initially proposed in 1961 a building with an all @-@ glass first floor and exposed stone upper floors , but the Commission of Fine Arts rejected his design as too modern . After redesigning his building along Federalist lines , the Commission approved the design but the D.C. zoning board refused to approve it because of the changes . The zoning board also was unhappy with the way Koubek intended to conceal the elevator and air conditioning equipment on the roof . After redesigning the rooftop , the building began construction in March 1963 . The first major office building to be constructed on the Georgetown waterfront in 50 years , 
 Construction began in April 1963 on his Brawner Building ( 888 17th Street NW ) , a 12 @-@ story office building on Farragut Square which incorporated dark bronze panels and solarized windows much as his 1234 19th Street building had . By the late 1960s , it was one of his best @-@ known designs . In January 1964 , Koubek designed what was then the D.C. metropolitan region 's tallest office building , the 19 @-@ story steel @-@ and @-@ black glass clad Barlow Building ( <unk> Wisconsin Avenue ) . In August , the Freed family commissioned him to build the eight @-@ story Chatham Apartments , the first high @-@ rise , medium @-@ income apartment building to be constructed among the two @-@ story Georgian @-@ style townhouses that comprised the 125 acres ( 51 ha ) Buckingham Historic District . His first major D.C. residential structure was a nine @-@ story apartment building ( now turned to condominiums ) at 1800 R Street NW , which opened in October 1964 . In April 1965 , construction began on the seven @-@ story 1325 Massachusetts Avenue NW , a Modernist building with broad horizontal swaths of grey brick and glass . ( The structure was home to the National Air Traffic Controllers Association and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force in 2011 . ) Another major office building , 1200 17th Street , NW ( at the time , the headquarters of the American Psychological Association ) , opened in October 1965 . It was a neo @-@ Brutalist structure featuring repetitive polished concrete panels and deeply recessed rectangular windows , and one of the first high @-@ rise office buildings on the downtown business district portion of Connecticut Avenue . That same year his 18 @-@ story Ross Building ( now known as <unk> Plaza ) in Richmond , Virginia , opened — the first high @-@ rise built in the city since 1928 , and the first glass @-@ curtain wall building constructed in the city . Koubek was also lead architect for and an investor in a syndicate ( " Reservation Eleven Associates " ) which designed a new United States Department of Labor ( DOL ) building at 2nd Street NW and Constitution Avenue NW in 1966 . The group proposed an arrangement in which it would construct the building , lease it to the federal government for 30 years , and then donate it to the government . Congress , cutting back on construction funds as well as interested in the build / lease / donate proposal , refused to appropriate funds for the DOL structure . Eventually , however , Koubek 's syndicate lost the commission , and a new DOL building ( jointly designed by the firm of Brooks , Barr , Graeber & White and the firm of Pitts , Mebane , Phelps & White ) was completed in 1974 . 
 Koubek 's D.C. area output slowed in the late 1960s . In February 1967 , the Bureau of National Affairs ( a privately held publisher of government news ) commissioned him to design a six @-@ story Modernist building at 1231 25th Street NW . ( This glass @-@ and @-@ white concrete neo @-@ Brutalist building was stripped to its frame in 2007 , four floors added , and joined to both an existing and a new structure to create luxury apartments . ) In October 1967 , construction began on his design for 1401 I Street NW , west of Franklin Square . ( The bland glass @-@ and @-@ steel box underwent a multimillion @-@ dollar renovation in 1991 . It was given a postmodern facade of finished grey concrete panels and brown granite , the center portion of the building on the south and east sides extended slightly outward to break up the flatness of the building , and twin giant six @-@ story @-@ high non @-@ structural Doric columns topped by a non @-@ structural colonnade and entablature . The building is now called Franklin Tower . ) In December 1967 , Koubek designed a new home for the Motion Picture Association of America at 1601 I Street NW , described as a " bronze @-@ tinted glass box on stilts enclosed by a bold screen of tan concrete " . Another critic later called it " elegant " and as good as the work of I. M. Pei . Construction began in February 1968 on his building for One Dupont Circle NW , an eight @-@ story office building with vertical concrete ribs over glass walls . 
 Meanwhile , Koubek was at work designing Bayfront Plaza , a $ 50 million " scaled @-@ down Rockefeller Center " complex of hotels , apartment buildings , retail shops , and piers on the waterfront of St. Petersburg , Florida . Proposed in 1966 , the project was significantly delayed by lawsuits from local citizens . Costs began to climb , interest rates on the proposed development loans soared , and the project was cancelled in 1969 . Koubek sued lawyer Hubert Caulfield and businessman Martin <unk> , who led the legal challenges against Bayfront Plaza , for $ 7 million , claiming legal harassment and abuse of the judicial process . The Supreme Court of Florida eventually ruled in favor of the developers , but it was too late . The parties settled out of court in 1972 for an undisclosed sum , and Koubek said he was pleased with the settlement . A 23 @-@ story office building planned for downtown Roanoke , Virginia , in 1969 was never built . 
 Several of Koubek 's buildings for important clients began or completed construction in 1969 . The Willoughby , at the time the largest apartment building in the D.C. metropolitan area , opened at 4515 Willard Avenue in Chevy Chase , Maryland , in January . Koubek assisted former First Lady Mamie Eisenhower and developer William Zeckendorf in breaking ground in February for the West Building ( 475 L 'Enfant Plaza SW ; now United States Postal Service headquarters ) , at 640 @,@ 000 square feet ( 59 @,@ 000 m2 ) the largest private office building at the time in Washington . Eight months later , his headquarters at 1133 15th Street NW for Fannie Mae ( the secondary mortgage market packaging corporation ) opened . 
 = = = Works from the 1970s = = = 
 Additional commissions from important clients as well as notable buildings continued in the 1970s . Construction on the Koubek @-@ designed 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 @,@ 000 m2 ) , $ 23 million L 'Enfant Plaza Hotel and office building began until June 1971 . In July 1970 , construction began on his 37 @-@ story , pink granite United States Fidelity and Guaranty Company Building in Baltimore . It was the largest building yet constructed in the United States to employ the <unk> method of continuously poured concrete . The USF & G Building successfully sparked the economic revival of the Inner Harbor . Opened in 1974 , as of 2010 it remained the tallest building in Baltimore . Forty years later , it is considered a Baltimore landmark . Richard Burns of Design Collective Inc. has said , " In my opinion , his USF & G tower , now Legg Mason , is one of the best if not the best office buildings in downtown Baltimore . It is simple , direct and honest ... " David Wallace , whose Wallace Roberts and Todd designed the master site plan for the Inner Harbor , declared it the " linchpin for the Inner Harbor . If you look at it from a boat , it 's a punctuation point at one corner of the Inner Harbor , signifying where the central business district meets the waterfront . " Construction started on his eight @-@ story 2021 K Street NW office building in November 1970 . In the summer of 1971 , he completed his site plan for Friendship Heights , a 150 acres ( 61 ha ) site straddling the boundary between the District of Columbia and Maryland border at Friendship Heights / Friendship Village . The plan contemplated several high @-@ rise office buildings , a loop roadway around the site , pedestrian concourses , and several multi @-@ story shopping malls clustered around the intersection of Wisconsin Avenue and Western Avenue . ( The project was built throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s . ) In March 1971 , the American Automobile Association commissioned him to design a six @-@ story , $ 10 @-@ million headquarters for the group at <unk> Gatehouse Road in Fairfax , Virginia . Eight months later , the Air Line Pilots Association ( <unk> ) began construction on a Koubek @-@ designed headquarters at 1625 Massachusetts Avenue NW , three blocks northwest from his 1965 office building and across the street from the Philippine Embassy . In March 1974 , developer Melvin <unk> commissioned Koubek to design an all @-@ glass Modernist building for 1900 M Street NW . Koubek designed an eight @-@ story cubist building with an all @-@ glass facade ; cutaway , cantilevered front corner ; and ground floor arcade . In March 1975 , the National Bank of Washington , one of the city 's oldest and most storied banks , commissioned a new operations center ( <unk> Connecticut Avenue NW ) from Koubek . In May 1975 , Koubek joined a consortium of prominent local architects to design the Washington Harbor complex of buildings on the Georgetown waterfront . The three @-@ block @-@ long , eight @-@ building complex , which contained luxury condominiums , office space , restaurants , luxury retail space , a boardwalk , and plaza , was the first large @-@ scale redevelopment of Georgetown 's waterfront in the city 's history . By the end of 1975 , the New York Times was reporting that Koubek 's firm had designed roughly half the office buildings built in the District of Columbia since the 1950s . 
 = = = The Willard renovation = = = 
 In 1974 , Koubek was hired to help renovate the long @-@ shuttered , historic Willard Hotel . The original hotel ( consisting of six townhouses joined together ) was built in 1816 , renovated and enlarged by leaseholder Henry Willard in 1847 , and the current 12 @-@ story structure erected in 1901 . Due to mismanagement and competition from more modern hotels , the Willard closed in 1968 . With the redevelopment of Pennsylvania Avenue in the 1960s and 1970s , the Willard was threatened repeatedly with demolition . In May 1974 , the National Trust for Historic Preservation paid Koubek $ 25 @,@ 000 to study saving the hotel , either as a hotel , as a mixed @-@ used structure , or as an office building . The Willard 's owners , Charles <unk> and Robert <unk> , had earlier commissioned Koubek to design a modern office building for the site which would have required demolition of the structure . 
 Ultimately , the New York City architecture firm of Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates was hired to lead the hotel 's rehabilitation and expansion . After this firm pulled out of the project , Koubek executed their concept , overseeing work until the hotel 's reopening in 1986 . Declaring the design worthy of " genuine architectural distinction , " Washington Post architectural critic Benjamin <unk> noted that Koubek was responsible for adding the giant ocular windows in the office complex , the marble office entryway with its marble canopy and columns , and the restructuring of the diagonal courtyard between the original hotel and the office additions . <unk> concluded that " ... a lot of the details , such as the exquisite storefronts or the sequence of pilasters , entablatures and cornices in the same elongated courtyard , are a treat to the eye . " Critic Paul Goldberger , writing for New York <unk> 1986 , declared the renovation ingenious . In 1988 , the Washington Chapter of the American Institute of Architects gave its 1988 Award for Excellence to Koubek for the Willard Hotel design and renovation . 
 = = = Other 1970s projects = = = 
 In February 1976 , Koubek contributed a third high @-@ rise office building to Farragut Square , this one a brick @-@ and @-@ solarized glass structure with a glass @-@ and @-@ aluminum penthouse at 818 Connecticut Avenue NW . His massive , grid @-@ like 400 North Capitol Street , one of the few office buildings he designed with a plaza between two wings , opened in June . His 12 @-@ story International Square building — with its inverted setbacks above the Farragut West Washington Metro station , ninth @-@ floor balcony with non @-@ structural columns , interior atrium , and ground level set @-@ back retail concourse — opened in November . Originally just a single office building on a corner for a city block , it expanded to occupy nearly the entire block with the addition of two almost identical towers in 1979 and 1980 . ( The atrium was upgraded and a fountain added in 1992 . ) Two blocks to the west , in April 1977 Koubek also designed a fairly nondescript office building at 1990 K Street NW . 
 Koubek also helped co @-@ design Metropolitan Square , a 12 @-@ story hotel and office building complex that occupies the entire block between F and G Streets NW and 14th and 15th Streets NW ( due east across the street from the Treasury Building ) . In November 1977 , developer Oliver T. Carr proposed tearing down the entire block , which was occupied by the Beaux @-@ Arts Keith @-@ Albee Building and Metropolitan National Bank Building as well as the 180 @-@ year @-@ old Rhodes Tavern . A years @-@ long legal and political battle ensued , as historic preservationists fought to keep all three buildings . Carr eventually agreed to retain the facades of the two Beaux @-@ Arts buildings facing G and 15th Streets . The battle to save the entire Rhodes ' Tavern , however , lasted into 1983 and involved a city @-@ wide ballot initiative and an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States . To preserve the facades , Carr hired Koubek and the New York City firm of Skidmore , Owings and Merrill and charged them with designing ground @-@ floor retail entrances and two upper floors which would reflect but not mimic the Beaux @-@ Arts style of the retained facades which building a more modern structure behind them . Construction on the new building began in 1980 . 
 In late 1977 , Koubek also completed the Camden Yards Sports Complex master site plan , which laid out projected baseball and football stadiums , museums , restaurants , and retail shopping buildings in an attempt to revitalized the economically depressed Camden Yards area of downtown Baltimore . In September 1978 , Koubek was commissioned to design an addition to the American Security Bank operations center at 635 Massachusetts Avenue NW . ( National Public Radio purchased the building in 1992 , but sold the black @-@ glass and travertine marble structure to Boston Properties in 2008 . After the broadcaster 's new building at 1111 North Capitol Street was completed in 2013 , Boston Properties tore down 635 Massachusetts Avenue . A Class A office building will be erected in its place by 2015 . ) Also in 1978 , Koubek 's 22 @-@ story Virginia Electric and Power Company headquarters in Richmond also opened . ( It is now known as One James River Plaza . ) In March 1979 , Koubek agreed to design the interior renovations to the East Capitol Street Car Barn , an 83 @-@ year @-@ old trolley barn at 14th and East Capitol Streets NE listed on the National Register of Historic Places , turning the old industrial site into a $ 10 million apartment and condominium complex . The renovation was called " striking " . Koubek also participated in the redevelopment of Vermont Avenue NW . In June 1979 , as buildings were razed across the street for the construction of 1090 Vermont Avenue , he was commissioned by the D.C. chapter of the American Medical Association to build a Modernist 12 @-@ story office building at 1100 Vermont Avenue NW . A month later , construction began on Koubek 's Spring Valley Center , a luxury shopping , restaurant , and office building located at <unk> Massachusetts Avenue NW ( on the site of the old Apex Theater ) . The six @-@ story post @-@ Modernist brick structure was not well received . In 1998 , one critic noted that it is " a structure easy to dislike . Clad in brick and encircled by horizontal window bands , it [ is ] <unk> and dimensionally out of scale with its more domestically scaled neighbors . <unk> planar walls and minimalist detailing made it even less charming . " ( The structure was sold to American University 's Washington College of Law in 1994 after a lengthy legal battle , and turned into classrooms and professors ' offices . ) 
 = = = Works of the 1980s = = = 
 The 1980s saw the last of Koubek 's major projects . In August 1980 , ground was broken on the 18 @-@ story Hyatt Regency Crystal City hotel ( <unk> Jefferson Davis Highway ) and adjacent 12 @-@ story office building ( <unk> Clark Street ) in the Crystal City neighborhood of Arlington , Virginia . The same year , construction began on Pentagon City I and Pentagon City II — 12 @-@ story twin office towers built by Rose Associates prior to the construction of the Fashion Centre at Pentagon City , Pentagon Centre mall , Southampton Condominiums , and Claridge House condominiums . Koubek was also the lead architect for Capitol Place , a 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) , $ 125 million project at the southeast corner of F Street NW and New Jersey Avenue NW . The project involved construction of a 13 @-@ story office building ( now the headquarters of the American Federation of Teachers ) and a hotel with a glass atrium ( now the Washington Court Hotel ) . Groundbreaking began in December 1982 , by which time another two office buildings ( integrated with the first ) had been added . In 1983 , construction was completed on Koubek 's black @-@ glass curtain @-@ walled Union Labor Life Insurance Company headquarters at 111 Massachusetts Avenue NW . ( Commonly called the " Darth Vader Building " for its imposing black surface , the company sold the building to developer Douglas <unk> in 2003 . ) In 1984 , Koubek partnered with architect Robert Brannen of Brannen / Jung Associates to design 1615 L Street NW , a 12 @-@ story office building with a two @-@ story red brick facade on the ground surmounted by light @-@ green glass and dark @-@ green spandrels on the upper floors . The building was highly praised by the Washington Post for its deeply recessed and double @-@ wide entrance and its spectacular , two @-@ story lobby with seven different kinds of polished marble . In 1988 , 1615 L Street NW won the Tucker Award of Excellence , " the stone industry 's most prestigious award , " for its use of stone in the building 's lobby and other interiors . In March 1986 , Koubek was commissioned to design One Judiciary Square , an 11 @-@ story office building on top of the Judiciary Square Metro station . He designed the Westin Georgetown hotel ( 2350 M Street NW ) in 1988 , a structure which successfully used large glass walls to " mingle outside with inside " . He also designed <unk> Slip ( formerly <unk> Plaza ) , a seven @-@ building complex at E. Cary and Governor Streets in Richmond , Virginia . 
 = = = Final works = = = 
 Although by 1990 Koubek Associates was the 12th largest architectural firm in <unk> area , Koubek personally worked on only a few projects in the 1990s . With John V. <unk> AIA as Associate Architect For Design , Koubek was the Architect of Record for the conversion of the 1919 gymnasium at The Catholic University of America into " The Edward M. Crough Center For Architectural Studies . " In 1990 , The Washington Chapter of The American Institute of Architects presented a Merit Award to the Center and the Architects " For extraordinary Achievement in Architecture . " Although he was not the lead architect on the project , he did the working drawings for the AARP Building at 601 E Street NW . He also did the working drawings for the massive , block @-@ long new headquarters for the International Finance Corporation at 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW in 1997 . 
 Some of his last projects were the 13 @-@ story , Beaux @-@ Arts Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in 1992 ( 1001 14th Street NW ) , the 29 @-@ story , post @-@ Modernist 100 Harborview Drive condominiums in Baltimore in 1993 , and Baltimore 's 33 @-@ story , post @-@ Modernist Water Tower ( 414 Water Street ) condominiums in 2000 ( in association with Sasaki Associates ) . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 In addition to his architectural work , Koubek performed civic service as well . He and his wife , Eva , were both highly active in the Czech émigré community in the United States and especially the Washington , D.C. , area . In 1990 , Czechoslovakian President Václav Havel appointed Koubek to a 15 @-@ member international board of consultants . In 1969 , President Richard Nixon appointed Koubek to serve on an architectural advisory panel to the General Services Administration . In 1984 , Koubek served as a consultant to the United States Department of State , inspecting security arrangements at United States Foreign Service housing in Europe and Asia . 
 Koubek was a nationally known authority on how to draft construction documents for commercial buildings . He also became a multi @-@ millionaire through his architectural work and through investments . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 Although Koubek designed more than 100 apartment buildings , condominiums , hotels , office buildings , and shopping malls during his long career , he did only a handful of private residences . He actively continued his architectural career and his office until the end of January 2003 . By the time of his passing he had designed buildings representing a combined investment of more than $ 2 billion . 
 Vlastimil Koubek 's marriage to Eva Koubek ended in divorce . He married Peggy Koubek in 1984 . Vlastimil Koubek died of cancer on February 15 , 2003 , at his home in Arlington , Virginia . 
 = = Design philosophy = = 
 Koubek 's architectural philosophy has been described as cosmetic and practical . Because the height of buildings in D.C. was limited to 130 feet ( 40 m ) by law and the cost of land was so high , buildings in the city were built to the maximum size possible . " There is nothing left for the architect to do except apply the cosmetics , " Koubek said . Koubek limited his " cosmetics " to the needs and budgets of his clients , often falling back on the design aesthetics of Marcel Breuer , I. M. Pei , and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe . His work was described as restrained , and an unnamed D.C. city planning official once described Koubek 's work as " last year 's Skidmore , Owings and Merrill . " 
 Koubek defended his work from criticisms that it was <unk> , sterile , repetitive , and dull . " Good architecture ... has to fit the fabric of the city and be functional inside and make economic sense . The most wonderful building in the world is not going to get built if it will not make money . " Others defended his work as well . Oliver T. Carr , chairman of the giant real estate developer <unk> , said , " He was good . He was different from so many architects of that time . His buildings had clean architectural lines , and yet they were functional and practical and offered good work space . For that period of time , he was a perfect fit . " 
 Koubek did not like mixing older , smaller buildings with his designs . " There is no place for big buildings next to little buildings , " he told the Washington Post in 1979 . He was also critical of Federalist architecture . He once scathingly noted , " I think that on Georgetown architecture I 'd rather not comment at all . You may quote me on that . I wish you would . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Koubek Auditorium in the Edward M. Crough Center for Architectural Studies at Catholic University of America is named for Koubek in honor of his many contributions to architectural design . 
 Among Koubek 's most notable buildings are : 
 American Automobile Association ( former headquarters in Fairfax , Virginia ) 
 International Finance Corporation headquarters 
 International Square 
 L 'Enfant Plaza Hotel 
 Motion Picture Association of America headquarters 
 USF & G Building ( now the Transamerica Tower ) 
 World Bank Annex 
 = Calostoma = 
 Calostoma is a genus of 29 species of gasteroid fungi in the suborder Sclerodermatineae . Like other gasteroid fungi , Calostoma do not have the spore discharge mechanism associated with typical gilled fungi ( ballistospory ) , and instead have enclosed spore @-@ bearing structures . Resembling round , orange to red gelatinous puffballs on thick stalks , species have been collected in regions of deciduous , temperate , tropical or subtropical forests . They have a worldwide distribution , including eastern North America , Asia , and Australasia . The common name given to some species , " <unk> " , alludes to the bright red fruit bodies with openings that may somewhat resemble lips . 
 The unusual fruit body structure has historically led mycologists to suggest various classification schemes based on presumed relationships to other puffball or " stomach mushrooms " . Phylogenetic analyses performed in the 2000s show the genus to be evolutionarily related to the <unk> mushrooms . Calostoma species are ectomycorrhizal , forming symbiotic associations with trees from various families . The type species , Calostoma cinnabarinum , is ectomycorrhizal with oak . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The original genus description , based on the type species Calostoma cinnabarinum ( synonymous with cinnabarina ) , was published by French botanist Nicaise Auguste Desvaux in 1809 . Before the advent of modern genetic analysis , the Calostoma was considered to be part of the Gasteromycetes , a grouping of fungi with enclosed spore @-@ bearing structures . Specifically , it was classified in the order of stalked puffballs , although some mycologists have suggested that the genus Calostoma should be merged with Tulostoma ( <unk> stalked puffballs ) , Scleroderma ( hard puffballs ) , Geastrum ( earthstars ) , or Pseudocolus ( stinkhorns ) . Some authors have placed Calostoma in its own family , the <unk> . 
 In the 2000s , a phylogenetic analyses using nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal gene sequences helped to clarify the phylogeny of Calostoma . Using the species C. cinnabarinum and C. ravenelli as representative examples , the research showed the genus evolutionarily related to the monophyletic Boletales clade , and separate from clades containing most of the gilled mushrooms , puffballs , stalked puffballs , earthstars , stinkhorns and non @-@ bolete Gasteromycetes . Calostoma belongs to the suborder Sclerodermatineae in the Boletales order . The Boletales comprise the following genera : Boletinellus , Calostoma , Gyroporus , Phlebopus , Pisolithus , Scleroderma , and <unk> . Calostoma is thought to have diverged evolutionarily from the other Boletales between 52 – 115 million years ago . 
 The genus name Calostoma is derived from the Greek <unk> or " beauty " , and stoma ( <unk> ) or " mouth " ; similarly , several species are referred to in the vernacular as " <unk> " . In Korea , it is called <unk> , or " red cheeks " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruit bodies , technically known as <unk> , form spherical spore @-@ bearing heads with a peridium ( outer tissue layer ) made of two to four clearly defined layers of tissue . The outermost peridial layer is a thick gelatinous or shiny cuticle , which during maturity peels away to reveal the brightly colored peristome that has a star @-@ shaped pore through which spores may escape . The innermost layer of the peridium is papery and membranous , and remains attached to the outer layers only at the apex of the star @-@ shaped apical pore or slit . The fruit bodies may either have no stalk ( sessile ) , or be atop a stalk . The stalk , made of thick , intertwined and fused cords of hyphae , is hygroscopic , and will expand upon absorbing moisture . The spore mass in the head , the gleba , is pale , and initially has thick @-@ walled skeletal hyphae called capillitia . Clamp connections are present in the fungal hyphae . 
 = = = Spores = = = 
 The spores are spherical to elliptical in shape , and typically have surfaces that are reticulate ( with interconnected grooves resembling a net ) or pitted . The variations in the elaborate pitted @-@ spore reticulations have inspired investigation with techniques such as scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy . The latter technique was used to distinguish subtle details ( at the nanometer scale ) and differences in the fine structure of the spores of various Calostoma species . The spore reticulations have purpose : they become entangled and interwoven with nurse cells and scaly hyphae , the net effect of which is to prevent the spores from being blown away simultaneously . 
 = = Development = = 
 When grown in humid conditions , such as might typically be found in a temperate deciduous forest , Calostoma species develop a thicker , more gelatinous exoperidium ( the outermost peridial layer ) . As the stalk expands , the exoperidium becomes sloughed off , exposing the <unk> and a raised peristome — the ridge of tissue around the opening suggestive of the common name , " <unk> " . The exoperidium may help to protect the maturing gleba of late @-@ fruiting species from harmful variations in temperature or humidity , or from insect predation . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The species in Calostoma have been collected in regions of deciduous , temperate , tropical or subtropical forests , containing tree species from the families Fagaceae , <unk> , Myrtaceae , and Dipterocarpaceae . The type species C. cinnabarinum was shown to form ectomycorrhizae with Quercus species , using isotopic labeling , molecular and morphological analyses . Southeast Asian Calostoma have also been described as ectomycorrhizal . Calostoma <unk> forms ectomycorrhizae with species of Lithocarpus ( Fagaceae ) while Calostoma <unk> forms ectomycorrhizae with species from the Myrtaceae . The ectomycorrhizal mode of nutrition is predominant in the Sclerodermatineae suborder . Historically , it had been assumed to be saprobic , due to its taxonomic uncertainly , and presumed relatedness to other saprobic fungi like the stalked puffballs and the earthstars . 
 The distribution of the genus is limited to Australasia ( Australia , New Zealand , Papua New Guinea ) , Southeast Asia , Asia , and North and Central America . Species have been described from Indonesia ( Borneo , Java , Sumatra , New Guinea ) , Ceylon , Himalaya , Nepal , Taiwan , China , New Zealand , North America , and Latin America . Australian species include C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. insigne , C. <unk> , and C. viride . David Arora mentions a preference for humid forests in eastern North America , particularly in the southern Appalachian Mountains . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 In general , Calostoma species are not considered edible ; because they typically begin their development underground , by the time fruit bodies appear they are too tough for consumption . However , a 2009 study reported that in the community of <unk> de Doria ( Hidalgo state , Mexico ) , Calostoma cinnabarinum used to be collected by children and consumed " like a <unk> " , although the tradition seems to have been abandoned in recent years . Locals called the young fruit bodies " <unk> " . 
 = = = Bioactive compounds = = = 
 Calostoma cinnabarinum contains a pigment named calostomal that is responsible for its red color . The chemical structure is all @-@ trans @-@ 16 @-@ oxohexadeca @-@ 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @,@ 8 @,@ 10 @,@ 12 @,@ 14 @-@ <unk> acid . 
 = = Species list = = 
 The following species list is compiled from Index Fungorum as well as species published in the literature , but missing in Fungorum , specifically C. <unk> , C. <unk> , and C. <unk> . The name listed under the species binomial is the authority — the author of the original description of that species , followed by the year of publication . 
 = Faryl = 
 Faryl is the debut album by British mezzo @-@ soprano Faryl Smith , released on 9 March 2009 by Universal Classics and Jazz . Smith rose to fame after her appearance on the second series of Britain 's Got Talent , and signed with Universal after the competition . The album was recorded during December 2008 and January 2009 and features the track " River of Light " , a song set to The Blue Danube with newly written lyrics . Faryl was produced by Jon Cohen , and the backing music was provided by a 60 @-@ piece orchestra . As part of the album 's promotion , Smith made numerous television and radio appearances and filmed a music video for " River of Light " . Around this time , she met with then @-@ Prime Minister Gordon Brown at 10 Downing Street . 
 After its release , Faryl became the fastest @-@ selling classical solo album in British chart history , selling 20 @,@ 000 copies in the first four days , and a total of 29 @,@ 200 copies in the first week , higher than any other debut album of a classical singer . Faryl entered the UK Albums Chart at number 6 , rising to number 4 the next week , and was the third album by a Britain 's Got Talent contestant to reach the top ten in Britain . Smith subsequently embarked on a promotional tour in the US to publicise the album , where it reached number 6 on the classical chart . 
 Faryl was fairly well received by critics , who praised Smith 's performances and Cohen 's production . However , criticism was directed at the use of the orchestra and at the song choices . As one of the ten best @-@ selling classical albums in the UK in 2009 , Faryl was nominated for a Classical BRIT Award in the album of the year category , but lost to Only Men Aloud 's Band of Brothers . In 2013 , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry . 
 = = Background = = 
 Smith rose to fame when she , aged 12 , competed in the second series of ITV talent show Britain 's Got Talent . During the series , she performed " Ave Maria " and a cover of Sarah McLachlan 's " Angel " . After her initial performance , she received singing lessons from Yvie Burnett , a move criticised by the press . Although she was at one point the favourite to win , she finished outside the top three in the live final . During the competition , Smith rejected offers of a record deal , and afterwards rejected offers from Sony BMG , instead signing a £ 2 @.@ 3 million , multi @-@ album deal with Universal Classics and Jazz , the most lucrative ever offered to a schoolgirl . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Faryl was recorded in London during Smith 's Christmas holiday during December 2008 and January 2009 , and completed on 3 January . It features a 60 @-@ piece orchestra , which was recorded at Air Studios , in London . The album includes the song " River of Light " . The track is a recording of The Blue Danube , a waltz composed by Johann Strauss II , with newly written lyrics . Smith talked about " River of Light " to the press , saying that The Blue Danube " now has words put to it . I like it because it 's different . Everyone knows the tune and everybody has got high hopes for it . " Smith said that her favourite song on the album was her version of the Welsh hymn " Calon Lân " . Other songs include Smith 's version of " Amazing Grace " , a cover of " Annie 's Song " by John Denver , and a version of " The Way Old Friends Do " , rewritten for Smith by Björn Ulvaeus . Smith spoke about the song , saying " It was about divorce ... They didn 't think it was appropriate for me to sing about that , so Björn changed the lyrics so it 's about friendship . " The album was produced by Jon Cohen , who has previously worked with artists including the <unk> and Vanessa Mae . 
 On 23 February , The Sun reported that Universal had received the first shipment of Faryl , but due to a pressing error , though they looked like Smith 's albums , they actually contained the music of The Fall 's album Imperial Wax Solvent . Universal was reported to have " severe words " with the pressing plant . The mix @-@ up received attention from the international press , including an article in Canadian magazine Exclaim ! . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Promotion began in January , with performances by Smith at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel and appearances at the debut of the Oliver ! 2009 revival . Smith also took part in a photoshoot for publicity and cover photos . According to writers for the Daily Mail , the cover photo was modified to give Smith " a smile worthy of a model from a Colgate advert " , due to her " gappy teeth " . Though generally critical of the move , the report conceded that it was better for Smith 's teeth to be digitally straightened , rather than forcing her " to endure a battery of dental surgery " . A television advert and music video for " River of Light " were recorded to further publicise the release , and Smith also appeared on the cover of April 's Classic FM Magazine . Further promotion in the weeks leading up to the release of Faryl included Smith appearing on Loose Women , The Paul O 'Grady Show , BBC Radio 4 , Radio Five Live and BBC Breakfast . She also appeared at the Children 's Champion Awards and met then @-@ Prime Minister Gordon Brown at 10 Downing Street . On the day of the release , there was an album signing in Smith 's hometown of Kettering , at the HMV branch . Smith said " I definitely want to be at home for the launch . I want to be surrounded by my friends and family because , obviously , it 's a big deal for me . " 
 After the UK release , Dickon Stainer , head of Universal Classics and Jazz , spoke of plans to publicise Faryl in the US , saying " America is going to be key . Because of her history on the talent show there 's already a great deal of interest in her . The demand is intense . " In April 2009 , Smith travelled to Los Angeles to begin her promotion of Faryl in the US . She appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in early May as part of her promotional tour . Faryl was released in the US on 5 May . Smith said before the release that she did not expect it to sell as well as it did in the UK . She said that " in the US it 's a lot harder because I 'm not as well @-@ known . In the UK , a lot of people obviously watched ' Britain 's Got Talent ' and stuff , and that was like fresh in everyone 's minds . " After the release , she was more optimistic , saying " [ w ] hen I performed in New York , it reminded me of the HMV signing in Kettering and there was quite a big queue so I think my album was well received . " Smith returned from the US in early May . Despite the contrary being said when she performed on the third series of Britain 's Got Talent , Smith had no plans for a concert tour in 2009 ; she was quoted as saying that " I 'm too young and don 't think I would be able to do a tour on my own " . However , she did plan to return to the US during her summer holidays to again promote Faryl . She said that " everyone in America was really nice and they do like classical music , but it is so difficult to make it over there ... They seem to like their own singers , but I will just keep trying my best " . However , she instead took a short break from her music career in summer , before returning to the recording studio later in the year for Wonderland , her second album , which was released in November . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewers were generally impressed by Smith 's performances . Pete Paphides , writing for The Times , said that the songs were performed " with power and restraint " , while Johnny Davis , writing for The Observer , said " [ y ] ou can practically hear Katherine Jenkins weep as Faryl flawlessly executes Amazing Grace " . Jason Birchmeier , writing for Allmusic , considered Smith 's performance even more noteworthy because of her young age . However , though he considered Smith 's voice impressive , Malcolm Mackenzie , writing for The London Paper , asked " will we care when the kid from Kettering loses her precocious appeal ? " Reviewers also responded positively to Cohen 's contribution to the album . Paphides claimed that his arrangements " suggest some kind of aesthetic endeavour beyond the basic thing for which they exist " , while Birchmeier claimed that the album was " produced with fine precision " . 
 Reviewers were more critical of the use of the orchestra . Helen Sloan , writing for Crackerjack ( Bristol Evening Post ) found that the orchestra rendered " the whole thing a bit bland and movie @-@ soundtrack " , and Birchmeier found it to be " a bit overwhelming " by the end of the album . Further , he was critical of the inclusion of " Amazing Grace " and " Ave Maria " , considering them to be overly predictable song choices . Though he was pleasantly surprised by some of the inclusions ( such as " River of Light " and " The Way Old Friends Do " ) , he concluded that " [ i ] t 's too bad that [ Smith ] isn 't given more creative material to sing . One hopes her next album is more adventurous . " 
 Overall , Paphides awarded the album 3 out of a possible 5 stars , and compared it favourably to three other Mothering Sunday releases , Lionel Richie 's Just Go , Ronan Keating 's Songs for My Mother and Barry Manilow 's The Greatest Songs of the Eighties , considering it stronger than any of the others . Davis also awarded the album 3 out of 5 , while Birchmeier was slightly more positive , awarding Faryl 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . 
 = = Performance = = 
 At the beginning of February , Faryl was placed at 295 in Amazon.co.uk 's best @-@ sellers chart and 13 in its easy listening chart , based on pre @-@ orders alone . A week before its release , the album was in the top 100 selling albums , and was the top @-@ selling opera album . Retailers in the UK ordered more than 80 @,@ 000 copies of the album in the week leading up to release , which Simon Cable , writing for the Daily Mail , noted was more than U2 's recent No Line on the Horizon . It also topped the Amazon.co.uk presale chart . On the day of the release , based only on presales , the album was at the number 1 spot on the UK Albums Chart . The album became the fastest @-@ selling classical solo album in Britain , beating Hayley Westenra 's Pure , selling 20 @,@ 000 copies in the first four days . The first week resulted in sales of 29 @,@ 200 copies , which is higher than any other debut album of a classical singer . Faryl officially entered the UK Albums Chart at number 6 , and climbed to number 4 the following week . Faryl made Smith the third former Britain 's Got Talent contestant to achieve a top ten album , after Paul Potts ( with One Chance ) and Andrew Johnston ( with One Voice ) . In the US , Faryl peaked at 31 on Top Heatseekers Albums chart , and at 6 on the Classical Albums chart , remaining in the charts for one and 17 weeks respectively . By February 2010 , over 160 @,@ 000 copies of Faryl had been sold , with over 150 @,@ 000 of these in the UK . In July 2013 , the British Phonographic Industry certified the album gold , denoting shipments of over 100 @,@ 000 units in the United Kingdom . 
 In February 2010 , after the release of Wonderland , Faryl was nominated for a Classical BRIT Award in the album category . The category is voted for by the public , and the shortlist comprises the ten best @-@ selling classical albums of the previous year . Faryl lost to Only Men Aloud 's Band of Brothers . Smith herself was also nominated in the young British classical performer category , becoming the youngest ever double Classical BRIT nominee . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
