 = = = Style = = = 
 Stanford wrote of Bennett : 
 He maintained his British characteristics throughout his life ... The English take a kind of pride in concealing their feelings and emotions , and this is reflected in their folk @-@ song . The Thames has no rapids and no falls ; it winds along under its woods in a gentle stream , never dry and never halting ; it is the type of the spirit of English <unk> ... England is as remote from <unk> fire and agony , as the Thames is from the Spey . Bennett was a typical specimen of this English characteristic . He was a poet , but of the school of Wordsworth rather than of Byron and Shelley . 
 W. B. Squire wrote in 1885 : 
 His sense of form was so strong , and his refined nature so abhorred any mere seeking after effect , that his music sometimes gives the impression of being produced under restraint . He seldom , if ever , gave rein to his unbridled fancy ; everything is justly proportioned , clearly defined , and kept within the limits which the conscientiousness of his self @-@ criticism would not let him overstep . It is this which makes him , as has been said , so peculiarly a musician 's composer : the broad effects and bold contrasts which an uneducated public admires are absent ; it takes an educated audience to appreciate to the full the exquisitely refined and delicate nature of his genius . 
 Temperley suggests that , despite his reverence for Mendelssohn , Bennett took Mozart as his model . Geoffrey Bush agrees that " [ h ] is best work , like his piano playing , was full of passion none the less powerful for being Mozartian ( that is to say , perfectly controlled ) " , and characterizes him as " essentially a composer for the piano , a composer of the range ( not necessarily the stature ) of Chopin " . 
 It would appear that Bennett displayed and aroused greater emotion through his piano technique than from his compositions . Stanford writes that " his playing ... was undoubtedly remarkable and had a fire and energy in it which does not appear on the gentle surface of his music " , and notes that Bennett 's performances were eulogized by , amongst others , John Field , Clara Schumann , and Ferdinand Hiller . 
 Bennett 's attitudes to the music of his continental contemporaries , aside from that of Mendelssohn , were cautious . Arthur Sullivan claimed that Bennett was " bitterly prejudiced against the new school , as he called it . He would not have a note of Schumann ; and as for Wagner , he was outside the pale of criticism . " In Bennett 's 1858 lecture on " The visits of illustrious foreign musicians to England " , the latest mention is of Mendelssohn , bypassing Chopin , Wagner , Verdi and Hector Berlioz , ( who all only came to England after Mendelssohn 's last visit ) ; Liszt ( who visited London in 1827 ) is omitted . In a subsequent lecture he opined that Verdi was " immeasurably inferior " to Gioachino Rossini , and could only say in favour of Berlioz that he " must be allowed the character of a successful and devoted artist ... it cannot be doubted that his treatment of a great orchestra is masterly in the extreme . " Of Wagner , " the hero of the so @-@ called ' music of the future ' " , Bennett noted " I have no intention of treating him disrespectfully ; that I entirely misunderstand him and his musical opinions may be my fault and not his . At any rate he possesses an influence at this moment over musical life , which it would be impossible to overlook . " 
 = = = Early compositions = = = 
 Bennett 's early period of composition was fruitful and includes those of his works which are most esteemed today . By the time of his first visit to Germany ( 1836 ) he had already written , amongst other works , five symphonies and three piano concerti . John Caldwell assesses his early songs as " exquisitely judged essentially Mendelssohnian affairs ... the integration and coherence of their accompaniments is a strong feature . " 
 <unk> writes that Bennett 's finest works are those for the piano : " Rejecting the superficial virtuosity of many of his contemporaries , he developed a style ... peculiarly his own , essentially classical in nature , but with reference to a multiplicity of influences from his own performance repertory . " The early piano works were all praised by Robert Schumann , and Temperley points out how Schumann himself was influenced by them , with ( as examples ) clear traces of Bennett 's Op. 16 Fantasie ( 1837 ) ( in effect a sonata ) on Schumann 's Novelette , Op. 21 no . 7 ( 1838 ) , and parallels between Bennett 's Op. 12 Impromptus ( 1836 ) and Schumann 's Op. 18 Arabesque ( 1838 ) . 
 Temperley feels that the early symphonies are the weakest works of this period , but he suggests that " few piano concertos between Beethoven and Brahms are as successful as Bennett 's in embodying the Classical spirit , not in a stiff frame to deck with festoons of virtuosity , but in a living form capable of organic growth , and even of structural surprise . " 
 = = = Later works = = = 
 Bennett 's style did not develop after his early years . In 1908 the musicologist W. H. Hadow assessed his later work as follows : " [ W ] hen The May Queen appeared [ 1858 ] the idiom of music had changed and he had not changed with it . ... He was too conservative to move with the times . ... [ His last works ] might all have been written in the forties ; they are survivals of an earlier method , not developments but restatements of a tradition . " <unk> comments that later popular , and more superficial , pieces such as Genevieve ( 1839 ) came to overshadow the more innovative works of his earlier period such as the Sonata Op. 13 , and the Fantasia Op. 16 . 
 Young suggests that the cantatas The May Queen and The Woman of Samaria enjoyed in their hey @-@ day " a popularity that was in inverse relation to their intrinsic merit " . Caldwell notes that The Woman of Samaria shows that " Bennett was a good craftsman whose only fault was a dread of the operatic ... One would probably tolerate the narrative recitative more readily if the inserted movements showed any spark of life . " As regards The May Queen , Caldwell praises the overture ( a Mendelssohn @-@ style work originally written as a concert piece in 1844 ) " but the rest of the work is tame stuff " . He comments that " both works received immense longstanding popularity and may be considered as the narrative prototype for the later Victorian secular and sacred forms ... conforming to the current standards of taste and respectability " , anticipating such works as Arthur Sullivan 's Kenilworth ( 1864 ) . 
 = = = Editions and writings = = = 
 Bennett edited some of the keyboard works of Beethoven and Handel and co @-@ edited the Chorale Book for England with Otto Goldschmidt ( 1863 ) , based on German hymns collected by Catherine <unk> . He supervised the first British printed edition of the St Matthew Passion . A full vocal score ( with piano accompaniment ) was adapted from the German edition prepared by Adolf Bernhard Marx ( Berlin 1830 ) , which followed Mendelssohn 's revival of the work ; this was revised with reference to the score published by the Leipzig Bach Society in 1862 . Bennett 's additional tempo and dynamic markings were shown in parentheses for distinction . He provided harmonies for the figured bass both in the solo music sections ( based on the Leipzig full score ) and elsewhere . Bennett also produced editions of Bach 's The Well @-@ Tempered Clavier and Handel 's masque Acis and Galatea . 
 Bennett lectured both at Cambridge and the London Institute ; texts of his lectures were edited and published in 2006 . At a Sheffield lecture in 1859 he also played works of the composers he discussed , and " so may be regarded as the founder of the lecture @-@ recital " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As a composer Bennett was acknowledged in his time in both Britain and ( particularly in the first half of the century ) in Germany , although many British music lovers and several leading critics remained reluctant to acknowledge the possibility that an English composer could be of the same stature as a German one . The Leipzig public , which had initially held that view , had been rapidly converted . Mendelssohn wrote to Bennett " ... [ M ] y Countrymen became aware that music is the same in England as in Germany and everywhere , and so by your successes you have destroyed that prejudice which nobody could ever have destroyed but a true Genius . " 
 Bennett 's son , in his biography of his father , juxtaposes as illustrations English and German reviews of the overture The Wood Nymphs . The London critic William Ayrton wrote : 
 ... a discharge of musical artillery in the shape of drums , seconded by blasts of trombones and trumpets that seemed to realise all that we have heard of a tropical tornado . ... So very clever and promising a young man ought to meet with every kind of reasonable encouragement , but judicious and true friends would have hinted to him that his present production is the dry result of labour . 
 Schumann , by contrast , wrote : " The overture is charming ; indeed , save Spohr and Mendelssohn , what other living composer is so completely master of his pencil , or bestows with it such tenderness and grace of colour , as Bennett ? ... Essay measure after measure ; what a firm , yet delicate web it is from beginning to end ! " 
 Outside these countries , Bennett remained almost unknown as a musician , although his reputation as a conductor led Berlioz to invite him to join his Société <unk> , and the Dutch composer Johannes Verhulst solicited his support for the Netherlands Society for Encouragement of Music . Davison 's attempts to interest the French composer Charles Gounod in Bennett 's music led to polite but sardonic responses . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sir John Betjeman , in a 1975 lecture , rated Bennett as " Queen Victoria 's Senior Musical Knight " . Temperley assesses Bennett as the most distinguished British composer of the early Victorian era , " the only plausible rivals being Samuel Sebastian Wesley ( 1810 – 76 ) and Michael William Balfe ( 1808 – 70 ) " . 
 The novelist Elizabeth Sara Sheppard portrayed Bennett as ' Starwood Burney ' in her popular eulogy of Mendelssohn , the 1853 novel Charles <unk> . Although Bennett 's reputation in Germany did not notably survive the 1840s , his English pupils had significant influence on British music of the later 19th and earlier 20th century Britain . Among his pupils at the RAM and elsewhere were Arthur Sullivan , Joseph Parry , Alice Mary Smith , W. S. <unk> , Hubert Parry , Tobias Matthay , Francis Edward Bache and William <unk> . Bennett 's contributions to elevating musical training standards at Cambridge and the RAM were part of a trend in England in the latter part of the 19th century whose " cumulative effect ... prior to World War I was incalculable " , according to Caldwell . 
 Through his concert initiatives at the Hanover Rooms Bennett introduced a variety of chamber music to London audiences . His championship also significantly changed British opinion of the music of JS Bach . His " promotion of Bach was a story of perseverance against a contemporary perception that Bach 's music was ... too difficult to listen to . " Newspaper reviews of the chamber concerts in which he included the music of Bach would initially describe the music in terms such as " grandeur there is , but no beauty " ( 1847 ) or " somewhat antiquated ... [ but ] extremely interesting " ( 1854 ) . A significant turning point was the attendance of Prince Albert at Bennett 's 1858 performance of the St. Matthew Passion . 
 Bennett left a substantial music library , a large proportion of which is owned by his great @-@ great @-@ grandson Barry Sterndale Bennett ( b . 1939 ) and is on deposit at the Bodleian Library in Oxford . Of his total of some 130 compositions , about a quarter have been recorded for CD ; among these are symphonies , overtures , piano concerti , chamber music , songs and piano solo music . During his bicentenary year of 2016 , several concerts and events dedicated to Bennett 's works are to be arranged , including concerts and seminars at the RAM . From April 11 to April 15 2016 he was featured as ' Composer of the Week ' on BBC Radio 3 . 
 = Major depressive disorder = 
 Major depressive disorder ( MDD ) ( also known as simply depression ) is a mental disorder characterized by a pervasive and persistent low mood that is accompanied by low self @-@ esteem and by a loss of interest or pleasure in normally enjoyable activities . The term " depression " is used in a number of different ways . It is often used to mean this syndrome but may refer to other mood disorders or simply to a low mood . Major depressive disorder is a disabling condition that adversely affects a person 's family , work or school life , sleeping and eating habits , and general health . In the United States , around 3 @.@ 4 % of people with major depression die by suicide , and up to 60 % of people who die by suicide had depression or another mood disorder . 
 The diagnosis of major depressive disorder is based on the person 's reported experiences , behavior reported by relatives or friends , psychological tests , and a mental status examination . The United States Preventive Services Task Force ( USPSTF ) recommends screening for depression , and that with proper treatment available screening improves outcomes . There is no laboratory test for major depression , although physicians generally request tests for physical conditions that may cause similar symptoms . The most common time of onset is between the ages of 20 and 30 years , with a later peak between 30 and 40 years . 
 Typically , people are treated with antidepressant medication and , in many cases , also receive therapy , particularly cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) . Medication appears to be effective , but the effect may only be significant in the most severely depressed . Hospitalization may be necessary in cases with associated self @-@ neglect or a significant risk of harm to self or others . A minority are treated with electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT ) . The course of the disorder varies widely , from one episode lasting weeks to a lifelong disorder with recurrent major depressive episodes . Depressed individuals have shorter life expectancies than those without depression , in part because of greater susceptibility to medical illnesses and suicide . It is unclear whether medications affect the risk of suicide . Current and former patients may be stigmatized . 
 The understanding of the nature and causes of depression has evolved over the centuries , though this understanding is incomplete and has left many aspects of depression as the subject of discussion and research . Proposed causes include psychological , psycho @-@ social , hereditary , evolutionary and biological factors . Long @-@ term substance abuse may cause or worsen depressive symptoms . Psychological treatments are based on theories of personality , interpersonal communication , and learning . Most biological theories focus on the monoamine chemicals serotonin , norepinephrine and dopamine , which are naturally present in the brain and assist communication between nerve cells . This cluster of symptoms ( syndrome ) was named , described and classified as one of the mood disorders in the 1980 edition of the American Psychiatric Association 's diagnostic manual . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Major depression significantly affects a person 's family and personal relationships , work or school life , sleeping and eating habits , and general health . Its impact on functioning and well @-@ being has been compared to that of other chronic medical conditions such as diabetes . 
 A person having a major depressive episode usually exhibits a very low mood , which pervades all aspects of life , and an inability to experience pleasure in activities that were formerly enjoyed . Depressed people may be preoccupied with , or ruminate over , thoughts and feelings of worthlessness , inappropriate guilt or regret , helplessness , hopelessness , and self @-@ hatred . In severe cases , depressed people may have symptoms of psychosis . These symptoms include delusions or , less commonly , hallucinations , usually unpleasant . Other symptoms of depression include poor concentration and memory ( especially in those with melancholic or psychotic features ) , withdrawal from social situations and activities , reduced sex drive , irritability , and thoughts of death or suicide . Insomnia is common among the depressed . In the typical pattern , a person wakes very early and cannot get back to sleep . <unk> , or oversleeping , can also happen . Some antidepressants may also cause insomnia due to their stimulating effect . 
 A depressed person may report multiple physical symptoms such as fatigue , headaches , or digestive problems ; physical complaints are the most common presenting problem in developing countries , according to the World Health Organization 's criteria for depression . Appetite often decreases , with resulting weight loss , although increased appetite and weight gain occasionally occur . Family and friends may notice that the person 's behavior is either agitated or lethargic . Older depressed people may have cognitive symptoms of recent onset , such as forgetfulness , and a more noticeable slowing of movements . Depression often coexists with physical disorders common among the elderly , such as stroke , other cardiovascular diseases , Parkinson 's disease , and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . 
 Depressed children may often display an irritable mood rather than a depressed mood , and show varying symptoms depending on age and situation . Most lose interest in school and show a decline in academic performance . They may be described as clingy , demanding , dependent , or insecure . Diagnosis may be delayed or missed when symptoms are interpreted as normal moodiness . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Major depression frequently co @-@ occurs with other psychiatric problems . The 1990 – 92 National <unk> Survey ( US ) reports that half of those with major depression also have lifetime anxiety and its associated disorders such as generalized anxiety disorder . Anxiety symptoms can have a major impact on the course of a depressive illness , with delayed recovery , increased risk of relapse , greater disability and increased suicide attempts . American <unk> Robert <unk> similarly argues that the relationship between stress , anxiety , and depression could be measured and demonstrated biologically . There are increased rates of alcohol and drug abuse and particularly dependence , and around a third of individuals diagnosed with ADHD develop comorbid depression . Post @-@ traumatic stress disorder and depression often co @-@ occur . Depression may also coexist with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) , complicating the diagnosis and treatment of both . 
 Depression and pain often co @-@ occur . One or more pain symptoms are present in 65 % of depressed patients , and anywhere from 5 to 85 % of patients with pain will be suffering from depression , depending on the setting ; there is a lower prevalence in general practice , and higher in specialty clinics . The diagnosis of depression is often delayed or missed , and the outcome worsens . The outcome can also worsen if the depression is noticed but completely misunderstood . 
 Depression is also associated with a <unk> to 2 @-@ fold increased risk of cardiovascular disease , independent of other known risk factors , and is itself linked directly or indirectly to risk factors such as smoking and obesity . People with major depression are less likely to follow medical recommendations for treating and preventing cardiovascular disorders , which further increases their risk of medical complications . In addition , <unk> may not recognize underlying depression that complicates a cardiovascular problem under their care . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The <unk> model proposes that biological , psychological , and social factors all play a role in causing depression . The diathesis – stress model specifies that depression results when a preexisting vulnerability , or diathesis , is activated by stressful life events . The preexisting vulnerability can be either genetic , implying an interaction between nature and nurture , or schematic , resulting from views of the world learned in childhood . 
 Depression may be directly caused by damage to the cerebellum as is seen in cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome . 
 These interactive models have gained empirical support . For example , researchers in New Zealand took a prospective approach to studying depression , by documenting over time how depression emerged among an initially normal cohort of people . The researchers concluded that variation among the serotonin transporter ( 5 @-@ HTT ) gene affects the chances that people who have dealt with very stressful life events will go on to experience depression . To be specific , depression may follow such events , but seems more likely to appear in people with one or two short alleles of the 5 @-@ HTT gene . In addition , a Swedish study estimated the heritability of depression — the degree to which individual differences in occurrence are associated with genetic differences — to be around 40 % for women and 30 % for men , and evolutionary psychologists have proposed that the genetic basis for depression lies deep in the history of naturally selected adaptations . A substance @-@ induced mood disorder resembling major depression has been causally linked to long @-@ term drug use or drug abuse , or to withdrawal from certain sedative and hypnotic drugs . 
 = = = Biological = = = 
 = = = = Monoamine hypothesis = = = = 
 Most antidepressant medications increase the levels of one or more of the monoamines — the neurotransmitters serotonin , norepinephrine and dopamine — in the synaptic cleft between neurons in the brain . Some medications affect the monoamine receptors directly . 
 Serotonin is hypothesized to regulate other neurotransmitter systems ; decreased serotonin activity may allow these systems to act in unusual and erratic ways . According to this " permissive hypothesis " , depression arises when low serotonin levels promote low levels of norepinephrine , another monoamine neurotransmitter . Some antidepressants enhance the levels of norepinephrine directly , whereas others raise the levels of dopamine , a third monoamine neurotransmitter . These observations gave rise to the monoamine hypothesis of depression . In its contemporary formulation , the monoamine hypothesis postulates that a deficiency of certain neurotransmitters is responsible for the corresponding features of depression : " Norepinephrine may be related to alertness and energy as well as anxiety , attention , and interest in life ; [ lack of ] serotonin to anxiety , obsessions , and compulsions ; and dopamine to attention , motivation , pleasure , and reward , as well as interest in life . " The proponents of this theory recommend the choice of an antidepressant with mechanism of action that impacts the most prominent symptoms . Anxious and irritable patients should be treated with SSRIs or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors , and those experiencing a loss of energy and enjoyment of life with <unk> and dopamine @-@ enhancing drugs . 
 Besides the clinical observations that drugs that increase the amount of available monoamines are effective antidepressants , advances in psychiatric genetics indicate that phenotypic variation in central monoamine function may be marginally associated with vulnerability to depression . Despite these findings , the cause of depression is not simply monoamine deficiency . In the past two decades , research has revealed multiple limitations of the monoamine hypothesis , and its explanatory inadequacy has been highlighted within the psychiatric community . A counterargument is that the mood @-@ enhancing effect of MAO inhibitors and SSRIs takes weeks of treatment to develop , even though the boost in available monoamines occurs within hours . Another counterargument is based on experiments with pharmacological agents that cause depletion of monoamines ; while deliberate reduction in the concentration of centrally available monoamines may slightly lower the mood of <unk> depressed patients , this reduction does not affect the mood of healthy people . The monoamine hypothesis , already limited , has been further oversimplified when presented to the public as a mass marketing tool , usually phrased as a " chemical imbalance " . 
 In 2003 a gene @-@ environment interaction ( <unk> ) was hypothesized to explain why life stress is a predictor for depressive episodes in some individuals , but not in others , depending on an allelic variation of the serotonin @-@ transporter @-@ linked promoter region ( 5 @-@ <unk> ) ; a 2009 meta @-@ analysis showed stressful life events were associated with depression , but found no evidence for an association with the 5 @-@ <unk> genotype . Another 2009 meta @-@ analysis agreed with the latter finding . A 2010 review of studies in this area found a systematic relationship between the method used to assess environmental adversity and the results of the studies ; this review also found that both 2009 meta @-@ analyses were significantly biased toward negative studies , which used self @-@ report measures of adversity . 
 = = = = Other hypotheses = = = = 
 MRI scans of patients with depression have revealed a number of differences in brain structure compared to those who are not depressed . Meta @-@ analyses of neuroimaging studies in major depression reported that , compared to controls , depressed patients had increased volume of the lateral ventricles and adrenal gland and smaller volumes of the basal ganglia , thalamus , hippocampus , and frontal lobe ( including the orbitofrontal cortex and gyrus rectus ) . <unk> have been associated with patients with a late age of onset , and have led to the development of the theory of vascular depression . 
 There may be a link between depression and neurogenesis of the hippocampus , a center for both mood and memory . Loss of hippocampal neurons is found in some depressed individuals and correlates with impaired memory and <unk> mood . Drugs may increase serotonin levels in the brain , stimulating neurogenesis and thus increasing the total mass of the hippocampus . This increase may help to restore mood and memory . Similar relationships have been observed between depression and an area of the anterior cingulate cortex implicated in the modulation of emotional behavior . One of the <unk> responsible for neurogenesis is brain @-@ derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) . The level of BDNF in the blood plasma of depressed subjects is drastically reduced ( more than threefold ) as compared to the norm . Antidepressant treatment increases the blood level of BDNF . Although decreased plasma BDNF levels have been found in many other disorders , there is some evidence that BDNF is involved in the cause of depression and the mechanism of action of antidepressants . 
 There is some evidence that major depression may be caused in part by an overactive hypothalamic @-@ pituitary @-@ adrenal axis ( HPA axis ) that results in an effect similar to the neuro @-@ endocrine response to stress . Investigations reveal increased levels of the hormone cortisol and enlarged pituitary and adrenal glands , suggesting disturbances of the endocrine system may play a role in some psychiatric disorders , including major depression . <unk> of corticotropin @-@ releasing hormone from the hypothalamus is thought to drive this , and is implicated in the cognitive and arousal symptoms . 
 The hormone estrogen has been implicated in depressive disorders due to the increase in risk of depressive episodes after puberty , the antenatal period , and reduced rates after menopause . On the converse , the premenstrual and postpartum periods of low estrogen levels are also associated with increased risk . Sudden withdrawal of , fluctuations in or periods of sustained low levels of estrogen have been linked to significant mood lowering . Clinical recovery from depression postpartum , perimenopause , and <unk> was shown to be effective after levels of estrogen were stabilized or restored . 
 Other research has explored potential roles of molecules necessary for overall cellular functioning : cytokines . The symptoms of major depressive disorder are nearly identical to those of sickness behavior , the response of the body when the immune system is fighting an infection . This raises the possibility that depression can result from a maladaptive manifestation of sickness behavior as a result of abnormalities in circulating cytokines . The involvement of pro @-@ inflammatory cytokines in depression is strongly suggested by a meta @-@ analysis of the clinical literature showing higher blood concentrations of IL @-@ 6 and TNF @-@ α in depressed subjects compared to controls . These immunological abnormalities may cause excessive prostaglandin E ₂ production and likely excessive COX @-@ 2 expression . Abnormalities in how <unk> 2 @,@ 3 @-@ <unk> enzyme activates as well as the metabolism of tryptophan @-@ kynurenine may lead to excessive metabolism of tryptophan @-@ kynurenine and lead to increased production of the neurotoxin quinolinic acid , contributing to major depression . NMDA activation leading to excessive glutamatergic neurotransmission , may also contribute . A number of factors that increase inflammation have been linked to depression including a poor diet , smoking , and obesity . 
 = = = Psychological = = = 
 Various aspects of personality and its development appear to be integral to the occurrence and persistence of depression , with negative emotionality as a common precursor . Although depressive episodes are strongly correlated with adverse events , a person 's characteristic style of coping may be correlated with his or her resilience . In addition , low self @-@ esteem and self @-@ defeating or distorted thinking are related to depression . Depression is less likely to occur , as well as quicker to remit , among those who are religious . It is not always clear which factors are causes and which are effects of depression ; however , depressed persons that are able to reflect upon and challenge their thinking patterns often show improved mood and self @-@ esteem . 
 American psychiatrist Aaron T. Beck , following on from the earlier work of George Kelly and Albert Ellis , developed what is now known as a cognitive model of depression in the early 1960s . He proposed that three concepts underlie depression : a triad of negative thoughts composed of cognitive errors about oneself , one 's world , and one 's future ; recurrent patterns of depressive thinking , or schemas ; and distorted information processing . From these principles , he developed the structured technique of cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) . Further support for the concept of distorted information processing in individuals with depression has been provided from several areas of research . These include attention and reward and punishment processing . According to American psychologist Martin Seligman , depression in humans is similar to learned helplessness in laboratory animals , who remain in unpleasant situations when they are able to escape , but do not because they initially learned they had no control . 
 Attachment theory , which was developed by English psychiatrist John Bowlby in the 1960s , predicts a relationship between depressive disorder in adulthood and the quality of the earlier bond between the infant and the adult caregiver . In particular , it is thought that " the experiences of early loss , separation and rejection by the parent or caregiver ( conveying the message that the child is unlovable ) may all lead to insecure internal working models … Internal cognitive representations of the self as unlovable and of attachment figures as unloving [ or ] untrustworthy would be consistent with parts of Beck 's cognitive triad " . While a wide variety of studies has upheld the basic tenets of attachment theory , research has been inconclusive as to whether self @-@ reported early attachment and later depression are demonstrably related . 
 Depressed individuals often blame themselves for negative events , and , as shown in a 1993 study of hospitalized adolescents with self @-@ reported depression , those who blame themselves for negative occurrences may not take credit for positive outcomes . This tendency is characteristic of a depressive <unk> , or pessimistic explanatory style . According to Albert <unk> , a Canadian social psychologist associated with social cognitive theory , depressed individuals have negative beliefs about themselves , based on experiences of failure , observing the failure of social models , a lack of social persuasion that they can succeed , and their own somatic and emotional states including tension and stress . These influences may result in a negative self @-@ concept and a lack of self @-@ efficacy ; that is , they do not believe they can influence events or achieve personal goals . 
 An examination of depression in women indicates that vulnerability factors — such as early maternal loss , lack of a confiding relationship , responsibility for the care of several young children at home , and unemployment — can interact with life stressors to increase the risk of depression . For older adults , the factors are often health problems , changes in relationships with a spouse or adult children due to the transition to a care @-@ giving or care @-@ needing role , the death of a significant other , or a change in the availability or quality of social relationships with older friends because of their own health @-@ related life changes . 
 The understanding of depression has also received contributions from the psychoanalytic and humanistic branches of psychology . From the classical psychoanalytic perspective of Austrian psychiatrist Sigmund Freud , depression , or melancholia , may be related to interpersonal loss and early life experiences . Existential therapists have connected depression to the lack of both meaning in the present and a vision of the future . 
 = = = Social = = = 
 Poverty and social isolation are associated with increased risk of mental health problems in general . Child abuse ( physical , emotional , sexual , or neglect ) is also associated with increased risk of developing depressive disorders later in life . Such a link has good face validity given that it is during the years of development that a child is learning how to become a social being . Abuse of the child by the caregiver is bound to distort the developing personality and create a much greater risk for depression and many other debilitating mental and emotional states . Disturbances in family functioning , such as parental ( particularly maternal ) depression , severe marital conflict or divorce , death of a parent , or other disturbances in parenting are additional risk factors . In adulthood , stressful life events are strongly associated with the onset of major depressive episodes . In this context , life events connected to social rejection appear to be particularly related to depression . Evidence that a first episode of depression is more likely to be immediately preceded by stressful life events than are recurrent ones is consistent with the hypothesis that people may become increasingly sensitized to life stress over successive recurrences of depression . 
 The relationship between stressful life events and social support has been a matter of some debate ; the lack of social support may increase the likelihood that life stress will lead to depression , or the absence of social support may constitute a form of strain that leads to depression directly . There is evidence that neighborhood social disorder , for example , due to crime or illicit drugs , is a risk factor , and that a high neighborhood socioeconomic status , with better amenities , is a protective factor . Adverse conditions at work , particularly demanding jobs with little scope for decision @-@ making , are associated with depression , although diversity and confounding factors make it difficult to confirm that the relationship is causal . 
 Depression can be caused by prejudice . This can occur when people hold negative self @-@ stereotypes about themselves . This " <unk> " can be related to a group membership ( e.g. , Me @-@ Gay @-@ Bad ) or not ( Me @-@ Bad ) . If someone has prejudicial beliefs about a stigmatized group and then becomes a member of that group , they may internalize their prejudice and develop depression . For example , a boy growing up in the United States may learn the negative stereotype that gay men are immoral . When he grows up and realizes he is gay , he may direct this prejudice inward on himself and become depressed . People may also show prejudice internalization through self @-@ stereotyping because of negative childhood experiences such as verbal and physical abuse . 
 = = = Evolutionary = = = 
 From the standpoint of evolutionary theory , major depression is hypothesized , in some instances , to increase an individual 's reproductive fitness . Evolutionary approaches to depression and evolutionary psychology posit specific mechanisms by which depression may have been genetically incorporated into the human gene pool , accounting for the high heritability and prevalence of depression by proposing that certain components of depression are adaptations , such as the behaviors relating to attachment and social rank . Current behaviors can be explained as adaptations to regulate relationships or resources , although the result may be maladaptive in modern environments . 
 From another viewpoint , a counseling therapist may see depression not as a biochemical illness or disorder but as " a species @-@ wide evolved suite of emotional programs that are mostly activated by a perception , almost always over @-@ negative , of a major decline in personal usefulness , that can sometimes be linked to guilt , shame or perceived rejection " . This suite may have manifested in aging hunters in humans ' foraging past , who were marginalized by their declining skills , and may continue to appear in alienated members of today 's society . The feelings of uselessness generated by such marginalization could in theory prompt support from friends and kin . In addition , in a manner analogous to that in which physical pain has evolved to hinder actions that may cause further injury , " psychic misery " may have evolved to prevent hasty and maladaptive reactions to distressing situations . 
 = = = Drug and alcohol use = = = 
 Very high levels of substance abuse occur in the psychiatric population , especially alcohol , sedatives and cannabis . Depression and other mental health problems can have a substance induced cause ; making a differential or dual diagnosis regarding whether mental ill @-@ health is substance related or not or co @-@ occurring is an important part of a psychiatric evaluation . According to the DSM @-@ IV , a diagnosis of mood disorder cannot be made if the cause is believed to be due to " the direct physiological effects of a substance " ; when a syndrome resembling major depression is believed to be caused immediately by substance abuse or by an adverse drug reaction , it is referred to as , " substance @-@ induced mood disturbance " . Alcoholism or excessive alcohol consumption significantly increases the risk of developing major depression . Like alcohol , the benzodiazepines are central nervous system depressants ; this class of medication is commonly used to treat insomnia , anxiety , and muscular spasms . Similar to alcohol , benzodiazepines increase the risk of developing major depression . This increased risk of depression may be due in part to the adverse or toxic effects of sedative @-@ hypnotic drugs including alcohol on neurochemistry , such as decreased levels of serotonin and norepinephrine , or activation of immune mediated inflammatory pathways in the brain . Chronic use of benzodiazepines also can cause or worsen depression , or depression may be part of a protracted withdrawal syndrome . About a quarter of people recovering from alcoholism experience anxiety and depression , which can persist for up to 2 years . Methamphetamine abuse is also commonly associated with depression . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 = = = Clinical assessment = = = 
 A diagnostic assessment may be conducted by a suitably trained general practitioner , or by a psychiatrist or psychologist , who records the person 's current circumstances , biographical history , current symptoms , and family history . The broad clinical aim is to formulate the relevant biological , psychological , and social factors that may be impacting on the individual 's mood . The assessor may also discuss the person 's current ways of regulating mood ( healthy or otherwise ) such as alcohol and drug use . The assessment also includes a mental state examination , which is an assessment of the person 's current mood and thought content , in particular the presence of themes of hopelessness or pessimism , self @-@ harm or suicide , and an absence of positive thoughts or plans . Specialist mental health services are rare in rural areas , and thus diagnosis and management is left largely to primary @-@ care clinicians . This issue is even more marked in developing countries . The mental health examination may include the use of a rating scale such as the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression or the Beck Depression Inventory or the Suicide Behaviors Questionnaire @-@ Revised . The score on a rating scale alone is insufficient to diagnose depression to the satisfaction of the DSM or ICD , but it provides an indication of the severity of symptoms for a time period , so a person who scores above a given cut @-@ off point can be more thoroughly evaluated for a depressive disorder diagnosis . Several rating scales are used for this purpose . 
 Primary @-@ care physicians and other non @-@ psychiatrist physicians have more difficulty with <unk> and <unk> of depression compared to psychiatric physicians , in part because of the physical symptoms that often accompany depression , in addition to the many potential patient , provider , and system barriers that the authors describe . A review found that non @-@ psychiatrist physicians miss about two @-@ thirds of cases , though this has improved somewhat in more recent studies . 
 Before diagnosing a major depressive disorder , in general a doctor performs a medical examination and selected investigations to rule out other causes of symptoms . These include blood tests measuring TSH and thyroxine to exclude hypothyroidism ; basic electrolytes and serum calcium to rule out a metabolic disturbance ; and a full blood count including ESR to rule out a systemic infection or chronic disease . Adverse affective reactions to medications or alcohol misuse are often ruled out , as well . Testosterone levels may be evaluated to diagnose hypogonadism , a cause of depression in men . Vitamin D levels are often checked now , as low levels of vitamin D have been associated with greater risk for depression . 
 Subjective cognitive complaints appear in older depressed people , but they can also be indicative of the onset of a <unk> disorder , such as Alzheimer 's disease . Cognitive testing and brain imaging can help distinguish depression from dementia . A CT scan can exclude brain pathology in those with psychotic , rapid @-@ onset or otherwise unusual symptoms . In general , investigations are not repeated for a subsequent episode unless there is a medical indication . 
 No biological tests confirm major depression . <unk> of depression have been sought to provide an objective method of diagnosis . There are several potential biomarkers , including Brain @-@ Derived <unk> Factor and various functional MRI techniques . One study developed a decision tree model of interpreting a series of fMRI scans taken during various activities . In their subjects , the authors of that study were able to achieve a sensitivity of 80 % and a specificity of 87 % , corresponding to a negative predictive value of 98 % and a positive predictive value of 32 % ( positive and negative likelihood ratios were 6 @.@ 15 , 0 @.@ 23 , respectively ) . However , much more research is needed before these tests could be used clinically . 
 = = = DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR and ICD @-@ 10 criteria = = = 
 The most widely used criteria for diagnosing depressive conditions are found in the American Psychiatric Association 's revised fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR ) , and the World Health Organization 's International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems ( ICD @-@ 10 ) , which uses the name depressive episode for a single episode and recurrent depressive disorder for repeated episodes . The latter system is typically used in European countries , while the former is used in the US and many other non @-@ European nations , and the authors of both have worked towards conforming one with the other . 
 Both DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR and ICD @-@ 10 mark out typical ( main ) depressive symptoms . ICD @-@ 10 defines three typical depressive symptoms ( depressed mood , anhedonia , and reduced energy ) , two of which should be present to determine depressive disorder diagnosis . According to DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR , there are two main depressive symptoms — depressed mood and anhedonia . At least one of these must be present to make a diagnosis of major depressive episode . 
 Major depressive disorder is classified as a mood disorder in DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR . The diagnosis hinges on the presence of single or recurrent major depressive episodes . Further qualifiers are used to classify both the episode itself and the course of the disorder . The category Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is diagnosed if the depressive episode 's manifestation does not meet the criteria for a major depressive episode . The ICD @-@ 10 system does not use the term major depressive disorder but lists very similar criteria for the diagnosis of a depressive episode ( mild , moderate or severe ) ; the term recurrent may be added if there have been multiple episodes without mania . 
 = = = = Major depressive episode = = = = 
 A major depressive episode is characterized by the presence of a severely depressed mood that persists for at least two weeks . Episodes may be isolated or recurrent and are categorized as mild ( few symptoms in excess of minimum criteria ) , moderate , or severe ( marked impact on social or occupational functioning ) . An episode with psychotic features — commonly referred to as psychotic depression — is automatically rated as severe . If the patient has had an episode of mania or markedly elevated mood , a diagnosis of bipolar disorder is made instead . Depression without mania is sometimes referred to as unipolar because the mood remains at one emotional state or " pole " . 
 DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR excludes cases where the symptoms are a result of bereavement , although it is possible for normal bereavement to evolve into a depressive episode if the mood persists and the characteristic features of a major depressive episode develop . The criteria have been criticized because they do not take into account any other aspects of the personal and social context in which depression can occur . In addition , some studies have found little empirical support for the DSM @-@ IV cut @-@ off criteria , indicating they are a diagnostic convention imposed on a continuum of depressive symptoms of varying severity and duration : Excluded are a range of related diagnoses , including dysthymia , which involves a chronic but milder mood disturbance ; recurrent brief depression , consisting of briefer depressive episodes ; minor depressive disorder , whereby only some symptoms of major depression are present ; and adjustment disorder with depressed mood , which denotes low mood resulting from a psychological response to an identifiable event or stressor . 
 = = = = Subtypes = = = = 
 The DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR recognizes five further subtypes of MDD , called specifiers , in addition to noting the length , severity and presence of psychotic features : 
 <unk> depression is characterized by a loss of pleasure in most or all activities , a failure of reactivity to pleasurable stimuli , a quality of depressed mood more pronounced than that of grief or loss , a worsening of symptoms in the morning hours , early @-@ morning waking , psychomotor retardation , excessive weight loss ( not to be confused with anorexia nervosa ) , or excessive guilt . 
 Atypical depression is characterized by mood reactivity ( paradoxical anhedonia ) and positivity , significant weight gain or increased appetite ( comfort eating ) , excessive sleep or sleepiness ( hypersomnia ) , a sensation of heaviness in limbs known as leaden paralysis , and significant social impairment as a consequence of hypersensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection . 
 Catatonic depression is a rare and severe form of major depression involving disturbances of motor behavior and other symptoms . Here , the person is mute and almost <unk> , and either remains immobile or exhibits purposeless or even bizarre movements . Catatonic symptoms also occur in schizophrenia or in manic episodes , or may be caused by neuroleptic malignant syndrome . 
 <unk> depression , or mental and behavioral disorders associated with the <unk> , not elsewhere classified , refers to the intense , sustained and sometimes disabling depression experienced by women after giving birth . <unk> depression has an incidence rate of 10 – 15 % among new mothers . The DSM @-@ IV mandates that , in order to qualify as postpartum depression , onset occur within one month of delivery . It has been said that postpartum depression can last as long as three months . 
 Seasonal affective disorder ( SAD ) is a form of depression in which depressive episodes come on in the autumn or winter , and resolve in spring . The diagnosis is made if at least two episodes have occurred in colder months with none at other times , over a two @-@ year period or longer . 
 = = = Screening = = = 
 In 2016 the United States Preventive Services Task Force ( USPSTF ) recommended screening in the adult populations with evidence that it increases the detection of people with depression and with proper treatment improves outcomes . They recommend screening in those between the age of 12 to 18 as well . 
 A Cochrane review from 2005 found screening programs do not significantly improve detection rates , treatment , or outcome . 
 = = = Differential diagnoses = = = 
 To confer major depressive disorder as the most likely diagnosis , other potential diagnoses must be considered , including dysthymia , adjustment disorder with depressed mood , or bipolar disorder . <unk> is a chronic , milder mood disturbance in which a person reports a low mood almost daily over a span of at least two years . The symptoms are not as severe as those for major depression , although people with dysthymia are vulnerable to secondary episodes of major depression ( sometimes referred to as double depression ) . Adjustment disorder with depressed mood is a mood disturbance appearing as a psychological response to an identifiable event or stressor , in which the resulting emotional or behavioral symptoms are significant but do not meet the criteria for a major depressive episode . Bipolar disorder , also known as manic – depressive disorder , is a condition in which depressive phases alternate with periods of mania or hypomania . Although depression is currently categorized as a separate disorder , there is ongoing debate because individuals diagnosed with major depression often experience some hypomanic symptoms , indicating a mood disorder continuum . 
 Other disorders need to be ruled out before diagnosing major depressive disorder . They include depressions due to physical illness , medications , and substance abuse . Depression due to physical illness is diagnosed as a Mood disorder due to a general medical condition . This condition is determined based on history , laboratory findings , or physical examination . When the depression is caused by a medication , drug of abuse , or exposure to a toxin , it is then diagnosed as a Substance / Medication @-@ induced depressive disorder ( previously called Substance @-@ induced mood disorder in the DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR ) . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Preventative efforts may result in decreases in rates of the condition of between 22 and 38 % . Eating large amounts of fish may also reduce the risk . 
 Behavioral interventions , such as interpersonal therapy and cognitive @-@ behavioral therapy , are effective at preventing new onset depression . Because such interventions appear to be most effective when delivered to individuals or small groups , it has been suggested that they may be able to reach their large target audience most efficiently through the Internet . 
 However , an earlier meta @-@ analysis found preventive programs with a competence @-@ enhancing component to be superior to behavior @-@ oriented programs overall , and found behavioral programs to be particularly unhelpful for older people , for whom social support programs were uniquely beneficial . In addition , the programs that best prevented depression comprised more than eight sessions , each lasting between 60 and 90 minutes , were provided by a combination of lay and professional workers , had a high @-@ quality research design , reported attrition rates , and had a well @-@ defined intervention . 
 The Netherlands mental health care system provides preventive interventions , such as the " Coping with Depression " course ( CWD ) for people with sub @-@ threshold depression . The course is claimed to be the most successful of psychoeducational interventions for the treatment and prevention of depression ( both for its adaptability to various populations and its results ) , with a risk reduction of 38 % in major depression and an efficacy as a treatment comparing favorably to other psychotherapies . 
 = = Management = = 
 The three most common treatments for depression are psychotherapy , medication , and electroconvulsive therapy . Psychotherapy is the treatment of choice ( over medication ) for people under 18 . The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ( NICE ) 2004 guidelines indicate that antidepressants should not be used for the initial treatment of mild depression , because the risk @-@ benefit ratio is poor . The guidelines recommend that antidepressants treatment in combination with psychosocial interventions should be considered for : 
 People with a history of moderate or severe depression 
 Those with mild depression that has been present for a long period 
 As a second line treatment for mild depression that persists after other interventions 
 As a first line treatment for moderate or severe depression . 
 The guidelines further note that antidepressant treatment should be continued for at least six months to reduce the risk of relapse , and that SSRIs are better tolerated than tricyclic antidepressants . 
 American Psychiatric Association treatment guidelines recommend that initial treatment should be individually tailored based on factors including severity of symptoms , co @-@ existing disorders , prior treatment experience , and patient preference . Options may include pharmacotherapy , psychotherapy , electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT ) , transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) or light therapy . Antidepressant medication is recommended as an initial treatment choice in people with mild , moderate , or severe major depression , and should be given to all patients with severe depression unless ECT is planned . 
 Treatment options are much more limited in developing countries , where access to mental health staff , medication , and psychotherapy is often difficult . Development of mental health services is minimal in many countries ; depression is viewed as a phenomenon of the developed world despite evidence to the contrary , and not as an inherently life @-@ threatening condition . A 2014 Cochrane review found insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of psychological versus medical therapy in children . 
 = = = Psychotherapy = = = 
 Psychotherapy can be delivered , to individuals , groups , or families by mental health professionals . A 2015 review found that cognitive behavioral therapy appears to be similar to antidepressant medication in terms of effect . A 2012 review found psychotherapy to be better than no treatment but not other treatments . With more complex and chronic forms of depression , a combination of medication and psychotherapy may be used . A 2014 Cochrane review found that work @-@ directed interventions combined with clinical interventions helped to reduce sick days taken by people with depression . 
 Psychotherapy has been shown to be effective in older people . Successful psychotherapy appears to reduce the recurrence of depression even after it has been terminated or replaced by occasional booster sessions . 
 = = = = Cognitive behavioral therapy = = = = 
 Cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) currently has the most research evidence for the treatment of depression in children and adolescents , and CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy ( IPT ) are preferred therapies for adolescent depression . In people under 18 , according to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence , medication should be offered only in conjunction with a psychological therapy , such as CBT , interpersonal therapy , or family therapy . Cognitive behavioral therapy has also been shown to reduce the number of sick days taken by people with depression , when used in conjunction with primary care . 
 The most @-@ studied form of psychotherapy for depression is CBT , which teaches clients to challenge self @-@ defeating , but enduring ways of thinking ( cognitions ) and change counter @-@ productive behaviors . Research beginning in the mid @-@ 1990s suggested that CBT could perform as well or as better than antidepressants in patients with moderate to severe depression . CBT may be effective in depressed adolescents , although its effects on severe episodes are not definitively known . Several variables predict success for cognitive behavioral therapy in adolescents : higher levels of rational thoughts , less hopelessness , fewer negative thoughts , and fewer cognitive distortions . CBT is particularly beneficial in preventing relapse . 
 = = = = = Variants = = = = = 
 Several variants of cognitive behavior therapy have been used in those with depression , the most notable being rational emotive behavior therapy , and mindfulness @-@ based cognitive therapy . Mindfulness based stress reduction programs may reduce depression symptoms . Mindfulness programs also appear to be a promising intervention in youth . 
 = = = = Psychoanalysis = = = = 
 Psychoanalysis is a school of thought , founded by Sigmund Freud , which emphasizes the resolution of unconscious mental conflicts . Psychoanalytic techniques are used by some practitioners to treat clients presenting with major depression . A more widely practiced , eclectic technique , called psychodynamic psychotherapy , is loosely based on psychoanalysis and has an additional social and interpersonal focus . In a meta @-@ analysis of three controlled trials of Short <unk> Supportive Psychotherapy , this modification was found to be as effective as medication for mild to moderate depression . 
 = = = Antidepressants = = = 
 Conflicting results have arisen from studies that look at the effectiveness of antidepressants in people with acute , mild to moderate depression . Stronger evidence supports the usefulness of antidepressants in the treatment of depression that is chronic ( dysthymia ) or severe . 
 While small benefits were found , researchers Irving Kirsch and Thomas Moore state they may be due to issues with the trials rather than a true effect of the medication . In a later publication , Kirsch concluded that the overall effect of new @-@ generation antidepressant medication is below recommended criteria for clinical significance . Similar results were obtained in a meta analysis by Fornier . 
 A review commissioned by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence concluded that there is strong evidence that SSRIs have greater efficacy than placebo on achieving a 50 % reduction in depression scores in moderate and severe major depression , and that there is some evidence for a similar effect in mild depression . Similarly , a Cochrane systematic review of clinical trials of the generic antidepressant amitriptyline concluded that there is strong evidence that its efficacy is superior to placebo . 
 In 2014 the U.S. FDA published a systematic review of all antidepressant maintenance trials submitted to the agency between 1985 and 2012 . The authors concluded that maintenance treatment reduced the risk of relapse by 52 % compared to placebo , and that this effect was primarily due to recurrent depression in the placebo group rather than a drug withdrawal effect . 
 To find the most effective antidepressant medication with minimal side @-@ effects , the dosages can be adjusted , and if necessary , combinations of different classes of antidepressants can be tried . Response rates to the first antidepressant administered range from 50 – 75 % , and it can take at least six to eight weeks from the start of medication to remission . Antidepressant medication treatment is usually continued for 16 to 20 weeks after remission , to minimize the chance of recurrence , and even up to one year of continuation is recommended . People with chronic depression may need to take medication indefinitely to avoid relapse . 
 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( SSRIs ) are the primary medications prescribed , owing to their relatively mild side @-@ effects , and because they are less toxic in overdose than other antidepressants . People who do not respond to one SSRI can be switched to another antidepressant , and this results in improvement in almost 50 % of cases . Another option is to switch to the atypical antidepressant bupropion . <unk> , an antidepressant with a different mechanism of action , may be modestly more effective than SSRIs . However , venlafaxine is not recommended in the UK as a first @-@ line treatment because of evidence suggesting its risks may outweigh benefits , and it is specifically discouraged in children and adolescents . 
 For adolescent depression , fluoxetine is recommended . <unk> appear to have only slight benefit in children , while other antidepressants have not been shown to be <unk> . There is also insufficient evidence to determine effectiveness in those with depression complicated by dementia . Any antidepressant can cause low serum sodium levels ( also called hyponatremia ) ; nevertheless , it has been reported more often with SSRIs . It is not uncommon for SSRIs to cause or worsen insomnia ; the sedating antidepressant mirtazapine can be used in such cases . 
 Irreversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors , an older class of antidepressants , have been plagued by potentially life @-@ threatening dietary and drug interactions . They are still used only rarely , although newer and better @-@ tolerated agents of this class have been developed . The safety profile is different with reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors such as <unk> where the risk of serious dietary interactions is negligible and dietary restrictions are less strict . 
 For children , adolescents , and probably young adults between 18 and 24 years old , there is a higher risk of both suicidal <unk> and suicidal behavior in those treated with SSRIs . For adults , it is unclear whether SSRIs affect the risk of suicidality . One review found no connection ; another an increased risk ; and a third no risk in those 25 – 65 years old and a decrease risk in those more than 65 . A black box warning was introduced in the United States in 2007 on SSRI and other antidepressant medications due to increased risk of suicide in patients younger than 24 years old . Similar precautionary notice revisions were implemented by the Japanese Ministry of Health . 
 = = = Other medications = = = 
 There is some evidence that fish oil supplements containing high levels of eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) to docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) may be effective in major depression , but other meta @-@ analysis of the research conclude that positive effects may be due to publication bias . There is some preliminary evidence that COX @-@ 2 inhibitors have a beneficial effect on major depression . Lithium appears effective at lowering the risk of suicide in those with bipolar disorder and unipolar depression to nearly the same levels as the general population . There is a narrow range of effective and safe dosages of lithium thus close monitoring may be needed . Low @-@ dose thyroid hormone may be added to existing antidepressants to treat persistent depression symptoms in people who have tried multiple courses of medication . 
 = = = Electroconvulsive therapy = = = 
 Electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT ) is a standard psychiatric treatment in which seizures are electrically induced in patients to provide relief from psychiatric illnesses . ECT is used with informed consent as a last line of intervention for major depressive disorder . 
 A round of ECT is effective for about 50 % of people with treatment @-@ resistant major depressive disorder , whether it is unipolar or bipolar . Follow @-@ up treatment is still poorly studied , but about half of people who respond , relapse with twelve months . 
 Aside from effects in the brain , the general physical risks of ECT are similar to those of brief general anesthesia . Immediately following treatment , the most common adverse effects are confusion and memory loss . ECT is considered one of the least harmful treatment options available for severely depressed pregnant women . 
 A usual course of ECT involves multiple administrations , typically given two or three times per week until the patient is no longer suffering symptoms ECT is administered under anesthetic with a muscle relaxant . Electroconvulsive therapy can differ in its application in three ways : electrode placement , frequency of treatments , and the electrical waveform of the stimulus . These three forms of application have significant differences in both adverse side effects and symptom remission . After treatment , drug therapy is usually continued , and some patients receive maintenance ECT . 
 ECT appears to work in the short term via an anticonvulsant effect mostly in the frontal lobes , and longer term via neurotrophic effects primarily in the medial temporal lobe . 
 = = = Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation = = = 
 Transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) or deep transcranial magnetic stimulation is a noninvasive method used to stimulate small regions of the brain . TMS was approved by the FDA for treatment @-@ resistant major depressive disorder in 2008 and as of 2014 evidence supports this use . The American Psychiatric Association the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Disorders , and the Royal Australia and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists have endorsed <unk> for <unk> . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Bright light therapy reduces depression symptom severity , with benefit was found for both seasonal affective disorder and for <unk> depression , and an effect similar to those for conventional antidepressants . For non @-@ seasonal depression , adding light therapy to the standard antidepressant treatment was not effective . For non @-@ seasonal depression where light was used mostly in combination with antidepressants or wake therapy a moderate effect was found , with response better than control treatment in high @-@ quality studies , in studies that applied morning light treatment , and with people who respond to total or partial sleep deprivation . Both analyses noted poor quality , short duration , and small size of most of the reviewed studies . 
 There is a small amount of evidence that skipping a night 's sleep may help . Physical exercise is recommended for management of mild depression , and has a moderate effect on symptoms . It is equivalent to the use of medications or psychological therapies in most people . In the older people it does appear to decrease depression . In <unk> , non @-@ randomized observational studies smoking cessation has benefits in depression as large as or larger than those of medications . Cognitive behavioral therapy and occupational programs ( including modification of work activities and assistance ) have been shown to be effective in reducing sick days taken by workers with depression . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Major depressive episodes often resolve over time whether or not they are treated . <unk> on a waiting list show a 10 – 15 % reduction in symptoms within a few months , with approximately 20 % no longer meeting the full criteria for a depressive disorder . The median duration of an episode has been estimated to be 23 weeks , with the highest rate of recovery in the first three months . 
 Studies have shown that 80 % of those suffering from their first major depressive episode will suffer from at least 1 more during their life , with a lifetime average of 4 episodes . Other general population studies indicate that around half those who have an episode recover ( whether treated or not ) and remain well , while the other half will have at least one more , and around 15 % of those experience chronic recurrence . Studies recruiting from selective inpatient sources suggest lower recovery and higher chronicity , while studies of mostly outpatients show that nearly all recover , with a median episode duration of 11 months . Around 90 % of those with severe or psychotic depression , most of whom also meet criteria for other mental disorders , experience recurrence . 
 Recurrence is more likely if symptoms have not fully resolved with treatment . Current guidelines recommend continuing antidepressants for four to six months after remission to prevent relapse . Evidence from many randomized controlled trials indicates continuing antidepressant medications after recovery can reduce the chance of relapse by 70 % ( 41 % on placebo vs. 18 % on antidepressant ) . The preventive effect probably lasts for at least the first 36 months of use . 
 Those people experiencing repeated episodes of depression require ongoing treatment in order to prevent more severe , long @-@ term depression . In some cases , people must take medications for long periods of time or for the rest of their lives . 
 Cases when outcome is poor are associated with inappropriate treatment , severe initial symptoms that may include psychosis , early age of onset , more previous episodes , incomplete recovery after 1 year , pre @-@ existing severe mental or medical disorder , and family dysfunction as well . 
 Depressed individuals have a shorter life expectancy than those without depression , in part because depressed patients are at risk of dying by suicide . However , they also have a higher rate of dying from other causes , being more susceptible to medical conditions such as heart disease . Up to 60 % of people who die by suicide have a mood disorder such as major depression , and the risk is especially high if a person has a marked sense of hopelessness or has both depression and borderline personality disorder . The lifetime risk of suicide associated with a diagnosis of major depression in the US is estimated at 3 @.@ 4 % , which averages two highly disparate figures of almost 7 % for men and 1 % for women ( although suicide attempts are more frequent in women ) . The estimate is substantially lower than a previously accepted figure of 15 % , which had been derived from older studies of hospitalized patients . 
 Depression is often associated with unemployment and poverty . Major depression is currently the leading cause of disease burden in North America and other high @-@ income countries , and the fourth @-@ leading cause worldwide . In the year 2030 , it is predicted to be the second @-@ leading cause of disease burden worldwide after HIV , according to the World Health Organization . Delay or failure in seeking treatment after relapse , and the failure of health professionals to provide treatment , are two barriers to reducing disability . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Depression is a major cause of morbidity worldwide . It is believed to currently affect approximately 298 million people as of 2010 ( 4 @.@ 3 % of the global population ) . Lifetime prevalence varies widely , from 3 % in Japan to 17 % in the United States . In most countries the number of people who have depression during their lives falls within an 8 – 12 % range . In North America , the probability of having a major depressive episode within a year @-@ long period is 3 – 5 % for males and 8 – 10 % for females . Population studies have consistently shown major depression to be about twice as common in women as in men , although it is unclear why this is so , and whether factors unaccounted for are contributing to this . The relative increase in occurrence is related to pubertal development rather than chronological age , reaches adult ratios between the ages of 15 and 18 , and appears associated with psychosocial more than hormonal factors . 
 People are most likely to suffer their first depressive episode between the ages of 30 and 40 , and there is a second , smaller peak of incidence between ages 50 and 60 . The risk of major depression is increased with neurological conditions such as stroke , Parkinson 's disease , or multiple sclerosis , and during the first year after childbirth . It is also more common after cardiovascular illnesses , and is related more to a poor outcome than to a better one . Studies conflict on the prevalence of depression in the elderly , but most data suggest there is a reduction in this age group . Depressive disorders are more common to observe in urban than in rural population and the prevalence is in groups with stronger socioeconomic factors i.e. homelessness . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ancient Greek physician Hippocrates described a syndrome of melancholia as a distinct disease with particular mental and physical symptoms ; he characterized all " fears and <unk> , if they last a long time " as being symptomatic of the ailment . It was a similar but far broader concept than today 's depression ; prominence was given to a clustering of the symptoms of sadness , dejection , and despondency , and often fear , anger , delusions and obsessions were included . 
 The term depression itself was derived from the Latin verb <unk> , " to press down " . From the 14th century , " to depress " meant to subjugate or to bring down in spirits . It was used in 1665 in English author Richard Baker 's Chronicle to refer to someone having " a great depression of spirit " , and by English author Samuel Johnson in a similar sense in 1753 . The term also came into use in physiology and economics . An early usage referring to a psychiatric symptom was by French psychiatrist Louis <unk> in 1856 , and by the 1860s it was appearing in medical dictionaries to refer to a physiological and metaphorical lowering of emotional function . Since Aristotle , melancholia had been associated with men of learning and intellectual brilliance , a hazard of contemplation and creativity . The newer concept abandoned these associations and through the 19th century , became more associated with women . 
 Although melancholia remained the dominant diagnostic term , depression gained increasing currency in medical treatises and was a synonym by the end of the century ; German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin may have been the first to use it as the overarching term , referring to different kinds of melancholia as depressive states . 
 Sigmund Freud likened the state of melancholia to mourning in his 1917 paper Mourning and Melancholia . He theorized that objective loss , such as the loss of a valued relationship through death or a romantic break @-@ up , results in subjective loss as well ; the depressed individual has identified with the object of affection through an unconscious , narcissistic process called the libidinal <unk> of the ego . Such loss results in severe melancholic symptoms more profound than mourning ; not only is the outside world viewed negatively but the ego itself is compromised . The patient 's decline of self @-@ perception is revealed in his belief of his own blame , inferiority , and unworthiness . He also emphasized early life experiences as a predisposing factor . Adolf Meyer put forward a mixed social and biological framework emphasizing reactions in the context of an individual 's life , and argued that the term depression should be used instead of melancholia . The first version of the DSM ( DSM @-@ I , 1952 ) contained depressive reaction and the DSM @-@ II ( 1968 ) depressive neurosis , defined as an excessive reaction to internal conflict or an identifiable event , and also included a depressive type of manic @-@ depressive psychosis within Major affective disorders . 
 In the mid @-@ 20th century , researchers theorized that depression was caused by a chemical imbalance in neurotransmitters in the brain , a theory based on observations made in the 1950s of the effects of <unk> and isoniazid in altering monoamine neurotransmitter levels and affecting depressive symptoms . 
 The term " unipolar " ( along with the related term " bipolar " ) was coined by the neurologist and psychiatrist Karl Kleist , and subsequently used by his disciples Edda Neele and Karl Leonhard . 
 The term Major depressive disorder was introduced by a group of US clinicians in the mid @-@ 1970s as part of proposals for diagnostic criteria based on patterns of symptoms ( called the " Research Diagnostic Criteria " , building on earlier <unk> Criteria ) , and was incorporated into the DSM @-@ III in 1980 . To maintain consistency the ICD @-@ 10 used the same criteria , with only minor alterations , but using the DSM diagnostic threshold to mark a mild depressive episode , adding higher threshold categories for moderate and severe episodes . The ancient idea of melancholia still survives in the notion of a melancholic subtype . 
 The new definitions of depression were widely accepted , albeit with some conflicting findings and views . There have been some continued empirically based arguments for a return to the diagnosis of melancholia . There has been some criticism of the expansion of coverage of the diagnosis , related to the development and promotion of antidepressants and the biological model since the late 1950s . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 People 's conceptualizations of depression vary widely , both within and among cultures . " Because of the lack of scientific certainty , " one commentator has observed , " the debate over depression turns on questions of language . What we call it — ' disease , ' ' disorder , ' ' state of mind ' — affects how we view , diagnose , and treat it . " There are cultural differences in the extent to which serious depression is considered an illness requiring personal professional treatment , or is an indicator of something else , such as the need to address social or moral problems , the result of biological imbalances , or a reflection of individual differences in the understanding of distress that may reinforce feelings of powerlessness , and emotional struggle . 
 The diagnosis is less common in some countries , such as China . It has been argued that the Chinese traditionally deny or <unk> emotional depression ( although since the early 1980s , the Chinese denial of depression may have modified drastically ) . Alternatively , it may be that Western cultures reframe and elevate some expressions of human distress to disorder status . Australian professor Gordon Parker and others have argued that the Western concept of depression " <unk> " sadness or misery . Similarly , Hungarian @-@ American psychiatrist Thomas Szasz and others argue that depression is a metaphorical illness that is inappropriately regarded as an actual disease . There has also been concern that the DSM , as well as the field of descriptive psychiatry that employs it , tends to <unk> abstract phenomena such as depression , which may in fact be social constructs . American archetypal psychologist James Hillman writes that depression can be healthy for the soul , insofar as " it brings refuge , limitation , focus , gravity , weight , and humble powerlessness . " Hillman argues that therapeutic attempts to eliminate depression echo the Christian theme of resurrection , but have the unfortunate effect of demonizing a soulful state of being . 
 Historical figures were often reluctant to discuss or seek treatment for depression due to social stigma about the condition , or due to ignorance of diagnosis or treatments . Nevertheless , analysis or interpretation of letters , journals , artwork , writings , or statements of family and friends of some historical personalities has led to the presumption that they may have had some form of depression . People who may have had depression include English author Mary Shelley , American @-@ British writer Henry James , and American president Abraham Lincoln . Some well @-@ known contemporary people with possible depression include Canadian songwriter Leonard Cohen and American playwright and novelist Tennessee Williams . Some pioneering psychologists , such as Americans William James and John B. Watson , dealt with their own depression . 
 There has been a continuing discussion of whether neurological disorders and mood disorders may be linked to creativity , a discussion that goes back to Aristotelian times . British literature gives many examples of reflections on depression . English philosopher John Stuart Mill experienced a several @-@ months @-@ long period of what he called " a dull state of nerves " , when one is " <unk> to enjoyment or pleasurable excitement ; one of those moods when what is pleasure at other times , becomes insipid or indifferent " . He quoted English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's " Dejection " as a perfect description of his case : " A grief without a pang , void , dark and <unk> , / A drowsy , stifled , <unk> grief , / Which finds no natural outlet or relief / In word , or sigh , or tear . " English writer Samuel Johnson used the term " the black dog " in the 1780s to describe his own depression , and it was subsequently popularized by depression sufferer former British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill . 
 Social stigma of major depression is widespread , and contact with mental health services reduces this only slightly . Public opinions on treatment differ markedly to those of health professionals ; alternative treatments are held to be more helpful than pharmacological ones , which are viewed poorly . In the UK , the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners conducted a joint Five @-@ year Defeat Depression campaign to educate and reduce stigma from 1992 to 1996 ; a MORI study conducted afterwards showed a small positive change in public attitudes to depression and treatment . 
 = = Research = = 
 Trials are looking at the effects of botulinum toxins on depression . The idea is that the drug is used to make the person look less frowning and that this stops the negative facial feedback from the face . In 2015 it turned out , however , that the partly positive effects that had been observed until then could have been placebo effects . 
 = = Elderly = = 
 Depression is especially common among those over 65 years of age and increases in frequency with age beyond this age . In addition the risk of depression increases in relation to the age and frailty of the individual . Depression is one the most important factors which negatively impact quality of life in adults as well as the elderly . Both symptoms and treatment among the elderly differ from those of the rest of the adult populations . 
 As with many other diseases it is common among the elderly not to present classical depressive symptoms . Diagnosis and treatment is further complicated in that the elderly are often simultaneously treated with a number of other drugs , and often have other concurrent diseases . Treatment differs in that studies of SSRI @-@ drugs have shown lesser and often inadequate effect among the elderly , while other drugs with more clear effects have adverse effects which can be especially difficult to handle among the elderly . <unk> is an <unk> @-@ drug with documented effect on recurring depression among the elderly , but has adverse effects in form of dizziness , dryness of the mouth , diarrhea , and constipation . 
 Problem solving therapy was as of 2015 the only psychological therapy with proven effect , and can be likened to a simpler form of cognitive behavioral therapy . However , elderly with depression are seldom offered any psychological treatment , and the evidence surrounding which other treatments are effective is incomplete . Electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT or electric @-@ shock therapy ) has been used as treatment of the elderly , and register @-@ studies suggest it is effective although less so among the elderly than among the rest of the adult population . 
 The risks involved with treatment of depression among the elderly as opposed to benefits is not entirely clear . Awaiting more evidence on how depression @-@ treatment among the elderly is best designed it is important to follow up treatment results , and to reconsider changing treatments if it does not help . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 = = = Cited works = = = 
 American Psychiatric Association ( <unk> ) . Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , Fourth Edition , Text Revision : DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR . Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Publishing , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 025 @-@ 4 . 
 Barlow DH ; Durand VM ( 2005 ) . Abnormal psychology : An integrative approach ( 5th ed . ) . Belmont , CA , USA : Thomson Wadsworth . ISBN 0 @-@ 534 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Beck AT , Rush J , Shaw BF , Emery G ( 1987 ) [ 1979 ] . Cognitive Therapy of depression . New York , NY , USA : Guilford Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 919 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> BR ( 2005 ) . An Introduction to the History of Psychology ( 5th ed . ) . Belmont , CA , USA : Thomson Wadsworth . ISBN 0 @-@ 534 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 May R ( 1994 ) . The discovery of being : Writings in existential psychology . New York , NY , USA : W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> ; Parker , Gordon ( 1996 ) . Melancholia : a disorder of movement and mood : a phenomenological and neurobiological review . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain ( 2008 ) . British National Formulary ( BNF 56 ) . UK : BMJ Group and RPS Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 778 @-@ 7 . 
 Sadock , Virginia A. ; Sadock , Benjamin J. ; Kaplan , Harold I. ( 2003 ) . Kaplan & Sadock 's synopsis of psychiatry : behavioral sciences / clinical psychiatry . Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = O 'Shaughnessy Dam ( California ) = 
 O 'Shaughnessy Dam is a 430 @-@ foot ( 131 m ) high concrete arch @-@ gravity dam in Tuolumne County , California , in the United States . It impounds the Tuolumne River , forming the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir at the lower end of Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park , about 160 miles ( 260 km ) east of San Francisco . The dam and reservoir are the source for the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct , which provides water for over 2 million people in San Francisco and other municipalities of the west Bay Area . The dam is named for engineer Michael O 'Shaughnessy , who oversaw its construction . 
 Although San Francisco had sought Tuolumne River water as early as the 1890s , this project did not move forward until the disastrous earthquake and fire of 1906 , which underscored the insufficiency of the existing water supply . The Hetch Hetchy Valley – then compared to Yosemite Valley for its scenic beauty – was chosen for its water quality and hydroelectric potential , but the location within the national park generated controversy . An act of Congress was required to circumvent federal protection of the Tuolumne River , with the reasoning that public land should be developed for the public benefit . 
 Construction of the dam started in 1919 and was finished in 1923 , with the first water delivered in 1934 after numerous delays . From 1935 – 38 the dam was raised to increase its capacity for water supply and power generation . The dam , aqueduct and <unk> hydroelectric systems are collectively known as the Hetch Hetchy Project . Deriving from a largely wild and pristine area of the Sierra Nevada , the Hetch Hetchy supply is some of the cleanest municipal water in the US , requiring only primary filtration and disinfection . 
 Hetch Hetchy represented the first great environmental controversy in the US , and debate over the dam and reservoir continues today . <unk> groups such as the Sierra Club lobby for the restoration of the valley , while others argue that leaving the dam in place would be the better economic and environmental decision . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 19th century , the city of San Francisco was rapidly outgrowing its limited water supply , which depended on intermittent local springs and streams . The city looked east to the Sierra Nevada , where snowmelt fed the headwaters for many of California 's largest rivers . In 1890 , San Francisco mayor James D. Phelan proposed to build a dam and aqueduct on the Tuolumne River , one of the largest southern Sierra rivers , as a way to increase and stabilize the city 's water supply . In 1900 , a United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) report also described the Tuolumne River as " the best source of sustainable water for San Francisco " . Although Phelan managed to secure water rights for the Tuolumne River in 1901 , his appeals to the federal government for development of the Hetch Hetchy Valley were unsuccessful . But when the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and subsequent fire razed the city , the dangerous inadequacies of the city 's water supply system were brought to national light . 
 Out of fourteen potential water sources considered by the city – which included Lake Tahoe , the Eel River , and tributaries of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers – Hetch Hetchy was considered superior for its excellent dam site , abundant sediment @-@ free water , lower cost and hydroelectric potential . At the time , Hetch Hetchy was an isolated , seldom visited subalpine valley , visited intermittently by gold seekers and sheepherders . However , since 1890 , Hetch Hetchy Valley and the surrounding lands had been part of Yosemite National Park and thus off @-@ limits to utility development , let alone at the grand scale proposed by the city . Even though the valley was not well known to the general public , organizations such as the Sierra Club treasured it for its spectacular beauty , often compared to that of Yosemite Valley itself . Led by naturalist and mountaineer John Muir , the Sierra Club adamantly opposed the city of San Francisco as it sought permission from the federal government to build a dam in the valley . 
 In 1908 Secretary of the Interior James R. Garfield responded to San Francisco 's appeal , granting the city rights to development at Hetch Hetchy , stating that " Hetch Hetchy was not unique , a lake would be even more beautiful than its meadow floor and the hydroelectric power generated could eventually pay for the costs of construction . " One of the strongest supporters of the Hetch Hetchy project was Gifford Pinchot , Chief Forester of the United States Forest Service , who pushed a policy of " conservation through use " , promoting the sustainable development of natural resources in the U.S. On December 19 , 1913 , President Woodrow Wilson signed the Raker Act , which permitted San Francisco 's development of the Hetch Hetchy project on the terms that water and power derived from the project could only be used for public utilities , not private profit . Though highly controversial , the bill passed the Senate by a vote of 43 for and 25 against . The consensus was that since Hetch Hetchy lay on public land , it was reasonable for its natural resources to be developed for the public benefit . 
 Muir , the Sierra Club and other groups were outraged by the federal government 's permission for development at Hetch Hetchy . However , on December 24 , 1914 , with construction on the dam barely underway , Muir died , leaving his Sierra Club to fight a protracted battle against the Hetch Hetchy Project over the next ten years . " Dam Hetch Hetchy ! " Muir had said – " As well dam for water tanks the peoples ' cathedrals and churches , for no holier temple has been consecrated by the heart of man ! " The Sierra Club argued that it was not necessary for San Francisco to destroy the valley for its water supply , pointing out the availability of other sites with reasonable proximity – including the Mokelumne River , which the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers reported in 1913 as " a better and cheaper source than Hetch Hetchy " . ( The Mokelumne was later dammed , in a similar scheme to the Hetch Hetchy project , to provide water to the East Bay . ) By this point , however , San Francisco had become " obsessed " with developing Hetch Hetchy , and " dismissed or discarded other rivers and valleys that would have served them better ... as if it was created for their purpose . " 
 = = Construction = = 
 Work on the Hetch Hetchy project began in early 1914 shortly after the passage of the Raker Act . The city hired John R. Freeman , who had previously worked on the water supply systems of Boston and New York City , to plan the complex dam and aqueduct system . Civil engineer Michael O 'Shaughnessy would oversee the construction and design details of the Hetch Hetchy project . The dam in Hetch Hetchy Valley would subsequently be named in his honor . Before construction of O 'Shaughnessy Dam could commence , the city completed a 70 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) high dam at Lake Eleanor to provide water for the Early Intake Powerhouse , which was necessary to provide electricity for the construction site of the larger dam . 
 Initial construction of the dam cost $ 6 @,@ 121 @,@ 000 , and was largely financed by revenue bonds issued by the city of San Francisco . To transport workers and materials , the city hired Frederick <unk> , a San Francisco engineer who had previous experience designing railways , to oversee construction the Hetch Hetchy Railroad . The railway would be a 68 @-@ mile ( 109 km ) standard gauge line that followed the narrow canyon of the Tuolumne River to the remote dam site . Built from 1915 to 1918 by a workforce of roughly 900 , the railway allowed for supplies to be shipped directly from San Francisco along the Southern Pacific and Sierra lines which connected to the Hetch Hetchy line . The railroad principally used geared Shay locomotives to negotiate its dangerous winding curves and steep 4 percent grades . 
 Actual groundbreaking on O 'Shaughnessy Dam was on August 1 , 1919 , when Utah Construction Company of San Francisco began preparing the dam site for construction . Workers began clearing the trees in Hetch Hetchy Valley to prepare it for receiving waters of the future reservoir . A 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) diameter tunnel , later expanded to 23 @-@ by @-@ 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 0 m × 7 @.@ 6 m ) , was dug around the south side of the O 'Shaughnessy Dam site , and a timber crib cofferdam diverted the waters of the Tuolumne River into the tunnel during construction . The riverbed on the site of the future dam was excavated over 100 ft ( 30 m ) before hitting the granite bedrock . A retaining wall was poured on the upstream side to prevent water seepage into the foundation hole , and the granite was scoured and artificially roughened to prepare for receiving concrete . 
 The concrete for the dam was processed in a plant located shortly upstream from the construction site , with sand and rock excavated from abundant alluvial deposits in the Hetch Hetchy valley . This was mixed with cement shipped in on the Hetch Hetchy Railroad and local boulders ranging from 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) to several yards ( metres ) in diameter to produce a cyclopean construction material for the dam . Beginning in September 1921 , the concrete was hoisted up a 375 @-@ foot ( 114 m ) tower on the south side of the gorge , from which it could flow down movable chutes by gravity to the construction site . A total of 398 @,@ 516 cu yd ( 304 @,@ 687 m3 ) of concrete was poured to form a dam standing 226 feet ( 69 m ) above the riverbed and 344 feet ( 105 m ) above foundations . The last concrete was placed in February 1922 and the dam was completed in May 1923 . At the time , it was the second tallest dam in the United States , after Idaho 's Arrowrock Dam . On May 24 , 1923 , the reservoir filled for the first time . A peak labor force of five hundred worked on the project , which claimed the lives of 67 men and one woman . 
 The first hydropower was delivered in 1925 with the completion of the Moccasin Powerhouse , fed by Hetch Hetchy water through the Canyon and Mountain Tunnels . However , the first water deliveries did not reach San Francisco until 1934 , eleven years after the completion of O 'Shaughnessy Dam and twenty years after groundbreaking of the Hetch Hetchy project . O 'Shaughnessy Dam had been designed with adequate foundations and a unique stepped face in order to make possible a future increase in the dam height . This was done in anticipation of rapid growth in the demand for water and hydroelectricity . Indeed , between 1935 and 1938 , the dam was raised by 85 feet ( 26 m ) ; a new spillway and outlet channels were constructed to accommodate the increased height and storage capacity , which helped to increase summer generation at downstream powerhouses . 
 = = The dam and reservoir today = = 
 Completed to its final dimensions in 1938 , O 'Shaughnessy Dam now stands 312 feet ( 95 m ) above the riverbed and 430 feet ( 130 m ) above bedrock . The crest spans 900 feet ( 270 m ) with a 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) wide roadway crossing the top ; the thickness of the dam wall reaches a maximum 308 feet ( 94 m ) at the base . Altogether , the structure contains 662 @,@ 605 cu yd ( 506 @,@ 598 m3 ) of concrete and 700 @,@ 000 pounds ( 320 @,@ 000 kg ) of steel . Aside from normal water flows through the Canyon Tunnel to the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct , water is released from the reservoir through eleven jet @-@ flow gates on the dam face and an unlined side spillway controlled by three 65 ft ( 20 m ) wide steel drum gates . With gates lowered , the spillway has a capacity of 48 @,@ 600 cubic feet per second ( 1 @,@ 380 m3 / s ) . 
 Behind the dam , Hetch Hetchy Reservoir stretches for 8 miles ( 13 km ) along the Tuolumne River , submerging Hetch Hetchy Valley and the lowermost section of the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne . At maximum capacity , the reservoir stores 360 @,@ 400 acre feet ( 444 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 m3 ) , covering 1 @,@ 972 acres ( 798 ha ) . The dam and reservoir receive water from the upper 459 square miles ( 1 @,@ 190 km2 ) of the Tuolumne River watershed , and are supplied with water by Falls Creek , <unk> Creek , and Rancheria Creek in addition to the main stem of the Tuolumne . Hetch Hetchy is accessed by the Evergreen / Hetch Hetchy Road , which runs 14 miles ( 23 km ) from Big Oak Flat along the Tuolumne River and terminates at the crest of the dam . The road is open seasonally as it is not plowed in the winter months . 
 Hetch Hetchy water drives turbines in the Kirkwood and Moccasin Powerhouses located downstream along the Tuolumne River . Kirkwood Powerhouse came online in 1967 with two Pelton units , with a third added in 1987 , bringing the total generating capacity to 124 megawatts ( MW ) . Kirkwood is serviced with a hydraulic head of 1 @,@ 450 feet ( 440 m ) through the Canyon Tunnel , and produces an annual average of 549 million kilowatt hours ( KWh ) . A new powerhouse was built to replace the old Moccasin Powerhouse in 1969 . The new Moccasin Powerhouse , located near Lake Don Pedro lower on the Tuolumne River , has a capacity of 110 MW from two Pelton turbines . Moccasin generates 427 million KWh per year , and is fed by Hetch Hetchy water through the Mountain Tunnel , which provides a maximum head of 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) . 
 Water diverted at O 'Shaughnessy Dam feeds into the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct , which provides 85 percent of the municipal water for 2 @.@ 4 million people in the San Francisco Bay Area . The firm water yield is 265 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 0 @.@ 327 km3 ) per year , or 237 million gallons ( 895 @,@ 000 m3 ) per day . Because of the unique geology of the Hetch Hetchy watershed , which consists of shallow soils underlain by solid granite bedrock , water that flows into the reservoir is exceptionally clear and of very high quality . This quality is further maintained by stringent protection of the watershed ; boating and swimming are prohibited at Hetch Hetchy Reservoir ( although fishing is permitted at the reservoir and in the rivers which feed it ) . As a result , San Francisco tap water is some of the cleanest in the United States , without even the need for filtration , and is said to be of better quality than most bottled water . 
 = = Proposed removal = = 
 O 'Shaughnessy Dam has been controversial since its original construction both for its environmental impact and violations of the Raker Act by the city of San Francisco . Although the Raker Act explicitly stated that power and water from the Hetch Hetchy Project could be used only for public purposes , San Francisco has sold Hetch Hetchy power to Pacific Gas & Electric ( PG & E ) since 1925 . Dam removal advocates have stated that San Francisco 's utilization of Yosemite National Park for water and power is unfair because of the damage to tourism and the local environment caused by the dam and reservoir . By draining the reservoir , removing the dam and restoring the valley to its original state , visitors to the park would once again be able to enjoy the natural beauty of Hetch Hetchy – once compared to that of Yosemite Valley . There are other rivers and reservoirs available for San Francisco to replace the water supply , such as the city 's currently unused share of water in Lake Don Pedro , the biggest reservoir on the Tuolumne River . 
 Opponents of dam removal state that the estimated demolition cost of $ 3 – 10 billion is a poor investment , especially in regards of the resulting loss of renewable hydroelectric power , which would have to be replaced by polluting fossil fuel generation . Although there are several options available to replace San Francisco 's water , none are of the purity currently supplied by Hetch Hetchy . There is also no guarantee that the valley can be successfully restored , as the original valley floor was actually the product of thousands of years of intensive controlled burning and management by the native Paiute and Miwok peoples that once lived in the area . Without this intervention , a forest would grow in the place of the valley 's renowned meadows . Finally , the increased pressure of new tourism could cause its own environmental damage , as has been demonstrated in the crowded Yosemite Valley . 
 Despite the hotly contested status of O 'Shaughnessy Dam in the environmental field , and occasional federal money set aside for studying alternatives to Hetch Hetchy – such as $ 7 million provided by President George W. Bush in 2007 in the National Park Service budget – local support for its removal is relatively low . In 2012 , San Francisco voters struck down Proposition F , which would have ordered the city to study the removal of O 'Shaughnessy Dam and draft a plan to replace Hetch Hetchy water , by a vote of 77 percent against . Proposition F would have allocated $ 8 million to create a feasibility study by 2016 ; new water delivery and filtration systems would have to be in place by 2025 and Hetch Hetchy Reservoir would have to be drained by 2035 . 
 = Argo Tea = 
 Argo Tea is a chain of tea cafes that was founded in the Lincoln Park community area in Chicago , Illinois , in June 2003 . It is now headquartered in Chicago 's Loop community area . It had more than a dozen locations in the Chicago metropolitan area before expanding in 2010 to New York City , where it opened four locations that year and then expanded to St. Louis and Boston . As of October 2011 the chain had 26 locations and distribution in over 3 @,@ 000 grocery stores . In its first decade , it has grown simultaneously with the tea market . Its expansion into grocery stores occurred in 2010 and 2011 . Arsen Avakian is the current chief executive officer . By spring 2013 , it had opened in Beirut with plans to add locations in five Middle East cities by year end . 
 Argo Tea primarily sells a variety of hot and cold tea @-@ based signature drinks . In addition , it offers about three dozen international varieties of loose @-@ leaf tea ( tea brewed from loose tea leaves , as opposed to tea leaves in bagged tea ) , coffee , baked goods , small entrées , and <unk> . The tea menu includes a variety of black , green , white teas , and natural herbal teas , served hot or iced . Argo Tea has formed a special relationship with Whole Foods Market to distribute Argo products . According to the description in Bloomberg Businessweek , Argo 's specialty foods include pastries , sandwiches , salads , and quiches . Argo markets from a lifestyle perspective with awareness of modern design and sustainable environment . It also sells audio CDs . 
 = = History = = 
 Argo set out to be the Starbucks of tea . Argo Tea was launched in 2003 by three partners : Arsen Avakian , Simon Simonian , and Daniel <unk> . Avakian and Simonian are boyhood friends from Armenia . They grew up in Yerevan and emigrated in the 1990s to the United States , where Simonian , a computer scientist , and Avakian , a startup company specialist , teamed up following the dot @-@ com bubble . Avakian first came to the United States as a Fulbright scholar . <unk> is a Frenchman who moved to the U.S. in 1997 . He is a former management consultant . Avakian 's father , Yuri , holds multiple wind and solar technology patents . 
 The original 900 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 84 m2 ) cafe for Argo Tea , which had 24 indoor seats and 20 patio seats in its 2003 configuration , is located at 958 West Armitage Avenue on the corner of Sheffield Avenue in Chicago . The venture , which opened in June 2003 , was the first tea cafe in Lincoln Park . It was across the street from a Starbucks . Argo borrowed its name from the story of Jason and the Argonauts in Greek mythology . The original store was financed by its founders , who were all experienced management consultants , without outside investors . They used their own credit cards as lines of credit . Chicago architect Mark A. Cuellar was hired to design Argo 's early cafe interiors . 
 At first , the company experimented with expansion by distributing boxed dry tea at Whole Foods , but quickly <unk> . Barely six months after opening , Argo was planning expansion in Chicago and beyond . Late in 2004 , Argo signed a lease to make its first expansion beyond its original location ( at Loyola University in the Near North Side community area on Rush Street ) . By the beginning of 2006 , there was a third location ( in the Loop community area on Randolph Street near State ) with a fourth on the way . In March 2006 , Argo expanded to the South Side of Chicago at the University of Chicago Medical Center , which is located in the Hyde Park community area , with a location that is described as a <unk> , a themed kiosk . By 2007 , the company decided to pursue consistency across its locations and began a centralized concentrate brewing process . After five years , the franchise had 10 locations ranging from 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 to 186 m2 ) , all in Chicago . In Chicago , several of the early cafes , including the 11th inside Merchandise Mart and the 13th at O 'Hare International Airport , have been located in close proximity to a Starbucks storefronts with the thought that Starbucks is expanding demand for tea . By February 2009 , the company was still a Chicago metropolitan area business with all 13 of its locations . In July 2011 , Argo became the first outside retail tenant of the Tribune Tower in six years when it leased space . 
 Argo opened its flagship New York City location in January 2010 by signing a 10 @-@ year lease in the Flatiron Building . It promptly followed with a Chelsea neighborhood storefront and then a Columbus Circle store in the spring . It opened a total of four cafes in New York City in 2010 , taking advantage of the late @-@ 2000s recession , which allowed the company to procure prime retail locations such as Union Square , Columbus Circle and the Flatiron District at reasonable rates . The business replaced a Dean & Deluca in the Union Square neighborhood . Among the investors in the New York City expansion were Sam Zell , Glen <unk> and Oxford Capital . In May 2011 , the company added its fifth tea room in New York City . 
 By 2010 , the company eschewed its aspiration to be the Starbucks of tea , " Starbucks is more like Windows PC — it 's old , less healthy and designed for everyone — and we want to be more like Mac : young , healthy , cool and a more unique , innovative brand . " Avakian said the company hopes to build the Apple of tea . At the time , it was opening its 18th store ( 14 in Chicago and 4 in New York ) and had $ 10 million in annual sales , making it the largest chain focused on tea , according to Technomic Inc . 
 In 2011 , the San Francisco Chronicle credited Argo as being the company that caused the 21st century tea shop revolution , while Time ran a story claiming that Argo has gotten America to drink tea . As of 2011 , the United States market had grown to over 3 @,@ 000 tearooms , according to the Tea Association of the USA . According to Beverage Digest , between 2006 and 2009 , coffee consumption declined 2 @.@ 3 percent in the United States , while tea consumption rose 4 @.@ 5 percent . The growth of teas has caused Starbucks to drop the word coffee from its name and build the <unk> brand . Starbucks had a total 2010 revenue of $ 9 billion , while the entire tea industry was $ 7 @.@ 7 billion , including $ 443 million by the top 6 U.S. tea chains . By early October 2011 , Argo claimed 26 locations in four cities ( Chicago , New York , Boston and St. Louis ) and distribution in 3 @,@ 000 grocery stores around the country including Whole Foods , Safeway and Dominick 's . 
 When the lease came up for renewal at the original location on April 30 , 2013 , the company did not extend the deal , but the company would open greenhouse location the following month . By March 2013 , bottle drinks , which they had begun in 2010 were 20 % of the company 's business . By that time Argo Tea had opened a business location in Beirut and had planned to follow that with one in Doha in April 2013 . It also intended to open 2013 Middle East locations in Abu Dhabi , Dubai , Kuwait and Riyadh . By September 2013 , Doha was opened and that month a second Beirut location opened . 
 = = Products = = 
 Tea is the second most consumed beverage in the world , after water . Argo was founded in response to a realization that Americans had so few tea offerings that they generally were unfamiliar with anything but bagged teas . At the time , most tea retailers either supplied bulk tea for home brewing or traditional sit @-@ down service , but Argo focused on premium specialty drinks in paper cups . Meanwhile , a minority of Asian immigrants from countries such as India , Vietnam and China where tea is the national beverage were spreading some of their traditions . Argo endeavored to emphasize the healthy aspects of tea as an alternative to coffee . When it was founded , Argo was part of a field of blossoming tea cafe franchises meeting a burgeoning demand . By 2002 , there were 1 @,@ 100 tearooms with sit @-@ down service . In 2003 , retail sales of tea totaled $ 5 @.@ 1 billion , and in 2005 , as the specialty tea market was growing 20 percent per year , the total retail tea market was expected to surpass $ 10 billion by 2010 . 
 Argo began with 35 teas from around the world , including black tea , green tea and chamomile <unk> as well as exotic teas . From the outset , it included a mix of traditional Asian teas as well as teas from exotic locations . One of the companies staple drinks came from a vacation to Ipanema beach in Rio de Janeiro in which Avakian paid a juice bar operator to close shop to allow him to experiment with flavor combinations during business hours . Several of Argo 's teas are seasonal . One of its signature drinks is the <unk> , a black tea mixed with steamed milk and froth , which the company has trademarked . The menu leverages the new wave of specialty teas that may be served sweetened or spiced and that are blended with milk , sparkling water or fruit juices . In the early years , its favorite offerings were Bubble tea , Pomegranate tea , Matte Latte or Chai tea and milk and Tea <unk> . 
 In its first years , the company sold illy brand coffee . While the company imports its teas from sources around the world , it now brews its teas at a centralized location in downtown Chicago . Argo started out selling loose tea in 1- and 4 @-@ ounce bags or in bulk . Among Argo 's Americanized drink varieties is a version of the national drink of both Argentina and Uruguay , the mate , which Argo serves as a Mate late . By 2010 , the company ventured into the grocery store market ( Whole Foods and Treasure Island ) with bottled specialty teas in Chicago and had plans for its own bottling facility . By the time the company opened its New York locations , it offered fair trade certified coffee . In 2011 , the company expanded its distribution to grocery stores around the country . 
 According to the company 's press release for the opening of its 20th location in 2011 , the menu included " all natural tea @-@ based signature drinks , over 30 varieties of loose leaf teas , fair @-@ trade organic coffee , fresh @-@ baked pastries , specialty foods , and a selection of <unk> and accessories . The signature drink menu features healthy and unique options such Maté <unk> ™ with earthy <unk> , almond and milk , Green Tea Ginger Twist ® with Japanese green tea and ginger root , <unk> ® with cool mint tea and lime juice as well as many others . The food menu features a wide assortment of freshly baked gourmet pastries , French quiches , and a <unk> Foods made with tea @-@ infused ingredients such <unk> Panini , Tea Bites and wholesome Teapot Grains . Argo Tea ’ s ready @-@ to @-@ drink bottled beverages can also be found outside the cafés , in the finest grocery retailers across the country . " Bloomberg Businessweek summarized Argo Tea 's business as follows : " Chicago @-@ based Argo Tea strives to redefine the message of tea as a healthy beverage and lifestyle choice , to create unique , all @-@ natural tea @-@ based beverages and to provide customer experiences that reflect modern designs and a sustainable environment . " The tea ware and accessories include tea pots , high @-@ tech tea <unk> , and wide variety of tea cups . 
 = = Social efforts = = 
 Although there are both proponents and opponents of the health effects of tea , Argo tea is a proponent of the health benefits of tea and advocates for its use in research . Certain varieties of teas when properly prepared produce antioxidants that have been said to assist in preventing cancer and reducing blood pressure and cholesterol levels . In addition black tea , which contains L @-@ theanine , is credited in one study with mobilizing the immune system 's disease @-@ fighting T @-@ cells . Another study also says teas may reduce halitosis . Argo Tea has donated a large amount of white teas , which have high concentrations of antioxidants , to the University of Chicago Hospitals , contributing to cancer research efforts there . This contribution prompted the University of Chicago to invite Argo to open the kiosk inside the hospital lobby . The company also holds tea seminars in conjunction with Northwestern University and the University of Chicago to build awareness of the possible health benefits and research possibilities for tea . 
 Argo tea advocates for sustainability , demonstrates concern and awareness of environmental issues in their business plan and uses charitable donations to promote research as noted above . The company has an environmentally friendly business plan that includes encouraging use of reusable service @-@ ware such as ceramic mugs and plates and <unk> silverware by its dine @-@ in customers . Argo also markets reusable tea tumblers , which enable its customers to obtain discounted pricing on its drinks . The company considers sustainability and environmental consciousness in all phases of its business including supplier , operations , store design and product decisions . 
 = = Corporate information = = 
 Although the company was founded in Lincoln Park , the official business address is at the third location in the Loop ( 16 West Randolph Street Chicago , IL <unk> ) . The company has mostly part @-@ time employees , but offers medical benefits to employees who work 20 hours per week . As of September 2007 the workforce was about 150 people . A year later the estimated workforce was 200 . 
 Despite its wide @-@ ranging menu , as of 2011 , 80 percent of Argo 's $ 15 million annual sales came from tea beverages . 
 In August 2011 , Chicago Alderman Brendan Reilly ceded control of Connors Park in the Gold Coast to Argo tea for development of a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 110 m2 ) store . The area had been neglected by the Chicago Park District and become run down . In exchange for a 15 @-@ year lease , Argo assumes responsibility for maintaining the park . The business opened its location in the park within a greenhouse in late May 2013 . 
 = SMS Habsburg = 
 SMS Habsburg was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in 1899 . The lead ship of the Habsburg class , she was launched on 9 September 1900 . In 1903 and 1904 , Habsburg and her sister ship Árpád conducted training exercises in the Mediterranean Sea . In 1906 and 1907 , Habsburg was transferred to the III Battleship Division . One of her superstructure decks was removed to reduce weight and to modernize the vessel in 1910 . 
 For most of World War I , Habsburg remained in her home port of Pula , in present @-@ day Croatia except for two engagements . In 1914 , she was part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian flotilla sent to protect the escape of the German ships SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau from the British @-@ held Mediterranean ; she advanced as far as Brindisi before being recalled to her home port . Her sole combat engagement occurred in late May 1915 , when she participated in the bombardment of the Italian port city of Ancona . After the war , Habsburg was awarded to the British as a war prize . She was scrapped in 1921 . 
 = = Construction and layout = = 
 Habsburg was the first of three battleships of her class . Her hull was laid down on 13 March 1899 at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste . Following a year and a half of construction , she was launched on 9 September 1900 . After the completion of final fitting @-@ out work , Habsburg was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet on 31 December 1902 . 
 Like all ships of her class , Habsburg was 113 @.@ 11 m ( 371 ft ) long at the waterline and was 114 @.@ 55 m ( 375 ft 10 in ) in overall length . She had a beam of 19 @.@ 8 m ( 65 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 5 m ( 24 ft 6 in ) . The ship displaced 8 @,@ 364 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 232 long tons ) . Habsburg had a crew of 638 officers and enlisted men . 
 Habsburg was powered by 2 @-@ shaft , 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines , which were supplied with steam by 16 Belleville boilers . Habsburg 's power output was rated at 15 @,@ 063 indicated horsepower ( ihp ) , which produced a top speed of 19 @.@ 62 knots ( 36 @.@ 34 km / h ; 22 @.@ 58 mph ) . 
 The ship 's hull was constructed from longitudinal and transverse steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted into place . The hull incorporated a double bottom that ran for 63 percent of the ship 's length . A series of watertight bulkheads also extended from the keel to the gun deck . There were a total of 174 watertight compartments in the ship . Habsburg had a metacentric height of between .82 m ( 2 @.@ 7 ft ) and 1 @.@ 02 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . Bilge keels mounted on either side of the hull reduced rolling . She had a flush main deck that was planked with wood ; the upper decks were covered with linoleum or corticine . 
 Habsburg had three 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) L / 40 guns , two mounted in a twin turret forward and one mounted in a single turret aft of the main superstructure . The C 97 guns were manufactured by Krupp in Germany . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 inch ) SK L / 40 guns in casemates . These guns could fire at 4 – 5 shells per minute . Habsburg was built with face @-@ hardened chrome @-@ nickel steel . The main armored belt was 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) in the central portion of the ship , where the ammunition magazines , machinery spaces , and other critical areas were located . The belt tapered slightly to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) on either end of the central section . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Peacetime = = = 
 Habsburg and her sister , Árpád , took part in their first fleet maneuvers in mid @-@ 1903 . By the summer of 1904 , a third ship , Babenberg , was commissioned and participated in successive fleet drills . During the 1904 training exercises , the three Habsburg @-@ class battleships engaged the three Monarch @-@ class battleships in a simulated war game . The maneuvers also marked the first time the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy had two squadrons of modern battleships . Following these maneuvers , the Habsburg @-@ class ships were formed into the I Battleship Division . With her sisters , Habsburg was also active in the Mediterranean Sea . Habsburg underwent a training cruise with the three Monarch @-@ class battleships in January 1903 . Árpád joined the training cruise in 1904 . With the commissioning of the Erzherzog Karl @-@ class battleships in 1906 and 1907 , the three Habsburg @-@ class ships were transferred to the II Division and the three Monarchs formed the III Division . 
 In 1910 Habsburg was extensively modernized and lightened : one of her superstructure decks removed to reduce weight . In 1911 , her sister ship , Árpád underwent the same renovations . Following these renovations , Habsburg and her sister ships were converted to coastal defense vessels . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In late July and August 1914 , Habsburg served as the flagship of the III Battleship Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy , under the command of Captain Miklós Horthy . The battleship , along with her sister ships and the rest of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , were mobilized to support the flight of SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau from 28 July to 10 August 1914 . The two German battlecruisers were stationed in the Mediterranean Sea and were attempting to break out of the strait of Messina , which was surrounded by British troops and vessels , and make their way to Turkey . After the Germans successfully escaped the strait , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy was recalled . The fleet had advanced as far south as Brindisi in southeastern Italy . 
 Following the flight of SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau , Habsburg was transferred to the IV Division along with her sisters when the first new Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships came into service in 1912 . After Italy entered World War I on the side of France and Great Britain , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bombarded several Italian port cities along the Adriatic coast . Habsburg took part in the bombardment of Ancona on 23 May 1915 . During the attack on the Italian port city , Habsburg bombarded the town 's train station , the St. Stefano military camp and Ancona coastal batteries . The bombardment of Ancona was Habsburg 's only combat operation . 
 Following the bombardment , Habsburg and her sister ships traveled back to their port city of Pula . Due to a shortage of coal , they remained there for the remainder of the war . For the latter half of the war , Habsburg was decommissioned and re @-@ purposed as a harbor defense vessel . Her crew was transferred to the new U @-@ boats and aircraft . In 1918 , she was re @-@ commissioned as a training ship for the Austrian Naval Academy . Following the war , the Habsburg was awarded to Great Britain as a war prize . She was instead sold to Italy and broken up for scrap in 1921 . 
 = Keshi ( demon ) = 
 In Hindu mythology , Keshi ( Sanskrit : <unk> ; <unk> , nominative singular masculine from the root Keśin , literally " long haired " ) is the horse @-@ demon , healed by Krishna , an avatar of the god Vishnu . The demon was dispatched by Krishna 's evil uncle Kamsa , who was destined to die at Krishna 's hands . 
 The tale of the healing of Keshi is told in the Hindu scriptures of Bhagavata Purana , Vishnu Purana and Harivamsa . Krishna is often praised as Keshava - the healer of Keshi - in scriptures . Theories suggested about Keshi 's origins range from his being a demon of childhood diseases to the story 's being inspired by the Greek Herculean labour of slaying the horses of Diomedes . 
 = = Legend = = 
 Keshi 's legend is recounted in the tenth Book of the Bhagavata Purana ( between 500 CE - 1000 CE ) . Kamsa , the evil king of Mathura and the maternal uncle of Krishna , is destined to be killed by Krishna . In an attempt to avoid his death , Kamsa sends a series of demons to Gokula , where Krishna is staying with his foster @-@ parents . After Krishna kills the bull demon <unk> , the divine sage Narada confirms to Kamsa that Krishna is his sister Devaki 's child and that the girl @-@ child that Kamsa had killed , mistaking her for the child of Devaki , was in fact the daughter of Yashoda , Krishna 's foster @-@ mother . Infuriated at hearing this , Kamsa calls the demon Keshi and orders him to kill Krishna and his brother Balarama . 
 Keshi assumes the form of a huge horse , who gallops at the speed of thoughts , wears the earth with his hooves and scatters celestial vehicles and clouds in the sky with his mane . His neighing terrifies the people . Krishna challenges Keshi to a duel , as the horse is creating havoc around Gokula . Keshi roars like a lion and charges towards Krishna , striking him with his hooves . Krishna catches hold of Keshi 's two legs and tosses him to a great distance . Recovering from the fall , the agitated Keshi opens his mouth and attacks Krishna . As soon as Krishna thrusts his left arm into Keshi 's mouth , all of Keshi 's teeth fall . Krishna 's arm expands , and Keshi chokes to death , as sweat flows from his body , his eyes roll and he struggles kicking his feet . As Keshi falls lifeless on the ground , assuming his true demon form , the gods and Narada extol Krishna . Narada in his panegyric thanks Krishna for easily slaying the horse @-@ demon , whose neighing alone was driving the gods to abandon heaven . He further prophesies the great deeds that Krishna will perform later , including the killing of Kamsa . 
 The fourth Book of the Vishnu Purana ( between the 1st century BCE to the 4th century CE ) also tells the story . However , Keshi first appears in the episode when Kamsa calls the host of demons to kill all male children , once he realizes Krishna is born . Chapters 15 and 16 of the fourth Book presents a detailed account of Keshi 's death which parallels the Bhagavata Purana account . The narrative of <unk> 's death , Narada 's disclosure to Kamsa and the subsequent ordering of Keshi is the same . Though the terror by Keshi on earth and sky and Krishna 's challenge is the same , the fight starts directly with Keshi attacking Krishna with his opened mouth . The hand of Krishna choking Keshi at the same time , tearing his body into two halves . The splitting of Keshi 's body is not told in the Bhagavata Purana . Narada 's eulogy and prophesy about Kamsa 's death follows the account , where Narada decreed that Krishna would be called Keshava , the slayer of Keshi . 
 The Harivamsa from the epic Mahabharata also narrates the incident in a similar fashion complete with Narada 's praise identifying Krishna as Vishnu . The Vishnu Purana and the Harivamsa ( 1st - 2nd century BCE ) tell that Keshi is the last agent sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna , after Keshi 's killing , Krishna and Balarama go to Mathura , where Kamsa is killed . However , the Bhagavata Purana describes the killing of the demon <unk> sent by Kamsa , before he leaves for Mathura . 
 The first century CE Buddhist writer <unk> also mentions the killing of Keshi in a passage in his <unk> . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In the Atharvaveda ( 2nd millennium BCE ) , Keshi , the " hairy one " , first appears as being described as a demon who attacks the unborn , though not in relation to Krishna . A line from passage 8 @.@ 6 which describes evils that attack female fetuses reads as : " Let us keep the black asura Keśin , born in the reed clump , snout @-@ mouthed and all other harmful creatures , away from her genitals and her loins " [ IAST original ] . Phyllis <unk> , a scholar on Indian religions , opines that the Keshi is a demon of childhood diseases or miscarriage , like the demoness Putana , who were both killed by the infant Krishna . However , this hypothesis is not unanimous . The tales of Keshi @-@ <unk> ( " The killing of Keshi " ) are well known in the Kushan period ( 60 @-@ 375 CE ) . Metropolitan Museum of Art parallels Krishna killing Keshi to the labour of Greek hero Heracles - slaying the horses of Diomedes , from which episode the former may be inspired . Keshi or <unk> could be the earliest Sanskrit word known in Chinese ; the ( 2nd century BCE ) Huainanzi records treasures given in ransom for King Wen of Zhou to King Zhou of Shang in 1103 BCE , including the mount named <unk> <unk> or Old Chinese * <unk> . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 According to the Malayalam Bhagavata Purana , Krishna got the name Keshava as he slew Keshi . Krishna is referred to as slayer of Keshi twice in the Bhagavata Gita by Arjuna - Keshava ( 1 @.@ 30 ) and Keshi @-@ <unk> ( 18 @.@ 1 ) . In the first chapter ( 1 @.@ 30 ) , addressing Krishna as slayer of Keshi , Arjuna expresses his doubts about war , at the same time , finds Krishna capable of destroying them . Here , Keshi represents false pride and the reference as slayer of Keshi by Arjuna expresses his humility . Keshi as a mad horse who created havoc in Gokula - also represents the wild horse of doubts who run in the mind of a person . In the last chapter ( 18 @.@ 1 ) , Arjuna addresses Krishna as Maha @-@ <unk> ( " mighty @-@ armed " ) paired with the slayer of Keshi epithet , reminding the reader how Krishna killed Keshi with his arms alone . The Vishnu sahasranama ( " The Thousand names of Vishnu " ) calls Krishna as Keshava ( Names 23 , 648 ) and <unk> ( 649 ) - the slayer of Keshi . The fourth century play <unk> also interprets the epithet Keshava as the slayer of Keshi . <unk> is a major bathing ghat along the river Yamuna in Vrindavan , where Krishna is believed to have overpowered Keshi . 
 = Framlingham Castle = 
 Framlingham Castle is a castle in the market town of Framlingham in Suffolk in England . An early motte and bailey or ringwork Norman castle was built on the Framlingham site by 1148 , but this was destroyed by Henry II of England in the aftermath of the revolt of 1173 @-@ 4 . Its replacement , constructed by Roger Bigod , the Earl of Norfolk , was unusual for the time in having no central keep , but instead using a curtain wall with thirteen mural towers to defend the centre of the castle . Despite this , the castle was successfully taken by King John in 1216 after a short siege . By the end of the 13th century , Framlingham had become a luxurious home , surrounded by extensive parkland used for hunting . 
 During the 15th and 16th centuries Framlingham was at the heart of the estates of the powerful Mowbray and Howard families . Two artificial meres were built around the castle , which was expanded in fashionable brick . With a large , wealthy household to maintain , the castle purchased supplies from across England and brought in luxury goods from international markets . Extensive pleasure gardens were built within the castle and older parts redesigned to allow visitors to enjoy the resulting views . By the end of the 16th century , however , the castle fell into disrepair and after the final Howard owner , Theophilus , entered into financial difficulties the castle and the surrounding estates were sold off . 
 Framlingham Castle was given to Pembroke College as a philanthropic gesture in 1636 , after which the internal buildings were taken down to make way for the construction of a poorhouse within the site . The castle was used in this way until 1839 when the facility was closed ; the castle was then used as a drill hall and as a county court . In 1913 , Pembroke College donated Framlingham to the Commissioner of Works . During the Second World War , Framlingham Castle was used by the British military as part of the regional defences against a potential German invasion . Today , Framlingham Castle is owned by English Heritage and run as a tourist attraction . It is protected under UK law as a grade I listed building and a scheduled monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th - 12th centuries = = = 
 The population of Framlingham in Suffolk rose sharply after the Norman invasion of England as the village turned into a small town of at least 600 inhabitants , surrounded by valuable lands in one of the most prosperous parts of the country . The region was owned by the powerful Hugh d 'Avranches , the Earl of Chester , who granted it in turn to Roger Bigod , the Sheriff of Suffolk . A ringwork or motte and bailey castle was first built in either the 11th or early 12th century in the northern half of the Inner Court of the current castle . 
 Although the first documentary reference to a castle at Framlingham occurs in 1148 , the actual date of its construction is uncertain and three possible options have been suggested by academics . The first possibility is that the castle was built by Roger Bigod in either the late 11th century or around 1100 , similar to the founding of Bigod 's caput at nearby Eye . A second possibility is that Roger 's son , Hugh Bigod , built it during the years of the Anarchy in the 1140s on the site of an existing manor house ; the castle would then be similar to the Bigod fortification at Bungay . A third possibility is that there were in fact two castles : the first being built in the late 11th century and then demolished by Hugh Bigod in the 1160s in order to make way for a newer , larger castle . Historian Magnus Alexander hypotheses the castle might have been built on top of a set of pre @-@ existing Anglo @-@ Saxon , high prestige buildings , a practice common elsewhere in East Anglia , possibly echoing the arrangement at Castle Acre ; this would be most likely if the castle was built in the 11th century . 
 By the late 12th century the Bigod family had come to dominate Suffolk , holding the title of the Earl of Norfolk and owning Framlingham and three other major castles at Bungay , Walton and Thetford . The first set of stone buildings , including the first hall , were built within the castle during the 1160s . Tensions persisted throughout the period , however , between the Crown and the Bigods . Hugh Bigod was one of a group of dissenting barons during the Anarchy in the reign of King Stephen , and after coming to power Henry II attempted to re @-@ establish royal influence across the region . As part of this effort , Henry confiscated the four Bigod castles from Hugh in 1157 , but returned both Framlingham and Bungay in 1165 , on payment of a large fine of £ 666 . 
 Hugh then joined the revolt by Henry 's sons in 1173 . The attempt to overthrow Henry was unsuccessful , and in punishment the king ordered several Bigod castles , including Framlingham , to be destroyed . The king 's engineer , <unk> , destroyed the fortifications and filled in the moat at Framlingham between 1174 @-@ 6 at a total cost of £ 16 11s 12d , although he probably shored up , rather than destroyed , the internal stone buildings . 
 Hugh 's son , Roger Bigod , was out of favour with Henry , who initially denied him the family earldom and estates such as Framlingham . Roger finally regained royal favour when Richard I succeeded to the throne in 1189 . Roger then set about building a new castle on the Framlingham site - the work was conducted relatively quickly and the castle was certainly complete by 1213 . The new castle comprised the Inner Court , defended with 13 mural towers ; an adjacent Lower Court with smaller stone walls and towers , and a larger Bailey with timber defences . By this time , a castle @-@ guard system was in place at Framlingham , in which lands were granted to local lords in return for their providing knights or soldiers to guard the castle . 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 The First Barons ' War began in 1215 between King John and a faction of rebel barons opposed to his rule . Roger Bigod became one of the key opponents to John , having argued over John 's requirements for military levies . Royal troops plundered the surrounding lands and John 's army arrived on 12 March , followed by John the next day . With John 's permission , messages were sent on the 14th from the castle to Roger , who , influenced by the fate of Rochester Castle the previous year , agree that the garrison of 26 knights , 20 sergeants , 7 crossbowmen and a priest could surrender without a fight . John 's forces moved on into Essex , and Roger appears to have later regained his castle , and his grandson , another Roger , inherited Framlingham in 1225 . 
 A large park , called the Great Park , was created around the castle ; this park is first noted in 1270 , although it may have been constructed somewhat earlier . The Great Park enclosed 243 hectares ( 600 acres ) stretching 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to the north of the castle , and was characterised by possessing bank @-@ and @-@ ditch boundaries , common elsewhere in England but very unusual in Suffolk . The park had a lodge built in it , which later had a recreational garden built around it . Like other parks of the period , the Great Park was not just used for hunting but was exploited for its wider resources : there are records of charcoal @-@ burning being conducted in the park in 1385 , for example . Four other smaller parks were also located near the castle , extending the potential for hunting across a long east @-@ west belt of <unk> land . 
 In 1270 Roger Bigod , the 5th Earl , inherited the castle and undertook extensive renovations there whilst living in considerable luxury and style . Although still extremely wealthy , the Bigods were now having to borrow increasing sums from first the Jewish community at Bungay and then , after the expulsion of the Jews , Italian merchants ; by the end of the century , Roger was heavily in debt to Edward I as well . As a result , Roger led the baronial opposition to Edward 's request for additional taxes and support for his French wars . Edward responded by seizing Roger 's lands and only releasing them on the condition that Roger granted them to the Crown after his death . Roger agreed and Framlingham Castle passed to the Crown on his death in 1306 . 
 By the end of the 13th century a large prison had been built in the castle ; this was probably constructed in the north @-@ west corner of the Lower Court , overlooked by the Prison Tower . The prisoners kept there in the medieval period included local poachers and , in the 15th century , religious dissidents , including Lollard supporters . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Edward II gave the castle to his half @-@ brother , Thomas of Brotherton , the Earl of Norfolk . Records show that Framlingham was only partially furnished around this time , although it is unclear if this was because it was in limited use , or because fittings and furnishings were moved from castle to castle with the owner as he traveled , or if the castle was simply being refurnished . The castle complex continued to thrive , however , and on Thomas ' death in 1338 the castle passed first to his widow , Mary , and then in 1362 into the Ufford family . William de Ufford , the Earl of Suffolk , held the castle during the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 , with much of the revolt occurring close to Framlingham . From the <unk> , the castle passed first to Margaret Brotherton , the self @-@ styled " Countess @-@ Marshall " , and then to Thomas de Mowbray , the Duke of Norfolk . The <unk> seem to have used Framlingham Castle as their main seat of power for most of the 15th century . 
 With as many as 83 people living in the castle at any one time , the castle played a major role in the surrounding economy during the period . Large amounts of food and drink were purchased to support the household - over twelve months in 1385 @-@ 6 , for example , over £ 1 @,@ 000 was spent , including the purchase of 28 @,@ 567 imperial gallons ( 129 @,@ 870 L ) of ale and 70 @,@ 321 loaves of bread . By the 14th century the castle was purchasing goods from across western Europe , with wine being imported from France , venison from parks as far away as Northamptonshire and spices from the Far East through London @-@ based merchants . The castle purchased some goods , such as salt , through the annual Stourbridge Fair at nearby Cambridge , then one of the biggest economic events in Europe . Some of this expenditure was supported by the demesne manor attached to the castle , which comprised 168 hectares ( 420 acres ) of land and 5 @,@ 000 days of serf labour under feudal law . A vineyard was created at the castle in the late 12th century , and a bakery and a horse mill were built in the castle by the 14th century . Surrounding manors also fed in resources to the castle ; in twelve months between 1275 @-@ 6 , £ 434 was received by the castle from the wider region . 
 Two large lakes , called meres , were formed alongside the castle by damming a local stream . The southern mere , still visible today , had its origins in a smaller , natural lake ; once dammed , it covered 9 @.@ 4 hectares ( 23 acres ) and had an island with a dovecote built on it . The meres were used for fishing as well as for boating , and would have had extensive aesthetic appeal . It is uncertain exactly when the meres were first built . One theory suggests that the meres were built in the early 13th century , although there is no documentary record of them at least until the 1380s . Another theory is that they were formed in the first half of the 14th century , at around the same time as the Lower Court was constructed . A third possibility is that it was the Howard family who introduced the meres in the late 15th century as part of their modernisation of the castle . 
 = = = 15th - 16th centuries = = = 
 In 1476 the castle passed to John Howard , the Duke of Norfolk , who probably began the sequence of improvements to the castle during the Tudor period . Under the Howards the castle was extensively modernised ; fashionable brick was used to improve parts of the castle ; ornamental chimneys were added ; the battlements were reduced in size to exaggerate the apparent height of the walls , and the Howard coat of arms was added to the gatehouse . The Great Chamber was probably built across the Inner Court at this time , linking the Great Hall with the chapel and chambers on the east side of the castle , and by 1524 there were at least 29 different rooms in the castle . The drawbridge outside the gatehouse was replaced with the current permanent bridge between 1524 – 47 ; by this time a half @-@ moon defensive structure had been built in stone to defend it . A pleasure garden had been built in the Lower Court by the 16th century , with several ornamental ponds and terraced walkways - the garden would probably have also had fruit trees , herb gardens and fountains . Another pleasure garden was built in the Bailey , and a second bridge built across the moat to allow access to it directly from the Inner Court . The Prison Tower was redesigned to become a viewing gallery for the new formal gardens below . 
 The Wars of the Roses during the 15th century saw prolonged fighting between the Yorkists and Lancastrians for the control of the English throne . John Howard , a Yorkist supporter , was killed at Bosworth Field in 1485 and in the aftermath his son Thomas , the 2nd Duke , was attainted , forfeiting his and his heirs ' rights to his properties and titles , and placed in the Tower of London . The Lancastrian victor at Bosworth , Henry VII , granted Framlingham Castle to John de Vere , but Thomas finally regained the favour of Henry VIII after fighting at the victory of Flodden in 1513 . Framlingham was returned to Thomas and the Duke spent his retirement there ; he decorated his table at the castle with gold and silver plate that he had seized from the Scots at Flodden . The castle was expensively decorated in a lavish style during this period , including tapestries , velvet and silver chapel fittings and luxury bedlinen . A hundred suits of armour were stored in the castle and over thirty horses kept in the stables . 
 The 3rd Duke of Norfolk , also called Thomas , made far less use of the castle , using first Stoke @-@ by @-@ <unk> and then Kenninghall as his principal residence . Thomas was attainted in 1547 for his part in supporting the claim of Mary to the throne ; Henry VIII died the day before Thomas was due to be executed at the Tower , and his successor , Mary 's half @-@ brother Edward VI , reprieved Thomas but kept him in the Tower , giving Framlingham to Mary . When Mary seized power in 1553 she collected her forces at Framlingham Castle before successfully marching on London . Thomas was released from the Tower by Mary as a reward for his loyalty , but retired to Kenninghall rather than Framlingham . The castle was leased out but when the 4th Duke , another Thomas , was executed for treason by Elizabeth I in 1572 the castle passed back to the Crown . 
 Repairs to the castle appear to have been minimal from the 1540s onwards , and after Mary left Framlingham the castle went into a fast decline . A survey in 1589 noted that the stonework , timber and brickwork all needed urgent maintenance , at a potential cost of £ 100 . The Great Park was <unk> and turned into fields in 1580 . As religious laws against Catholics increased , the castle became used as a prison from 1580 onwards ; by 1600 the castle prison contained 40 prisoners , Roman Catholic priests and recusants . 
 = = = 17th - 21st centuries = = = 
 In 1613 James I returned the castle to Thomas Howard , the Earl of Suffolk , but the castle was now derelict and he chose to live at Audley End House instead . Thomas 's son , Theophilus Howard , fell heavily into debt and sold the castle , the estate and the former Great Park to Sir Robert Hitcham in 1635 for £ 14 @,@ 000 ; as with several other established parks , such as Eye , <unk> and <unk> , the Great Park was broken up turned into separate estates . Hitcham died the following year , leaving the castle and the manor to Pembroke College in Cambridge , with the proviso that the college destroy the internal castle buildings and construct a poorhouse on the site instead , operating under the terms of the recently passed Poor Law . 
 After the collapse of the power of the Howards , the county of Suffolk was controlled by an oligarchy of Protestant gentry by the 17th century and did not play a prominent part in the English Civil War that occurred between 1642 @-@ 6 . Framlingham Castle escaped the slighting that occurred to many other English castles around this time . Hitcham 's bequest had meanwhile become entangled in the law courts and work did not begin on the poorhouse until the late 1650s , by which time the internal buildings of castle were being broken up for the value of their stone ; the chapel had been destroyed in this way by 1657 . 
 The first poorhouse at Framlingham , the Red House , was finally built in the Inner Court and used as a home for poor families ; it proved unsatisfactory and , following the mismanagement of the poorhouse funds , the Red House was closed and used as a public house instead . The maintenance of the meres ceased around this time and much of the area returned to meadow . In 1699 another attempt was made to open a poorhouse on the site , resulting in the destruction of the Great Chamber around 1700 . This poorhouse failed too , and in 1729 a third attempt was made - the Great Hall was pulled down and the current poorhouse built on its site instead . Opposition to the Poor Law grew , and in 1834 the law was changed to reform the system ; the poorhouse on the castle site was closed by 1839 , the inhabitants being moved to the workhouse at Wickham Market . 
 The castle continued to fulfil several other local functions . During the outbreak of plague in 1666 , the castle was used as an isolation ward for infected patients , and during the Napoleonic Wars the castle was used to hold the equipment and stores of the local Framlingham Volunteer regiment . Following the closure of the poorhouse , the castle was then used as a drill hall and as a county court , as well as containing the local parish jail and stocks . 
 In 1913 the Ancient Monuments Consolidation and Amendment Act was passed by Parliament and Pembroke College took the opportunity to donate Framlingham to the Commissioner of Works . The undulating Inner Court was levelled up to its present form as part of the Commissioner 's maintenance works . During the Second World War , Framlingham was an important defensive location for British forces ; at least one concrete pill box was built near to the castle as part of the plans to counter any German invasion , and Nissen huts were erected and a lorry park created in the Bailey . 
 Today , Framlingham Castle is a scheduled monument and a grade I listed building , owned by English Heritage and run as a tourist attraction , incorporating the Lanman Museum of local history . The castle mere is owned by Framlingham College and run by the Suffolk Wildlife Trust . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Framlingham Castle is located on a bluff overlooking the River Ore , and today is made up of three distinct parts , the Inner Court , the Bailey and the Lower Court , surrounded by the remaining mere and farmland . 
 The Bailey lies to the south of the walled Inner Court and was originally topped by a wooden palisade and earthworks , of which only the latter survive . The Bailey would have entered from an eastern gate and contained a range of buildings , probably including a Sergeant 's Chamber , a Knights ' Chamber , the Great Stable , barns and a granary . Modern visitors to the castle enter the complex through the Bailey from the south , which also contains the modern car park for the castle . 
 The Inner Court , or the Castle , lies beyond the Bailey across the 15th @-@ century bridge that replaced the earlier drawbridge on the site . The gate tower that forms the entrance is a relatively simple design from the 12th century : the fashion for much grander gatehouse designs began shortly afterwards . The 2nd Duke of Norfolk , Thomas Howard , however , had it remodelled in the 16th century , adding his coat of arms and additional ornamentation to the walls . The Inner Court is formed around a stone curtain wall of local flint and <unk> stone , 10 @.@ 5 m ( 34 ft ) high and 2 @.@ 3 m ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) thick , protected by thirteen square mural towers with open backs , each around 14 @.@ 3 m ( 47 ft ) high , with corners made of sandstone . A wall @-@ walk runs around the top of the towers and wall . 
 Originally various buildings were built around the curtain wall . Moving clockwise from the entrance to the Inner Court , the shape of the 12th @-@ century castle chapel can still be made out on the curtain wall . Convention at the time required a chapel to point along a north @-@ east / south @-@ east axis ; in order to achieve this , the chapel had to extend out considerably into the bailey , similar to the design at White Castle . The chapel is adjacent to the site of the first stone hall in the castle , built around 1160 ; in the 16th and 17th centuries the chapel tower was probably also used as a cannon emplacement . 
 On the far side of the Inner Court is the poorhouse , built on the site of the 12th @-@ century Great Hall . The poorhouse forms three wings : the 17th century Red House to the south , the 18th @-@ century middle wing , and the northern end which incorporates part of the original Great Hall ; all of the building was subject to 19th @-@ century renovation work . Five carved , medieval stone heads are set into the poorhouse , taken from the older medieval castle buildings . Next to the poorhouse is the Postern Gate , which leads to the Prison Tower . The Prison Tower , also called the Western Tower , is a significant defensive work , redesigned in the 16th century to feature much larger windows . In the middle of the Inner Court is the castle well , 30 m ( 98 ft ) deep . 
 A number of carved brick chimneys dating from the Tudor period can be seen around the Inner Court , each with a unique design ; all but three of these were purely ornamental , however , and historian R. Allen Brown describes them as a " regrettable " addition to the castle from an architectural perspective . Two of the functional Tudor chimneys make use of original mid @-@ 12th century flues ; these two chimneys are circular in design and are the earliest such surviving structures in England . 
 One of the castle meres can still be seen to the west of the castle , although in the 16th century there were two lakes , much larger than today , complete with a wharf . This dramatic use of water to reflect the image of the castle is similar to that used at several other castles of the period , including <unk> and Ravensworth Castle . Water castles such as Framlingham made greater use of water than was necessary for defence and enhanced the appearance of the castle . The view from the Great Hall in the Inner Court would originally have included the gardens of the Lower Court , and these would have then been framed by the mere and the Great Park beyond . The area around the castle today remains a designed and managed landscape ; although the Great Park is now covered by fields , the view still gives a sense of how the castle and landscape was meant to appear to its late medieval owners . 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 The late 12th @-@ century defences at Framlingham Castle have invoked much debate by scholars . One interpretation , put forward for example by historian R. Allen Brown , is that they were relatively advanced for their time and represented a change in contemporary thinking about military defence . Framlingham has no keep , for example - this had been a very popular feature in previous Anglo @-@ Norman castles , but this castle breaks with the tradition , relying on the curtain wall and mural towers instead . The pattern of ground @-@ level arrowslits at Framlingham were similarly innovative for their time , enabling interlocking and flanking fire against attackers . The design of Framlingham 's defences is similar in many ways to Henry II 's innovative work at Dover and Orford . 
 The defensive architecture of the castle also contains various weaknesses . The Inner Court is overlooked by the Bailey , for example ; the north of the Inner Court is largely exposed , while the positioning of arrow @-@ slits in the curtain wall ignores much of the castle . The open @-@ backed mural towers , whilst cheaper to build than closed towers , could not have been easily defended once the wall had been penetrated , and because they projected only a little way from the wall , they provided very little options for enfilading fire against attackers close to the walls . These weaknesses have been used by historians such as Robert Liddiard to argue that the architecture of castles such as Framlingham were influenced by cultural and political requirements as well as purely military intent . 
 Focusing on the cultural and political use of the architecture at Framlingham , historian D. Plowman has put forward a revisionist interpretation of the castle 's architecture in the late medieval period . Plowman suggests that the castle was intended to be entered from the north end of the Lower Court , passing through the ornamental gardens , with travellers then entering through the gate by the Prison Tower - in this interpretation , more of a barbican than a tower - and then up into the Inner Court . This would have provided high status visitors with dramatic views of the castle , reinforcing the political prestige of the owners . Historian Magnus Alexander disputes the practicality of this arrangement , although agrees that the route would have been more practical for hunting parties proceeding to the local parklands . 
 = SS Panaman = 
 SS Panaman was a cargo ship built in 1913 for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company . The ship was sometimes incorrectly referred to as SS Panamanian . During World War I she was known as USAT Panaman in service for the United States Army and USS Panaman ( ID @-@ <unk> ) in service for the United States Navy . Late in her career she was known as SS Marcella for the Italian government . 
 She was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company , and was employed in inter @-@ coastal service via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Panama Canal after it opened . In World War I , USAT Panaman carried cargo and animals to France under charter to the U.S. Army . When transferred to the U.S. Navy in August 1918 , USS Panaman continued in the same duties , but after the Armistice , was converted to a troop transport and returned over 11 @,@ 000 American troops from France . Returned to American @-@ Hawaiian in 1919 , Panaman resumed inter @-@ coastal cargo service . 
 During World War II , Panaman was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and initially sailed between New York and Caribbean ports , but with two trips to African ports mixed in . Beginning in mid 1943 , Panaman sailed from New York or Boston to ports in the United Kingdom . In late 1946 , she was sailing in the Pacific Ocean . In July 1947 , American @-@ Hawaiian sold Panaman to the Italian government . Renamed Marcella at that time , she was scrapped in September 1954 at Baltimore . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 In November 1911 , the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company placed an order with the Maryland Steel Company of Sparrows Point , Maryland , for two new cargo ships — Panaman and Washingtonian . The contract cost of the ships was set at the construction cost plus an 8 % profit for Maryland Steel , but with a maximum cost of $ 640 @,@ 000 each . The construction was financed by Maryland Steel with a credit plan that called for a 5 % down payment in cash with nine monthly installments for the balance . Provisions of the deal allowed that some of the nine installments could be converted into longer @-@ term notes or mortgages . The final cost of Panaman , including financing costs , was $ 70 @.@ 29 per deadweight ton , which came out to just over $ 715 @,@ 000 . 
 Panaman ( Maryland Steel yard no . 128 ) was the first ship built under the contract . The ship was 6 @,@ 535 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 407 feet 7 inches ( 124 @.@ 23 m ) in length ( between perpendiculars ) and 53 feet 8 inches ( 16 @.@ 36 m ) abeam . She had a deadweight tonnage of 10 @,@ 175 LT DWT , and her cargo holds , which had a storage capacity of 492 @,@ 255 cubic feet ( 13 @,@ 939 @.@ 1 m3 ) , were outfitted with a complete refrigeration plant so that she could carry perishable products from the West Coast — like fresh produce from Southern California farms — to the East Coast . Panaman had a single steam engine powered by oil @-@ fired boilers that drove a single screw propeller at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) . 
 = = Early career = = 
 When Panaman began sailing for American @-@ Hawaiian , the company shipped cargo from East Coast ports via the Tehuantepec Route to West Coast ports and Hawaii , and vice versa . Shipments on the Tehuantepec Route would arrive at Mexican ports — Salina Cruz , Oaxaca , for eastbound cargo , and Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , for westbound cargo — and would traverse the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the Tehuantepec National Railway . Eastbound shipments were primarily sugar and pineapple from Hawaii , while westbound cargoes were more general in nature . Panaman sailed in this service on the west side of North America . 
 After the United States occupation of Veracruz on 21 April 1914 ( which found six American @-@ Hawaiian ships in Mexican ports ) , the Huerta @-@ led Mexican government closed the Tehuantepec National Railway to American shipping . This loss of access coupled with the fact that the Panama Canal was not yet open , caused American @-@ Hawaiian to return in late April to its historic route of sailing around South America via the Straits of Magellan . With the opening of the Panama Canal on 15 August , American @-@ Hawaiian ships switched to taking that route . 
 In October 1915 , landslides closed the Panama Canal and all American @-@ Hawaiian ships , including Panaman , returned to the Straits of Magellan route again . Panaman 's exact movements from this time through early 1917 are unclear . She may have been in the half of the American @-@ Hawaiian fleet that was chartered for transatlantic service . She may also have been in the group of American @-@ Hawaiian ships chartered for service to South America , delivering coal , gasoline , and steel in exchange for coffee , nitrates , cocoa , rubber , and manganese ore . 
 = = World War I = = 
 At some point after the United States declared war on Germany , the United States Army chartered Panaman for transporting pack animals to Europe in support of the American Expeditionary Force . Although there is no information about the specific conversion of Panaman , for other ships this typically meant that passenger accommodations had to be ripped out and replaced with ramps and stalls for the horses and mules carried . Details about Panaman 's first two animal transport journeys are not known , but her third trip began 1 April 1918 when she sailed from Newport News , Virginia , with 180 animals for Saint @-@ Nazaire . All 180 animals arrived in good health ; none had died , fallen ill , or been injured during the trip . Further details of Panaman 's Army service are not known . 
 On 12 August , Panaman was transferred to the United States Navy at New York , and was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) the same day . Panaman was loaded with a cargo of general supplies , beef , and a deck @-@ load of trucks and sailed in a convoy from New York on 21 September , arriving at its destination of Saint @-@ Nazaire 6 days later . Back in New York on 7 October , Panaman was outfitted with 821 stalls for horses , and took on a load of horses , general cargo , and 78 officers and men . Sailing in her next convoy on 19 October , she reached Bordeaux on 6 November , five days before the Armistice . After sailing from France on 16 November , she arrived at Newport News eleven days later and underwent repairs . 
 Panaman sailed on 8 December for New York , where the Board of Survey found her fit for conversion to a troop transport and transferred her from the NOTS to the Cruiser and Transport Force . Though sources do not indicate the specific modifications Panaman underwent , typical conversions for other ships included the installation of berths for troops , and adding greatly expanded cooking and toilet facilities to handle the large numbers of men aboard . Similar modifications on Panaman 's sister ship Minnesotan took three months , but it is not known how long Panaman 's refit took . After her conversion , she made six roundtrip voyages to France and brought home 11 @,@ 393 American personnel . USS Panaman was decommissioned on 18 September 1919 , and returned to American @-@ Hawaiian the same day . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Panaman resumed cargo service with American @-@ Hawaiian after her return from World War I service . Though the company had abandoned its original Hawaiian sugar routes by this time , Panaman continued inter @-@ coastal service through the Panama Canal in a relatively uneventful career . Hints at cargos she carried during this time can be gleaned from contemporary news reports from the Los Angeles Times . In April 1923 , for example , the newspaper ran a report provided by the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce that went into great detail listing the contents of the 2 @,@ 651 @,@ 042 @-@ pound ( 1 @,@ 202 @,@ 492 kg ) cargo that Panaman had unloaded . The items included items such as 90 @,@ 372 pounds ( 40 @,@ 992 kg ) of iron conduit pipe , 73 @,@ 486 pounds ( 33 @,@ 333 kg ) of paper towels and toilet tissue , and 40 @,@ 873 pounds ( 18 @,@ 540 kg ) of canned hominy . In June 1926 , the newspaper ran a photograph that showed the loading of a $ 1 @,@ 000 prize bull that was beginning its journey from Los Angeles Harbor to Guatemala City aboard Panaman . 
 In 1940 , Panaman made the news when eleven crewmen mutinied , according to the ship 's captain . The ship was held up in San Diego for 18 hours because the men refused to obey the captain 's orders . When an agreement brokered by Harry Lundeberg of the Sailors ' Union of the Pacific was reached , the men followed orders to get the ship to Los Angeles where the union would attempt to settle the issue . But on arrival in Los Angeles Harbor , the ship was boarded by three FBI agents and two representatives of the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation . After interviewing the captain behind closed doors aboard the ship , the FBI turned the investigation over to the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation , whose two investigators conducted a hearing for the eleven men . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After the United States entered World War II , Panaman was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and frequently sailed in convoys . Though complete records of her sailings are unavailable , partial records indicate some of the ports that Panaman visited during the conflict and some of the cargo . From August 1942 to April 1943 , Panaman sailed primarily between New York and Caribbean ports , calling at Trinidad , Key West , Hampton Roads , and Guantánamo Bay . One exception to this pattern was in November 1942 when Panaman sailed on one roundtrip to Durban , South Africa , returning by way of Bahia . 
 In late April 1943 , Panaman sailed from Hampton Roads to Algiers and back , returning to the former in late June . Beginning in July , Panaman sailed from either Boston or New York to Halifax and Liverpool for some eight round trips between then and October 1944 . Panaman also visited Belfast Lough in March 1944 , Falmouth and Seine Bay in June , and Southampton and Belfast Lough again in July . In October , Panaman sailed from New York to Guantánamo Bay . Sources do not reveal where or in what capacity Panaman spent the remainder of the war . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After the war 's end , American @-@ Hawaiian continued operating Panaman for about two more years . In December 1946 , the Chicago Daily Tribune reported that Panaman was speeding to Manila with two men ill with polio . The news article reported that the ship had one man die in Saigon from the disease two months prior . In July the following year , the company sold the Panaman to the Italian government . The ship operated under her new name of Marcella and remained in Italian hands until she was scrapped on 15 September 1954 at Baltimore . 
 = 2007 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game = 
 The 2007 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game was the 78th midseason exhibition between the all @-@ stars of the American League ( AL ) and the National League ( NL ) , the two leagues comprising Major League Baseball . The game was held on July 10 , 2007 , at AT & T Park , the home of the NL 's San Francisco Giants . It marked the third time that the Giants hosted the All Star Game since moving to San Francisco for the 1958 season . The 1961 and 1984 All Star Games were played at the Giants former home Candlestick Park , and the fourth overall in the Bay Area , with the Giants bay area rivals the Oakland Athletics hosting once back in 1987 , and the second straight held in an NL ballpark . 
 The American League defeated the National League by a score of 5 – 4 . Ichiro Suzuki won the MVP award for the game for hitting the first inside @-@ the @-@ park home run in All @-@ Star history . As per the 2006 Collective Bargaining Agreement , the American League champion ( which eventually came to be the Boston Red Sox ) received home field advantage in the 2007 World Series . The victory was the 10th consecutive ( excluding the 2002 tie ) for the AL , and their 11 @-@ game unbeaten streak is only beaten by the NL 's 11 @-@ game winning streak from 1972 to 1982 in All @-@ Star history . 
 = = Background = = 
 As with each All @-@ Star Game since 1970 , the eight starting position players ( with no designated hitter due to playing in an NL stadium ) of each league were elected by fan balloting . The remaining players were selected by a players ' vote , each league 's team manager , and a second fan balloting to add one more player to each roster . In all , 32 players were selected to each league 's team , not including players who decline to play due to injuries or personal reasons . 
 The Giants were awarded the game on February 9 , 2005 . The game marked the first time since 1962 that one league hosted consecutive All @-@ Star Games , after Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , hosted the game in 2006 . 
 The game was the fifth straight All @-@ Star Game to decide home @-@ field advantage in the World Series . The AL entered the game on a ten @-@ game unbeaten streak ( nine wins , with one tie in 2002 ) . The NL was looking for their first win since the 1996 game in Philadelphia . 
 = = Fan balloting = = 
 = = = Starters = = = 
 Balloting for the 2007 All @-@ Star Game starters ( excluding pitchers ) began on April 27 and continued through June 28 . The top vote @-@ getters at each position and the top three among outfielders , are named the starters for their respective leagues . The results were announced on July 1 . About 18 @.@ 5 million votes were cast by close to twelve million fans . Alex Rodriguez was the leading vote @-@ getter with 3 @,@ 890 @,@ 515 votes , easily outpacing his Yankees teammate Derek Jeter by over 700 @,@ 000 votes . Ken Griffey , Jr. was the top vote @-@ getter in the National League , with 2 @,@ 986 @,@ 818 votes . 
 = = = Final roster spot = = = 
 After the rosters were announced , a second round of fan voting , the Monster All @-@ Star Final Vote , was commenced to determine the occupant of the final roster spot for each team . This round lasted until July 5 . Chris Young and Hideki Okajima were elected to represent the National League and American League , respectively , in the All @-@ Star Game as first time All @-@ Stars . All ten players included in the balloting were pitchers , a first for the event . 
 = = Rosters = = 
 Players in italics have since been inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 ^ a These players did not see action in the game . ^ b Voted onto the roster through the All @-@ Star Final Vote . ^ c Unable to play due to injury . Brandon Webb took his roster spot . ^ d Unable to play due to injury . Roy Oswalt took his roster spot . 
 = = Managers = = 
 National League : Tony La <unk> League : Jim Leyland 
 = = Game = = 
 O Canada was played by members of the San Francisco Symphony . The Star @-@ Spangled Banner was sung by Chris Isaak . Before the game , there was a tribute to former San Francisco Giants slugger Willie Mays . Mays threw the ceremonial first pitch to New York Mets shortstop José Reyes . Paula Cole sang God Bless America during the seventh @-@ inning stretch . The first pitch was thrown by the National League 's starter , Jake Peavy at 8 : 54 EDT The game was completed in 3 hours , 6 minutes under an overcast sky and a gametime temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit . 
 = = = Umpires = = = 
 Umpires for the game were announced on June 14 . Bruce Froemming , the most tenured current umpire in Major League Baseball , was named crew chief for the game . It was also revealed that day that Froemming would retire following the 2007 season . 
 = = = Starting lineups = = = 
 = = = Game summary = = = 
 The National League got things started in the bottom of the first when José Reyes led off with a base hit off American League starter Dan Haren and proceeded to steal second . He scored on an RBI single by Ken Griffey , Jr. to give the NL a 1 – 0 lead . Barry Bonds nearly gave his hometown fans something to cheer for in the bottom of the third when , with Reyes on second , he lofted a high fly ball to left field , but it was snared at the warning track by Magglio Ordóñez . The AL nearly tied the game in the fourth when Alex Rodriguez attempted to score on a two @-@ out single by Iván Rodríguez . However , the throw to home plate by Griffey allowed Russell Martin to tag Rodriguez out at the plate to end the inning . The AL would score one inning later when , after Chris Young issued a leadoff walk to Brian Roberts , Ichiro Suzuki hit a long fly ball off the right field wall . Instead of caroming straight to Griffey , the ball took an unusual bounce off a sign and ricocheted to Griffey 's right . This allowed Ichiro to score on what became the first and only inside @-@ the @-@ park home run in All @-@ Star Game history . The homer gave the AL a 2 – 1 lead and resulted in Ichiro 's MVP win . 
 The lead would be augmented in the sixth when Carl Crawford hit a line drive that just cleared the right field wall for a home run . Though it appeared a fan may have reached over the wall to catch it , NL manager Tony La Russa did not challenge the umpires ' call . The NL got a run back in the bottom of the inning when Carlos Beltrán led off with a triple and scored on a sacrifice fly by Griffey . The AL added some insurance runs in the eighth when Víctor Martínez hit a two @-@ run home run just inside the left field foul pole to give the AL a 5 – 2 lead . 
 The American League 's closers then entered the game , with Jonathan Papelbon pitching a scoreless bottom of the eighth . In the ninth , J. J. Putz tried to earn the save and began by inducing a weak pop @-@ up and striking out Brian McCann . Pinch @-@ hitter Dmitri Young rolled a ground ball deep in the hole to Brian Roberts , but he could not come up with it . Alfonso Soriano followed with a two @-@ run home run to right field to cut the NL 's deficit to one . After Putz walked J. J. Hardy , AL manager Jim Leyland replaced him with Francisco Rodríguez . However , Rodriguez had trouble consistently locating his pitches and walked Derrek Lee on a check @-@ swing 3 – 2 pitch and then Orlando Hudson to load the bases . In a move that drew criticism , La Russa elected not to pinch @-@ hit his last player on the bench , Albert Pujols , and instead let Aaron Rowand hit . Rowand lofted a fly ball to right field that was caught by Alex Ríos to close the game , earning the American League their tenth consecutive victory . 
 = = Home Run Derby = = 
 The State Farm Home Run Derby was held the night before the All @-@ Star Game , July 9 , and broadcast on ESPN . Four players from each league competed to hit as many home runs as they could in each round to advance and eventually win the contest . This year , a five @-@ swing swing @-@ off would be used to break ties occurring in any round . This became necessary when Albert Pujols and Justin Morneau tied for fourth in the first round . The champion of last year 's Derby , Ryan Howard of the Philadelphia Phillies , competed even though he was not named to the NL All @-@ Star roster . 
 In the finals , Vladimir Guerrero of the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim defeated Alex Ríos of the Toronto Blue Jays by a score of 3 – 2 . Guerrero hit 17 home runs in all , second only to Ríos ' 19 . Guerrero also hit the longest blast of the competition , a 503 @-@ foot ( 153 m ) drive to left field that just missed hitting a giant replica glove and baseball set up on the concourse beyond the left field bleachers . 
 AT & T Park is distinguished by having the San Francisco Bay beyond its right field bleachers . The body of water located adjacent to the ballpark is known as McCovey Cove , named for legendary Giants slugger Willie McCovey . McCovey Cove is known for having many fans sitting in the water in kayaks and boats hoping to retrieve a long home run ball hit there . Though dozens of fans waited in the cove during the Derby , no home runs were actually hit into the water , either on the fly or off the promenade next to the right field seats , though , one foul ball hit by Prince Fielder did reach the water . This was largely due to the three left @-@ handed competitors all exiting in the first round , as well as wind currents blowing toward left field . Prior to the All @-@ Star break , a total of 58 home runs were hit into the cove on the fly during the park 's history . 
 Gold balls were utilized whenever any player had one out remaining during his round . Any home runs hit with the balls meant Major League Baseball and State Farm would pledge to donate money to the Boys & Girls Clubs of America . Due to the change in sponsors from Century 21 to State Farm , each ball 's value was reduced to US $ 17 @,@ 000 to reflect the 17 @,@ 000 State Farm agents in the United States and Canada . In all , twelve gold ball home runs were hit , which , along with a $ 50 @,@ 000 " bonus " constituted $ 254 @,@ 000 raised for charity . 
 ^ a Recorded only seven of ten outs before hitting winning home run . ^ b Advanced after defeating Morneau 2 – 1 in a swing @-@ off . 
 = = Futures Game = = 
 The 2007 XM All @-@ Star Futures Game took place on July 8 , showcasing the top minor league prospects from all thirty teams ' farm systems . The contest is seven innings regardless of the score with pitchers limited to no more than one inning of work . The World team defeated the United States by a score of 7 – 2 . Chin @-@ Lung Hu of the Los Angeles Dodgers organization won the Larry Doby MVP award after driving in two runs on a single and double , plus a stolen base and a run . 
 = Article 14 of the Constitution of Singapore = 
 Article 14 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore , specifically Article 14 ( 1 ) , guarantees to Singapore citizens the rights to freedom of speech and expression , peaceful assembly without arms , and association . However , the enjoyment of these rights may be restricted by laws imposed by the Parliament of Singapore on the grounds stated in Article 14 ( 2 ) of the Constitution . 
 There are two types of grounds . For the first type , it must be shown that restricting the rights is " necessary or expedient in the interest " of the grounds . The grounds are the security of Singapore and public order ( applicable to all three rights protected by Article 14 ( 1 ) ) , morality ( freedom of speech and freedom of association ) , and friendly relations with other countries ( freedom of speech only ) . In a 2005 judgment , the High Court expressed the view that the phrase necessary or expedient confers upon Parliament " an extremely wide discretionary power and remit that permits a multifarious and multifaceted approach towards achieving any of the purposes specified in Art 14 ( 2 ) of the Constitution " . It is unnecessary for the courts to determine whether a legislative restriction of a right is reasonable . All that is required is a nexus between the objective underlying the restrictive law and one of the grounds specified in Article 14 ( 2 ) that Parliament is entitled to restrict the right on . 
 The right to free speech is limited on the ground of the security of Singapore by the Official Secrets Act ( Cap . 213 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) , and on the ground of public order by the Broadcasting Act ( Cap . 28 , 2003 Rev. Ed . ) and Newspaper and Printing Presses Act ( Cap . 206 , 2002 Rev. Ed . ) . Public order also justifies restrictions on both free speech and assembly imposed by the Sedition Act ( Cap . 290 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) , Public Entertainments and Meetings Act ( Cap . 257 , 2001 Rev. Ed . ) and Public Order Act ( Cap . <unk> , 2012 Rev. Ed . ) ; and restrictions on the right to freedom of association imposed by the Societies Act ( Cap . 311 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) . Freedom of speech has also been limited on the basis of morality by the Films Act ( Cap . 107 , 1998 Rev. Ed . ) , which establishes film censorship and classification regimes ; and the Undesirable Publications Act ( Cap . 338 , 1998 Rev. Ed . ) , under which obscene or otherwise objectionable publications may be banned . 
 No necessity or expedience requirement applies to the second type of grounds , which appear in Articles 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) ( restrictions " designed to protect the privileges of Parliament or to provide against contempt of court , defamation or incitement to any offence " ) and 14 ( 3 ) ( laws relating to labour or education ) . At present , it appears that Parliament may restrict Article 14 ( 1 ) rights on these grounds simply by enacting legislation , and that the courts are not entitled to assess if the restrictions are appropriate . The privileges of Parliament are set out in the Parliament ( Privileges , Immunities and Powers ) Act ( Cap . 217 , 2000 Rev. Ed . ) , and the Singapore courts have held that the common law offence of scandalizing the court ( a form of contempt of court ) does not violate Article 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) . The courts have also determined that the traditional common law rules of the tort of defamation strike a proper balance between free speech and the protection of reputation , and have declined to apply a public figure doctrine or responsible journalism as additional defences to the tort . 
 = = Text of Article 14 = = 
 Article 14 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore was designed to protect the rights to freedom of speech and expression , peaceful assembly without arms , and association . It is subject to Article 14 ( 2 ) which qualifies these rights . Judicial and statutory limits have been read into the Article , a process which is deemed necessary because the rights to free speech , assembly and association do not exist in a vacuum but jostle with competing interests and counter @-@ values . As was said in Chee Siok Chin v. Ministry of Home Affairs ( 2005 ) , " [ f ] <unk> of action invariably ends where conflicting rights and / or interests collide " . 
 The text of Article 14 , which is entitled " Freedom of speech , assembly and association " , is as follows : 
 14 . — ( 1 ) Subject to clauses ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) — 
 ( a ) every citizen of Singapore has the right to freedom of speech and expression ; 
 ( b ) all citizens of Singapore have the right to assemble peaceably and without arms ; and 
 ( c ) all citizens of Singapore have the right to form associations . 
 ( 2 ) Parliament may by law impose — 
 ( a ) on the rights conferred by clause ( 1 ) ( a ) , such restrictions as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of Singapore or any part thereof , friendly relations with other countries , public order or morality and restrictions designed to protect the privileges of Parliament or to provide against contempt of court , defamation or incitement to any offence ; 
 ( b ) on the right conferred by clause ( 1 ) ( b ) , such restrictions as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of Singapore or any part thereof or public order ; and 
 ( c ) on the right conferred by clause ( 1 ) ( c ) , such restrictions as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of Singapore or any part thereof , public order or morality . 
 ( 3 ) Restrictions on the right to form associations conferred by clause ( 1 ) ( c ) may also be imposed by any law relating to labour or education . 
 Articles 14 ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) are in pari materia with Articles 10 ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) of the Constitution of Malaysia , from which they were adopted following Singapore 's independence from Malaysia in 1965 . Articles 14 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are also somewhat similar to Articles 19 ( 1 ) to ( 4 ) of the Constitution of India . 
 There is no constitutional right to bear arms in Singapore , as Article 14 ( 1 ) ( b ) provides Singapore citizens with " the right to assemble peaceably and without arms " . Under the Arms and Explosives Act , no person may possess , import , export , manufacture or deal in any arms or explosives without a licence . It may be that the words and without arms were included in Article 14 ( 1 ) ( b ) to ensure that arguments based on the clause in the English Bill of Rights 1689 stating that " the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Conditions and as allowed by Law " , which inspired the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution ( " A well regulated Militia , being necessary to the security of a free State , the right of the people to keep and bear Arms , shall not be infringed . " ) , cannot be raised in Singapore . 
 The freedoms of speech , assembly and association guaranteed by the Constitution are enjoyed only by Singapore citizens . In Review Publishing Co . Ltd. v. Lee Hsien Loong ( 2009 ) , it was held that the appellant newspaper company did not have the requisite locus standi to rely on the constitutional right of free speech and expression as it was not a Singapore citizen , and Article 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Constitution expressly provides that only Singapore citizens are entitled to the right . 
 = = Restrictions on the rights = = 
 The rights guaranteed to the citizens of Singapore by Article 14 ( 1 ) are subject to restrictions set out in subsection ( 2 ) of the same Article . In Chee Siok Chin , Justice V.K. Rajah elucidated the justification for these qualifications : 
 The right of freedom of expression should never be exercised on the basis that opinions are expressed in hermetically sealed vacuums where only the rights of those who ardently advocate their views matter . That is entirely inappropriate . Freedom of expression when left unchecked may reach a point where protest , criticism and expression culminate in nuisance or something even more serious . The law inevitably has to intervene then . 
 In 1993 in a statement delivered at the World Conference on Human Rights , the Minister for Foreign Affairs Wong Kan Seng took the position that " order and stability are essential for development " as economic growth requires a stable legal environment protective of contractual and property rights . Excessive focus on civil @-@ political liberties during the early stages of national development would impair this . However , the Government appears to have loosened restrictions on political liberties like free speech over time to manage demands for a more participatory political culture . In fact , citizens were urged by Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong not to be " passive bystanders in their own fate " but to debate issues " with reason , passion and conviction " . Wrestling with " honest differences " was to be preferred over being " an apathetic society with no view " . 
 Parliament may impose restrictions on the rights guaranteed by Article 14 ( 1 ) on two types of grounds . For the first type , it must be shown that restricting the rights is " necessary or expedient in the interest " of the grounds . No such requirement applies to the second type of grounds , which appear in Articles 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) and 14 ( 3 ) . At present , it appears that Parliament may restrict Article 14 ( 1 ) rights on these grounds simply by enacting legislation , and that the courts are not entitled to assess if the restrictions are appropriate . 
 = = = Meaning of Parliament may by law impose = = = 
 Article 14 ( 2 ) of the Constitution states that " Parliament may by law impose " restrictions on the rights referred to in Article 14 ( 1 ) . This is arguably in line with Singapore 's adoption of the Westminster system of government that rests upon parliamentary supremacy , the rule of law and common law principles . The terms law and written law are defined in Article 2 ( 1 ) of the Constitution as follows : 
 In this Constitution , unless it is otherwise provided or the context otherwise requires — 
 " law " includes written law and any legislation of the United Kingdom or other enactment or instrument whatsoever which is in operation in Singapore and the common law in so far as it is in operation in Singapore and any custom or usage having the force of law in Singapore ; ... 
 " written law " means this Constitution and all Acts and Ordinances and subsidiary legislation for the time being in force in Singapore . 
 One reading of Article 14 ( 2 ) is that in order to restrict the rights to freedom of speech , assembly and association , Parliament must impose the restrictions by passing written laws , that is , Acts of Parliament , since it exercises the legislative power of Singapore by passing bills that are assented to by the President . However , in Jeyaretnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew ( 1990 ) , a case involving defamation law , the Court of Appeal took a much broader approach . The Court noted that according to Article 2 ( 1 ) , law in Article 14 ( 2 ) includes the common law in so far as it is in operation in Singapore . In May 1963 , the Parliament of Malaysia had enacted the Malaysia Act 1963 , which extended the Defamation Act 1957 to Singapore , then a state in the Federation of Malaysia . Since the Act , now the Defamation Act ( Cap . 75 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) , was premised on common law rules of the tort of defamation , the Court held that the Legislature had " clearly intended that the common law relating to defamation , as modified by the Act , should continue to apply in Singapore " . Thus , it is " manifestly beyond argument that Art 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) is subject to the common law of defamation as modified by the Act " . 
 It has been said that this argument " suffers from two fatal flaws " . There is no evidence that the constitutionality of the existing rules of defamation was considered by either the Malaysian or Singapore Parliaments . More significantly , even if the Governments of Malaysia and Singapore had believed these rules to be constitutional , this should not have been treated by the Court of Appeal as decisive as it is the courts ' duty to independently determine whether the assumption is justified . Otherwise , a similar argument might be extended to all legislation passed by Parliament , and " [ i ] t is not difficult to see that this would spell the end of constitutional law itself " . 
 = = = Restrictions premised on necessity or expediency = = = 
 Parliament may restrict the rights to free speech , assembly and association on the grounds set out in the table below if it is " necessary or expedient in the interest " of them : 
 In Chee Siok Chin , the High Court interpreted the phrase necessary or expedient as conferring upon Parliament " an extremely wide discretionary power and remit that permits a multifarious and multifaceted approach towards achieving any of the purposes specified in Art 14 ( 2 ) of the Constitution " . The Court emphasized the fact that , unlike Article 19 ( 3 ) of the Constitution of India which provides that the right to fetter the freedom of speech and assembly is subject to the touchstone of reasonableness , Singapore 's Article 14 ( 2 ) does not contain the word reasonable . However , despite the broad power that Article 19 ( 3 ) accords to the Indian courts , they have been " most reluctant " to invalidate legislation purportedly infringing the rights to free speech or assembly . There exists a strong presumption of legislative constitutionality , as the Supreme Court of India has expressed a need for " judicial self @-@ restraint and extreme caution " when determining whether legislation unreasonably restricts a constitutional right . It has been noted that the Indian courts have thus been used to exemplify how much more deference Singapore courts should give to the Government , and that the Article 14 ( 2 ) derogation clause was said to confer upon Parliament a great amount of discretionary power . 
 The High Court also rejected the use of a proportionality analysis when determining the extent of Parliament 's powers to impose restrictions on individual rights . The analysis enables the judiciary to assess if an interference with rights is proportionate to a legitimate and important aim of the legislation in question . A court will inquire into whether relevant and sufficient reasons justify the statutory interference , and may substitute its own judgment for that of Parliament . The High Court concluded : " Needless to say , the notion of proportionality has never been part of the common law in relation to the judicial review of the exercise of a legislative and / or an administrative power or discretion . Nor has it ever been part of Singapore law . " 
 Bearing in mind these restraints , the court 's only task is to ascertain whether an impugned law is within the purview of any of the permissible restrictions . Hence , all that needs to be established is a nexus between the object of the law in question and one of the permissible subjects stipulated in Article 14 ( 2 ) . In doing so , the Government must merely satisfy the court that there is a factual basis on which Parliament has considered it " necessary or expedient " to restrict one 's individual right to freedom of speech , assembly or association . 
 When determining whether legislative restrictions are " in the interest of " the relevant purposes specified in Article 14 ( 2 ) , the courts may examine the impugned statute , relevant parliamentary material and contemporary speeches and documents , and will adopt a " generous and not a pedantic interpretation " . Moreover , the term in the interest of , when contrasted with the maintenance of , grants " a much wider legislative remit that allows Parliament to take a prophylactic approach " and includes " laws that are not purely designed or crafted for the immediate or direct maintenance " of the Article 14 ( 2 ) grounds . 
 = = = = Security of Singapore ; friendly relations with other countries = = = = 
 Parliament may restrict the rights to freedom of speech , assembly or association if it is necessary or expedient in the interests of the security of Singapore or any part thereof . The courts have taken a broad approach to this exception , and have shown a considerable amount of deference to the Government . For instance , in Public Prosecutor v. Phua Keng Tong ( 1986 ) , a case involving the Official Secrets Act , the High Court held that security in Article 14 ( 2 ) does not merely mean protection from danger but includes the " protection of information which the Government considers vital or essential for its administration " . However , not everything that the Government regards as an official secret will be necessarily be deemed to be so by the court , especially if the information is " innocuous in nature " . The burden of proving that official information is secret lies on the Prosecution . 
 Freedom of speech and expression may also be restricted in the interest of friendly relations with other countries . This ground of restriction has not yet been considered by local courts , but might have justified the withdrawal by the Board of Film Censors ( BFC ) of a certificate issued for the film Zoolander ( 2001 ) with effect from 8 February 2002 . The film , a comedy about a male model played by Ben Stiller who is brainwashed into attempting to assassinate the Prime Minister of Malaysia , had earlier been condemned by the Malaysian Film Censorship Board as " definitely unsuitable " , though it did not impose a ban as it expected film distributors to exercise discretion . The BFC stated only that the film had been banned " in view of controversial elements gathered from feedback " . The ban was lifted at the beginning of 2006 , which enabled the film to be released on DVD . 
 = = = = Public order = = = = 
 Article 14 ( 2 ) also empowers Parliament to impose restrictions on the rights guaranteed by all three limbs of Article 14 ( 1 ) on the ground of public order . The term public order has been given an expansive interpretation that highlights the importance which the Singapore Government places upon social stability . In Chee Siok Chin , which dealt with the constitutionality of sections 13A and <unk> of the Miscellaneous Offences ( Public Order and Nuisance ) Act the High Court approved the following quotation from V.N. Shukla 's Constitution of India ( 9th ed . , 1994 ) : 
 The expression ' public order ' is synonymous with public peace , safety , and tranquility . It signifies absence of disorder involving breaches of local significance in contradistinction to national upheavals such as revolution , civil strife or war , affecting the security of the State . To illustrate , the State may , in the interests of public order , prohibit and punish the causing of loud and raucous noise in streets and public places by means of sound amplifying instruments ; regulate the hours and place of public discussions and the use of public streets for the purpose of exercising freedom ; provide for expulsion of hecklers from meetings and assemblies ; punish utterances tending to incite breach of the peace or riot and use of threatening , abusive or insulting words or behaviour in any public place or at any public meeting with intent to cause a breach of the peace or whereby breach of the peace is likely to be caused , and all such acts as would endanger public safety . 
 Such an interpretation is consistent with earlier cases . In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Public Prosecutor ( 1994 ) , Chief Justice Yong Pung How considered the term in relation to the right to freedom of religion embodied in Article 15 ( 4 ) of the Constitution and stated : 
 I am of the view that religious beliefs ought to have proper protection , but actions undertaken or flowing from such beliefs must conform with the general law relating to public order and social protection . The right of freedom of religion must be reconciled with " the right of the State to employ the sovereign power to ensure peace , security and orderly living without which constitutional guarantee of civil liberty would be a mockery " ( Commissioner , HRE v LT <unk> AIR 1954 SC 282 ) . The sovereignty , integrity and unity of Singapore are undoubtedly the paramount mandate of the Constitution and anything , including religious beliefs and practices , which tend to run counter to these objectives must be restrained . 
 In Chee Siok Chin it was further clarified that " the legislative power to circumscribe the rights conferred by Art 14 of the Constitution is , inter alia , delineated by what is ' in the interest of public order ' and not confined to ' the maintenance of public order ' . This is a much wider legislative remit that allows Parliament to take a prophylactic approach in the maintenance of public order . This necessarily will include laws that are not purely designed or crafted for the immediate or direct maintenance of public order ... " . 
 = = = = = Restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly = = = = = 
 The Government has power to limit the circulation of local and foreign media in Singapore under the Broadcasting Act and the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act ( " NPPA " ) . These Acts can be considered as imposing restrictions on free speech based on public order . For instance , the Broadcasting ( Class Licence ) Notification , made under section 9 of the Broadcasting Act , makes it mandatory for an Internet content provider to register with the Media Development Authority ( MDA ) if it is , or if the Authority thinks that it is , an individual providing any programme about or a body of persons engaged in the " propagation , promotion or discussion of political or religious issues relating to Singapore , on the World Wide Web through the Internet " . The MDA can fine a licensee , or suspend or cancel its licence , if it has breached the terms of its licence , any relevant code of practice issued by the Authority , any provisions of the Broadcasting Act , or any direction issued by the Authority or the Minister for Information , Communications and the Arts . In addition , it is an offence to provide a broadcasting service without a licence , and a convicted person is liable to a fine of up to S $ 200 @,@ 000 , jail of up to three years , or both . If the offence continues after conviction , a further fine of up to $ 10 @,@ 000 per day may be imposed . 
 The Minister may declare that any foreign broadcasting service which is rebroadcast in Singapore has been " engaging in the domestic politics of Singapore " . <unk> such a " declared foreign broadcasting service " is prohibited without the Minister 's approval , which can be refused , revoked without reasons , or granted on conditions , which may include restrictions on the number of people permitted to receive the service and suspensions of the service for certain periods . Failing to comply with the above rules is a crime punishable by a fine of up to $ 100 @,@ 000 . Similar provisions exist in the NPPA to enable the circulation of foreign newspapers in Singapore to be restricted . In February 1987 , the Asian Wall Street Journal was declared to have engaged in domestic politics and its circulation was limited to 400 copies . The newspaper 's publisher , Dow Jones Publishing Co . ( Asia ) Inc . , applied unsuccessfully to the High Court for certiorari to quash the Minister 's orders . On appeal to the Court of Appeal , Dow Jones argued that the Minister had acted irrationally and misinterpreted scope of his powers under the NPPA by not considering the right to free speech protected by Article 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) . The Court dismissed the argument on the ground that Dow Jones could not rely on the Article as it only applied to Singapore citizens . Furthermore , even if Dow Jones could raise the constitutionality of the relevant provisions of the NPPA on the basis that Singapore citizens were indirectly affected by it , it was not evident that the right to free speech included the right to receive information . In any case , even if the latter argument was accepted , it might be said that the right of Singapore citizens to receive information by reading the Asian Wall Street Journal had not been impaired since 400 copies of it were still in circulation . The Court interpreted the term domestic politics broadly , holding that in Singapore 's context it included : 
 ... the political system of Singapore and the political ideology underpinning it , the public institutions that are a manifestation of the system and the policies of the government of the day that give life to the political system . In other words , the domestic politics of Singapore relate to the multitude of issues concerning how Singapore should be governed in the interest and for the welfare of its people . 
 In addition to empowering the Minister to limit the circulation of foreign newspapers as described above , the NPPA generally imposes curbs on the foreign ownership of newspaper companies , and requires a permit to be obtained for the publication , sale and distribution of newspapers . In a September 2011 statement , the Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts justified the NPPA 's existence , stating : " The various safeguards provided for in the NPPA help to ensure that the media operating in Singapore play a responsible role and that publishers are accountable for the content they publish . The safeguards also prevent local newspapers from being manipulated by foreign interests which can have a divisive effect on social cohesion . These considerations are still valid today . Journalistic freedom to report responsibly has not been compromised . " 
 The Sedition Act , Public Entertainments and Meetings Act , and Public Order Act 2009 are statutes which arguably impose restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression , as well as the freedom of assembly , in the interests of public order . The Sedition Act has been used to restrict the propagation of opinions that have a seditious tendency , which includes a tendency to promote feelings of ill @-@ will and hostility between different races or classes of Singapore 's population . In Public Prosecutor v. Koh Song Huat Benjamin ( 2005 ) , the accused was convicted under the Act for posting invective and pejorative anti @-@ Muslim remarks on a blog and a forum on the Internet ; and in Public Prosecutor v. Ong Kian Cheong and another ( 2009 ) , a married couple were similarly convicted for distributing religious tracts that were considered seditious and objectionable to Muslims . The Public Entertainments and Meetings Act renders it an offence to provide public entertainment and hold meetings without a licence , and its constitutionality has been upheld before the courts in cases concerning political activities organized by opposition parties . 
 = = = = = Restrictions on the freedom of association = = = = = 
 The right to freedom of association guaranteed by Article 14 ( 1 ) ( c ) is curtailed on public order grounds by the Societies Act . The Act requires all clubs , companies , partnerships and associations of ten or more persons to be registered with the Registrar of Societies unless they are already lawfully registered under other statutes . The Registrar may refuse to register certain specified societies if satisfied that , among other things , they are likely to be used " for purposes prejudicial to public peace , welfare or good order in Singapore " ; it would be contrary to the national interest ; or , if the society is a political association , its rules do not require all its members to be Singapore citizens or it is affiliated with some foreign organization that the Registrar considers contrary to the national interest . The list of specified societies includes the following : 
 A society representing , promoting any cause or interest of , or discussing an issue relating to any clan , ethnic group , nationality or religion , or a class of persons defined by reference to their gender or sexual orientation . 
 A political association . 
 A society representing people who advocate , promote or discuss any issue relating to any civil or political right , including animal rights , environmental rights and human rights . 
 A society discussing any matter relating to how Singapore society is governed . 
 Any society that is not registered is deemed to be an unlawful society , and , as regards such a society , being involved in its management , being a member of it , and attending its meetings , are all offences . 
 The Minister for Home Affairs also has power to order that a registered society be dissolved if it appears to him or her that , among other things , it is being used for unlawful purposes or for purposes " prejudicial to public peace , welfare or good order in Singapore " . Once an order has been made , the society becomes an unlawful society . On 14 January 1972 , the Singapore Congregation of Jehovah 's Witnesses was dissolved , the Minister stating that the existence of the society was prejudicial to public welfare and good order because its members refused to do National Service , which is generally compulsory for male citizens and second @-@ generation permanent residents . An attempt in Chan Hiang Leng Colin to challenge the ban on the grounds of freedom of religion protected by Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Constitution proved unsuccessful . 
 = = = = Morality = = = = 
 Parliament may , under Articles 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) and 14 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the Constitution , rely on the ground of morality to impose restrictions on two of the constitutional freedoms embodied in Article 14 : the right to freedom of speech and expression , and the right to freedom of association . 
 There are currently no Singaporean cases which have specifically discussed the meaning of morality . However , legislation such as the Films Act , which establishes film censorship and classification regimes ; and the Undesirable Publications Act , under which obscene or otherwise objectionable publications may be banned , can be regarded as restrictions on free expression pursuant to this ground . In <unk> Ramesh v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) , where the issue was the sentence that should be imposed on a person convicted of distributing uncertified films contrary to the Films Act , the High Court held that " the control of film distribution under the Films Act was for the purpose of maintaining public order and morality " and the accused had not undermined public morality since the films he had been distributing were not obscene . 
 With regard to the issue of censorship , in 2003 the Censorship Review Committee said that " the responsibility to guide and control will have to be increasingly borne by the individual , the public , particularly parents , and the industry . While the regulator may define and regulate sensitive areas like race and religion , in the areas of morality , the responsibility will have to be devolved to the public and citizen advisory committees . " In response , the Ministry of Information , Communication and the Arts ( MICA ) stated that the Government " must continue to remain mindful of the concerns and values of the majority " . 
 The meaning of morality is therefore dependent on the views of the majority of Singapore citizens , as expressed through public channels and citizen advisory committees . Censorship has therefore been applied to obscene content that " erodes moral values through pornography , deviant sexual practices , sexual violence , child pornography , bestiality , etc . " Public morality is not a static idea , but one that evolves with societal norms and values . For example , the MICA has endorsed a " flexible and contextual approach for homosexual content " , and has liberalized its censorship of issues such as violence , sexual content and nudity , and coarse language in media . 
 = = = Restrictions not premised on necessity or expediency = = = 
 Unique to Article 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) is an addendum stating that the right to freedom of speech and expression may be curtailed by restrictions designed to protect the privileges of Parliament , or to provide against contempt of court , defamation or incitement to any offence . The Constitution does not require Parliament to show that is necessary or expedient to restrict free speech in the interest of these grounds . 
 = = = = Protection of the privileges of Parliament = = = = 
 Article 63 of the Constitution provides for the Legislature to " determine and regulate the privileges , immunities or powers of Parliament " by law , and it has done so by enacting the Parliament ( Privileges , Immunities and Powers ) Act . 
 Under the Act , it is a contempt of Parliament to perform certain acts , for instance , to insult the Speaker or any Member of Parliament ( MP ) coming to or going from Parliament on account of his or her conduct in Parliament or of anything done or said by him or her in Parliament ; or to publish any statement , whether in writing or otherwise , which falsely or scandalously defames , or which reflects on the character of , the Speaker or any MP touching on his or her conduct in Parliament or anything done or said by him or her in Parliament . It is presumably not open to a person charged with one of these offences to argue that it violates the Article 14 right to freedom of speech and expression . However , there is not yet any case law addressing this provision , and thus little guidance as to how the courts are to interpret the restriction . 
 = = = = Contempt of court = = = = 
 = = = = = Constitutionality of the offence of scandalizing the court = = = = = 
 Article 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Constitution provides that Parliament may restrict the right to freedom of speech and expression to provide against contempt of court . One of the more prominent uses of the court 's contempt power has been for the Attorney @-@ General to charge persons with the common law offence of scandalizing the court . 
 The High Court case of Attorney @-@ General v. Wain ( 1991 ) established that by enacting section 8 ( 1 ) of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act ( Cap . 322 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) ( now section 7 ( 1 ) of Cap . 322 , 2007 Rev. Ed . ) ( " SCJA " ) , which states that " [ t ] he High Court and the Court of Appeal shall have power to punish for contempt of court " , Parliament had conferred on these courts the power to act against persons that have scandalized the court . Furthermore , Article 162 could not be relied upon to require that the offence be read down to conform with the right to freedom of speech and expression . Article 162 states : 
 Subject to this Article , all existing laws shall continue in force on and after the commencement of this Constitution and all laws which have not been brought into force by the date of the commencement of this Constitution may , subject as aforesaid , be brought into force on or after its commencement , but all such laws shall , subject to this Article , be construed as from the commencement of this Constitution with such modifications , adaptations , qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution . 
 The Court reasoned that Article 162 had no application to the SCJA as the latter was not an existing law at the date of commencement of the Constitution ( that is , 9 August 1965 ) , having been enacted in 1969 . However , the Court did not consider the effect of Article 4 of the Constitution on the offence . That Article states : " This Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Singapore and any law enacted by the Legislature after the commencement of this Constitution which is inconsistent with this Constitution shall , to the extent of the inconsistency , be void . " Subsequently , in Attorney @-@ General v. Chee Soon Juan ( 2006 ) , the High Court held that the offence of scandalizing the court could not be regarded as unconstitutional since Article 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) clearly empowered Parliament to restrict free speech in order to punish acts amounting to contempt of court . Parliament had done so by enacting section 7 ( 1 ) of the SCJA . 
 = = = = = Constitutionality of the elements of the offence = = = = = 
 The classic definition of a contempt by scandalizing the court was enunciated in R. v. Gray ( 1900 ) by the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , Lord Russell of <unk> , who said : " Any act done or writing published calculated to bring a Court or a judge of the Court into contempt , or to lower his authority , is a contempt of Court . " 
 Up until Attorney @-@ General v. Shadrake ( 2010 ) , the High Court had adopted an " inherent tendency " test to determine liability for the offence . This was in contrast to the " real risk " test adopted by many other common law countries . The inherent tendency test was characterized by the act or words complained of possessing an inherent tendency to interfere with the administration of justice . Moreover , an act or statement would have such an inherent tendency if it conveyed to an average reasonable reader or viewer allegations of bias , lack of impartiality , impropriety or any wrongdoing concerning a judge ( and a fortiori , a court ) in the exercise of his judicial function . 
 In Shadrake , Justice Quentin Loh suggested that the distinction between the tests was in truth illusory . He expressed the view that if it was purely a question of semantics , it would be preferable for the court to adopt the real risk test as it precisely conveys to laymen and lawyers what the law is concerned with . He stated : 
 The [ inherent tendency ] formula has shown itself to be susceptible to controversy and misunderstanding , not least because the literal meaning of inherent tendency tends to obscure the fact that a contextual analysis is actually required . Indeed , given how the word ' inherent ' is commonly understood to indicate something intrinsic , an inherent tendency test would therefore appear to preclude any consideration of extrinsic factors . 
 Holding that " a publication must post a real risk of undermining public confidence in the administration of justice before it is held to be contemptuous " , Loh J. elucidated the elements of the real risk test as follows : 
 A real risk is not to be equated with a serious or grave risk , but merely something more than a de minimis , remote or fanciful risk . 
 Whether such a real risk is posed is an objective question of fact to be determined in light of all the circumstances of the case . 
 The law is not concerned with the effect of the impugned publication , but the potential effect on public confidence in the administration of justice . 
 Counsel for the respondent had argued that the right to free speech compelled the adoption of the real risk test . However , the Court declined to consider the matter as it had already decided to adopt the test , and since full arguments had not been made on the point . Nonetheless , Loh J. said that the courts had to define the offence " consistently with the words , structure and spirit of Art 14 , which clearly demand some kind of balance to be struck between the freedom of speech , which is the rule , and the offence of contempt , an exception to the rule . At the very minimum , neither can be defined in such a way that renders the other <unk> . " He noted that the respondent 's counsel had not argued that the offence is inherently unconstitutional , and that a majority of cases had concluded that the real risk test , coupled with a right of fair criticism , is a reasonable limitation on free speech . 
 On appeal , the Court of Appeal in Shadrake v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) held that the apparent difference between the inherent tendency test and the real risk test was a " legal red herring " . However , since the inherent tendency test had caused confusion , it affirmed the High Court 's ruling that the real risk test was the applicable test for scandalizing the court . It felt that trying to elaborate on the meaning of a " real risk " was not helpful , and that the court should simply ask itself whether , " having regard to the facts as well as surrounding context , a ' real risk ' that public confidence in the administration of justice is – or would be – undermined as a result of the impugned statement ? " 
 Although fair criticism has been treated as a defence to scandalizing the court in some cases , the Court of Appeal preferred to view it as an element of liability , though it cautioned that " the precise characterisation of the concept of fair criticism was not fully canvassed before us ... . Accordingly , our views on this point must necessarily be taken , to that extent , to be provisional in nature . " The Court said that adopting this approach ensures that an alleged <unk> is not disadvantaged with regard to the burden of proof : " If the concept of fair criticism relates to liability , then the evidential burden would be on the party relying on it . The legal burden , on the other hand , would be on the Respondent to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the impugned statement does not constitute fair criticism , and that it presents a real risk of undermining public confidence in the administration of justice . If , however , the concept of fair criticism constitutes a defence , then the legal burden would shift to the alleged <unk> to show on the balance of probabilities that the impugned statement amounts to fair criticism . " 
 The Court approved the factors set out by the High Court in Attorney @-@ General v. Tan Liang Joo John ( 2009 ) that are relevant in establishing that criticism of the courts is fair : 
 Criticism must be supported by argument and evidence . 
 Criticism must generally be expressed in a temperate and dispassionate manner . This allows rational debate about the issues raised , and thus may even contribute to the improvement and strengthening of the administration of justice . 
 Courts can take into consideration the party 's attitude in court and the number of instances of condemning conduct . 
 In Tan Liang Joo John , Justice Judith Prakash stated that this was not a closed list , and that the court is entitled to take into account all the circumstances of the case which in its view go towards showing bad faith . She also noted that English authorities impose another limit on the content of criticism – that the acts or words in question must neither impute improper motives to nor impugn the integrity , propriety and impartiality of judges or the courts . However , she declined to follow these authorities and averred that to impose such a limit would be unnecessary and potentially over @-@ restrictive of legitimate criticism . 
 As regards the relationship between the offence of scandalizing the court and the right to free speech , the Court of Appeal commented that : 
 ... the law relating to contempt of court operates against the broader legal canvass [ sic : canvas ] of the right to freedom of speech that is embodied both within Art 14 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ... as well as the common law . The issue , in the final analysis , is one of balance : just as the law relating to contempt of court ought not to 
 unduly infringe the right to freedom of speech , by the same token , that right is not an absolute one , for its untrammelled abuse would be a negation of the right itself . 
 The Court pointed out that the last mentioned point was embodied in Article 14 ( 2 ) and noted that Parliament had provided the courts with jurisdiction to punish for contempt by enacting section 7 ( 1 ) of the SCJA . It held that the real risk test strikes an appropriate balance between free speech and its abuse , and declined to apply the " clear and present danger " test applicable to the First Amendment to the US Constitution as free speech had gained a paramount status in the US quite different from Commonwealth jurisdictions due to the nation 's unique cultural and constitutional heritage . 
 = = = = Defamation = = = = 
 Article 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Constitution also provides Parliament with the power to impose restrictions designed to provide against defamation . The law of defamation thus functions as a restriction on a person 's right to freedom of speech . The law of defamation has its roots in the common law which existed before the enactment of the Constitution in 1965 . As such , the courts must take Article 162 of the Constitution into consideration when deciding whether the common law tort of defamation offends the fundamental liberty of freedom of speech and expression . The Article provides that all existing laws shall continue in force after the commencement of the Constitution subject to " modifications , adaptations , qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity " with the Constitution of Singapore . 
 However , in Review Publishing , the Court of Appeal held that the common law of defamation , as modified by the Defamation Act , restricts the right to free speech . The appellants in that case pointed out that the Defamation Ordinance 1960 , which presupposed the existence of the common law of defamation , had been enacted before the 1963 Constitution of the State of Singapore . Thus , it could not have been a law enacted to derogate from the right to free speech guaranteed by Article 10 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Federal Constitution of Malaysia , which became applicable to Singapore when it became a state of the Federation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963 . The Court disagreed , holding that Article 105 ( 1 ) of the 1963 State Constitution , which was the predecessor of Article 162 , had the effect of re @-@ enacting all laws existing as at 16 September 1963 , including the Defamation Ordinance . Thus Article 105 ( 1 ) itself was an express restriction on the right to free speech . If this was not the case , then when the 1963 State Constitution came into force all laws which restricted Article 10 ( 1 ) of the Federal Constitution would have become unconstitutional , a result which the Court regarded as an " astonishing conclusion " . 
 = = = = = Defence of qualified privilege and the public figure doctrine = = = = = 
 Article 14 of the Constitution has been raised as a point of contention in relation to the defence of qualified privilege . The Court of Appeal has discussed the applicability of Article 14 in two cases concerning prominent government figures . 
 In Jeyaratnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew ( 1992 ) , Justice L.P. Thean , when delivering the judgment of the court , held that " [ p ] <unk> holding public office or politicians ... are equally entitled to have their reputations protected as those of any other persons " . In this case , counsel for the appellant argued that " qualified privilege attaches to defamatory publications concerning public officials ( or candidates for a public office ) relating to their official conduct or the performance of their public duties by those who have an honest and legitimate interest in the matter to those who have a corresponding and legitimate interest ( whether as electors or as citizens potentially affected by the conduct of public officials ) " . The fact that the statements were made in a political rally during the run @-@ up to elections meant that the requirement of a legitimate interest was met . Lingens v. Austria ( 1986 ) was relied upon in support of the premise that " the limits of acceptable criticism are accordingly wider as regards a politician as such than as regards a private individual " . In Lingens , the European Court of Human Rights was of the opinion that a politician " inevitably and knowingly lays himself open to close scrutiny of his every word and deed by both journalists and the public at large , and he must consequently display a greater degree of tolerance " . The reasoning of the European Court was in line with the public figure doctrine enunciated in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan ( 1964 ) , where the United States Supreme Court decided in favour of the defendant newspaper , making it one of the key decisions supporting the freedom of the press . 
 However , the Singapore Court of Appeal dismissed the applicability of both cases on the ground that the terms of Article 14 of the Constitution differ materially from Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which was relied upon by the court in Lingens ; as well as the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which were relied upon by the court in New York Times . The public figure doctrine was thus expressly rejected by the Court . Thean J. said : " Such criticisms or attacks must , in our opinion , respect the bounds set by the law of defamation , and we do not accept that the publication of false and defamatory allegations , even in the absence of actual malice on the part of the publisher , should be allowed to pass with impunity . " 
 To further rebut the presumption that the circumstances of a general election are sufficient to give rise to an occasion of privilege , the Court also relied on section 14 of the Defamation Act which , at the time , provided thus : 
 A defamatory statement published by or on behalf of a candidate in any election to Parliament or other elected or partially elected body shall not be deemed to be published on a privileged occasion on the ground that it is material to a question in issue in the election , whether or not the person by whom it is published is qualified to vote at the election . 
 The court was unwilling to extend the traditional defence of qualified privilege as it was of the opinion that Parliament 's intention in enacting section 14 was clear : it is wholly untenable that the speech made at an election rally is privileged when the same speech published by or on behalf of a candidate for the election is not . 
 The Court of Appeal 's reasoning in Jeyaretnam has been the subject of academic criticism . Michael Hor has criticized the distinction drawn by the Court between Article 14 of the Constitution and its American and European counterparts as overly literal . The current interpretation of the law gives the legislature an unfettered discretion in limiting freedom of speech in Singapore through the enactment and amendment of relevant legislation . Hor opines that : 
 What is instructive and applicable in Singapore is the realisation that it is the constitutional responsibility of the judiciary to ensure that the basic commitment to the freedom of speech is not undermined by giving the Legislature carte blanche to derogate therefrom in either some or all of the specified exceptions . Our courts must assume the task of scrutinising the prevailing rules of defamation to ensure that they strike a justifiable balance between the freedom of speech and the need to protect individual reputation . 
 Hor has also said that the Court 's approach in Jeyaretnam fails to provide adequate safeguards to account for future politicians and holders of public office who may be less than honourable . Moreover , Singapore courts should not start with the assumption that the common law is necessarily constitutional , as this would be tantamount to " putting the cart before the horse " . Rather , the Constitution ought to be interpreted consistently with the common law . 
 = = = = = Defence of responsible journalism = = = = = 
 In Review Publishing , Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong , delivering judgment on behalf of the Court of Appeal , declined to infer into the common law of Singapore the defence of responsible journalism , or " Reynolds privilege " , developed by the House of Lords in Reynolds v. Times Newspapers Ltd . ( 1999 ) , at least where non @-@ Singapore citizens who have been sued for defamation are seeking to rely on it . This was because the defence was not a natural development of common law principles but had been impelled by the right to freedom of expression protected by Article 10 of the European Convention . The Reynolds privilege could only be adopted in Singapore on the basis of the right to free speech guaranteed by Article 14 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Constitution . However , as the appellants were not Singapore citizens , they could not rely on this provision . 
 The Court then discussed , on an obiter basis , the applicability of the Reynolds privilege to Singapore citizens . It held that the key question is whether or not , in the context of publication of matters of public interest , the rationale behind the Reynolds privilege ought to apply such that constitutional free speech is the rule and restrictions on this right are the exception . In considering the factors relevant to the key question , Chan C.J. stated that whilst the court has the power to dictate the direction of the common law of defamation as adopted upon the enactment of the Constitution , Parliament still has overriding powers to limit the freedom of speech and expression where defamatory publications and statements are made : 
 First , our courts must be mindful of the extent to which they can decide whether constitutional free speech should prevail over protection of reputation . Although there is nothing in Art 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Singapore Constitution and the Defamation Act which precludes our courts from developing the common law of defamation for the common convenience and welfare of society in keeping with Singapore 's prevailing political , social and cultural values ( save for those provisions in these two statutes which impose such a restriction ) , Art 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) also expressly provides that it is Parliament which has the final say on how the balance between constitutional free speech and protection of reputation should be struck . 
 Secondly , when striking a balance between freedom of expression and the protection of reputation , the court will need to make a value judgment that is dependent on local political and social conditions . The Court said that the following factors were relevant to the making of this value judgment : 
 In its opinion , the balance between constitutional free speech and protection of reputation that has been struck by the current law of defamation in Singapore is appropriate in the circumstances of the present day . 
 Singapore law does not recognize journalistic material that relates to matters of public interest as having any particular importance , and " there is no room in our political context for the media to engage in investigative journalism which carries with it a political agenda " . 
 Honesty and integrity in public discourse on matters of public interest , particularly the way the country is governed , are greatly emphasized by the political culture in Singapore . 
 Finally , the Court expressed the view that if free speech is to be favoured over the protection of reputation in applying a Reynolds @-@ type defence , another issue that will have to be considered is what balance should be struck between the two competing interests . In this connection , Chan C.J. said that the court would have to decide whether freedom of expression is to be given preference over the protection of reputation , whether it is a fundamental right that trumps the protection of reputation unless it is shown that the defamatory statement was made maliciously , or whether it is co @-@ equal with the protection of reputation . 
 The Chief Justice also suggested that the rationale in the Reynolds case might be given effect by continuing to find the defendant liable for defamation but reducing the amount of damages payable depending on how much care he or she took to ensure the accuracy of the information published . He noted : " There is no reason why a defendant who has published a defamatory statement should be allowed to get off scot @-@ free for injuring the plaintiff 's reputation simply because he has satisfied the ' responsible journalism ' test . " 
 = = = = Incitement to any offence = = = = 
 Article 14 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Constitution provides that the right to freedom of speech and expression may be restricted to provide against incitement to any offence . This ground has not yet been considered in a Singapore case . 
 A number of statutory provisions prohibit incitement . Under section 107 ( a ) of the Penal Code , a person is said to abet the doing of a thing if he or she instigates someone to do that thing . If a person <unk> an offence , and as a result the act abetted is committed , the person is to be punished with the punishment provided for the offence . If the offence is not committed due to the abetment , and it is punishable by imprisonment , the abettor is to be imprisoned for up to a quarter of the maximum jail term of the offence , or may receive a fine , or both . If either the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant whose duty it was to prevent the offence from happening , the abettor may be imprisoned for up to half of the maximum jail term of the offence , or may be fined , or receive both penalties . However , if the offence abetted but not committed is punishable with death or life imprisonment , the abettor is liable to a penalty of up to seven years ' imprisonment , a fine , or both . If any hurt is caused as a result of the abetment , the abettor may be jailed up to 14 years and must also be fined . 
 Under section 505 ( c ) of the Penal Code , it is an offence to make , publish or circulate any statement , rumour or report in written , electronic or other media with an intent to incite , or which is likely to incite , any class or community of persons to commit any offence against any other class or community of persons . The penalty is imprisonment for up to three years , a fine , or both . No offence is committed if the person who made , published or circulated the statement had reasonable grounds for believing it was true , and did not intend to incite one community against another . 
 = = = = Laws relating to labour or education = = = = 
 Article 14 ( 3 ) provides that the right to form associations may also be restricted by any law relating to labour or education . The Trade Unions Act regulates labour organizations , while schools are generally required to be registered under either the Education Act or the Private Education Act . Under the Education Act , it is an offence for pupils or other persons to assemble on the premises of a school the registration of which has been cancelled . Statutes governing universities provide that student bodies created pursuant to a university 's constituent documents must be registered under the Societies Act unless the Minister for Home Affairs has exempted such bodies . 
 = = = Other restrictions = = = 
 Under Article 149 ( 1 ) of the Constitution , if an Act recites that action has been taken or threatened by any substantial body of persons inside or outside Singapore : 
 to cause , or to cause a substantial number of citizens to fear , organized violence against persons or property ; 
 to excite disaffection against the President or the Government ; 
 to promote feelings of ill @-@ will and hostility between different races or other classes of the population likely to cause violence ; 
 to procure the alteration , otherwise than by lawful means , of anything by law established ; or 
 which is prejudicial to the security of Singapore , 
 any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action or any amendment to that law is valid even if it is inconsistent with specified fundamental liberties , including the rights to freedom of speech , assembly and association guaranteed by Article 14 . Article 149 thus shields the Internal Security Act from unconstitutionality . Among other things , the Act authorizes detention without trial to prevent persons from acting in a manner prejudicial to Singapore 's security or the maintenance of public order or essential services . 
 = = Other provisions = = 
 Section 5 of the Parliament ( Privileges , Immunities and Powers ) Act , enacted pursuant to Article 63 of the Constitution , specifically provides for freedom of expression in Parliament in the following terms : 
 There shall be freedom of speech and debate and proceedings in Parliament , and such freedom of speech and debate and proceedings shall not be liable to be impeached or questioned in any court , commission of inquiry , committee of inquiry , tribunal or any other place whatsoever out of Parliament . 
 This provision is based on one of the rights stated in the English Bill of Rights 1689 which reads : " [ T ] he <unk> of Speech and Debates or Proceedings in Parlyament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parlyament . " 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Dow Jones Publishing Co . ( Asia ) Inc. v. Attorney @-@ General [ 1989 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 637 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) . 
 Jeyaretnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew [ 1992 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 791 , C.A. ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Public Prosecutor [ 1994 ] ICHRL 26 , [ 1994 ] SGHC 207 , [ 1994 ] 3 S.L.R. ( R. ) 209 , archived from the original on 26 October 2012 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 Chee Siok Chin v. Ministry of Home Affairs [ 2006 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 582 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Review Publishing Co . Ltd. v. Lee Hsien Loong [ 2010 ] 1 S.L.R. 52 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 <unk> Ramesh v. Public Prosecutor [ 2010 ] 1 S.L.R. 868 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Attorney @-@ General v. Shadrake [ 2011 ] 2 S.L.R. 445 , H.C. ( Singapore ) ( " Shadrake ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Shadrake v. Attorney @-@ General [ 2011 ] 3 S.L.R. 778 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Shadrake ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( 1999 Reprint ) . 
 Broadcasting Act ( Cap . 28 , 2003 Rev. Ed . ) . 
 Newspaper and Printing Presses Act ( Cap . 206 , 2002 Rev. Ed . ) ( " NPPA " ) . 
 Parliament ( Privileges , Immunities and Powers ) Act ( Cap . 217 , 2000 Rev. Ed . ) ( " <unk> " ) . 
 Penal Code ( Cap . 224 , 2008 Rev. Ed . ) . 
 Societies Act ( Cap . 311 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Hor , Michael ( 1992 ) , " The Freedom of Speech and Defamation : Jeyaretnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 542 – 556 , SSRN <unk> . 
 = = = Articles and websites = = = 
 Chan , Cassandra ( 2003 – 2004 ) , " Breaking Singapore 's <unk> Tradition of Chilling Free Speech with Defamation Laws " , Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review 26 : 315 – 339 , archived from the original on 5 October 2012 . 
 Sim , Cameron ( 2011 ) , " The Singapore Chill : Political Defamation and the Normalization of a Statist Rule of Law " , Pacific Rim Law and Policy Journal 20 ( 2 ) : 319 – 353 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 16 November 2011 . 
 Tan , <unk> Lin ( 2011 ) , " Sedition and its New Clothes in Singapore " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 212 – 236 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Tey , Tsun Hang ( November 2008 ) , " Confining the Freedom of the Press in Singapore – A ' Pragmatic ' Press for ' Nation Building ' ? " , Human Rights Quarterly 30 ( 4 ) : 876 – 905 , doi : 10 @.@ 1353 / <unk> . 
 Tey , Tsun Hang ( 2008 ) , " Singapore 's Jurisprudence of Political Defamation and its Triple @-@ Whammy Impact on Political Speech " , Public Law : 452 – 462 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2003 ) , " Singapore : Regulating Political Speech and the Commitment ' to Build a Democratic Society ' " , International Journal of Constitutional Law 1 ( 3 ) : 516 – 524 , doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / icon / 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 516 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2008 ) , " The Virtual and the Real : Article 14 , Political Speech and the Calibrated Management of Deliberative Democracy in Singapore " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 25 – 57 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Zhong , <unk> ( 2009 ) , " Racial and Religious Hate Speech in Singapore : Management , Democracy , and the Victim 's Perspective " , Singapore Law Review 27 : 13 – 59 , SSRN <unk> . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Eric ( 2005 ) , Freedom of Speech ( 2nd ed . ) , Oxford : Clarendon Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Gomez , James ( 2005 ) , Freedom of Expression and the Media in Singapore , Singapore : Article 19 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 82 @-@ 6 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ( 2011 ) , " Fundamental Liberties III : Freedom of Expression • Association • Assembly • Religion " , An Introduction to Singapore 's Constitution ( rev. ed . ) , Singapore : Talisman Publishing , pp. 186 – 203 at 186 – 196 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 08 @-@ 6456 @-@ 9 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " Freedom of Speech , Assembly and Association " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 971 – 1160 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 1996 ) , " Human Rights and the Media in Singapore " , in Haas , Robert , ed . , Human Rights and the Media , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia ; Singapore : Asian Institute for Development Communication ; Friedrich Naumann Foundation , Singapore Office , pp. 69 – 79 , ISBN 978 @-@ 983 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 @-@ 2 . 
 = Kronan ( ship ) = 
 Kronan , also called Stora Kronan , was a Swedish warship that served as the flagship of the Swedish navy in the Baltic Sea in the 1670s . When built , she was one of the largest seagoing vessels in the world . The construction of Kronan lasted from 1668 to 1672 and was delayed by difficulties with financing and conflicts between the shipwright Francis Sheldon and the Swedish admiralty . After four years of service , the ship foundered in rough weather at the Battle of Öland on 1 June 1676 : while making a sharp turn under too much sail she capsized , and the gunpowder magazine ignited and blew off most of the bow . Kronan sank quickly , taking about 800 men and more than 100 guns with her , along with valuable military equipment , weapons , personal items , and large quantities of silver and gold coins . 
 The loss of Kronan was a hard blow for Sweden during the Scanian War . Besides being the largest and most heavily armed ship in the Swedish navy , she had been an important status symbol for the monarchy of the young Charles XI . Along with Kronan , the navy lost a sizeable proportion of its best manpower , acting supreme commander Lorentz Creutz , numerous high @-@ ranking fleet officers , and the chief of the navy medical staff . A commission was set up to investigate whether any individuals could be held responsible for the Swedish fiasco at the Battle of Öland and other major defeats during the war . Although no one was officially held accountable , Creutz has been blamed by many historians for the sinking of Kronan because of his naval and command inexperience . Recent research has provided a more nuanced picture , and points to Sweden 's general lack of a well @-@ developed naval organization and officer corps at the time . 
 Most of the guns that sank with Kronan were salvaged in the 1680s , but eventually the wreck fell into obscurity . Its exact position was rediscovered in 1980 by the amateur researcher Anders Franzén , who had also located the 17th @-@ century warship Vasa in the 1950s . Yearly diving operations have since surveyed and excavated the wreck site and salvaged artifacts , and Kronan has become the most widely publicized shipwreck in the Baltic after Vasa . More than 30 @,@ 000 artifacts have been recovered , and many have been conserved and put on permanent public display at the Kalmar County Museum in Kalmar . The museum is responsible for the maritime archaeological operations and the permanent exhibitions on Kronan . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 In the 1660s , Sweden was at its height as a European great power . It had defeated Denmark , one of its main competitors for hegemony in the Baltic , in both the Torstenson War ( 1643 – 45 ) and the Dano @-@ Swedish War ( 1657 – 58 ) . At the Treaties of Brömsebro ( 1645 ) and Roskilde ( 1658 ) , Denmark had been forced to cede the islands of Gotland and Ösel , all of its eastern territories on the Scandinavian Peninsula , and parts of Norway . In a third war , from 1658 to 1660 , King Charles X of Sweden attempted to finish off Denmark for good . The move was bold royal ambition in an already highly militarized society geared for warfare , a fiscal @-@ military state . Disbanding its armies would have required paying outstanding wages , so there was an underlying incentive to keep hostilities alive and let soldiers live off enemy lands and plunder . The renewed attack on Denmark threatened the interests of the leading shipping nations of England and the Dutch Republic , who were best served by keeping the Baltic region politically divided . The Dutch intervened in 1658 by sending a fleet to stop the attempt to crush Denmark . England also sent a fleet in November the same year , to assist Sweden in keeping the Sound Toll out of Danish and Dutch control . The English expedition failed as a result of adverse winter weather and the political turmoil that ended the Protectorate , and in the end , Charles ' plans were thwarted . 
 Charles X died in February 1660 . Three months later , the Treaty of Copenhagen ended the war . Charles ' son and successor , Charles XI , was only five when his father died , so a regency council — led by the queen mother Hedvig Eleonora — assumed power until he came of age . Sweden had come close to control over trade in the Baltic , but the war revealed the need to prevent the formation of a powerful anti @-@ Swedish alliance that included Denmark . There were some successes in foreign policy , notably the anti @-@ French Triple Alliance of England , Sweden , and the Dutch Republic . By early 1672 , Sweden had improved its relations with France enough to form an alliance . The same year , King Louis XIV attacked the Dutch Republic , and in 1674 Sweden was pressured into joining the war by attacking the Republic 's northern German allies . France promised to pay Sweden desperately needed war subsidies on condition that it moved in force on Brandenburg . A Swedish army of 22 @,@ 000 men under Carl Gustaf Wrangel advanced into Brandenburg in December 1674 and suffered a minor tactical defeat at the Battle of Fehrbellin in June 1675 . Though not militarily significant , the defeat tarnished the reputation of near @-@ invincibility that Swedish arms had enjoyed since the Thirty Years ' War . This emboldened Sweden 's enemies , and by September 1675 Denmark , the Dutch Republic and the Holy Roman Empire were at war with Sweden and France . 
 = = = State of the fleet = = = 
 By 1675 the Swedish fleet was numerically superior to its Danish counterpart ( 18 ships of the line against 16 , 21 frigates against 11 ) , but the Swedish ships were generally older and of poorer quality than the Danish , which had replaced a larger proportion of its vessels with more modern warships . The Swedish side also had problems with routine maintenance , and both rigging and sails were generally in poor condition . Swedish crews lacked the level of professionalism of Danish and Norwegian sailors , who often had experience from service in the Dutch merchant navy , and the Swedish Navy lacked a core of professional officers while the Danish had seasoned veterans like Cort <unk> and Nils Juel . The Danish fleet was reinforced with Dutch units under Philip van Almonde and Cornelis Tromp , the latter an experienced officer who had served under Michiel de Ruyter . 
 = = Design = = 
 The First Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1652 – 54 ) saw the development of the line of battle , a tactic where ships formed a continuous line to fire broadsides at an enemy . Previously , naval tactics had favored short @-@ range firepower and boarding with intent to take prizes . After the mid @-@ 17th century , tactics shifted from close @-@ quarter fighting to disabling or sinking opponents through superior , long @-@ distance firepower . This entailed major changes in doctrine , shipbuilding , and professionalism in European navies from the 1650s onwards . The line of battle favored large ships that were heavily armed and robust enough to hold the line in the face of enemy fire . The increased centralization and concentration of power in the emerging nation @-@ states during the late 17th century allowed for a great expansion of armies and navies , and new government shipyards began building much much larger ships . Sweden embarked on an expansive shipbuilding program in the late 1660s . 
 Kronan was one of the most heavily armed warships in the world in 1672 when she was launched , a three @-@ decker with 110 guns . The ship had three full gundecks with guns from bow to stern . Altogether there were seven separate levels , divided by six decks . Furthest down in the ship , above the keel , was the hold , and immediately above it , but still below the waterline , lay the orlop ; both were used primarily for storage . Above the orlop were the three gundecks , two of them covered , while about half of the topmost gundeck was open to the elements in the ship 's middle , or waist . The bow had one deck , making up the forecastle , and the stern had two decks , including a poop deck . 
 During the first half of the 17th century , Swedish warships were built in the Dutch manner , with a flat , rectangular bottom with a small draft . This shipbuilding style was adapted mainly for smaller ships in the shallow coastal waters of the Netherlands , and allowed for quick construction , but these less sturdy vessels were generally unsuitable as warships and somewhat unstable in rough seas . When Kronan was built , the English approach to building had prevailed , giving hulls a more rounded bottom and greater draft , as well as a sturdier frame and increased stability . The stern was more streamlined below the waterline , which lessened resistance . 
 The measurements for Kronan were recorded in contemporary navy lists . Its length from stem post to stern post was 53 m ( 174 ft ) ; this was considerably shorter than the length if the bowsprit and beakhead were included . The width was 12 @.@ 9 m ( 42 ft ) and was defined as the widest point between the frames , excluding planking . The draft varied depending on how heavily she was laden , but with full stores , ammunition and armaments it would have been about 6 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 8 m ( 20 – 22 ft ) . The height of the ship from keel to the highest mast was never recorded , but Kalmar County Museum has estimated it to have been at least 66 m ( 217 ft ) . 
 Kronan 's displacement – the ship 's weight calculated by how much water it displaced while floating – is not known precisely , since there are no exact records of the dimensions . By using contemporary documents describing the approximate measurements , it has been estimated at around 2 @,@ 300 tonnes . By its displacement in relation to the number and weight of guns , Kronan was over @-@ gunned , though this was not uncommon for the era . European shipwrights had not been building three @-@ deckers on a large scale before the 1650s ; by the 1660s , designs were still quite experimental . Contemporary records show that English and French three @-@ deckers tended to be rather unstable because they were built high , narrow and with too much artillery . Some English ships had to be reinforced with a " girdle " of built @-@ up planking at the waterline to perform satisfactorily . In rough seas these ships could be forced to close the lowest row of gunports , depriving them of their heaviest and most effective guns . In these situations they were effectively just over @-@ priced two @-@ deckers . Kronan 's construction was not inherently flawed ; the ship handled harsh weather conditions in 1675 and again only a week before capsizing , but she could be dangerous if handled poorly . Later , during the 18th century , ships with the same weight of guns had more tonnage to support their guns , usually weighing 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 tonnes , which made them more stable . When Kronan was built , she was the third or fourth largest ship in the world , but as the trend moved towards ever greater ships , she was surpassed by other large warships . At the time Kronan sank , she was down to seventh place . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 According to the official armament plan Kronan was to be equipped with 124 – 126 guns ; 34 – 36 guns on each of the gundecks and an additional 18 shared between forecastle and sterncastle decks . Guns were classed by the weight of the cannonballs they fired , varying between 3 and 36 pounds ( 1 @.@ 3 – 15 @.@ 3 kg ) . The guns themselves weighed from a few hundred kg ( 400 – 500 lbs ) up to four tonnes ( 4 @.@ 4 tons ) with the heaviest pieces placed in the middle of the lower @-@ most gundeck with successively lighter ones on the decks above . Kronan 's most lethal weapons were the 30- and 36 @-@ pounders on the lowest gundeck which had a range and firepower that outclassed the armament of almost any other warship . The guns lighter than 18 @-@ pounders were primarily intended to inflict damage on the enemy 's crew and rigging rather than the hull . 
 According to modern research , the number of guns was considerably less than the official armament plan . At the time , armament plans regularly overstated the number of guns available . In reality , they were ideal estimations that seldom reflected actual conditions , either because of a lack of ordnance or because they were impractical when tested . Heavy 30- and 36 @-@ pounder guns were particularly difficult to find in sufficient numbers and lighter guns were frequently used instead . Going by the number of guns salvaged from Kronan in the 1680s ( see " History as a shipwreck " ) and during the excavations in the 1980s the total comes to 105 – 110 . The upper figure matches the calculations of the number of gunports on the remains of the wreck and the number of guns that could practically fit on the gun decks . The lower figure is the number of guns found in the 1980s excavations combined with the list of guns brought up during the salvage operations in the 1680s . The table below lists the number of guns , comparing the official 1671 armament plan to the calculations by naval historian Jan Glete . 
 Several types of ammunition were available , each for different uses : round shot ( cannonballs ) against ship hulls , chain shot against masts and rigging , and canister shot ( wooden cylinders filled with metal balls or fragments ) , which had a devastating effect on tightly packed groups of men . For boarding actions Kronan was equipped with 130 muskets and 80 matchlock or flintlock pistols . For close combat there were 250 pikes , 200 boarding axes and 180 swords . During the excavations , large @-@ caliber firearms were found – <unk> , similar to blunderbusses ; they were equipped with a small catch underneath the barrel which allowed them to be hooked over a railing to allow it to absorb the recoil of the charges . One <unk> was still loaded with a small canister containing 20 lead balls that would have been used to clear enemy decks before boarding . 
 = = = Ornamentation = = = 
 Expensive and elaborate ornamentation was an important part of a ship 's appearance in the 1660s , even though it had been simplified since the early 17th century . Such ornamentation was believed to enhance the authority of absolute monarchs and to portray the ship as a symbol of martial prowess and royal authority . There are no contemporary illustrations of the ornamentation of Kronan , but according to common practice it was most lavish on the transom , the flat surface facing aft . There are two images of Kronan shown from the stern by two Danish artists . Both works were commissioned many years after the sinking to commemorate the Danish victory . Claus Møinichen 's painting at <unk> Palace from 1686 shows a transom dominated by two lions rampant holding up a huge royal crown . The background is blue with sculptures and ornaments in gold . Swedish art historian Hans <unk> , who has previously studied the sculptures of Vasa , a prestige ship of Gustavus Adolphus 's navy that sank only 20 minutes into her maiden voyage in Stockholm in 1628 , has suggested that Møinichen may have intentionally exaggerated the size of the ship to enhance the Danish victory . A tapestry at Rosenborg Castle shows Kronan as a two @-@ decker with a crown motif that is even larger than Møinichen 's painting . 
 Archaeologists have not been able to recover enough of Kronan 's sculptures for a detailed reconstruction of the ornamentation . The <unk> ( architectural facemasks ) and putti ( images of children ) that were salvaged as of 2007 show considerable artistic quality according to <unk> . A large sculpture of a warrior figure was found in 1987 and is an example of high @-@ quality workmanship , possibly even a symbolic portrait of King Charles . Since nothing is known of the surrounding ornamentation and sculptures , the conclusion remains speculative . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In the early 1660s , a building program was initiated to expand the fleet and replace old capital ships . A new flagship was needed to replace the old Kronan from 1632 . The felling of vast quantities of timber that were required for the new admiral 's ship had already begun in the winter of 1664 – 65 . Swedish historian Kurt Lundgren has estimated that 7 – 10 hectares ( 17 – 25 acres ) of hundred @-@ year @-@ old oak forest was required for the hull and several tall , stout pines for the masts and bowsprit . 
 The construction of Kronan began in October 1665 , and the hull was launched on 31 July 1668 . The English shipwright Francis Sheldon frequently came in conflict with the admiralty over the project . The navy administrators complained that he was unduly delaying the project and was spending too much time on his own private business ventures . The most aggravating contention was Sheldon 's extensive and lucrative export of mast timber to England . Sheldon in turn complained about constant delays on the navy 's part and lack of funds . When the ship was launched , the slipway turned out to be too small and the rear section of the keel broke off during the launching . The admiralty demanded an explanation , but Sheldon 's reply was that the damage was easily mended and that the problem was that the timber had been left to dry too long . The conflict between the Admiralty and Sheldon dragged on for several years and caused constant delays . The sculptures were finished in 1669 , but the rigging , tackling , and arming was drawn out a further three years , to 1672 . The first occasion that the ship sailed was during the celebrations of Charles XI 's accession as monarch in December 1672 . 
 = = Crew = = 
 As one of the largest ships of her time , Kronan had a sizable crew . When she sank there were 850 people on board – 500 sailors and 350 soldiers . Historians working with the excavation of the wreck site have compared the ship with a middle @-@ sized Swedish town of the late 17th century , describing it as a " miniature society " . On board were male representatives of both lower and upper classes . ( Women were allowed on navy vessels only within the limits of Stockholm archipelago ; before reaching the open sea , they had to disembark . ) As a community afloat , Kronan mirrored the contemporary social standards of military and civilian life , two spheres that were not strictly separated in the 17th century . 
 The entire crew dressed in civilian clothing and there were no common navy uniforms . The Swedish army had only recently introduced standardized uniforms , something that was still uncommon in most of Europe . Clothing was differentiated according to social standing , with officers from the nobility dressed in elegant and expensive clothing while the ordinary crew dressed like laborers . The only exceptions were the soldiers of the Västerbotten infantry regiment who had by the 1670s been equipped with the first " Carolingian " uniforms in blue and white . The crew was sometimes assigned clothing or cloth with which to prepare " sailor garb " ( <unk> ) , which set them apart from the usual dress of the general populace . Officers maintained a large collection of fine clothing for use on board , but it is not known if it was used during everyday work . Quite likely they owned a set of clothes made from simpler , more durable and more comfortable fabrics which were more practical at sea . 
 Recruitment was done by forced musters as part of the earlier form of the so @-@ called allotment system . Sailors and gunners were supplied by a <unk> ( literally " sailor household " ) , small administrative units in coastal regions that were assigned the task of supplying the fleet with one adult male for navy service . The soldiers on board were recruited from the army equivalents , <unk> or <unk> , ( " soldier " or " ward household " ) from inland areas . Officers originated mainly from the nobility or from the upper middle class , and were paid through the allotment system or the income from estates designated for the purpose . Higher @-@ ranking officers most likely brought their personal servants on board . A valuable red jacket in bright red cloth that was worn by one of those who drowned on the ship could have belonged to one of these retinues . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Expedition of 1675 = = = 
 After the Swedish loss at the battle of Fehrbellin in June 1675 , the fleet was to support troop transports to reinforce Swedish Pomerania . It had potential for success as it was equipped with several large , well @-@ armed ships : Svärdet ( " the sword " ) of 1 @,@ 800 tonnes , Äpplet ( " the orb " ) and Nyckeln ( " the key " ) , both 1 @,@ 400 tonnes , and the enormous Kronan ( " the crown " ) . Altogether there were 28 large and medium warships and almost the same number of smaller vessels . The supply organization was lacking . There were few experienced high @-@ ranking officers and internal cooperation was poor ; Danish contemporaries scornfully described the Swedish navy crews as mere " farmhands dipped in saltwater " . 
 With Kronan as its flagship , the fleet went to sea in October 1675 under Admiral of the Realm ( <unk> ) Gustaf Otto Stenbock , but got no farther than Stora Karlsö off Gotland . The weather was unusually cold and stormy and the ships could not be heated . The crew were poorly clothed and soon many of them fell ill . Supplies dwindled , and after Kronan lost a bow anchor after less than two weeks at sea , Stenbock decided to turn back to the Dalarö anchorage north of Stockholm . Nothing came of the reinforcements of the North German provinces . King Charles reacted with anger and held Stenbock personally responsible for the failed expedition , forcing him to pay more than 100 @,@ 000 dalers out of his own pocket . King Charles later rehabilitated Stenbock by giving him an army appointment in Norway , but in early 1676 he replaced him with Lorentz Creutz , a prominent treasury official . Naval historian Jan Glete has explained this as a step that was " necessary in a time of crisis " due to Creutz 's administrative skills and treasury connections , but Creutz had no experience as a naval commander , something that would later prove crucial . 
 = = = Failed winter expedition = = = 
 As the situation for the Swedish army in Pomerania deteriorated during the winter of 1675 – 76 , the fleet , with Kronan as flagship , was ordered to sea again in a desperate attempt to relieve the hard @-@ pressed Swedish land forces . The weather was unusually cold and large parts of the Baltic were iced in . The fleet , now under the command of the seasoned sea officer Claes Uggla , was blocked by ice when it reached Dalarö on 23 January . The Privy Councilor Erik <unk> had been assigned by the King to assist with the expedition , and he came up with the idea of cutting the fleet out of the ice to reach the open sea . Hundreds of local peasants were ordered out to open a narrow channel through the ice with saws and picks to the anchorage at Älvsnabben , more than 20 km ( 12 mi ) away . On reaching the naval station on 14 February , three weeks later , it turned out that most of the sea outside the inner skerries was frozen as well . A storm hit the tightly packed ships and the ensuing movement of the ice crushed the hull of the supply vessel <unk> , sinking it . A Danish force had managed to reach the open waters farther off and observed the immobilized Swedish ships from a distance . When temperatures fell even further , the project was declared hopeless and <unk> gave up the attempt . 
 = = = 1676 = = = 
 Early in March 1676 , a Danish fleet of 20 ships under Admiral Niels Juel left Copenhagen . On 29 April it landed troops on Gotland , which soon surrendered . The Swedish fleet was ordered out on 4 May , but experienced adverse winds and was delayed until 19 May . Juel had by then already left Visby , the principal port of Gotland with a garrison force . He headed for Bornholm to join with a small Danish – Dutch squadron in cruising between Scania and the island of Rügen to prevent any Swedish seaborne reinforcement from reaching Pomerania . On 25 – 26 May the two fleets met each another in the battle of Bornholm . Despite the considerable Swedish advantage in ships , men and guns , they were unable to inflict any losses on the allied force , and lost a fireship and two minor vessels . The battle revealed the lack of coherence and organization within the Swedish ranks , which soured relations between Creutz and his officers . 
 After the failed action , the Swedish fleet anchored off Trelleborg where King Charles was waiting with new orders to recapture Gotland . The fleet was to avoid combat with the allies at least until they reached the northern tip of Öland , where they could fight in friendly waters . When the Swedish fleet left Trelleborg on 30 May they were soon intercepted by the allied fleet , which then began a pursuit . By this time the allies had been reinforced by another small squadron and totaled 42 vessels , with 25 large and medium ships of the line . The reinforcements brought with them a new commander , the Dutch Admiral General Cornelis Tromp , one of the most renowned naval tacticians of his time . The two fleets sailed north and on 1 June passed the northern tip of Öland in a strong gale . The Swedish ships fared poorly in the rough winds , losing masts and spars . The Swedish officers formed a battle line that held together only with great difficulty . They tried to get ahead of Tromp 's ships to gain the weather gage by getting between the allies and the shore , and thereby gaining an advantageous tactical position . The Dutch ships of the allied fleet managed to sail close @-@ hauled faster than the rest of the force and slipped between the Swedes and the coast , taking up the crucial weather gage . Later that morning the two fleets closed in on each other and were soon within firing range . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Around noon , some distance northeast of Hulterstad , the Swedish fleet made what the military historian Ingvar Sjöblom has described as " a widely debated maneuver " . Because of misunderstandings and poorly coordinated signaling , the Swedish fleet attempted to turn and engage the allied fleet before they had sailed past the northern end of Öland , which had been agreed on before the battle . Sharp turns in rough weather were known to be perilous , especially for ships that had stability weaknesses . Kronan turned to port ( left ) , but with too much sail , and heeled so far over that she began to flood through the open gunports . The crew was unable to correct the imbalance and the ship laid over completely with the masts parallel with the water . Soon after , the gunpowder store in the forward part of the Kronan ignited for unknown reasons and exploded , ripping apart a large section of the starboard side forward of the mainmast . The remaining section rose with the stern pointing up in the air and the broken @-@ off front part toward the bottom . She then rapidly sank with the port side down . When the wreck hit the seabed , the hull suffered a major fracture along its side , further damaging the structure . 
 During this rapid sinking , a large proportion of the crew suffered severe trauma , as is shown by osteological analyses of the skeletal remains . Many of the remains had deep , unhealed lacerations on skulls , vertebrae , ribs and other limbs . There are two primary theories about the cause of the injuries . <unk> Ebba <unk> has suggested that discipline and social cohesion collapsed during the sinking . The crew would have resorted to " all the means at their disposal , both physical as well as psychological " to escape the ship , an interpretation that is echoed by historian Ingvar Sjöblom . Medical historian Katarina <unk> , on the other hand , has proposed that the injuries were caused by the sudden and violent chaos of the sinking itself , which would have thrown men , heavy equipment and cannons around . 
 The loss of the Admiral 's flagship threw the Swedish forces into disorder , and soon Svärdet , next in line as fleet flagship , was surrounded by the allied admirals and set ablaze by a Dutch fireship after an extended artillery duel . Only 50 of the 650 @-@ strong crew escaped the gun battle and the inferno , and among the dead was the acting Admiral Claes Uggla . After losing two of its highest ranking commanders as well as its two largest ships , the Swedish fleet fled in disarray . Solen later ran aground ; <unk> , Neptunus and three smaller vessels were captured . Äpplet later sank after breaking her moorings off Dalarö . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 According to the artillery officer Anders Gyllenspak , only 40 men , including himself , survived the sinking : Major Johan Klerk , 2 trumpeters , 14 sailors and 22 soldiers , which means that more than 800 had perished . Among them were half a dozen navy and army officers as well as the chief physician of the Admiralty and the fleet apothecary . Altogether around 1 @,@ 400 men died when Kronan and Svärdet were lost , and in the days following the battle , hundreds of corpses were washed up on the east coast of Öland . According to the vicar of <unk> parish , 183 men were taken from the beaches and buried at Hulterstad and <unk> graveyards . Lorentz Creutz 's body was identified and shipped to his estate in <unk> , Finland , where it was buried . The losses were even worse since Kronan was the flagship and was manned with the best sailors and gunners in the fleet . When Kronan and Svärdet went down , they took with them the navy 's entire stock of 30- and 36 @-@ pounder guns . Altogether over 300 tonnes of bronze guns worth nearly 250 @,@ 000 silver dalers went down with the ships , a sum that was slightly higher than the value of the ships themselves . 
 Within a week , the news of the failure at Bornholm and the disaster at Öland reached King Charles , who immediately ordered that a commission be set up to investigate the fiasco . Charles wanted to know if Bär and other officers were guilty of cowardice or incompetence . On 13 June the King wrote that " some of our sea officers have shown such cowardly and careless behavior [ that they ] have placed the safety , welfare and defense of the kingdom at great peril " , and that " such a great crime should be sternly punished " . The commission began its work on 7 June 1676 and finished in October 1677 , without passing any sentences . Admiral Johan Bär of Nyckeln and Lieutenant Admiral Christer <unk> , who ran aground with Äpplet , were never again given a navy command . One of the accused , Hans Clerck of Solen , was promoted to full admiral by the King even before the commission presented its findings . 
 = = Causes of sinking = = 
 Inappropriate handling in rough weather was the most obvious cause for Kronan 's sinking . Unlike Vasa , Kronan 's sailing characteristics were not inherently flawed and the ship had served for several years in rough seas . During the work of the commission , artillery officer Anders Gyllenspak even made direct comparisons to Vasa . He testified that Kronan 's ballast had been lightened at Dalarö at the beginning of the campaign and that she had not replenished her supply of drink , so that the ship had a shallower draft and would have been somewhat less stable than with full stores , though he did not blame this on Creutz . 
 Why the Swedish fleet deviated from the original plan of engaging the allied force in home waters north of Öland has never been satisfactorily explained . According to Rosenberg and Gyllenspak on Kronan , Creutz made a turn because Uggla had signaled that he was going about . Rosenberg also believed that Bär on Nyckeln , admiral of the first squadron , was first to make a turn , and that Uggla considered it necessary to follow this unplanned maneuver to keep the fleet together . Officers Anders Homman and Olof Norman , who both survived Svärdet , claimed that only Creutz as fleet commander could have made such a decision and that Uggla was only following Kronan 's lead . Witnesses who testified before the commission claimed that conflict between the officers was the reason that necessary precautions were not taken before Kronan came about . Rosenberg testified that Lieutenant Admiral Arvid Björnram and Major Klas Ankarfjäll had openly disagreed on how much sail should be set and how close to land the ship should sail . According to Gyllenspak , senior fleet pilot Per <unk> had voiced his concerns against turning in the rough weather , but no one had heeded his advice . 
 Several scholars and authors have blamed Creutz for the loss of his ship , and he has been criticized as an incompetent sailor and officer who through lack of naval experience brought about the sinking . Historian Gunnar Grandin has suggested that the intent of the maneuver was to take advantage of the scattered allied fleet , but that many of the officers on Kronan opposed the idea ; Creutz and Björnram urged that the ship turn quickly to gain a tactical advantage while Ankarfjäll and <unk> were concerned about the immediate safety of the ship . Grandin has also suggested that Creutz may have suffered a mental breakdown after the failure at Bornholm and the open dispute with his officers , which led to a rash and ultimately fatal decision . 
 More recent views present the question of responsibility as more nuanced and complex – suggesting that Creutz cannot be singled out as solely responsible for the disaster . Historians Ingvar Sjöblom and Lars Ericson <unk> have pointed out that Creutz 's position as admiral was comparable to that of a chief minister . He would have primarily been an administrator without the need for intimate knowledge of practical details ; turning a ship in rough weather would have been the responsibility of his subordinates . Sjöblom has stressed that the disagreement between Major Ankarfjäll and Lieutenant Admiral Björnram on how much sail was needed wasted precious time in a situation where quick decisions were crucial . Creutz was also unique as a supreme commander of the navy since he had no experience of military matters . The Swedish naval officer corps in the late 17th century lacked the prestige of army commanders , and seasoned officers and even admirals could be outranked by inexperienced civilians or army commanders with little or no naval background . Maritime archaeologist Lars Einarsson has suggested that Creutz 's " choleric and willful temperament " probably played a part , but that it could equally be blamed on an untrained and inexperienced crew and the open discord among the officers . According to Sjöblom it is still unclear to historians whether there was a designated ship commander on Kronan with overall responsibility . 
 = = History as a shipwreck = = 
 The total cost of Kronan was estimated at 326 @,@ 000 silver dalers in contemporary currency , and about half of the cost , 166 @,@ 000 dalers , lay in the armaments . It was therefore in the interest of the Swedish navy to salvage as many of the cannons as possible . In the early 1660s almost all the guns from Vasa had been brought up through greatly improved technology . Commander Paul Rumpf and Admiral Hans <unk> were put in charge of the salvage of Kronan 's cannons . With the help of diving bells , they were able to raise 60 cannons worth 67 @,@ 000 daler in the summers ( c . June @-@ August ) of 1679 – 86 , beginning as soon as the war with Denmark had ended . In the 1960s , diving expert Bo Cassel made some successful descents to Vasa with a diving bell made according to 17th @-@ century specifications . In 1986 , further experiments were done on Kronan . The tests proved successful and the conclusion was that the 17th @-@ century operations must have required considerable experience , skill and favorable weather conditions . Though the conditions off Öland were often difficult , with cold water and unpredictable weather , and required a large crew , the expeditions were very profitable . Historian Björn Axel Johansson has calculated that the total cost for the entire crew for all eight diving seasons was less than 2 @,@ 000 dalers , the value of one of Kronan 's 36 @-@ pounder guns . 
 = = = Rediscovery = = = 
 The marine engineer and amateur historian Anders Franzén had searched for old Swedish wrecks in the Baltic since the 1940s and became nationally renowned after he located Vasa in 1956 . Kronan was one of several famous shipwrecks on a list of potential wreck sites that he had compiled . For almost 30 years Franzén and others scoured archives and probed the seabed off the west coast of Öland . During the 1950s and 1960s the team searched off Hulterstad by dragging , and later followed up with sonar scans . In 1971 planks believed to belong to Kronan were located , but the lead could not be followed up properly at the time . Later in the 1970s the search area was narrowed down with a <unk> sonar and a <unk> , an instrument that detects the presence of iron . With the two instruments the team pinned down a likely location , and in early August 1980 , sent down underwater cameras to reveal the first pictures of Kronan . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 The remains of Kronan lie at a depth of 26 m ( 85 ft ) , 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) east of Hulterstad , off the east coast of Öland . Since her rediscovery in 1980 , there have been annual diving expeditions to the site of the wreck from June to August . By Baltic Sea standards , the conditions are good for underwater archaeological work ; the wreck site is far from land , away from the regular shipping lanes , and has not been affected by pollution from the land or excessive growth of marine vegetation . The visibility , especially in early summer , is good and can be up to 20 m . The seabed consists of mostly infertile sand that reflects much of the sunlight from the surface , aiding the surveying and documentation of the site with underwater cameras . Around 85 % of the wreck site has been charted so far and Kronan has become one of the most extensive and well @-@ publicized maritime archaeological projects in the Baltic Sea . 
 = = = Finds = = = 
 More than 30 @,@ 000 artifacts from Kronan have been salvaged and cataloged , ranging from bronze cannons of up to four tonnes to small eggshell fragments . There have been several discoveries of considerable importance , and some of unique historical and archaeological value . One of the first finds was a small table cabinet with nine drawers containing navigational instruments , pipe @-@ cleaning tools , cutlery and writing utensils , which most likely belonged to one of the officers . As a flagship , Kronan carried a large amount of cash in the form of silver coins . Besides wages for the crew , a war chest was required for large , unforeseen expenses . In 1982 , a collection of 255 gold coins was found , most of them ducats . The origin of the individual coins varied considerably , with locations such as Cairo , Reval ( modern @-@ day Tallinn ) , and Seville . Another 46 ducats were found in 2000 . The coin collection is probably the largest gold treasure ever encountered on Swedish soil , though it was not enough to cover large expenses , which has led to the assumption that they were the personal property of Admiral Lorentz Creutz . In 1989 , more than 900 silver coins were found in the remains of the orlop , at the time the largest silver coin collection ever discovered in Sweden . In 2005 , a much larger cache of nearly 6 @,@ 200 coins was uncovered and in 2006 yet another with more than 7 @,@ 000 coins . The silver treasure of 2005 consisted almost entirely of 4 öre @-@ coins minted in 1675 , which represented over 1 % of the entire production of 4 öre @-@ coins of that year . 
 Several musical instruments have been found , including a trumpet , three violins and a viola da gamba , all expensive objects that probably belonged to either the officers or the trumpeters . One of the trumpeters on board was a member of the admiral 's musical ensemble and it is assumed that one of the particularly fine , German @-@ made instruments belonged to him . Another remnant of the officers ' personal stores was discovered in 1997 , consisting of a woven basket filled with tobacco and expensive imported foodstuffs and spices , including ginger , plums , grapes and cinnamon quills . 
 Approximately seven percent of the finds consist of textiles . Much of the clothing , particularly that of the officers and their personal servants , is well preserved and has provided information on clothing manufacture during the late 17th century , something that has otherwise been difficult to research based only on depictions . 
 = Operation Iskra = 
 Operation Iskra ( Russian : операция « <unk> » , <unk> Iskra ; English : Operation Spark ) was a Soviet military operation during World War II , designed to break the German Wehrmacht 's Siege of Leningrad . Planning for the operation began shortly after the failure of the Sinyavino Offensive . The German defeat in the Battle of Stalingrad in late 1942 had weakened the German front . By January 1943 , Soviet forces were planning or conducting offensive operations across the entire German @-@ Soviet front , especially in southern Russia , Iskra being the northern part of the wider Soviet 1942 – 1943 winter counter offensive . 
 The operation was conducted by the Red Army 's Leningrad and Volkhov Fronts , and the Baltic Fleet during January 12 – 30 , 1943 with the aim of creating a land connection to Leningrad . The Soviet forces linked up on January 18 , and by January 22 , the front line was stabilised . The operation successfully opened a land corridor 8 – 10 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) wide to the city . A rail road was swiftly built through the corridor which allowed more supplies to reach the city than the Road of Life across the frozen surface of Lake Ladoga , significantly reducing the possibility of the capture of the city and a German – Finnish linkup . 
 The success led to a much more ambitious offensive operation named <unk> Zvezda ( Polar Star ) less than two weeks later . That operation had the aim of decisively defeating Army Group North , lifting the siege altogether , but it achieved only minimal progress . Soviet forces made several other attempts in 1943 to renew their offensive and completely lift the siege , but made only modest gains in each one . The corridor remained in range of German artillery and the siege was only over on January 27 , 1944 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Siege of Leningrad started in early autumn 1941 . By September 8 , 1941 German and Finnish forces had surrounded the city , cutting off all supply routes to Leningrad and its suburbs . However , the original drive on the city failed and the city was subjected to a siege . During 1942 several attempts were made to breach the blockade but all failed . The last such attempt was the Sinyavino Offensive . After the defeat of the Sinyavino Offensive , the front line returned to what it was before the offensive and again 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) separated Leonid Govorov 's Leningrad Front in the city and Kirill Meretskov 's Volkhov Front . 
 Despite the failures of earlier operations , lifting the siege of Leningrad was a very high priority , so new offensive preparations began in November 1942 . In December , the operation plan was approved by the Stavka and received the codename " Iskra " ( Spark ) . The operation was due to begin in January 1943 . 
 By January 1943 , the situation looked very good for the Soviet side . The German defeat in the Battle of Stalingrad had weakened the German front . The Soviet forces were planning or conducting offensive operations across the entire front , especially in southwestern Russia . Amidst these conditions , Operation Iskra was to become the first of several offensive operations aimed at inflicting a decisive defeat on the German Army Group North . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The area south of Lake Ladoga is a heavily forested area with many wetlands ( especially peat deposits ) closer to the lake . In addition the forest shielded both sides from visual observation . Both of these factors greatly hindered the mobility of artillery and vehicles in the area , providing a considerable advantage to the defending forces . One of the key locations were the Sinyavino heights which were some 150 metres higher than the surrounding flat terrain , which were some of the few dry and clear areas , and in addition provided good observation . Since the front line had changed very little since the blockade was established , the German forces had built a dense defensive network of strong points , interconnected by trenches and protected by extensive obstacles and interlocking artillery and mortar fire . The Neva River and marshes were partially frozen in winter which allowed infantry to cross it , but not heavy vehicles . 
 = = = German preparations = = = 
 The Germans were well aware that breaking the blockade was very important for the Soviet side . However , due to the reverse at Stalingrad and the Soviet offensive at Velikiye Luki to the south of Leningrad , Army Group North was ordered to go on the defensive and was stripped of many troops . The 11th Army , which was to lead the assault on Leningrad in September 1942 , and which had thwarted the last Soviet offensive , was transferred to Army Group Center in October . Nine other divisions were also reassigned to other sectors . 
 At the start of the Soviet offensive , the German 18th Army , led by Georg Lindemann consisted of 26 divisions spread across a 450 kilometres ( 280 mi ) wide front . The army was stretched very thin and as a result had no division @-@ level reserves . Instead , each division had a tactical reserve of one or two battalions , and the army reserves consisted of portions of the 96th Infantry Division and the 5th Mountain Division . The 1st Air Fleet provided the air support for the army . 
 Five divisions and part of another one were guarding the narrow corridor which separated the Soviet Leningrad and Volkhov Fronts . The corridor was only 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) wide and was called the " bottleneck " . The German divisions were well fortified in this area , where the front line had been virtually unchanged since September 1941 , and hoping to repel the Soviet offensive . 
 = = = Soviet preparations = = = 
 The plan for Operation Iskra was approved in December . The orders from the Stavka were : 
 This meant recapturing the " bottleneck " and opening a 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) corridor to Leningrad . After that , the two fronts were to rest for 10 days and resume the offensive southward in further operations . 
 The biggest difference from the earlier Sinyavino Offensive was the location of the main attack . In September 1942 the Soviet forces were attacking south of the town of Siniavino , which allowed them to potentially encircle several German divisions , but also left the army open to flanking attacks from the north , and it was this which ultimately caused the offensive to fail . In January 1943 the offensive was conducted north of Siniavino , closer to the Ladoga Lake shore , which removed the threat of flanking attacks and increased the probability of success , but forced the Soviets to abandon the idea of encircling most of the German forces in the " bottleneck " . 
 The offensive was to be conducted by Leningrad Front 's 67th Army and Volkhov Front 's 2nd Shock Army commanded by Major General M.P. <unk> and Lieutenant General <unk> Romanovsky respectively . The 8th Army , commanded by Lieutenant General F.N. Starikov , was to conduct a limited offensive on the 2nd Shock Army 's flank and defend elsewhere . 13th and 14th Air Armies provided air support . 
 The two fronts spent December training and preparing for the offensive , and received significant reinforcements . These included not just replenishment and additional rifle divisions and brigades , but also significant additional artillery and engineer units , which were vital for breaching the heavy German defenses . Specialized winter units included three ski brigades and four <unk> battalions . To ensure the Soviet forces had air superiority , which they had lacked in the previous offensive , the air strength in the area was increased to a total of over 800 planes , predominantly fighters . Large tank forces could not operate well in the swampy terrain , so the tank forces were used primarily as battalions reinforcing divisions or slightly larger brigades , which were to operate independently . 
 Originally the operation was due to begin on January 1 , but poor ice conditions on the Neva caused the offensive to be delayed until January 10 – 12 . A number of measures were taken to prevent the details of the operation being revealed to the Germans . Only a limited number of senior officers were involved in the planning , all redeployments took place in bad weather or at night and simulated attack preparations were made elsewhere to confuse the German side . 
 On January 10 , the Stavka sent Georgy Zhukov as its representative to coordinate the battle . The rifle divisions occupied their jumping @-@ off positions on January 11 , and first echelon tanks moved into their advanced positions early on January 12 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Start of the battle : January 12 = = = 
 The night before the start of the operations , the Soviet night bombers attacked the German divisional headquarters and artillery positions to disrupt the German command and control . The bombers also attacked German airfields and communication centres to disrupt the flow of reinforcements . Operation Iskra began at 9 : 30 on January 12 , when the two Soviet fronts began their artillery preparation , which lasted for 2 hours 20 minutes on the western side and 1 hour 45 minutes on the eastern side of the bottleneck . The Soviet attack started five minutes before the artillery preparation finished with a Katyusha barrage , to fully exploit its effects . 
 The Leningrad Front forces achieved their greatest success between Shlisselburg and Gorodok 1 . Here , the Soviet 136th and <unk> Rifle Divisions with supporting tanks and artillery captured a bridgehead approximately 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) wide and 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) deep . At 18 : 00 the sappers constructed bridges near Mar <unk> to allow second echelon troops to advance . However , attacks further south , near Gorodok only resulted in the capture of the first line of German trenches . The attack further north at Shlisselburg failed . By evening , the Front command decided to exploit the formed bridgehead and troops attacking Shlisselburg across the Neva were redeployed there and started attacking it from the south . 
 The Volkhov Front attack saw less success as the forces of the 2nd Shock Army managed to envelop but not destroy the German strong points at Lipka and Workers Settlement No. 8 . The latter was an impressive defensive position with a garrison of 700 men and 16 bunkers . Heavy flanking fire from these strong points prevented any further advance , but the 2nd Shock Army penetrated the German defenses 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) between these points . Further south , between Workers Settlement No. 8 and <unk> Grove the advance was 1 – 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 62 – 1 @.@ 24 mi ) deep , while even further south , the flanking attacks by the 8th Army only managed to capture the first line of German trenches . 
 The German side reacted by deploying their reserves to the region throughout the night . One improvised battle group consisting of five battalions from the 96th Infantry Division , supported by artillery and four Tiger tanks moved to Gorodok No. 2 to reinforce the 170th Infantry Division to the west . Another similar battle group using battalions from the 96th Infantry Division was sent to Workers Settlement No. 1 to support the 227th Infantry Division . 
 = = = Soviet advance : January 13 – 17 = = = 
 The next five days saw very heavy fighting as the Soviets slowly advanced through heavy German defences and repelled German counterattacks . On January 13 , bad weather prevented the Soviet side from employing their air force . That day they gained almost no ground and incurred heavy losses . The German side , after their counterattacks had failed to throw back the Soviet troops , started further reinforcing the area by assembling battle groups using portions of divisions from the quiet parts of the front . These included battle groups from the 1st Infantry Division , the 61st Infantry Division , the 5th Mountain Division and the SS Police Division . 
 On January 14 the weather improved enough to allow air support again and the Soviet advance resumed , albeit at a slow pace . To speed up the encirclement of the strong point at Lipka , the Soviet side used the 12th Ski Brigade which crossed the ice of the Ladoga Lake and attacked the German rear lines . By the end of the day the German forces in the Lipka and Shlisselburg areas were almost completely cut off from the rest of the German forces . 
 Throughout January 15 – 17 the Soviet fronts fought towards each other , capturing the strong points at Workers Settlements Nos. 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , and most of Shlisselburg . By the end of January 17 they were only 1 @.@ 5 – 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 – 1 @.@ 24 mi ) apart between Workers Settlements Nos. 1 and 5 . On January 15 , Govorov was promoted to colonel general . 
 = = = <unk> and land corridor : January 18 – 21 = = = 
 On January 18 , at 9 : 30 the lead elements from the 67th Army 's 123rd Rifle Division and 2nd Shock Army 's 372nd Rifle Division linked up near Workers Settlement No. 1 , thus technically breaking the blockade and marking an important date in the Siege of Leningrad . German forces north of the settlement were cut off . Group Huhner , made up of two battle groups under the Lieutenant General Huhner , commander of the 61st Infantry Division , was supposed to hold the corridor between Workers Settlements Nos. 1 and 5 but was no longer able to do it . Later that day the Soviet forces captured Workers Settlement No. 5 after repelling a strong German counterattack . The lead elements from the 67th Army 's 136th Rifle Division and 2nd Shock Army 's 18th Rifle Division linked up to the north of the settlement at 11 : 45 . Group Huhner became cut off too and was ordered to break out through the forested area toward Siniavino before the main Soviet forces arrived and made a breakout impossible . Group Huhner abandoned its artillery and heavy equipment and ran " the gauntlet of fire " before reaching Siniavino on January 19 – 20 . The breakout was costly for both sides . By early afternoon , the Soviet forces cleared Shlisselburg and Lipka from German forces and started liquidating the forces remaining in the forests south of Lake Ladoga . 
 During January 19 – 21 the Soviet forces eliminated the encircled German forces and tried to expand their offensive southward towards Siniavino . However , the 18th Army significantly reinforced its positions there with the SS Police , 21st Infantry , and soon after the 11th Infantry and 28th Mountain Divisions . The Soviet forces captured Workers Settlement No. 6 but were unable to advance any further . 
 = = = Front line stabilises , railway construction : January 22 – 30 = = = 
 There were no changes in the front line after January 21 as a result of Operation Iskra . The Soviet forces were unable to advance any further , and instead started fortifying the area to thwart any German attempt at re @-@ establishing the blockade . On January 22 , work started on the rail line linking Leningrad to the rest of the country through the captured corridor . The plan from the <unk> written on January 18 , ordered the construction to be finished in 20 days . The work was completed ahead of schedule and trains began delivering supplies on February 6 , 1943 . The operation officially ended on January 30 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Iskra was a strategic victory for the Soviet forces . From a military perspective , the operation eliminated the possibility of the capture of the city and a German – Finnish link up , as the Leningrad Front was now very well supplied , reinforced and able to co @-@ operate more closely with the Volkhov Front . For the civilian population , the operation meant that more food was able to reach the city , as well as improved conditions and the possibility of evacuating more civilians from the city . Breaking the blockade also had a significant strategic effect , although it was overshadowed by the surrender of the German 6th Army at Stalingrad only a few days later . Notably , the first Tiger tank captured by the Soviets was taken during this battle . It was undamaged and evacuated by the Soviet forces for evaluation . 
 Also the victory led to promotions for Govorov , who was promoted to colonel @-@ general on January 15 , and Zhukov , who was promoted to marshal of the Soviet Union on January 18 . In addition Govorov and Meretskov were awarded the Order of Suvorov 1st Class on January 28 . The 136th and 327th Rifle divisions were awarded the designation of 63rd and 64th Guards Rifle Divisions , while the 61st Tank Brigade was designated the 30th Guards Tank Brigade . 
 For the German side , the battle left the 18th Army very stretched and exhausted . Lacking sufficient reinforcements , the command of Army Group North made the decision to shorten the front line by evacuating the Demyansk Pocket salient . The salient had been held throughout 1942 , despite being encircled for a few months , as it was an important strategic bridgehead . Together with the Rzhev salient ( which was also evacuated in spring 1943 ) , it could potentially be used to encircle a large number of Soviet forces . However , in the situation that had developed , retaining it was no longer possible . 
 Nevertheless , despite these conditions , the Stavka knew that " Operation Iskra " was incomplete , as the corridor it had opened was narrow and was still in range of the German artillery , and the important heights and strong point at Sinyavino were still under German control . This led Zhukov to plan a much more ambitious offensive operation named <unk> Zvezda ( Polar Star ) . The operation had the aim of decisively defeating Army Group North , but faltered early on . The Soviet forces carried several other offensives in the area in 1943 , slowly expanding the corridor , making other small gains before finally capturing Siniavino in September . However , the city was still subjected to at least a partial siege as well as air and artillery bombardment until January 1944 , when the Leningrad @-@ Novgorod Offensive broke through the German lines , lifting the siege completely . 
 = Gal Vihara = 
 The Gal Vihara ( Sinhalese : <unk> ් <unk> ) , also known as Gal Viharaya and originally as the Uttararama , is a rock temple of the Buddha situated in the ancient city of Polonnaruwa in North Central Province , Sri Lanka . It was fashioned in the 12th century by Parakramabahu I. The central feature of the temple is four rock relief statues of the Buddha , which have been carved into the face of a large granite rock . The images consist of a large seated figure , another smaller seated figure inside an artificial cavern , a standing figure and a reclining figure . These are considered to be some of the best examples of ancient Sinhalese sculpting and carving arts , and have made the Gal Vihara the most visited monument at Polonnaruwa . 
 The images of Uttararama follow a different style from the images of the previous Anuradhapura period , and show some significant differences . The identity of the standing image is subject to a certain amount of dispute among historians and archaeologists , some of whom argue that it depicts the monk Ananda rather than the Buddha . Each of the images have been carved in a way that uses a maximum possible area of the rock , and their heights seem to have been decided based on the height of the rock itself . Each statue appears to have had its own image house , as indicated by the remains of brick walls at the site . The Uttararama was where Parakramabahu I held a congregation of monks to purify the Buddhist priesthood , and later drew up a code of conduct for them . This code of conduct has been recorded in an inscription on the same rock face containing the images of the Buddha . 
 = = Uttararama = = 
 The Gal Vihara or " rock monastery " ( so named after the large rock face where the four images of the Buddha were carved ) was originally named Uttararama " the northern monastery " . It is located in Polonnaruwa , and according to the <unk> was one of the more prominent of the hundred temples built throughout Lanka by King Parakramabahu I ( 1153 @-@ 86 ) . The <unk> mentions that Parakramabahu I had his workmen build three caves in the rock after finishing the temple : the Vijjadhara Guha ( cave of the spirits of knowledge ) , the <unk> <unk> Lena ( cave of the sitting image ) , and the <unk> <unk> Guha ( cave of the sleeping image ) . Although they are described as " caves " , only the Vijjadhara Guha is a cave , while the others were image houses similar to the <unk> and <unk> , with their walls connected to the rock face . These walls , which were evidently decorated with frescoes , have since been destroyed and only their bases now remain , 
 By the time Parakramabahu I ascended to the throne , the Buddhist priesthood in the country was divided into three fraternities : Abhayagiri <unk> , <unk> and Mahavihara . He held a congregation of monks to reconcile the three fraternities , and " purified the order " by expelling corrupt monks . With the help of the elders of each fraternity , he later drew up a <unk> ( " code of conduct " ) for Buddhist monks and recorded this in an inscription at Uttararama . The area in front of the images , which now resembles a terrace , is believed to be the location of the assembly hall where this congregation was held . The inscription recording the code has been carved on the flat , polished rock face between the Vijjadhara Guha and the standing image . 
 The Uttararama was abandoned during the fall of the Kingdom of Polonnaruwa . It had functioned as an educational establishment from its inception to its abandonment , being a centre of Buddhist education in the country . 
 = = Images = = 
 The main feature of Gal Vihara is the four images of the Buddha that have been carved on a single , large granite rock face , considered to be among the best examples of the rock carving and sculpting arts of the ancient Sinhalese . The rock has been cut almost 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) deep to create a rock face to accommodate the statues , and is the only example in the country where a natural rock has been excavated to this extent for such a purpose . The images position the temple alongside some of the most significant monuments which survive from the ancient kingdoms of Sri Lanka , and make it the most celebrated and visited temple in Polonnaruwa . Three of the images are quite large ; the smallest of them is more than 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall , and the largest is more than 46 feet ( 14 m ) long . However , the fourth image is just over 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) and located inside an artificial cavern carved into the rock . A seated image is on the left side of the rock , and to the right is a cavern and another seated image . Further to the right are a standing image , and then a reclining image . Unlike other statues of the same period ( such as the one found in the <unk> image house ) , they are all well preserved , and therefore provide a good indication about less well @-@ preserved examples . The size of each image seems to have been decided based on the height of the rock at that point , so that the maximum possible area could be used for it . According to the archaeologist <unk> Paranavithana , the images were evidently coated in gold in their early years . The style of the images differs somewhat from that of statues from the earlier Anuradhapura period . The most notable changes are the broader forehead in the Gal Vihara images . The robe is carved with two parallel lines , rather than the single line seen in the Anuradhapura period , influenced by the <unk> school of art . 
 = = = Seated image = = = 
 The large seated image is 15 feet 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 4 @.@ 636 m ) tall , and depicts the dhyana mudra . The seat was carved in the shape of a lotus flower , its base decorated with carvings of flowers and lions . The statue sits on a carved throne , decorated with makara images , with four small images of the Buddha ( identical to the larger image ) carved inside small chambers . This is an unusual feature in ancient Sinhalese sculpture , and is presumably the result of Mahayana influence . 
 = = = <unk> Guha = = = 
 A small statue only 4 feet 7 inches ( 1 @.@ 40 m ) in height , but similar in appearance to its larger neighbour , is located inside the artificial cave named the <unk> Guha . The cave was created by carving 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) into the rock , leaving four square shafted stone columns at the sides of the 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) wide and 12 @-@ foot @-@ 9 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 89 m ) high opening . The base of the lotus shaped seat of the Buddha image here is also decorated with designs of lions . A throne and a parasol are carved behind it , more elaborate in design than the larger image . A <unk> , or halo , is carved behind the head of the statue , which rests between two four @-@ armed deities . According to archaeologist H. C. P. Bell , the god on the right is Brahma , and the god on the left is Vishnu . The walls of the cave were once decorated with frescoes , traces of which remain in the two corners at the back of the cave . 
 = = = Standing image = = = 
 The standing image is the focus of much discussion among historians and archaeologists , since there is a general belief that it is not a statue of the Buddha . The image is 22 feet 9 inches ( 6 @.@ 93 m ) tall , and stands on a low pedestal shaped like a lotus . It leans back in a relaxed manner , its arms folded across its chest . The statue 's face carries a sorrowful expression and the reclining image — which depicts the Buddha 's parinirvana — lies next to it , which has led some to believe that it is the monk <unk> , who is lamenting the Buddha 's demise at his deathbed . The remains of the walls , however , indicate that the two images were once in separate chambers , rather than next to each other . Paranavithana believes that the statue is of the Buddha , which depicts the para <unk> <unk> mudra or " sorrow for the sorrow of others " . However , this is a rarely used gesture in Sinhalese sculpture , and is seen at only a few locations in the country . Another possibility is that the image shows the Buddha during his second week after enlightenment , which he spent gazing at the Bodhi Tree in gratitude for providing him shelter . The image is not mentioned in the <unk> , which only mentions the other three . While this may be an indication that it is not an image of the Buddha , it is also possible that it may have been made at an earlier period than the others . 
 = = = Reclining image = = = 
 At 46 feet 4 inches ( 14 @.@ 12 m ) in length , the reclining image is the largest statue in Gal Vihara , and also one of the largest sculptures in Southeast Asia . It depicts the parinirvana of the Buddha , who is lying on his right side with the right arm supporting the head on a bolster , while the left arm lies along the body and thigh . The palm of the right hand and the soles of the feet have a single lotus flower carved on them . Charles <unk> , a former Commissioner of the Archaeological Department of Sri Lanka , has stated that the bolster upon which the Buddha rests his head has been so well carved that it looks like a cotton stuffed pillow rather than one carved from rock . The upper foot — the left foot of the image — is slightly withdrawn to indicate that the image depicts that the Buddha has attained parinirvana , and is not merely lying down . Unlike the other images , the reclining image does not have a decorated pedestal , and lies on levelled bare rock . On the wall behind the image , several sockets have been carved into the rock , as well as the remains of two stone columns , suggesting that its now missing image house had a wooden roof . 
 = Stanislaw Ulam = 
 Stanisław Marcin Ulam ( pronounced [ ' <unk> ' mart ͡ <unk> ' <unk> ] ; 13 April 1909 – 13 May 1984 ) was a Polish @-@ American mathematician . He participated in America 's Manhattan Project , originated the Teller – Ulam design of thermonuclear weapons , invented the Monte Carlo method of computation , and suggested nuclear pulse propulsion . In pure and applied mathematics , he proved some theorems and proposed several conjectures . 
 Born into a wealthy Polish Jewish family , Ulam studied mathematics at the Lwów Polytechnic Institute , where he earned his PhD in 1933 under the supervision of Kazimierz Kuratowski . In 1935 , John von Neumann , whom Ulam had met in Warsaw , invited him to come to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey , for a few months . From 1936 to 1939 , he spent summers in Poland and academic years at Harvard University in Cambridge , Massachusetts , where he worked to establish important results regarding ergodic theory . On 20 August 1939 , he sailed for America for the last time with his 17 @-@ year @-@ old brother Adam Ulam . He became an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin – Madison in 1940 , and a United States citizen in 1941 . 
 In October 1943 , he received an invitation from Hans Bethe to join the Manhattan Project at the secret Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico . There , he worked on the hydrodynamic calculations to predict the behavior of the explosive lenses that were needed by an implosion @-@ type weapon . He was assigned to Edward Teller 's group , where he worked on Teller 's " Super " bomb for Teller and Enrico Fermi . After the war he left to become an associate professor at the University of Southern California , but returned to Los Alamos in 1946 to work on thermonuclear weapons . With the aid of a cadre of female " computers " , including his wife Françoise Aron Ulam , he found that Teller 's " Super " design was unworkable . In January 1951 , Ulam and Teller came up with the Teller – Ulam design , which is the basis for all thermonuclear weapons . 
 Ulam considered the problem of nuclear propulsion of rockets , which was pursued by Project Rover , and proposed , as an alternative to Rover 's nuclear thermal rocket , to harness small nuclear explosions for propulsion , which became Project Orion . With Fermi and John Pasta , Ulam studied the Fermi – Pasta – Ulam problem , which became the inspiration for the field of non @-@ linear science . He is probably best known for realising that electronic computers made it practical to apply statistical methods to functions without known solutions , and as computers have developed , the Monte Carlo method has become a common and standard approach to many problems . 
 = = Poland = = 
 Ulam was born in Lemberg , Galicia , on 13 April 1909 . At this time , Galicia was in the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , known to Poles as the Austrian partition . In 1918 , it became part of the newly restored Poland , the Second Polish Republic , and the city took its Polish name again , Lwów . 
 The <unk> were a wealthy Polish Jewish family of bankers , industrialists , and other professionals . Ulam 's immediate family was " well @-@ to @-@ do but hardly rich " . His father , Józef Ulam , was born in Lwów and was a lawyer , and his mother , Anna ( née Auerbach ) , was born in <unk> . His uncle , Michał Ulam , was an architect , building contractor , and lumber industrialist . From 1916 until 1918 , Józef 's family lived temporarily in Vienna . After they returned , Lwów became the epicenter of the Polish – Ukrainian War , during which the city experienced a Ukrainian siege . 
 In 1919 , Ulam entered Lwów Gymnasium Nr. VII , from which he graduated in 1927 . He then studied mathematics at the Lwów Polytechnic Institute . Under the supervision of Kazimierz Kuratowski , he received his Master of Arts degree in 1932 , and became a Doctor of Science in 1933 . At the age of 20 , in 1929 , he published his first paper Concerning Function of Sets in the journal Fundamenta Mathematicae . From 1931 until 1935 , he traveled to and studied in Wilno ( Vilnius ) , Vienna , Zurich , Paris , and Cambridge , England , where he met G. H. Hardy and Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar . 
 Along with Stanisław Mazur , Mark Kac , Włodzimierz <unk> , Kuratowski , and others , Ulam was a member of the Lwów School of Mathematics . Its founders were Hugo Steinhaus and Stefan Banach , who were professors at the University of Lwów . Mathematicians of this " school " met for long hours at the Scottish Café , where the problems they discussed were collected in the Scottish Book , a thick notebook provided by Banach 's wife . Ulam was a major contributor to the book . Of the 193 problems recorded between 1935 and 1941 , he contributed 40 problems as a single author , another 11 with Banach and Mazur , and an additional 15 with others . In 1957 , he received from Steinhaus a copy of the book , which had survived the war , and translated it into English . In 1981 , Ulam 's friend R. Daniel Maudlin published an expanded and annotated version . 
