 = = Coming to America = = 
 In 1935 , John von Neumann , whom Ulam had met in Warsaw , invited him to come to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey , for a few months . In December of that year , Ulam sailed to America . At Princeton , he went to lectures and seminars , where he heard Oswald Veblen , James Alexander , and Albert Einstein . During a tea party at von Neumann 's house , he encountered G. D. Birkhoff , who suggested that he apply for a position with the Harvard Society of Fellows . Following up on Birkhoff 's suggestion , Ulam spent summers in Poland and academic years at Harvard University in Cambridge , Massachusetts from 1936 to 1939 , where he worked with John C. <unk> to establish results regarding ergodic theory . These appeared in Annals of Mathematics in 1941 . 
 On 20 August 1939 , in Gdynia , Józef Ulam , along with his brother Szymon , put his two sons , Stanislaw and 17 year old Adam , on a ship headed for America . Two weeks later , the Germans invaded Poland . Within two months , the Germans completed their occupation of western Poland , and the Soviets invaded and occupied eastern Poland . Within two years , Józef Ulam and the rest of his family were victims of the Holocaust , Hugo Steinhaus was in hiding , Kazimierz Kuratowski was lecturing at the underground university in Warsaw , Włodzimierz <unk> and his two sons had been killed in the massacre of Lwów professors , and the last problem had been recorded in the Scottish Book . Stefan Banach survived the Nazi occupation by feeding lice at Rudolf Weigl 's typhus research institute . In 1963 , Adam Ulam , who had become an eminent <unk> at Harvard , received a letter from George Volsky , who hid in Józef Ulam 's house after deserting from the Polish army . This reminiscence gave a chilling account of Lwów 's chaotic scenes in late 1939 . In later life Ulam described himself as " an agnostic . Sometimes I muse deeply on the forces that are for me invisible . When I am almost close to the idea of God , I feel immediately estranged by the horrors of this world , which he seems to tolerate " . 
 In 1940 , after being recommended by Birkhoff , Ulam became an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin – Madison . Here , he became a United States citizen in 1941 . That year , he married Françoise Aron . She had been a French exchange student at Mount Holyoke College , whom he met in Cambridge . They had one daughter , Claire . In Madison , Ulam met his friend and colleague C. J. Everett , with whom he would collaborate on a number of papers . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 In early 1943 , Ulam asked von Neumann to find him a war job . In October , he received an invitation to join an unidentified project near Santa Fe , New Mexico . The letter was signed by Hans Bethe , who had been appointed as leader of the theoretical division of Los Alamos National Laboratory by Robert Oppenheimer , its scientific director . Knowing nothing of the area , he borrowed a New Mexico guide book . On the checkout card , he found the names of his Wisconsin colleagues , Joan Hinton , David Frisch , and Joseph McKibben , all of whom had mysteriously disappeared . This was Ulam 's introduction to the Manhattan Project , which was America 's wartime effort to create the atomic bomb . 
 = = = <unk> calculations of implosion = = = 
 A few weeks after Ulam reached Los Alamos in February 1944 , the project experienced a crisis . In April , Emilio Segrè discovered that plutonium made in reactors would not work in a gun @-@ type plutonium weapon like the " Thin Man " , which was being developed in parallel with a uranium weapon , the " Little Boy " that was dropped on Hiroshima . This problem threatened to waste an enormous investment in new reactors at the Hanford site and to make slow separation of uranium isotopes the only way to prepare fissile material suitable for use in bombs . To respond , Oppenheimer implemented , in August , a sweeping reorganization of the laboratory to focus on development of an implosion @-@ type weapon and appointed George Kistiakowsky head of the implosion department . He was a professor at Harvard and an expert on precise use of explosives . 
 The basic concept of implosion is to use chemical explosives to crush a chunk of fissile material into a critical mass , where neutron multiplication leads to a nuclear chain reaction , releasing a large amount of energy . Cylindrical implosive configurations had been studied by Seth Neddermeyer , but von Neumann , who had experience with shaped charges used in armor @-@ piercing ammunition , was a vocal advocate of spherical implosion driven by explosive lenses . He realized that the symmetry and speed with which implosion compressed the plutonium were critical issues , and enlisted Ulam to help design lens configurations that would provide nearly spherical implosion . Within an implosion , because of enormous pressures and high temperatures , solid materials behave much like fluids . This meant that hydrodynamical calculations were needed to predict and minimize asymmetries that would spoil a nuclear detonation . Of these calculations , Ulam said : 
 The hydrodynamical problem was simply stated , but very difficult to calculate – not only in detail , but even in order of magnitude . In this discussion , I stressed pure pragmatism and the necessity to get a heuristic survey of the problem by simple @-@ minded brute force , rather than by massive numerical work . 
 Nevertheless , with the primitive facilities available at the time , Ulam and von Neumann did carry out numerical computations that led to a satisfactory design . This motivated their advocacy of a powerful computational capability at Los Alamos , which began during the war years , continued through the cold war , and still exists . Otto Frisch remembered Ulam as " a brilliant Polish topologist with a charming French wife . At once he told me that he was a pure mathematician who had sunk so low that his latest paper actually contained numbers with decimal points ! " 
 = = = Statistics of branching and multiplicative processes = = = 
 Even the inherent statistical fluctuations of neutron multiplication within a chain reaction have implications with regard to implosion speed and symmetry . In November 1944 , David Hawkins and Ulam addressed this problem in a report entitled " Theory of <unk> Processes " . This report , which invokes probability @-@ generating functions , is also an early entry in the extensive literature on statistics of branching and multiplicative processes . In 1948 , its scope was extended by Ulam and Everett . 
 Early in the Manhattan project , Enrico Fermi 's attention was focused on the use of reactors to produce plutonium . In September 1944 , he arrived at Los Alamos , shortly after breathing life into the first Hanford reactor , which had been poisoned by a xenon isotope . Soon after Fermi 's arrival , Teller 's " Super " bomb group , of which Ulam was a part , was transferred to a new division headed by Fermi . Fermi and Ulam formed a relationship that became very fruitful after the war . 
 = = Post war Los Alamos = = 
 In September 1945 , Ulam left Los Alamos to become an associate professor at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles . In January 1946 , he suffered an acute attack of encephalitis , which put his life in danger , but which was alleviated by emergency brain surgery . During his recuperation , many friends visited , including Nicholas Metropolis from Los Alamos and the famous mathematician Paul Erdős , who remarked : " Stan , you are just like before . " This was encouraging , because Ulam was concerned about the state of his mental faculties , for he had lost the ability to speak during the crisis . Another friend , Gian @-@ Carlo Rota , asserted in a 1987 article that the attack changed Ulam 's personality ; afterwards , he turned from rigorous pure mathematics to more speculative conjectures concerning the application of mathematics to physics and biology . This assertion was not accepted by Françoise Aron Ulam . 
 By late April 1946 , Ulam had recovered enough to attend a secret conference at Los Alamos to discuss thermonuclear weapons . Those in attendance included Ulam , von Neumann , Metropolis , Teller , Stan Frankel , and others . Throughout his participation in the Manhattan Project , Teller 's efforts had been directed toward the development of a " super " weapon based on nuclear fusion , rather than toward development of a practical fission bomb . After extensive discussion , the participants reached a consensus that his ideas were worthy of further exploration . A few weeks later , Ulam received an offer of a position at Los Alamos from Metropolis and Robert D. Richtmyer , the new head of its theoretical division , at a higher salary , and the <unk> returned to Los Alamos . 
 = = = Monte Carlo method = = = 
 Late in the war , under the sponsorship of von Neumann , Frankel and Metropolis began to carry out calculations on the first general @-@ purpose electronic computer , the ENIAC at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland . Shortly after returning to Los Alamos , Ulam participated in a review of results from these calculations . Earlier , while playing solitaire during his recovery from surgery , Ulam had thought about playing hundreds of games to estimate statistically the probability of a successful outcome . With ENIAC in mind , he realized that the availability of computers made such statistical methods very practical . John von Neumann immediately saw the significance of this insight . In March 1947 he proposed a statistical approach to the problem of neutron diffusion in fissionable material . Because Ulam had often mentioned his uncle , Michał Ulam , " who just had to go to Monte Carlo " to gamble , Metropolis dubbed the statistical approach " The Monte Carlo method " . Metropolis and Ulam published the first unclassified paper on the Monte Carlo method in 1949 . 
 Fermi , learning of Ulam 's breakthrough , devised an analog computer known as the Monte Carlo trolley , later dubbed the <unk> . The device performed a mechanical simulation of random diffusion of neutrons . As computers improved in speed and <unk> , these methods became more useful . In particular , many Monte Carlo calculations carried out on modern massively parallel supercomputers are embarrassingly parallel applications , whose results can be very accurate . 
 = = = Teller – Ulam design = = = 
 On 29 August 1949 , the Soviet Union tested its first fission bomb , the RDS @-@ 1 . Created under the supervision of Lavrentiy Beria , who sought to duplicate the American effort , this weapon was nearly identical to Fat Man , for its design was based on information provided by spies Klaus Fuchs , Theodore Hall , and David Greenglass . In response , on 31 January 1950 , President Harry S. Truman announced a crash program to develop a fusion bomb . 
 To advocate an aggressive development program , Ernest Lawrence and Luis Alvarez came to Los Alamos , where they conferred with Norris Bradbury , the laboratory director , and with George Gamow , Edward Teller , and Ulam . Soon , these three became members of a short @-@ lived committee appointed by Bradbury to study the problem , with Teller as chairman . At this time , research on the use of a fission weapon to create a fusion reaction had been ongoing since 1942 , but the design was still essentially the one originally proposed by Teller . His concept was to put tritium and / or deuterium in close proximity to a fission bomb , with the hope that the heat and intense flux of neutrons released when the bomb exploded , would ignite a self @-@ sustaining fusion reaction . Reactions of these isotopes of hydrogen are of interest because the energy per unit mass of fuel released by their fusion is much larger than that from fission of heavy nuclei . 
 Because the results of calculations based on Teller 's concept were discouraging , many scientists believed it could not lead to a successful weapon , while others had moral and economic grounds for not proceeding . Consequently , several senior people of the Manhattan Project opposed development , including Bethe and Oppenheimer . To clarify the situation , Ulam and von Neumann resolved to do new calculations to determine whether Teller 's approach was feasible . To carry out these studies , von Neumann decided to use electronic computers : ENIAC at Aberdeen , a new computer , MANIAC , at Princeton , and its twin , which was under construction at Los Alamos . Ulam enlisted Everett to follow a completely different approach , one guided by physical intuition . Françoise Ulam was one of a cadre of women " computers " who carried out laborious and extensive computations of thermonuclear scenarios on mechanical calculators , supplemented and confirmed by Everett 's slide rule . Ulam and Fermi collaborated on further analysis of these scenarios . The results showed that , in workable configurations , a thermonuclear reaction would not ignite , and if ignited , it would not be self @-@ sustaining . Ulam had used his expertise in Combinatorics to analyze the chain reaction in deuterium , which was much more complicated than the ones in uranium and plutonium , and he concluded that no self @-@ sustaining chain reaction would take place at the ( low ) densities that Teller was considering . In late 1950 , these conclusions were confirmed by von Neumann 's results . 
 In January 1951 , Ulam had another idea : to channel the mechanical shock of a nuclear explosion so as to compress the fusion fuel . On the recommendation of his wife , Ulam discussed this idea with Bradbury and Mark before he told Teller about it . Almost immediately , Teller saw its merit , but noted that soft X @-@ rays from the fission bomb would compress the thermonuclear fuel more strongly than mechanical shock and suggested ways to enhance this effect . On 9 March 1951 , Teller and Ulam submitted a joint report describing these innovations . A few weeks later , Teller suggested placing a fissile rod or cylinder at the center of the fusion fuel . The detonation of this " spark plug " would help to initiate and enhance the fusion reaction . The design based on these ideas , called staged radiation implosion , has become the standard way to build thermonuclear weapons . It is often described as the " Teller – Ulam design " . 
 In September 1951 , after a series of differences with Bradbury and other scientists , Teller resigned from Los Alamos , and returned to the University of Chicago . At about the same time , Ulam went on leave as a visiting professor at Harvard for a semester . Although Teller and Ulam submitted a joint report on their design and jointly applied for a patent on it , they soon became involved in a dispute over who deserved credit . After the war , Bethe returned to Cornell University , but he was deeply involved in the development of thermonuclear weapons as a consultant . In 1954 , he wrote an article on the history of the H @-@ bomb , which presents his opinion that both men contributed very significantly to the breakthrough . This balanced view is shared by others who were involved , including Mark and Fermi , but Teller persistently attempted to downplay Ulam 's role . " After the H @-@ bomb was made , " Bethe recalled , " reporters started to call Teller the father of the H @-@ bomb . For the sake of history , I think it is more precise to say that Ulam is the father , because he provided the seed , and Teller is the mother , because he remained with the child . As for me , I guess I am the midwife . " 
 With the basic fusion reactions confirmed , and with a feasible design in hand , there was nothing to prevent Los Alamos from testing a thermonuclear device . On 1 November 1952 , the first thermonuclear explosion occurred when Ivy Mike was detonated on Enewetak Atoll , within the US Pacific Proving Grounds . This device , which used liquid deuterium as its fusion fuel , was immense and utterly unusable as a weapon . Nevertheless , its success validated the Teller – Ulam design , and stimulated intensive development of practical weapons . 
 = = = Fermi – Pasta – Ulam problem = = = 
 When Ulam returned to Los Alamos , his attention turned away from weapon design and toward the use of computers to investigate problems in physics and mathematics . With John Pasta , who helped Metropolis to bring MANIAC on line in March 1952 , he explored these ideas in a report " <unk> Studies in Problems of Mathematical Physics on High Speed Computing Machines " , which was submitted on 9 June 1953 . It treated several problems that cannot be addressed within the framework of traditional analytic methods : billowing of fluids , rotational motion in gravitating systems , magnetic lines of force , and hydrodynamic instabilities . 
 Soon , Pasta and Ulam became experienced with electronic computation on MANIAC , and by this time , Enrico Fermi had settled into a routine of spending academic years at the University of Chicago and summers at Los Alamos . During these summer visits , Pasta and Ulam joined him to study a variation of the classic problem of a string of masses held together by springs that exert forces linearly proportional to their displacement from equilibrium . Fermi proposed to add to this force a nonlinear component , which could be chosen to be proportional to either the square or cube of the displacement , or to a more complicated " broken linear " function . This addition is the key element of the Fermi – Pasta – Ulam problem , which is often designated by the abbreviation FPU . 
 A classical spring system can be described in terms of vibrational modes , which are analogous to the harmonics that occur on a stretched violin string . If the system starts in a particular mode , vibrations in other modes do not develop . With the nonlinear component , Fermi expected energy in one mode to transfer gradually to other modes , and eventually , to be distributed equally among all modes . This is roughly what began to happen shortly after the system was initialized with all its energy in the lowest mode , but much later , essentially all the energy periodically reappeared in the lowest mode . This behavior is very different from the expected <unk> of energy . It remained mysterious until 1965 , when Kruskal and <unk> showed that , after appropriate mathematical transformations , the system can be described by the <unk> – de Vries equation , which is the prototype of nonlinear partial differential equations that have <unk> solutions . This means that FPU behavior can be understood in terms of <unk> . 
 = = = Nuclear propulsion = = = 
 Starting in 1955 , Ulam and Frederick Reines considered nuclear propulsion of aircraft and rockets . This is an attractive possibility , because the nuclear energy per unit mass of fuel is a million times greater than that available from chemicals . From 1955 to 1972 , their ideas were pursued during Project Rover , which explored the use of nuclear reactors to power rockets . In response to a question by Senator John O. Pastore at a congressional committee hearing on " Outer Space Propulsion by Nuclear Energy " , on January 22 , 1958 , Ulam replied that " the future as a whole of mankind is to some extent involved inexorably now with going outside the globe . " 
 Ulam and C. J. Everett also proposed , in contrast to Rover 's continuous heating of rocket exhaust , to harness small nuclear explosions for propulsion . Project Orion was a study of this idea . It began in 1958 and ended in 1965 , after the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 banned nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere and in space . Work on this project was spearheaded by physicist Freeman Dyson , who commented on the decision to end Orion in his article , " Death of a Project " . 
 Bradbury appointed Ulam and John H. Manley as research advisors to the laboratory director in 1957 . These newly created positions were on the same administrative level as division leaders , and Ulam held his until he retired from Los Alamos . In this capacity , he was able to influence and guide programs in many divisions : theoretical , physics , chemistry , metallurgy , weapons , health , Rover , and others . 
 In addition to these activities , Ulam continued to publish technical reports and research papers . One of these introduced the Fermi – Ulam model , an extension of Fermi 's theory of the acceleration of cosmic rays . Another , with Paul Stein and Mary <unk> , titled " Quadratic Transformations " , was an early investigation of chaos theory and is considered the first published use of the phrase " chaotic behavior " . 
 = = Return to academia = = 
 During his years at Los Alamos , Ulam was a visiting professor at Harvard from 1951 to 1952 , MIT from 1956 to 1957 , the University of California , San Diego , in 1963 , and the University of Colorado at Boulder from 1961 to 1962 and 1965 to 1967 . In 1967 , the last of these positions became permanent , when Ulam was appointed as professor and Chairman of the Department of Mathematics at Boulder , Colorado . He kept a residence in Santa Fe , New Mexico , which made it convenient to spend summers at Los Alamos as a consultant . 
 In Colorado , where he rejoined his friends Gamow , Richtmyer , and Hawkins , Ulam 's research interests turned toward biology . In 1968 , recognizing this emphasis , the University of Colorado School of Medicine appointed Ulam as Professor of <unk> , and he held this position until his death . With his Los Alamos colleague Robert <unk> he published a report , " Some Elementary Attempts at Numerical Modeling of Problems Concerning Rates of Evolutionary Processes " , which applied his earlier ideas on branching processes to biological inheritance . Another , report , with William Beyer , Temple F. Smith , and M. L. Stein , titled " Metrics in Biology " , introduced new ideas about biometric distances . 
 When he retired from Colorado in 1975 , Ulam had begun to spend winter semesters at the University of Florida , where he was a graduate research professor . Except for sabbaticals at the University of California , Davis from 1982 to 1983 , and at Rockefeller University from 1980 to 1984 , this pattern of spending summers in Colorado and Los Alamos and winters in Florida continued until Ulam died of an apparent heart attack in Santa Fe on 13 May 1984 . Paul Erdős noted that " he died suddenly of heart failure , without fear or pain , while he could still prove and conjecture . " In 1987 , Françoise Ulam deposited his papers with the American Philosophical Society Library in Philadelphia . She continued to live in Santa Fe until she died on 30 April 2011 , at the age of 93 . Both Françoise and her husband are buried with her French family in Montparnasse Cemetery in Paris . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 From the publication of his first paper as a student in 1929 until his death , Ulam was constantly writing on mathematics . The list of Ulam 's publications includes more than 150 papers . Topics represented by a significant number of papers are : set theory ( including measurable cardinals and abstract measures ) , topology , transformation theory , ergodic theory , group theory , projective algebra , number theory , combinatorics , and graph theory . In March 2009 , the Mathematical Reviews database contained 697 papers with the name " Ulam " . 
 Notable results of this work are : 
 With his pivotal role in the development of thermonuclear weapons , Stanislaw Ulam changed the world . According to Françoise Ulam : " Stan would reassure me that , barring accidents , the H @-@ bomb rendered nuclear war impossible . " In 1980 , Ulam and his wife appeared in the television documentary The Day After Trinity . 
 The Monte Carlo method has become a ubiquitous and standard approach to computation , and the method has been applied to a vast number of scientific problems . In addition to problems in physics and mathematics , the method has been applied to finance , social science , environmental risk assessment , linguistics , radiation therapy , and sports . 
 The Fermi – Pasta – Ulam problem is credited not only as " the birth of experimental mathematics " , but also as inspiration for the vast field of Nonlinear Science . In his <unk> Prize lecture , David K. Campbell noted this relationship and described how FPU gave rise to ideas in chaos , <unk> , and dynamical systems . In 1980 , Donald Kerr , laboratory director at Los Alamos , with the strong support of Ulam and Mark Kac , founded the Center for Nonlinear Studies ( CNLS ) . In 1985 , CNLS initiated the Stanislaw M. Ulam Distinguished Scholar program , which provides an annual award that enables a noted scientist to spend a year carrying out research at Los Alamos . 
 The fiftieth anniversary of the original FPU paper was the subject of the March 2005 issue of the journal Chaos , and the topic of the 25th Annual International Conference of CNLS . The University of Southern Mississippi and the University of Florida supported the Ulam Quarterly , which was active from 1992 to 1996 , and which was one of the first online mathematical journals . Florida 's Department of Mathematics has sponsored , since 1998 , the annual Ulam Colloquium Lecture , and in March 2009 , the Ulam Centennial Conference . 
 Ulam 's work on non @-@ Euclidean distance metrics in the context of molecular biology made a significant contribution to sequence analysis and his contributions in theoretical biology are considered watersheds in the development of cellular automata theory , population biology , pattern recognition , and biometrics generally . Colleagues noted that some of his greatest contributions were in clearly identifying problems to be solved and general techniques for solving them . 
 In 1987 , Los Alamos issued a special issue of its Science publication , which summarized his accomplishments , and which appeared , in 1989 , as the book From Cardinals to Chaos . Similarly , in 1990 , the University of California Press issued a compilation of mathematical reports by Ulam and his Los Alamos collaborators : Analogies Between Analogies . During his career , Ulam was awarded honorary degrees by the Universities of New Mexico , Wisconsin , and Pittsburgh . 
 = Jean Sibelius = 
 Jean Sibelius ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; Swedish pronunciation ) , born Johan Julius Christian Sibelius ( 8 December 1865 – 20 September 1957 ) , was a Finnish composer and violinist of the late Romantic and early @-@ modern periods . He is widely recognized as his country 's greatest composer and , through his music , is often credited with having helped Finland to develop a national identity during its struggle for independence from Russia . 
 The core of his oeuvre is his set of seven symphonies which , like his other major works , continue to be performed and recorded in his home country and internationally . His best @-@ known compositions are Finlandia , the Karelia Suite , Valse triste , the Violin Concerto , the choral symphony Kullervo , and The Swan of Tuonela ( from the Lemminkäinen Suite ) . Other works include pieces inspired by the Finnish national epic , the Kalevala , over a hundred songs for voice and piano , incidental music for numerous plays , the opera <unk> i <unk> ( The Maiden in the Tower ) , chamber music , piano music , Masonic ritual music , and 21 publications of choral music . Throughout his career , the composer found inspiration in nature and Nordic mythology , especially the heroic legends of the national epic , the Kalevala . 
 Sibelius composed prolifically until the mid @-@ 1920s but after completing his Seventh Symphony ( 1924 ) , the incidental music for The Tempest ( 1926 ) , and the tone poem Tapiola ( 1926 ) , he failed to produce any major works in his last thirty years , a stunning and perplexing decline commonly referred to as " The Silence of Järvenpää " , the location of his home . Although he is reputed to have stopped composing , he attempted to continue writing , including abortive efforts on an eighth symphony . In later life , he wrote Masonic music and re @-@ edited some earlier works while retaining an active but not always favourable interest in new developments in music . 
 The Finnish 100 mark note featured his image until 2002 when the euro was adopted . Since 2011 , Finland has celebrated a Flag Day on 8 December , the composer 's birthday , also known as the " Day of Finnish Music " . In 2015 , the 150th anniversary of the composer 's birth , a number of special concerts and events were held , especially in the city of Helsinki . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Sibelius was born on 8 December 1865 in Hämeenlinna in the Grand Duchy of Finland , an autonomous part of the Russian Empire . He was the son of the Swedish @-@ speaking medical doctor Christian Gustaf Sibelius and Maria Charlotta Sibelius née Borg . The family name stems from the <unk> Estate in Eastern Uusimaa which was owned by his paternal great grandfather . Sibelius 's father died of typhoid in July 1868 , leaving substantial debts . As a result , his mother — who was again pregnant — had to sell their property and move the family into the home of Katarina Borg , her widowed mother , who also lived in Hämeenlinna . Sibelius was therefore brought up in a decidedly female environment , the only male influence coming from his uncle , Pehr Ferdinand Sibelius , who was interested in music , especially the violin . It was he who gave the boy a violin when he was ten years old and later encouraged him to maintain his interest in composition . For Sibelius , Uncle Pehr not only took the place of a father but of a musical adviser . 
 From an early age , Sibelius showed a strong interest in nature , frequently walking around the countryside when the family moved to Loviisa on the coast for the summer months . In his own words : " For me , Loviisa represented sun and happiness , Hämeenlinna was where I went to school . Loviisa was freedom . " It was in Hämeenlinna , when he was seven , that his aunt Julia was brought in to give him piano lessons on the family 's upright instrument , rapping him on the knuckles whenever he played a wrong note . He reacted by improvising on his own but nevertheless learned to read music . He later turned to the violin which he preferred . He participated in trios with his elder sister Linda , who played the piano , and his younger brother Christian on the cello . ( Christian Sibelius was to become an eminent psychiatrist , still remembered for his contributions to modern psychiatry in Finland . ) Furthermore , Sibelius often played in quartets with neighbouring families , receiving a background in chamber music . Fragments survive of his early compositions of the period , a trio , a piano quartet and a Suite in D Minor for violin and piano . Around 1881 , he recorded on paper his short pizzicato piece <unk> ( Water Drops ) for violin and cello although it might just have been a musical exercise . The first reference he himself made to composing comes in a letter from August 1883 in which he reveals he had composed a trio and was working on another : " They are rather poor , but it is nice to have something to do on rainy days . " In 1881 , he started to take violin lessons from the local bandmaster , Gustaf Levander , immediately developing a particularly strong interest in the instrument . Setting his heart on a career as a great violin virtuoso , he soon succeeded in becoming quite an accomplished player , performing David 's Concerto in E minor in 1886 and , the following year , the last two movements of Mendelssohn 's Violin Concerto in Helsinki . Despite his success as an instrumentalist , he ultimately chose to become a composer . 
 Although his mother tongue was Swedish , in 1874 Sibelius attended Lucina Hagman 's Finnish @-@ speaking preparatory school . In 1876 , he was then able to continue his education at the Finnish @-@ language Hämeenlinna Normal Lyceum where he proved to be a rather absent @-@ minded pupil although he did quite well in mathematics and botany . Despite having to repeat a year , he succeeded in passing the school @-@ leaving examination in 1885 which allowed him to study at university . As a boy he was known as Janne , a colloquial form of Johan . However , during his student years , he adopted the French form Jean , inspired by the business card of his deceased seafaring uncle . Thereafter he became known as Jean Sibelius . 
 = = = Studies and early career = = = 
 After graduating from high school in 1885 , Sibelius began to study law at the Imperial Alexander University in Finland but , showing far more interest in music , soon moved to the Helsinki Music Institute ( now the Sibelius Academy ) where he studied from 1885 to 1889 . One of his teachers was its founder , Martin <unk> , who did much to support the development of education in Finland . It was he who gave the self @-@ taught Sibelius his first formal lessons in composition . Another important influence was his teacher Ferruccio Busoni , a pianist with whom he enjoyed a lifelong friendship . His close circle of friends included the pianist and writer Adolf Paul and the conductor @-@ to @-@ be Armas Järnefelt ( who introduced him to his influential family including his sister Aino who would become Sibelius 's wife ) . The most remarkable of his works during this period was the Violin Sonata in F , rather reminiscent of Grieg . 
 Sibelius continued his studies in Berlin ( from 1889 to 1890 ) with Albert Becker and in Vienna ( from 1890 to 1891 ) with Robert Fuchs and the Hungarian Karl Goldmark . In Berlin , he had the opportunity to widen his musical experience by going to a variety of concerts and operas , including the premiere of Richard Strauss 's Don Juan . He also heard the Finnish composer Robert Kajanus conducting the Berlin Philharmonic in a programme which included his symphonic poem Aino , a patriotic piece which may well have triggered Sibelius 's later interest in using the epic poem Kalevala as a basis for his compositions . While in Vienna , he became particularly interested in the music of Anton Bruckner whom , for a time , he regarded as " the greatest living composer " , although he continued to show interest in the established works of Beethoven and Wagner . He enjoyed his year in Vienna , frequently partying and gambling with his new friends . It was also in Vienna that he turned to orchestral composition , working on the Overture in E major and the Scène de Ballet . While embarking on Kullervo , an orchestral work inspired by the Kalevala , he fell ill but was restored to good health after a gallstone had been removed . Shortly after returning to Helsinki , Sibelius thoroughly enjoyed conducting his Overture and the Scène de Ballet at a popular concert . He was also able to continue working on Kullervo , now that he was increasingly developing an interest in all things Finnish . Premiered in Helsinki on 28 April 1892 , the work was an enormous success . 
 It was around this time that Sibelius finally abandoned his cherished aspirations as a violinist : 
 My tragedy was that I wanted to be a celebrated violinist at any price . Since the age of 15 I played my violin practically from morning to night . I hated pen and ink — unfortunately I preferred an elegant violin bow . My love for the violin lasted quite long and it was a very painful awakening when I had to admit that I had begun my training for the exacting career of a virtuoso too late . 
 In addition to the long periods he spent studying in Vienna and Berlin ( 1889 – 91 ) , in 1900 he travelled to Italy where he spent a year with his family . He composed , conducted and socialized actively in the Scandinavian countries , the UK , France and Germany and later travelled to the United States . 
 = = = Marriage and rise to fame = = = 
 While Sibelius was studying music in Helsinki in the autumn of 1888 , Armas Järnefelt , a friend from the Music Institute , invited him to the family home . There he met and immediately fell in love with Aino , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of General Alexander Järnefelt , the governor of Vaasa , and Elisabeth <unk> von <unk> , a Baltic aristocrat . The wedding was held on 10 June 1892 at <unk> . They spent their honeymoon in Karelia , the home of the Kalevala . It served as an inspiration for Sibelius 's tone poem En saga , the Lemminkäinen legends and the Karelia Suite . Their home , Ainola , was completed on Lake Tuusula , Järvenpää , in 1903 . Over their years in Ainola , they had six daughters : Eva , Ruth , Kirsti ( who died very young from typhoid ) , Katarina , Margareta and Heidi . Eva married an industrial heir , Arvi Paloheimo , and later became the CEO of the Paloheimo Corporation . Ruth <unk> was a prominent actress , Katarina Ilves became the wife of a banker , and Heidi Blomstedt was a designer , her husband Aulis Blomstedt being an architect . Margareta married the conductor Jussi Jalas , Aulis Blomstedt 's brother . 
 In 1892 , the Kullervo became the beginning of Sibelius 's focus on orchestral music . It was described by the composer Aksel <unk> as " a volcanic eruption " while Juho Ranta who sang in the choir stated , " It was Finnish music . " At the end of the year , the composer 's grandmother , Katarina Borg died . Sibelius went to her funeral , visiting his Hämeenlinna home one last time before the house was sold . On 16 February 1893 , the first ( long ) version of En saga was presented in Helsinki although it was not too well received , the critics suggesting that superfluous sections should be eliminated ( as they were in Sibelius 's 1902 version ) . Even less successful were three more performances of Kullervo in March which one critic found was incomprehensible and lacking in vitality . Following the birth of Sibelius 's first child Eva , in April the premiere of his choral work Väinämöinen 's Boat @-@ ride was a considerable success , receiving the support of the press . 
 On 13 November 1893 , the full version of Karelia was premiered at a student association gala at the <unk> in Viipuri with the collaboration of the artist Axel <unk> and the sculptor Emil <unk> who had been brought in to design the stage sets . While the first performance was difficult to appreciate over the background noise of the talkative audience , a second performance on 18 November was more successful . Furthermore , on the 19th and 23rd , Sibelius presented an extended suite of the work in Helsinki , conducting the orchestra of the Philharmonic Society . Sibelius 's music was increasingly presented in Helsinki 's concert halls . In the 1894 – 95 season , works such as En saga , Karelia and <unk> ( composed in 1894 ) were included in at least 16 concerts in the capital , not to mention those in Turku . When performed in a revised version on 17 April 1895 , the composer Oskar Merikanto welcomed <unk> ( Spring Song ) as " the fairest flower among Sibelius 's orchestral pieces " . 
 For a considerable period , Sibelius worked on an opera , <unk> <unk> ( The Building of the Boat ) , again based on the Kalevala . To some extent he had come under the influence of Wagner but he finally realized his mistake , drawing instead inspiration from Liszt 's tone poems . Adapted from material for the opera which was never completed , his Lemminkäinen Suite consisted of four legends in the form of tone poems . They were premiered in Helsinki on 13 April 1896 to a full house . In contrast to Merikanto 's enthusiasm for the Finnish quality of the work , the critic Karl Flodin found the cor anglais solo in The Swan of Tuonela " stupendously long and boring " , although he considered the first legend , Lemminkäinen and the Maidens of the Island , represented the peak of Sibelius 's achievement to date . 
 To pay his way , from 1892 Sibelius had taken on teaching assignments at the Music Institute and at Kajanus 's conducting school but this left him insufficient time for composing . The situation improved considerably when in 1898 he was awarded a substantial annual grant , initially for ten years and later extended for life . He was able to complete the music for Adolf Paul 's play King Christian II . Performed on 24 February 1898 , its catchy tunes appealed to the public . The scores of four popular pieces from the play were published in Germany and sold well in Finland . When the orchestral suite was successfully performed in Helsinki in November 1898 , Sibelius commented : " The music sounded excellent and the tempi seem to be right . I think this is the first time that I have managed to make something complete . " The work was also performed in Stockholm and Leipzig . 
 In January 1899 , Sibelius embarked on his First Symphony at a time when his patriotic feelings were being enhanced by the Russian emperor Nicholas II 's attempt to restrict the powers of the Grand Duchy of Finland . The symphony was well received by all when it was premiered in Helsinki on 26 April 1899 . But the programme also premiered the even more compelling , blatantly patriotic Song of the Athenians for boys ' and male choirs . The song immediately brought Sibelius the status of a national hero . Another patriotic work followed on 4 November in the form of eight tableaux depicting episodes from Finnish history known as the Press Celebration Music . It had been written in support of the staff of the <unk> newspaper which had been suspended for a period after editorially criticizing Russian rule . The last tableau , Finland Awakens , was particularly popular ; after minor revisions , it became the well @-@ known Finlandia . 
 In February 1900 , Sibelius and his wife were deeply saddened by the death of their youngest daughter . Nevertheless , in the spring Sibelius went on an international tour with Kajanus and his orchestra , presenting his recent works ( including a revised version of his First Symphony ) in thirteen cities including Stockholm , Copenhagen , Hamburg , Berlin and Paris . The critics were highly favourable , bringing the composer international recognition with their enthusiastic reports in the Berliner <unk> @-@ Courier , the Berliner <unk> and the Berliner <unk> Anzeiger . 
 During a trip with his family to Rapallo in 1901 , Sibelius began to write his Second Symphony , partly inspired by the fate of Don Juan in Mozart 's Don Giovanni . It was completed in early 1902 with its premiere in Helsinki on 8 March . The work was received with tremendous enthusiasm by the Finns . Merikanto felt it exceeded " even the boldest expectations " while Evert Katila qualified it as " an absolute masterpiece " . Flodin , too , wrote of a symphonic composition " the likes of which we have never had occasion to listen to before " . 
 Sibelius spent the summer in <unk> near Hanko where he worked on the song Var det en <unk> ( Was it a Dream ) as well as on a new version of En saga . When it was performed in Berlin with the Berlin Philharmonic in November 1902 , it served to firmly establish the composer 's reputation in Germany leading shortly afterwards to the publication of his First Symphony . 
 In 1903 , Sibelius spent much of his time in Helsinki where he indulged excessively in <unk> and dining , running up considerable bills in the restaurants . Nevertheless , he continued to compose , one of his major successes being Valse triste , one of six pieces of incidental music he composed for his brother @-@ in @-@ law Arvid Järnefelt 's play Kuolema ( Death ) . Short of money , he sold the piece at a low price but it quickly gained considerable popularity not only in Finland but internationally . During his long stays in Helsinki , Sibelius 's wife Aino frequently wrote to him , imploring him to return home but to no avail . Even after their fourth daughter , Katarina , was born , he continued to work away from home . Early in 1904 , he finished his Violin Concerto but its first public performance on 8 February was not a success . It led to a revised condensed version which was performed in Berlin the following year . 
 = = = Move to Ainola = = = 
 In November 1903 , Sibelius began to build his new home Ainola ( Aino 's Place ) near Lake Tuusula some 45 km ( 30 miles ) north of Helsinki . To cover the construction costs , he gave concerts in Helsinki , Turku and Vaasa in early 1904 as well as in Tallinn , Estonia , and in Latvia during the summer . The family were finally able to move into the new property on 24 September 1904 , making friends with the local artistic community , including the painters Eero Järnefelt and Pekka Halonen and the novelist Juhani Aho . 
 In January 1905 , Sibelius returned to Berlin where he conducted his Second Symphony . While the concert itself was successful , it received mixed reviews , some very positive while those in the Allgemeine Zeitung and the Berliner Tageblatt were less enthusiastic . Back in Finland , he rewrote the increasingly popular Pelléas and Mélisande as an orchestral suite . In November , visiting Britain for the first time , he went to Liverpool where he met Henry Wood . On 2 December , he conducted the First Symphony and Finlandia , writing to Aino that the concert had been a great success and widely acclaimed . 
 In 1906 , after a short , rather uneventful stay in Paris at the beginning of the year , Sibelius spent several months composing in Ainola , his major work of the period being Pohjola 's Daughter , yet another piece based on the Kalevala . Later in the year he composed incidental music for Belshazzar 's Feast , also adapting it as an orchestral suite . He ended the year conducting a series of concerts , the most successful being the first public performance of Pohjola 's Daughter at the Mariinsky Theatre in St Petersburg . 
 = = = Ups and downs = = = 
 From the beginning of 1907 , Sibelius again indulged in excessive <unk> and dining in Helsinki , spending exorbitant amounts on champagne and lobster . His lifestyle had a disastrous effect on the health of Aino who was driven to retire to a sanatorium , suffering from exhaustion . While she was away , Sibelius resolved to give up drinking , concentrating instead on composing his Third Symphony . He completed the work for a performance in Helsinki on 25 September . Although its more classical approach surprised the audience , Flodin commented that it was " internally new and revolutionary " . 
 Shortly afterwards Sibelius met Gustav Mahler who was in Helsinki . The two agreed that with each new symphony , they lost those who had been attracted to their earlier works . This was demonstrated above all in St Petersburg where the Third Symphony was performed in November 1907 to dismissive reviews . Its reception in Moscow was rather more positive . 
 In 1907 , Sibelius underwent a serious operation for suspected throat cancer . Early in 1908 , Sibelius had to spend a spell in hospital . His smoking and drinking had now become life @-@ threatening . Although he cancelled concerts in Rome , Warsaw and Berlin , he maintained an engagement in London but there too his Third Symphony failed to attract the critics . In May 1908 , Sibelius 's health deteriorated further . He travelled with his wife to Berlin to have a tumour removed from his throat . After the operation , he vowed to give up smoking and drinking once and for all . The impact of this brush with death has been said to have inspired works that he composed in the following years , including Luonnotar and the Fourth Symphony . 
 = = = More pleasant times = = = 
 In 1909 , the successful throat operation resulted in renewed happiness between Sibelius and Aino in the family home . In Britain too , his condition was well received as he conducted En saga , Finlandia , Valse Triste and Spring Song to enthusiastic audiences . A meeting with Claude Debussy produced further support . After another uneventful trip to Paris , he went to Berlin where he was relieved to learn that his throat operation had been entirely successful . 
 Sibelius started work on his Fourth Symphony in early 1910 but his dwindling funds also required him to write a number of smaller pieces and songs . In October , he conducted concerts in Kristiania ( now Oslo ) where The Dryad and In Memoriam were first performed . His Valse triste and Second Symphony were particularly well received . He then travelled to Berlin to continue work on his Fourth Symphony , writing the finale after returning to Järvenpää . 
 Sibelius conducted his first concerts in Sweden in early 1911 when even his Third Symphony was welcomed by the critics . He completed the Fourth Symphony in April but , as he expected , with its introspective style it was not very warmly received when first performed in Helsinki with mixed reviews . Apart from a trip to Paris where he enjoyed a performance of Richard Strauss 's Salome , the rest of the year was fairly uneventful . In 1912 , he completed his short orchestral work Scènes historiques II . It was first performed in March together with the Fourth Symphony . The concert was repeated twice to enthusiastic audiences and critics including Robert Kajanus . The Fourth Symphony was also well received in Birmingham in September . In March 1913 , it was performed in New York but a large section of the audience left the hall between the movements while in October , after a concert conducted by Carl Muck , the Boston American labelled it " a sad failure " . 
 Sibelius 's first significant composition of 1913 was the tone poem The Bard which he conducted in March to a respectful audience in Helsinki . He went on to compose Luonnotar ( Daughter of Nature ) for soprano and orchestra . With a text from the Kalevala , it was first performed in Finnish in September 1913 by Aino <unk> ( to whom it had been dedicated ) at the music festival in Gloucester , England . In early 1914 , Sibelius spent a month in Berlin where he was particularly drawn to Arnold Schönberg . Back in Finland , he began work on The Oceanides which had been commissioned by the American millionaire Carl Stoeckel for the Norfolk Music Festival . After first composing the work in D flat major , Sibelius undertook substantive revisions , presenting a D major version in Norfolk which was well received , as were Finlandia and the Valse triste . Henry Krehbiel considered The Oceanides to be one of the most beautiful pieces of sea music ever composed , while The New York Times commented that Sibelius 's music was the most notable contribution to the music festival . While in America , Sibelius received an honorary doctorate from Yale University and , almost simultaneously , one from the University of Helsinki where he was represented by Aino . 
 = = = First World War years = = = 
 While travelling back from the United States , Sibelius heard about the events in Sarajevo which led to the beginning of the First World War . Although he was far away from the fighting , his royalties from abroad were interrupted . To make ends meet , he was forced to compose lots of smaller works for publication in Finland . In March 1915 , he was able to travel to Gothenburg in Sweden where his The Oceanides was really appreciated . While working on his Fifth Symphony in April , he saw 16 swans flying by , inspiring him to write the finale . " One of the great experiences of my life ! " he commented . Although there was little progress on the symphony during the summer , he was able to complete it by his 50th birthday on 8 December . 
 On the evening of his birthday , Sibelius conducted the premiere of the Fifth Symphony in the hall of the Helsinki Stock Exchange . Despite high praise from Kajanus , the composer was not satisfied with his work and soon began to revise it . Around this time , Sibelius was running ever deeper into debt . The grand piano he had received as a present was about to be confiscated by the bailiffs when the singer Ida Ekman paid off a large proportion of his debt after a successful fund @-@ raising campaign . 
 A year later , on 8 December 1915 , Sibelius presented the revised version of his Fifth Symphony in Turku , combining the first two movements and simplifying the finale . When it was performed a week later in Helsinki , Katila was very favourable but Wasenius frowned on the changes , leading the composer to rewrite it once again . 
 From the beginning of 1917 , Sibelius started drinking again , triggering arguments with Aino . Their relationship improved with the excitement resulting from the start of the Russian Revolution . By the end of the year , Sibelius had composed his Jäger March . The piece proved particularly popular after the Finnish parliament accepted the Senate 's declaration of independence from Russia in December 1917 . The Jäger March , first played on 19 January 1918 , coinciding with the beginning of the Finnish Civil War , delighted the Helsinki elite for a short time until the Finnish Red Guard , supporting the Russians , seized power in Helsinki on 28 January . When the Red Guards had been defeated by Gustaf Mannerheim , Sibelius conducted the march in Helsinki , reinforcing his image as a national hero . 
 = = = Revived fortunes = = = 
 In early 1919 , Sibelius enthusiastically decided to change his image , removing his thinning hair . In June , together with Aino , he visited Copenhagen on his first trip outside Finland since 1915 , successfully presenting his Second Symphony . In November he conducted the final version of his Fifth Symphony , receiving repeated ovations from the audience . By the end of the year , he was already working on the Sixth . 
 In 1920 , despite a growing tremor in his hands , Sibelius composed the Hymn of the Earth to a text by the poet Eino Leino for the Suomen <unk> Choir and orchestrated his Valse lyrique , helped along by drinking wine . On his birthday in December 1920 , Sibelius received a donation of 63 @,@ 000 marks , a substantial sum the tenor <unk> Sola had raised from Finnish businesses . Although he used some of the money to reduce his debts , he also spent a week celebrating to excess in Helsinki . 
 Sibelius enjoyed a highly successful trip to England in early 1921 conducting several concerts around the country which included the Fourth and Fifth symphonies , The Oceanides and the ever popular Finlandia and Valse triste . Immediately afterwards , he conducted the Second Symphony and Valse triste in Norway . Although he was beginning to suffer from exhaustion , the critics were still very positive . On his return to Finland in April , he presented Lemminkäinen 's Return and the Fifth Symphony at the Nordic Music Days . 
 Early in 1922 , after suffering from headaches Sibelius decided to acquire spectacles although he never wore them for photographs . In July , he was saddened by the death of his brother Christian . In August , he joined the Finnish Freemasons and composed ritual music for them . February 1923 saw the premiere of his Sixth Symphony which was highly praised by Evert Katila who qualified it as " pure idyll " . Before the year was out he had also conducted concerts in Stockholm and Rome , the first to considerable acclaim , the second to mixed reviews . He then proceeded to Gothenburg where he enjoyed an ecstatic reception despite arriving at the concert hall suffering from over @-@ indulgence in food and drink . Despite continuing to drink , to Aino 's dismay , Sibelius managed to complete his Seventh Symphony in early 1924 . In March , under the title of Fantasia <unk> it received its first public performance in Stockholm where it was a success . It was even more highly appreciated at a series of concerts in Copenhagen in late September . Sibelius was honoured with the Knight Commander 's Cross of the Order of the Dannebrog . 
 He spent most of the rest of the year resting as his recent spate of activity was straining his heart and nerves . Composing a few small pieces , he relied increasingly on alcohol . In May 1925 , his Danish publisher Wilhelm Hansen and the Royal Danish Theatre invited him to compose incidental music for a production of Shakespeare 's The Tempest . He completed the work well in advance of its premiere in March 1926 . It was well received in Copenhagen although Sibelius was not there himself . 
 = = = Last major contributions = = = 
 The year 1926 saw a sharp and lasting decline in Sibelius 's output : after his Seventh Symphony he produced only a few major works during the rest of his life . Arguably the two most significant were the incidental music for The Tempest and the tone poem Tapiola . For most of the last thirty years of his life , Sibelius even avoided talking publicly about his music . 
 There is substantial evidence that Sibelius worked on an eighth symphony . He promised the premiere of this symphony to Serge Koussevitzky in 1931 and 1932 , and a London performance in 1933 under Basil Cameron was even advertised to the public . The only concrete evidence of the symphony 's existence on paper is a 1933 bill for a fair copy of the first movement and short draft fragments first published and played in 2011 . Sibelius had always been quite self @-@ critical ; he remarked to his close friends , " If I cannot write a better symphony than my Seventh , then it shall be my last . " Since no manuscript survives , sources consider it likely that Sibelius destroyed most traces of the score , probably in 1945 , during which year he certainly consigned a great many papers to the flames . His wife Aino recalled , 
 In the 1940s there was a great auto da fé at Ainola . My husband collected a number of the manuscripts in a laundry basket and burned them on the open fire in the dining room . Parts of the Karelia Suite were destroyed – I later saw remains of the pages which had been torn out – and many other things . I did not have the strength to be present and left the room . I therefore do not know what he threw on to the fire . But after this my husband became calmer and gradually lighter in mood . 
 On 1 January 1939 , Sibelius participated in an international radio broadcast which included the composer conducting his Andante <unk> . The performance was preserved on transcription discs and later issued on CD . This is probably the only surviving example of Sibelius interpreting his own music . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 From 1903 and for many years thereafter Sibelius had lived in the countryside . From 1939 he and Aino again had a home in Helsinki but they moved back to Ainola in 1941 , only occasionally visiting the city . After the war he returned to Helsinki only a couple of times . The so @-@ called " the Silence of Järvenpää " became something of a myth , as in addition to countless official visitors and colleagues , his grandchildren and great grandchildren also spent their holidays in Ainola . 
 Sibelius avoided public statements about other composers , but Erik W. Tawaststjerna and Sibelius 's secretary Santeri <unk> have documented his private conversations in which he admired Richard Strauss and considered Béla Bartók and Dmitri Shostakovich the most talented composers of the younger generation . In the 1950s he promoted the young Finnish composer <unk> Rautavaara . 
 His 90th birthday , in 1955 , was widely celebrated and both the Philadelphia Orchestra under Eugene Ormandy and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra under Sir Thomas Beecham gave special performances of his music . 
 Erik Tawaststjerna also relates an anecdote in connection with Sibelius 's death : 
 [ He ] was returning from his customary morning walk . <unk> , he told his wife Aino that he had seen a flock of cranes approaching . " There they come , the birds of my youth , " he exclaimed . Suddenly , one of the birds broke away from the formation and circled once above Ainola . It then rejoined the flock to continue its journey . 
 Two days later , on 20 September 1957 , Sibelius died of a brain haemorrhage at age 91 in Ainola . At the time of his death , his Fifth Symphony , conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent , was being broadcast from Helsinki . He is buried in the garden at Ainola . Another well @-@ known Finnish composer , Heino <unk> , died the same day . Aino lived there for the next 12 years until she died on 8 June 1969 ; she is buried alongside her husband . 
 = = Music = = 
 Sibelius is widely known for his symphonies and his tone poems , especially Finlandia and the Karelia suite . His reputation in Finland grew in the 1890s with the choral symphony Kullervo , which like many subsequent pieces drew on the epic poem Kalevala . His First Symphony was first performed to an enthusiastic audience in 1899 at a time when Finnish nationalism was evolving . In addition to six more symphonies , he gained popularity at home and abroad with incidental music and more tone poems , especially En saga , The Swan of Tuonela and Valse triste . Sibelius also composed a series of works for violin and orchestra including a Violin Concerto , the opera <unk> i <unk> , many shorter orchestral pieces , chamber music , works for piano and violin , choral works and numerous songs . 
 In the mid @-@ 1920s , after his Sixth and Seventh Symphonies , he composed the symphonic poem Tapiola and incidental music for The Tempest . Thereafter , although he lived until 1957 when he was 92 , he did not publish any further works of note . For several years , he worked on an Eighth Symphony which he later burned , leaving virtually no trace . 
 As for his musical style , hints of Tchaikovsky 's music are particularly evident in early works such as his First Symphony and his Violin Concerto . For a period , he was nevertheless overwhelmed by Wagner , particularly while composing his opera . More lasting influences included Ferruccio Busoni and Anton Bruckner . But for his tone poems , he was above all inspired by Liszt . The similarities to Bruckner can be seen in the brass contributions to his orchestral works and the generally slow tempo of his music . 
 Sibelius progressively stripped away formal markers of sonata form in his work and , instead of contrasting multiple themes , focused on the idea of continuously evolving cells and fragments culminating in a grand statement . His later works are remarkable for their sense of unbroken development , progressing by means of thematic permutations and derivations . The completeness and organic feel of this synthesis has prompted some to suggest that Sibelius began his works with a finished statement and worked backwards , although analyses showing these predominantly three- and four @-@ note cells and melodic fragments as they are developed and expanded into the larger " themes " effectively prove the opposite . 
 This self @-@ contained structure stood in stark contrast to the symphonic style of Gustav Mahler , Sibelius 's primary rival in symphonic composition . While thematic variation played a major role in the works of both composers , Mahler 's style made use of disjunct , abruptly changing and contrasting themes , while Sibelius sought to slowly transform thematic elements . In November 1907 Mahler undertook a conducting tour of Finland , and the two composers were able to take a lengthy walk together , leading Sibelius to comment : 
 I said that I admired [ the symphony 's ] severity of style and the profound logic that created an inner connection between all the motifs ... Mahler 's opinion was just the reverse . " No , a symphony must be like the world . It must embrace everything . " 
 = = = Symphonies = = = 
 Sibelius started work on his Symphony No. 1 in E minor , Op. 39 , in 1898 and completed it in early 1899 , when he was 33 . The work was first performed on 26 April 1899 by the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra , conducted by the composer , in an original , well received version which has not survived . After the premiere , Sibelius made some revisions , resulting in the version performed today . The revision was completed in the spring and summer of 1900 , and was first performed in Berlin by the Helsinki Philharmonic , conducted by Robert Kajanus on 18 July 1900 . The symphony begins with a highly original , rather forlorn clarinet solo backed by subdued timpani . 
 His Second Symphony , the most popular and most frequently recorded of his symphonies , was first performed by the Helsinki Philharmonic Society on 8 March 1902 , with the composer conducting . The opening chords with their rising progression provide a motif for the whole work . The heroic theme of the finale with the three @-@ tone motif is interpreted by the trumpets rather than the original woodwinds . During a period of Russian oppression , it consolidated Sibelius 's reputation as a national hero . After the first performance , Sibelius made some changes , leading to a revised version which was given its first performance by Armas Järnefelt on 10 November 1903 in Stockholm . 
 The Third Symphony is a good @-@ natured , triumphal , and deceptively simple @-@ sounding piece . The symphony 's first performance was given by the Helsinki Philharmonic Society , conducted by the composer , on 25 September 1907 . There are themes from Finnish folk music in the work 's early chords . Composed just after his move to Ainola , it contrasts sharply with the first two symphonies , with its clear mode of expression developing into the marching tones of the finale . His Fourth Symphony was premiered in Helsinki on 3 April 1911 by the Philharmonia Society , with Sibelius conducting . It was written while Sibelius was undergoing a series of operations to remove a tumour from his throat . Its grimness can perhaps be explained as a reaction from his ( temporary ) decision to give up drinking . The opening bars , with cellos , basses and bassoons , convey a new approach to timing . It then develops into melancholic sketches based on the composer 's setting of Poe 's The Raven . The waning finale is perhaps a premonition of the silence Sibelius would experience twenty years later . In contrast to the usual assertive finales of the times , the work ends simply with a " leaden thud " . 
 Symphony No. 5 was premiered in Helsinki to great acclaim by Sibelius himself on 8 December 1915 , his 50th birthday . The version most commonly performed today is the final revision , consisting of three movements , presented in 1919 . The Fifth is Sibelius 's only symphony in a major key throughout . From its soft opening played by the horns , the work develops into rotational repetitions of its various themes with considerable transformations , building up to the trumpeted swan hymn in the final movement . While the Fifth had already started to veer away from the sonata form , the Sixth , conducted by the composer at its premiere in February 1923 , is even further removed from the traditional norms . Tawaststjerna comments that " the [ finale 's ] structure follows no familiar pattern " . Composed in the Dorian mode , it draws on some of the themes developed while Sibelius was working on the Fifth as well as from material intended for a lyrical violin concerto . Now taking a purified approach , Sibelius sought to offer " spring water " rather than cocktails making use of lighter flutes and strings rather than the heavy brass of the Fifth . 
 Symphony No. 7 in C major was his last published symphony . Completed in 1924 , it is notable for having only one movement . It has been described as " completely original in form , subtle in its handling of tempi , individual in its treatment of key and wholly organic in growth " . It has also been called " Sibelius 's most remarkable compositional achievement " . Initially titled Fantasia <unk> , it was first performed in Stockholm in March 1924 , conducted by Sibelius . It was based on an adagio movement which he had sketched down almost ten years earlier . While the strings dominate , there is also a distinctive trombone theme . 
 = = = Tone poems = = = 
 After the seven symphonies and the violin concerto , Sibelius 's thirteen symphonic poems are his most important works for orchestra and , along with the tone poems of Richard Strauss , represent some of the most important contributions to the genre since Franz Liszt . As a group , the symphonic poems span the entirety of Sibelius 's artistic career ( the first was composed in 1892 , while the last appeared in 1925 ) , display the composer 's fascination with nature and Finnish mythology ( particularly the Kalevala ) , and provide a comprehensive portrait of his stylistic maturation over time . 
 En saga ( meaning a fairy tale ) was first presented in February 1893 with Sibelius conducting . The single @-@ movement tone poem was possibly inspired by the Icelandic mythological work Edda although Sibelius simply described it as " an expression of [ his ] state of mind " . Beginning with a dreamy theme from the strings , it evolves into the tones of the woodwinds , then the horns and the violas , demonstrating Sibelius 's ability to handle an orchestra . The composer 's first significant orchestral piece , it was revised in 1902 when Ferruccio Busoni invited Sibelius to conduct his work in Berlin . Its successful reception encouraged him to write to Aino : " I have been acknowledged as an accomplished ' artist ' " . 
 The Wood Nymph , a single @-@ movement tone poem for orchestra , was written in 1894 . Premiered in April 1895 in Helsinki with Sibelius conducting , it is inspired by the Swedish poet Viktor Rydberg 's work of the same name . Organizationally , it consists of four informal sections , each corresponding to one of the poem 's four stanzas and evoking the mood of a particular episode : first , heroic vigour ; second , frenetic activity ; third , sensual love ; and fourth , inconsolable grief . Despite the music 's beauty , many critics have faulted Sibelius for his " over @-@ reliance " on the source material 's narrative structure . 
 The Lemminkäinen Suite was composed in the early 1890s . Originally conceived as a mythological opera , <unk> <unk> ( The Building of the Boat ) , on a scale matching those by Richard Wagner , Sibelius later changed his musical goals and the work became an orchestral piece in four movements . The suite is based on the character Lemminkäinen from the Finnish national epic , the Kalevala . It can also be considered a collection of symphonic poems . The second / third section , The Swan of Tuonela , is often heard separately . 
 Finlandia , probably the best known of all Sibelius 's works , is a highly patriotic piece which was first performed in November 1899 as one of the tableaux for the Finnish Press Celebrations . It had its public premiere in revised form in July 1900 . The current title only emerged later , first for the piano version , then in 1901 when Kajanus conducted the orchestral version under the name Finlandia . Although Sibelius insisted it was primarily an orchestral piece , it became a world favourite for choirs too , especially for the hymn episode . Finally the composer consented and in 1937 and 1940 agreed to words for the hymn , first for the Free Masons and later for more general use . 
 The Oceanides is a single @-@ movement tone poem for orchestra written in 1913 – 14 . The piece , which refers to the nymphs in Greek mythology who inhabited the Mediterranean Sea , premiered on 4 June 1914 at the Norfolk Music Festival in Connecticut with Sibelius himself conducting . The work ( in D major ) , praised upon its premiere as " the finest evocation of the sea ever produced in music " , consists of two subjects Sibelius gradually develops in three informal stages : first , a placid ocean ; second , a gathering storm ; and third , a thunderous wave @-@ crash climax . As the tempest subsides , a final chord sounds , symbolizing the mighty power and limitless expanse of the sea . 
 Tapiola , Sibelius 's last major orchestral work , was commissioned by Walter Damrosch for the New York Philharmonic Society where it was premiered on 26 December 1926 . It is inspired by Tapio , a forest spirit from the Kalevala . To quote the American critic Alex Ross , it " turned out to be Sibelius 's most severe and concentrated musical statement " . Even more emphatically , the composer and biographer Cecil Gray asserts : " Even if Sibelius had written nothing else , this one work would entitle him to a place among the greatest masters of all time . " 
 = = = Other important works = = = 
 The Karelia Music , one of the composer 's earlier works , written for the Vyborg Students ' Association , was first performed on 13 November 1893 to a noisy audience . The " Suite " emerged from a concert on 23 November consisting of the overture and the three movements which were published as Op. 11 , the Karelia Suite . It continues to be one of Sibelius 's most popular pieces . 
 Valse triste is a short orchestral work which was originally part of the incidental music Sibelius composed for his brother @-@ in @-@ law Arvid Järnefelt 's 1903 play Kuolema . It is now far better known as a separate concert piece . Sibelius wrote six pieces for the 2 December 1903 production of Kuolema ( meaning death ) . The waltz accompanied a sequence in which a woman rises from her deathbed to dance with ghosts . In 1904 , Sibelius revised the piece for a performance in Helsinki on 25 April where it was presented as Valse triste . An instant success , it took on a life of its own , and remains one of Sibelius 's signature pieces . 
 The Violin Concerto in D minor was first performed on 8 February 1904 with Victor <unk> as soloist . As Sibelius had barely completed the piece in time for the premiere , <unk> had insufficient time to prepare with the result that the performance was a disaster . After substantial revisions , a new version was premiered on 19 October 1905 with Richard Strauss conducting the Berlin Court Orchestra . With Karel <unk> , the orchestra 's leader , as soloist it was a tremendous success . The piece has become increasingly popular and is now the most frequently recorded of all the violin concertos composed in the 20th century . 
 Kullervo , one of Sibelius 's early works , is sometimes referred to as a choral symphony but is better described as a suite of five symphonic movements resembling tone poems . Based on the character Kullervo from the Kalevala , it was premiered on 28 April 1892 with Emmy <unk> and Abraham <unk> as soloists and Sibelius conducting the chorus and orchestra of the recently founded Helsinki Orchestra Society . Although the work was only performed five times during the composer 's lifetime , since the 1990s it has become increasingly popular both for live performances and recordings . 
 = = Freemasonry = = 
 When Freemasonry was revived in Finland , having been forbidden during the Russian sovereignty , Sibelius was one of the founding members of Suomi Lodge No. 1 in 1922 and later became the Grand Organist of the Grand Lodge of Finland . He composed the ritual music used in Finland ( Op 113 ) in 1927 and added two new pieces composed in 1946 . The new revision of the ritual music of 1948 is one of his last works . 
 = = Nature = = 
 Sibelius loved nature , and the Finnish landscape often served as material for his music . He once said of his Sixth Symphony , " [ It ] always reminds me of the scent of the first snow . " The forests surrounding Ainola are often said to have inspired his composition of Tapiola . On the subject of Sibelius 's ties to nature , his biographer , Erik Tawaststjerna , wrote : 
 Even by Nordic standards , Sibelius responded with exceptional intensity to the moods of nature and the changes in the seasons : he scanned the skies with his binoculars for the geese flying over the lake ice , listened to the screech of the cranes , and heard the cries of the curlew echo over the marshy grounds just below Ainola . He savoured the spring blossoms every bit as much as he did autumnal scents and colours . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sibelius exerted considerable influence on symphonic composers and musical life , at least in English @-@ speaking and Nordic countries . The Finnish symphonist Leevi Madetoja was a pupil of Sibelius . In Britain , Vaughan Williams and Arnold Bax both dedicated their fifth symphonies to Sibelius . Furthermore , Tapiola is prominently echoed in both Bax 's Sixth Symphony and Moeran 's Symphony in G Minor . The influence of Sibelius 's compositional procedures is also strongly felt in the First Symphony of William Walton . When these and several other major British symphonic essays were being written in and around the 1930s , Sibelius 's music was very much in vogue , with conductors like Beecham and Barbirolli championing its cause both in the concert hall and on record . Walton 's composer friend Constant Lambert even claimed that Sibelius was " the first great composer since Beethoven whose mind thinks naturally in terms of symphonic form " . Earlier , Granville Bantock had championed Sibelius ( the esteem was mutual : Sibelius dedicated his Third Symphony to the English composer , and in 1946 he became the first President of the Bantock Society ) . More recently , Sibelius was also one of the composers championed by Robert Simpson . Malcolm Arnold acknowledged his influence , and Arthur Butterworth also saw Sibelius 's music as a source of inspiration in his work . 
 Eugene Ormandy and to a lesser extent , his predecessor with the Philadelphia Orchestra Leopold Stokowski , were instrumental in bringing Sibelius 's music to American audiences by frequently programming his works ; the former developed a friendly relationship with Sibelius throughout his life . Later in life , Sibelius was championed by the American critic Olin Downes , who wrote a biography of the composer . 
 In 1938 Theodor Adorno wrote a critical essay , notoriously charging that " If Sibelius is good , this invalidates the standards of musical quality that have persisted from Bach to Schoenberg : the richness of inter @-@ connectedness , articulation , unity in diversity , the ' multi @-@ faceted ' in ' the one ' . " Adorno sent his essay to Virgil Thomson , then music critic of the New York Herald Tribune , who was also critical of Sibelius ; Thomson , while agreeing with the essay 's sentiment , declared to Adorno that " the tone of it [ was ] more apt to create antagonism toward [ Adorno ] than toward Sibelius " . Later , the composer , theorist and conductor René Leibowitz went so far as to describe Sibelius as " the worst composer in the world " in the title of a 1955 pamphlet . 
 Perhaps one reason Sibelius has attracted both the praise and the ire of critics is that in each of his seven symphonies he approached the basic problems of form , tonality , and architecture in unique , individual ways . On the one hand , his symphonic ( and tonal ) creativity was novel , while others thought that music should be taking a different route . Sibelius 's response to criticism was dismissive : " Pay no attention to what critics say . No statue has ever been put up to a critic . " 
 In the latter decades of the twentieth century , Sibelius began to be re @-@ assessed more favourably : Milan Kundera dubbed the composer 's approach to be that of " <unk> modernism " , standing outside the perpetual progression of the status quo . In 1990 , the composer Thea Musgrave was commissioned by the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra to write a piece in honour of the 125th anniversary of Sibelius 's birth : Song of the Enchanter was premiered on 14 February 1991 . In 1984 , the American avant @-@ garde composer Morton Feldman gave a lecture in Darmstadt , Germany , wherein he stated that " the people you think are radicals might really be conservatives – the people you think are conservatives might really be radical , " whereupon he began to hum Sibelius 's Fifth Symphony . 
 Writing in 1996 , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning music critic Tim Page stated , " There are two things to be said straightaway about Sibelius . First , he is terribly uneven ( much of his chamber music , a lot of his songs and most of his piano music might have been churned out by a second @-@ rate salon composer from the 19th century on an off afternoon ) . Second , at his very best , he is often weird . " 
 With 8 December 2015 being the 150th anniversary of Sibelius 's birth , the Helsinki Music Centre has planned an illustrated and narrated " Sibelius Finland Experience Show " every day during the summer of 2015 . The production is also planned to extend over 2016 and 2017 . On 8 December itself , the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by John Storgårds has planned a commemorative concert featuring En Saga , Luonnotar and the Seventh Symphony . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1972 , Sibelius 's surviving daughters sold Ainola to the State of Finland . The Ministry of Education and the Sibelius Society of Finland opened it as a museum in 1974 . The Finnish 100 mark bill featured his image until 2002 when the euro was adopted . Since 2011 , Finland has celebrated a Flag Day on 8 December , the composer 's birthday , also known as the " Day of Finnish Music " . The year 2015 , the 150th anniversary of the composer 's birth , featured a number of special concerts and events , especially in the city of Helsinki . 
 The quinquennial International Jean Sibelius Violin Competition , instituted in 1965 , and the Sibelius Monument , unveiled in 1967 in Helsinki 's Sibelius Park , both exist in his honour , as does the asteroid 1405 Sibelius . 
 Sibelius kept a diary in 1909 – 1944 , and his family allowed it to be published unabridged in 2005 . The diary was edited by Fabian Dahlström and published in the Swedish language in 2005 . To celebrate the 150th anniversary of the composer , the entire diary was also published in the Finnish language in 2015 . Several volumes of Sibelius ’ correspondence have also been edited and published in Swedish , Finnish and English . 
 = Steve Purcell = 
 Steven Ross Purcell ( born 1961 ) is an American cartoonist , animator , director and game designer . He is most widely known as the creator of Sam & Max , an independent comic book series about a pair of anthropomorphic animal vigilantes and private investigators , for which Purcell received an Eisner Award in 2007 . Since being a comic , the series has grown to incorporate an animated television series and several video games . A graduate of the California College of Arts and Craft , Purcell began his career creating comic strips for the college newsletter . He performed freelance work for Marvel Comics and Fishwrap Productions before publishing his first Sam & Max comic in 1987 . Purcell was hired by LucasArts as an artist and animator in 1988 , working on several titles within the company 's adventure games era . 
 Purcell collaborated with Nelvana to create a Sam & Max television series in 1997 , and briefly worked as an animator for Industrial Light & Magic after leaving LucasArts . He is currently employed in the story development department at Pixar . His main work for the animation studio has been with the 2006 film Cars , the 2012 film Brave and spin @-@ off materials such as shorts and video games . Alongside his employment with Pixar , Purcell has continued to work with comic books and came together with Telltale Games in 2005 to bring about new series of Sam & Max video games . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Purcell entered into a career with comic books while an undergraduate at the California College of Arts and Crafts in 1980 ; he produced comic strips for the weekly newsletter . These strips featured Sam and Max , an anthropomorphic dog and rabbit duo who work as vigilantes and private investigators ; Purcell drew the first strip the night before the deadline . Following his graduation in 1982 , Purcell became involved in freelance illustration , working briefly for Marvel Comics , Chaosium , and on Steven Moncuse 's Fish Police series . Moncuse approached Purcell about the possibility of another comic book series to accompany his well @-@ performing Fish Police series in 1987 . Purcell agreed , and wrote his first feature length comic using the characters of Sam and Max . The 32 @-@ page comic was published by Fishwrap Productions in 1987 . The comic contained two Sam & Max stories : " Monkeys Violating the Heavenly Temple " , a name that Purcell found on a firework and thought was appropriate ; and " Night of the Gilded Heron @-@ Shark " . Purcell published a further story in a 1987 issue of Critters titled " Night of the <unk> Wildebeest " . These three stories established the basics for Purcell 's future work with the characters . 
 = = = LucasArts = = = 
 Purcell was hired by LucasArts , then known as Lucasfilm Games , as an animator in 1988 , but was subsequently laid off when the project he was working on was canceled . Despite being laid off , he was rehired to produce artwork for the graphic adventure game Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders . Purcell was later commissioned to create the cover artwork for Maniac Mansion and the first two Monkey Island games and researched into whips for the adventure game version of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade . He worked with animation in several LucasArts adventure games , published three more Sam & Max comic books during this time , and began creating brief comic strips for LucasArts ' quarterly newsletter , The Adventurer . The characters eventually became involved as training material for LucasArts programmers working with SCUMM , the core game engine used by LucasArts adventure games ; Purcell created versions of Sam and Max in their office for new programmers under Ron Gilbert to practice on . References to the characters were occasionally made in unrelated LucasArts adventure games as a clandestine appearance in backgrounds . Purcell wrote the six @-@ issue comic book series Defenders of <unk> City for Marvel Comics in 1992 . 
 After a positive reaction to the Sam & Max strips in The Adventurer and wanting to expand into other franchises following Maniac Mansion and Monkey Island , LucasArts offered to create a graphic adventure game on the characters in 1992 . Sam & Max Hit the Road was conceived and developed by a small team headed by Purcell , Sean Clark , Michael Stemmle and Collette Michaud . Purcell decided to base the game on one of his earlier Sam & Max stories , the 1988 story " On The Road " . In 1995 , Purcell combined all published Sam & Max printed media into a 154 @-@ page paperback compilation titled Sam & Max : Surfin ' the Highway . After producing the cover artwork for Herc 's Adventures and concept art for The Curse of Monkey Island , Purcell left LucasArts . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 Purcell joined with story editor Dan Smith from Canadian studio Nelvana to create an animated television series of Sam & Max in 1996 . The result was the 1997 series The Adventures of Sam & Max : Freelance Police , broadcast on Fox Kids in the United States , YTV in Canada and Channel 4 in the United Kingdom . Purcell wrote the jokes for each installment of the 24 episode series , and wrote the scripts for four episodes . Despite the toned down violence and mild profanity common in the Sam & Max franchise due to the target audience of children , Purcell was content that the characters maintained their moral ambiguity . Some parent groups in the United States attempted to have the series pulled from networks due to content issues ; Purcell was pleased that they " had managed to ruffle some feathers along the way " . Two Sam & Max comic strips appeared in Fox 's Totally Fox Kids Magazine in 1998 to accompany the series ; other Sam & Max strips appeared in Wizard and Oni Double Feature . During the development of the television series in 1997 , Purcell co @-@ authored and illustrated the Hellboy Christmas Special with Mike Mignola and Gary Gianni . After the conclusion of the Sam & Max animated series , Purcell was briefly employed by Industrial Light & Magic to work on digital effects for a film version of Frankenstein . Despite his work , the project was canceled ; Purcell believes that some of the development work morphed into ILM 's contributions to Van Helsing . While at ILM , Purcell was involved in a project to create an animated film based on Monkey Island ; while the project did not reach fruition , Purcell began posting concept art he had produced for the film on his personal blog several years after . 
 = = = Pixar and Telltale Games = = = 
 After the brief stint at ILM , Purcell moved to Pixar . Despite being employed by Pixar , Purcell acted as an advisor in the development of Sam & Max : Freelance Police , a sequel to Sam & Max Hit the Road that began development in 2002 under LucasArts . Purcell provided Michael Stemmle 's development team with concept art and assisted in the creation of the game 's plot . Despite its smoothly proceeding development , LucasArts abruptly canceled the project in March 2004 . Purcell was unable to understand why development halted ; he described himself as " frustrated and disappointed " at the decision . 
 At Pixar 's story development department , Purcell contributed screenplay material and voice work for the 2006 film Cars , and designed the character of the Screaming Banshee in the short Mater and the Ghostlight . Providing scripts and voice work for three games based on Cars , Purcell became involved with THQ 's video game adaptations of Pixar films . Purcell was credited for involvement with Pixar 's 2007 film Ratatouille ; he provided the voice for the character of Carl in George & A.J. — a 2009 short based on the film Up . Purcell was key for Pixar 's 2012 film Brave , co @-@ directing the film alongside Brenda Chapman and Mark Andrews in addition to providing work for the screenplay ; Brave constituted Purcell 's biggest role in a Pixar project to date . 
 In 2014 , Purcell wrote and directed the Pixar Christmas special Toy Story That Time Forgot which aired on ABC on December 2 , 2014 . Purcell is not considering the possibility of Pixar adapting Sam & Max into a film , as the characters ' moral ambiguity is inconsistent with traditional Pixar stories . 
 In 2005 , <unk> 's license with Purcell that gave them the right to produce games based on the Sam & Max franchise expired ; this allowed Purcell to take the franchise to Telltale Games , a new company formed by members of Stemmle 's development team . A new episodic series of Sam & Max games , Sam & Max Save the World , was announced . Purcell 's work on the new game series encompassed design and writing , as well as the design of the game 's cover artwork ; despite his work , Purcell described it as " minimal " due to the effectiveness of the team . At the same time , Purcell began a Sam & Max webcomic hosted on the Telltale Games website . The webcomic ran for twelve issues , and it earned Purcell an Eisner Award for " Best Digital Comic " when the comic finished its run in 2007 . Purcell assisted with design and writing when Sam & Max Beyond Time and Space began development in 2007 . Through Telltale Games , he released two sketchbooks of his Sam & Max work and a 20th anniversary edition of Sam & Max : Surfin ' the Highway in 2008 . Purcell later painted the cover artwork for Telltale 's Tales of Monkey Island . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Purcell grew up in California , where he still resides . In a 2000 interview , Purcell said that he had been drawing all his life , and that he still possesses drawings from when he was three years old . Noting that his line of creative work depends entirely on things one learns , Purcell describes himself as an " average " student at school , but wishing that he had tried harder at some classes . After studying film @-@ making courses at junior college , Purcell enrolled in the California College of Arts and Crafts to read fine art ; he now holds a bachelor 's degree there . Purcell befriended Mike Mignola , and later Art Adams while at the college . Citing the Marx Brothers , Peter Sellers and Monty Python as among his interests , he says that he is inspired by " creative people who have made their seemingly most self @-@ indulgent artistic whims into a career " . During the development of Sam & Max Hit the Road in 1993 , Purcell married fellow lead designer Collette Michaud ; the wedding cake was topped with figurines of Sam and Max as a bride and groom . Purcell has two sons . 
 The characters of Sam and Max were created in Purcell 's youth ; Purcell 's younger brother Dave originally came up with several comics around the idea of a dog and rabbit detective duo . Dave would often leave unfinished comics around the house . Deliberately making the characters mix up each other 's names , shoot at each other and mock the way in which they had been drawn , Steve , in a case of sibling rivalry , would sometimes finish the stories in parodies of their original form . This developed from Steve mocking his brother 's to the creation of his own stories with the characters . In the late 1970s , Dave Purcell gave Steve the rights to the characters ; he signed them over in a contract on Steve 's birthday and allowed him to develop the characters in his own way . Purcell believes that his younger brother has recovered and forgiven him from their earlier years . Having kept one as a pet in his youth , Purcell has an interest in rats , which are commonly featured in his artistic work . 
 = = Credited works = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 The Completely Mental Misadventures of Ed Grimley ( 1988 ) – production crew 
 The Adventures of Sam & Max : Freelance Police ( 1997 – 1998 ) – writing and design 
 Cars ( 2006 ) – additional screenplay material , voice of the tractors 
 Mater and the Ghostlight ( 2006 ) – additional character design 
 Ratatouille ( 2007 ) – production crew 
 George & A.J. ( 2009 ) – voice of Carl Fredricksen 
 Brave ( 2012 ) – co @-@ director and writing , voice of the crow 
 Toy Story That Time Forgot ( 2014 ) – writer and director , voice of the Cleric 
 = Bicycle kick = 
 A bicycle kick , also known as an overhead kick or scissors kick , is a physical move in association football . It is achieved by throwing the body backward up into the air , making a shearing movement with the lower limbs to get one leg in front of the other in order to strike an airborne ball rearwards above head level , without resting on the ground . In most languages , the manoeuvre is named after either the cycling motion or the scissor motion that it resembles . Its complexity and uncommon performance in competitive football matches makes it one of association football 's most celebrated skills . 
 Bicycle kicks can be used defensively to clear away the ball from the goalmouth or offensively to strike at the goal in an attempt to score . The bicycle kick is an advanced football skill that is dangerous for inexperienced players . Its successful performance has largely been limited to the most experienced and athletic players in football history . 
 The bicycle kick was invented in South America , possibly as early as the late 19th century , during a period of development in football history . Innovations like the bicycle kick were the result of local adaptations to the football style introduced by British immigrants . Football lore has many legends on the possible origins of the bicycle kick . Newspaper archives from the beginning of the 20th century evidence a complex , multinational history for the bicycle kick 's invention , naming , and diffusion . 
 As an iconic skill , bicycle kicks are an important part of association football culture . Executing a bicycle kick in a competitive football match , particularly in scoring a goal , usually garners wide attention in the sports media . The bicycle kick has been featured in works of art , such as sculptures , films , advertisements , and literature . The manoeuvre is also used in other similar ball sports , particularly in the variants of association football ( like futsal and beach soccer ) . The controversy over the move 's invention and name in Brazil , Chile , and Peru ( and its status as an element of the notable Chile – Peru football rivalry ) has added to the kick 's acclaim in popular culture . 
 = = Name = = 
 The bicycle kick is known in English by three names : bicycle kick , overhead kick , and scissors kick . The term " bicycle kick " describes the action of the legs while the body is in mid @-@ air , resembling the pedalling of a bicycle . The manoeuvre is also called an " overhead kick " , which refers to the ball being kicked above the head or a " scissors kick " , reflecting the movement of two scissor blades coming together . Some authors differentiate the " scissors kick " as similar to a bicycle kick , but done sideways or at an angle ; other authors consider them to be the same move . 
 In languages other than English , its name also reflects the action it resembles . Sports journalist Alejandro <unk> , from Chilean newspaper El Mercurio , compiled a list of these names . In most cases , they either refer to the kick 's scissor @-@ like motion , such as the French <unk> <unk> ( returned scissor ) and the Greek <unk> , or to its bicycle @-@ like action , such as the Portuguese <unk> de <unk> . In other languages , the nature of the action is described : German <unk> ( falling backward kick ) , Polish <unk> ( overturn kick ) , Dutch <unk> ( turnaround drag ) , and Italian <unk> ( reversed kick ) . 
 Exceptions to these naming patterns are found in languages that designate the move by making reference to a location , such as the Norwegian <unk> ( Brazilian kick ) . This exception is most significant in Spanish , where there exists a fierce controversy between Chile and Peru — as part of their historic sports rivalry — over the naming of the bicycle kick ; Chileans know it as the chilena , while Peruvians call it the chalaca . Regardless , the move is also known in Spanish by the less tendentious names of <unk> and <unk> — both a reference to the manoeuvre 's scissor @-@ like motion . 
 = = Execution = = 
 A successful performance of the bicycle kick in association football typically requires great skill and athleticism . Not only does the performer need to maintain good form when executing the move , but must simultaneously exhibit exceptional accuracy and precision when striking the ball . Sports historian Richard Witzig recommends that footballers attempt executing a bicycle kick with a focused and determined state of mind . Due to the action 's complexity , a successfully executed bicycle kick is notable and , according to sports journalist Elliott Turner , prone to awe audiences . Brazilian forward Pelé , one of the sport 's renowned players , also considers the manoeuvre difficult and recalled having scored from it only a few times out of his 1 @,@ 283 career goals . 
 To perform a bicycle kick , the ball must be airborne so that the player can hit it while doing a backflip ; the ball can either come in the air towards the player , such as from a cross , or the player can flick the ball up into the air . The non @-@ kicking leg should rise first to help propel the body up while the kicking leg makes the jump . While making the leap , the body 's back should move rearwards until it is parallel to the ground . As the body reaches peak height , the kicking leg should snap toward the ball as the non @-@ kicking leg is simultaneously brought down to increase the kick 's power . Vision should stay focused on the ball until the foot strikes it . The arms should be used for balance and to diminish the impact from the fall . 
 Bicycle kicks are generally done in two situations , one defensive and the other offensive . A defensive bicycle kick is done when a player facing his side 's goal uses the action to clear the ball in the direction opposite his side 's goalmouth . Sports historian Richard Witzig considers defensive bicycle kicks a desperate move requiring less aim than its offensive variety . An offensive bicycle kick is used when a player has his back to the opposing goal and is near the goalmouth . According to Witzig , the offensive bicycle kick requires concentration and a good understanding of the ball 's location . Bicycle kicks can also be done in the midfield , but this is not recommended because safer and more accurate passes can be done in this zone . 
 Crosses that precede an offensive bicycle kick are of dubious accuracy — German striker Klaus Fischer reportedly stated that most crosses prior to a bicycle kick are bad . Moreover , performing a bicycle kick is dangerous , even when done correctly , as it may result in the injury of a startled participant in the field . For this reason , Peruvian defender César González recommends that the player executing the bicycle kick have enough space to perform it . For the player using the manoeuvre , the greatest danger happens during the drop ; a bad fall can result in injuries to the head , back , or wrist . Witzig recommends players attempting the move to land on their upper back , using their arms as support , and simultaneously rolling over to a side in order to diminish impact from the drop . A poor bicycle kick can also expose a player to ridicule . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The bicycle kick was created in South America during an era of innovation in association football tactics and skills . Football was introduced to South America by British immigrants who , during the 1800s , were attracted by the region 's economic prospects , including the export of coffee from Brazil , hide and meat from Argentina , and guano from Peru . The sport was adopted by South Americans through trans @-@ cultural diffusion , because the British immigrant communities founded institutions , such as schools and sporting clubs , where activities included the practice of association football . 
 Football had previously spread to mainland Europe , principally Belgium , the Netherlands and Scandinavia , but British sports journalist Jonathan Wilson argues that no innovations were made to the game in these locations . Matters developed differently in South America because , rather than simply imitate the British immigrant 's style of play — which was based more on the slower " Scottish passing game " than on the faster and rougher English football style — the South Americans contributed to the sport 's growth by emphasizing the players ' technical qualities . By adapting the sport to their preferences , South American footballers mastered individual skills like the dribble , bending free kicks , and the bicycle kick . 
 = = = Invention = = = 
 The possible origins of the bicycle kick have been a part of football lore , with many legends relating when it was first performed and who created it . According to Brazilian football chronicler Mario Rodrigues Filho , claims of authorship of football skills reflected the tenor of the early game . Peruvian football journalist Roberto Castro wrote that it is inherently impossible to know for certain who made the first bicycle kick , as anyone playing with a ball could have done it without it being recorded . Uruguayan sports journalist Diego Pérez wrote in the Montevideo @-@ based newspaper El País that the legends obscure the origin of the bicycle kick . Although journalists Uli Hesse and Paul Simpson regard the invention of the bicycle kick as one of several puzzles of football , they consider that reconstructing the true history is possible and that it is to be preferred over the legends . 
 The earliest known person to perform the bicycle kick is the defender Ramón Unzaga , a Basque athlete born in Spain and naturalized Chilean , and he is sometimes credited as its inventor . His first bicycle kick is dated as occurring either in 1914 or in 1916 . According to journalist Luis <unk> <unk> , the author of Talcahuano 's football history , Unzaga 's first recorded bicycle kick occurred in 1918 , as documented by a civil law notary report filed after a heated match between Talcahuano and neighbouring Concepción turned violent . Unzaga , described by <unk> <unk> as a hot @-@ tempered Basque , got into a fistfight with a referee who called a foul on the player 's bicycle kick . This event was reported a few days after the match in the Concepción newspaper El Sur , where Unzaga defends himself by indicating that he had previously executed the manoeuvre in other matches without it being called a foul . To name the move , Chilean newspapers referred to the bicycle kick as a <unk> ( alluding to Talcahuano , Chile , where Unzaga played the sport ) . 
 Argentine football journalist Jorge Barraza , former director of CONMEBOL 's official magazine ( Magazine <unk> ) , affirms that Chilean newspaper records from 1900 also name the bicycle kick as a chalaca ( alluding to the port of Callao , Peru ) , a term that they would use again in 1935 when Peruvian forward Alejandro Villanueva performed it during Alianza Lima 's undefeated tour in Chile . Reports and oral traditions further indicate that the bicycle kick was already being used by Afro @-@ Peruvian footballers in Callao by the end of the 19th century , during football games played between locals and British sailors and railroad employees . Since the second half of the 19th century , football had developed in Peru 's chief seaport as a working @-@ class sport , and it was common for British mariners to practice the game with stevedores and other locals as a form of leisure while their ships docked in Callao . For these reasons , various researchers conclude that the bicycle kick was invented in Peru . Football was also commonly played between Peruvian and Chilean mariners at the beginning of the 20th century , and Barraza reasons that Chileans learned about the bicycle kick or <unk> de chalaca ( " chalaca shot " , as spectators called it ) through these matches , which Colombian journalist Alejandro Millán Valencia considers the first international football games between Chile and Peru . 
 = = = Diffusion = = = 
 According to Millán Valencia , Chilean footballers first performed the bicycle kick outside Western South America during the 1910s and 1920s . During the first editions of the South American Championship , Chilean defenders Ramón Unzaga and Francisco Gatica amazed the public with their bicycle kicks ; Gatica 's bicycle kick , used to stop an imminent goal , garnered so much attention that he was credited with the move 's invention . Also notable were the actions of Chilean club Colo @-@ Colo founder David Arellano , who played as a forward and performed the bicycle kick during his team 's tour of Spain in 1927 . Impressed by the Chileans ' bicycle kick , aficionados from Spain and Argentina named it chilena for the players ' nationality . 
 It was also around this time that , in Brazil , footballer Petronilho de Brito would achieve notoriety for his bicycle kicks — locally receiving credit for the move 's invention . During a 1922 match between clubs from São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro , Petronilho notably scored twice from a bicycle kick — or <unk> , as it was locally known . Amid the nascent football of the Río de la Plata , the bicycle kick was associated with other skills ( such as the back @-@ heel volley and the diving header ) as the nucleus of what newspaper El <unk> in 1928 praised as a uniquely Argentine style of football ; according to that newspaper , the creative striker Pedro <unk> of Boca Juniors invented the bicycle kick . 
 Football skills from South America , including the bicycle kick , also reached Europe through Italy , which received numerous Argentine , Uruguayan , and Brazilian footballers until the mid @-@ 1930s . The South American football style and the Danubian School , a football system from Central Europe that emphasized ball control and tactical positioning on the field , was of significant importance in Italian football and its development of a fourth model of play . This Italian football style furthered the sport 's complexity by giving more precise roles for individual players , especially defenders , and emphasizing micro @-@ level tactics . 
 During the 1930s , the instinctive striker Silvio Piola of Italy was among Europe 's first notable bicycle kick performers — Italians even credited him for its invention and the phrase a la Piola ( " like Piola " ) became locally synonymous with bicycle kick goals . The bicycle kick attained greater notability after it was performed in the France 1938 World Cup quarter @-@ finals match between Brazil and Czechoslovakia , by the Brazilian forward Leônidas da Silva . At the international level , he had previously scored twice from a bicycle kick , in 1932 , against Uruguay . Leônidas would also be hailed as the manoeuvre 's inventor , or as the one to have perfected it , and the bicycle kick continues being closely associated with the Brazilian football style . 
 According to sports historian David Goldblatt 's , the influx of South American footballers ended before the start of the Second World War . In spite of the war , football continued being practiced in various European countries . During the 1940s , the bicycle kick was again popularized in Italy by local defender Carlo <unk> , nicknamed Signor <unk> ( " Mr. Reverse Kick " ) , and Italians credited him with its invention . Doug Ellis , President Emeritus of English club Aston Villa , claimed to have invented the manoeuvre at Southport at around the same time ; however , due to the lack of new developments in British football at the time , Ellis may have been the first player to make a bicycle kick in England . 
 = = = Pelé 's kick = = = 
 During the second half of the twentieth century , the bicycle kick would again be brought forth to international acclaim by Pelé , who learned the manoeuvre from Petronilho 's younger brother , Waldemar de Brito . Pelé 's capability to perform bicycle kicks with ease was one of the traits that made him stand out from other players early in his sports career , and it also boosted his self @-@ confidence as a footballer . 
 The majority of the goals that Pelé scored from a bicycle kick occurred during club matches with Santos FC and the New York Cosmos , but the most celebrated is the one he scored in an international football match between Brazil and Belgium in 1968 . Due to the skill 's rarity at the time , Pelé 's bicycle kick caught the Belgian goalkeeper by surprise and dumbfounded the spectators ; an iconic photograph , taken while Pelé was in mid @-@ air , helped immortalize the event . Pelé has since been closely associated with the bicycle kick and has also been attributed its invention . 
 After Pelé , Argentine midfielder Diego Maradona and Mexican forward Hugo Sánchez became notable performers of the bicycle kick during the last decades of the 20th century . Other notable players to have performed the move during this period include Peruvian winger Juan Carlos <unk> , who scored a bicycle kick goal in a 1975 Copa América match between Peru and Chile , and Welsh forward Mark Hughes , who scored from a bicycle kick in a World Cup qualification match played between Wales and Spain in 1985 . 
 = = = Modern acclaim = = = 
 Some of the late twentieth century 's most memorable bicycle kicks have also been performed in the FIFA World Cup finals . German striker Klaus Fischer scored from a bicycle kick in the Spain 1982 World Cup semi @-@ finals match between West Germany and France , tying the score in overtime — the game then went into a penalty shootout , which ended in favour of the German team . Hesse and Simpson consider Fischer 's action the World Cup 's most outstanding bicycle kick . In the Mexico 1986 World Cup , Mexican midfielder Manuel Negrete Arias scored from a bicycle kick during the round of 16 match between Mexico and Bulgaria — despite receiving great notability early in the tournament , Negrete 's goal was eventually overshadowed by " The Goal of the Century " scored by Maradona in the quarter @-@ finals match between Argentina and England . 
 Not all bicycle kicks in association football 's major international tournament have to result in a goal to be notable , however , as proven by a memorable bicycle kick that occurred in the United States 1994 World Cup , when U.S. defender Marcelo Balboa used the skill during the group stage match between Colombia and the United States . Even though it did not result in a goal , Balboa 's move has received much praise and is even credited with boosting the sport 's popularity in the United States . 
 Since the beginning of the twenty @-@ first century , the bicycle kick continues to be a skill that is rarely successfully executed in football matches . In 2001 , Spanish midfielder Guti scored a bicycle kick goal in a match between Real Madrid and Villarreal that sports journalist Rob Smyth listed as one of the six best bicycle kicks in the history of football in an article for <unk> In the Korea @-@ Japan 2002 World Cup , Belgian attacking midfielder Marc Wilmots scored what English football writer Brian Glanville describes as a " spectacular bicycle kick " against Japan . Other notable players to have performed the bicycle kick in recent years include Swedish forward Zlatan Ibrahimović , who in 2012 scored an overhead goal during an international friendly match between Sweden and England , and English forward Wayne Rooney , who during the 2011 Manchester derby scored a bicycle kick that was voted as the best in the Premier League 's history . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The bicycle kick retains popular appeal ; Hesse and Simpson highlight the positive impact a successful bicycle kick has on player notability , and the United States Soccer Federation describes it as an iconic embellishment of the sport . According to former Manchester City defender Paul Lake , a notable bicycle kick performed by English left winger Dennis <unk> in the English Premier League injured hundreds of fans who tried to emulate it . When Italian striker Mario Balotelli during his youth development years tried to pattern his skills on those of Brazilian midfielder Ronaldinho and French midfielder Zinedine Zidane , he fixated on the bicycle kick . The manoeuvre is also admired in variants of association football , such as beach soccer and futsal . An action like the bicycle kick is also used in <unk> takraw , a sport whose objective is to kick a ball over a net and into the opposing team 's side . 
 Bicycle kicks are also an important part of football culture . According to the United States Soccer Federation , Pelé 's bicycle kick in the 1981 film Escape to Victory is a textbook execution of the skill and Pelé expressed satisfaction with his attempt to " show off " for the film in his autobiography . A Google Doodle in September 2013 , celebrating Leônidas da Silva 's 100th birthday , prominently featured a bicycle kick performed by a stick figure representing the popular Brazilian forward . Bicycle kicks have also been featured in advertisements , such as in a 2014 television commercial where Argentine forward Lionel Messi executes the manoeuvre to promote that year 's FIFA football simulation video game . 
 A monument to the bicycle kick executed by Ramón Unzaga was erected in Talcahuano , Chile , in 2014 ; created by sculptor María Angélica <unk> , the statue is composed of copper and bronze and measures three meters in diameter . A statue in honor of Manuel Negrete 's bicycle kick is planned for the <unk> district of Mexico City . The Uruguayan novelist Eduardo Galeano wrote about the bicycle kick in his book Soccer in Sun and Shadow , praising Unzaga as the inventor . The Peruvian Nobel laureate writer Mario Vargas Llosa has the protagonist in The Time of the Hero 's Spanish edition declare that the bicycle kick must have been invented in Callao , Peru . 
 = = = Origin controversy = = = 
 According to journalist Diego Pérez , bicycle kicks are currently less common and their origins cloudier . Popular opinion in Brazil , Chile , and Peru defends those nations ' claims of inventing the bicycle kick . Witzig acknowledges different names for the move , depending on country . 
 In Goal : The New York Times Soccer Blog , journalist Juan <unk> wrote that the bicycle kick 's origin is a sensitive issue in Peru and Chile . In 2006 , Harold Mayne @-@ Nicholls , president of the Football Federation of Chile ( <unk> ) , poked gentle fun at Peruvian insistence on credit for the bicycle kick . That year Mayne @-@ Nicholls ' Peruvian Football Federation ( FPF ) counterpart , Manuel Burga , announced a campaign to verify the bicycle kick 's origin in his country . In 2009 , Peruvian footballer Teófilo Cubillas advised the FPF to patent the manoeuvre with FIFA , and that year Chilean footballer <unk> <unk> expressed his belief that the Peruvian position was based on anti @-@ Chilean sentiment . 
 According to Brazilian anthropologist Antonio Jorge Soares , the bicycle kick 's origin is important only as an example of how folklore is created . In the Spanish newspaper El País , journalist Alberto <unk> raised no objection to local names for the move . Simpson and Hesse agree that the move 's name should be a matter of personal opinion . Roberto Castro wrote that the bicycle kick 's alternate names are synonyms , with no one name definitive . 
 = Battle of Huoyi = 
 The Battle of Huoyi ( <unk> ; Wade @-@ Giles : Huo @-@ i ) was fought in China on 8 September 617 between the forces of the rebel Duke of Tang , Li Yuan , and the army of the ruling Sui Dynasty . Li Yuan , with an army of ca . 25 @,@ 000 , was advancing south along the Fen River towards the imperial capital , Daxingcheng . His advance was stalled for two weeks due to heavy rainfall and he was met at the town of Huoyi by an elite Sui army of 20 @,@ 000 ( or 30 @,@ 000 ) men . Li Yuan 's cavalry , under the command of his two eldest sons , lured the Sui out of the protection of the city walls , but in the first clash between the two main armies , Li Yuan 's forces were initially driven back . At that point , possibly due to a stratagem on Li Yuan 's behalf , the arrival of the rest of the rebel army , or to the flanking manoeuvres of Li Yuan 's cavalry , which had gotten behind the Sui army , the Sui troops collapsed and routed , fleeing back towards Huoyi . Li Yuan 's cavalry , however , cut off their retreat . The battle was followed by the capture of weakly defended Huoyi , and the advance on Daxingcheng , which fell to the rebels in November . In the next year , Li Yuan deposed the Sui and proclaimed himself emperor , beginning the Tang Dynasty . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the later reign of the second emperor of the Sui Dynasty , Yang , the dynasty 's authority began to wane . The main reason was the immense material and human cost of the protracted and fruitless attempts to conquer the Korean kingdom of Goguryeo . Coupled with natural disasters , the conscription of more and more men for the war and the hoarding of scarce grain reserves for the army 's needs increased provincial discontent . As a result , from 611 on rural revolts broke out across the empire , and with the emperor 's prestige and legitimacy diminished by military failure , ambitious provincial magnates were encouraged to challenge his rule . Yang nevertheless continued to be fixated on the Korean campaigns , and only as unrest spread within the Empire and the powerful Eastern Turks turned hostile , did he realize the gravity of the situation : in 616 , he abandoned the north and withdrew to Jiangdu , where he remained until his assassination in 618 . 
 With the emperor 's withdrawal from the scene , local governors and magnates emerged to claim power . Nine major contenders emerged , some claiming the imperial title for themselves , others , like Li Mi in Henan , contending themselves , for the time being , with more modest titles . Among the most well @-@ positioned contenders was Li Yuan , Duke of Tang and governor of Taiyuan in the northwest ( modern Shanxi ) . A scion of a noble family related to the Sui dynasty , and with a distinguished career behind him , Li Yuan was an obvious candidate for the throne . His province possessed excellent natural defences , a heavily militarized population and was located near the capitals of Daxingcheng ( Chang 'an ) and Luoyang . 
 = = Li Yuan 's march south = = 
 Traditional historiography emphasizes Li Yuan 's initial reluctance to revolt against the Sui , and that he had to be persuaded by his senior aides and his second son ( and eventual successor ) , Li Shimin . In reality , Li Yuan was considering a rebellion at least by the time of his appointment to Taiyuan in early 617 . In mid @-@ 617 , Li began raising additional troops from his province and executed his two deputies — who were appointed by emperor Yang to watch over him . He also concluded an alliance with <unk> , the powerful khagan of the Eastern Turks , which secured his northern frontier from a Turkish invasion and provided him with men and , most importantly , horses , which he lacked . Initially , however , Li Yuan portrayed himself a Sui loyalist , and proclaimed his intention of placing Yang 's grandson , Yang You , on the throne . 
 Li Yuan 's campaign is recorded in detail by his chief secretary , Wen Daya . In mid @-@ July , a first expedition , under Li Yuan 's eldest sons Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin , was launched against the loyalist <unk> commandery further south along the Fen River . Li Yuan 's sons succeeded in capturing the province within a few days and returned to Taiyuan . Finally , after his preparations were complete , on 10 August , Li Yuan began his march south , along the Fen towards Daxingcheng . His " righteous army " comprised 30 @,@ 000 men , raised from the local " soaring hawk " militia , but with some 10 @,@ 000 additional volunteers and including a 500 @-@ strong Turkish contingent , provided by the khagan along with 2 @,@ 000 horses . His fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son Li <unk> was left behind to guard Taiyuan , while Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin accompanied their father as his lieutenants . A small force under Chang Lun was detached to advance parallel to the main army and capture the loyalist commanderies further west , securing the flanks . 
 Li Yuan 's advance was stopped at a place called <unk> for two weeks in late August due to heavy rainfall , giving time to the Sui authorities to react : the general <unk> Tong was sent to secure <unk> Commandery on the Yellow River , while another army , of 20 @,@ 000 elite troops under Song Laosheng advanced north to the town of Huoyi , some 17 miles south of <unk> , to confront him . Huoyi was placed on the southern exit of a defile through which the road passed , following the course of the Fen River , and provided an excellent position from which to check an army coming from the north . When Li Yuan 's army learned of Song Laosheng 's presence , some began advocating a retreat to Taiyuan , fearing that in their absence the Turks might break the treaty and attack it . A council was held , at which Li Yuan sided with his sons , who argued forcefully for continuing the campaign . Thus , on 8 September , after the rains stopped , Li Yuan 's army set out from its encampment . Instead of following the road through the defile , however , they chose a path through the southeastern hills , allegedly revealed to them by a peasant . 
 Li Yuan 's army that arrived at Huoyi numbered less than its original 30 @,@ 000 men , perhaps as few as 25 @,@ 000 , due to the detachments left behind . It was predominantly composed of infantry was divided into six divisions under a general ( <unk> ) , but it is unclear how they were subordinated to Li Yuan and his sons : Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin were named in the traditional fashion as commanders of the left and right respectively , but in the accounts of the battle , the army appears formed in van , middle and rear divisions . The cavalry , a few hundred strong , was apparently kept as a strategic reserve . Very little is also known about the Sui army , except that Song Laosheng 's troops were considered to be elite warriors . Some sources raise their number to 30 @,@ 000 from the more typical 20 @,@ 000 ; this could be an error , or possibly indicate additional forces recruited at Huoyi . 
 = = Battle = = 
 There are two accounts of the subsequent battle : the account of Wen Daya , and a later official account , which became the dominant version in traditional Chinese historiography . The latter was compiled during the reign of Li Shimin , and therefore enhances his own role , having him decide the battle in a cavalry charge , while denigrating the role of both his father and his elder brother Li Jiancheng , whom Li Shimin would murder and supplant on the throne . The two accounts are difficult to reconcile , but Wen Daya 's account , despite its own inadequacies , is clearly to be preferred as an eyewitness testimony . According to Wen Daya , Li Yuan feared that Song Laosheng would deny battle and instead force him to engage in a prolonged and costly siege of the town . For this reason , as soon as the headquarters with the cavalry cleared the hills and came into view of Huoyi in the early afternoon of 8 September , Li Yuan sent his sons at the head of the cavalry to manoeuvre before the walls of Huoyi , hoping to entice the Sui army to come out . In this he hoped to exploit Song Laosheng 's reputation for rashness . The slower @-@ moving infantry , which formed bulk of Li Yuan 's army , was still in the process of traversing the hills , and Li Yuan sent officers to hurry them up . Song Laosheng , who may have seen this as an opportunity of destroying his enemy piecemeal , deployed his army outside the town wall , but proved reluctant to advance further , and had to be goaded further away from the town through a feigned retreat by the cavalry . 
 At this time , Li Yuan 's infantry began arriving , with the van division deploying in a square to fend off a Sui attack while the other two divisions were coming up behind it . Wen Daya 's account now becomes <unk> , indicating that the infantry charged the Sui army , at which point Li Yuan 's sons led the cavalry around the Sui flank towards the town , where the small garrison left behind by Song Laosheng was forced to drop the portcullis gates . Li Yuan then let spread the rumour that Song Laosheng had been killed , which demoralized the Sui force . The Sui army began to retreat , but this turned into a rout when they found their retreat to Huoyi cut off by Li Yuan 's cavalry and the barred gates . Wen Daya 's narrative can be supplemented by the later account , which , despite its bias regarding Li Shimin , also contains indications that not everything went according to Li Yuan 's plans : it appears that in the first clash between Li Yuan 's infantry and the Sui army , the Sui had the upper hand and pushed Li Yuan back , possibly because he had not yet managed to bring all his forces into the field . Either through the arrival of the rest of Li Yuan 's infantry , the actions of Li Yuan 's cavalry along and behind the Sui flanks , or Li Yuan 's stratagem , the Sui army 's morale gave way abruptly , and their resistance collapsed . 
 The battle was over by 4 p.m. in a crushing victory for Li Yuan , who then led his troops against Huoyi itself . Although he lacked any siege equipment , the garrison in the town was too small to effectively resist Li Yuan 's army , and Huoyi fell within a few hours . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following their victory , Li Yuan and his army continued their southward advance , and in mid @-@ October reached the Yellow River . Part of the army was left behind to contain the Sui garrison at <unk> , while the rest crossed the river , defeating a Sui army that tried to prevent them . The governor of <unk> surrendered the city and its vital granaries to him , and turned towards the capital . On the way , he was joined by his daughter , Princess <unk> , and his cousin , Li <unk> , with the troops they had raised themselves . By the time Li Yuan 's army reached Daxingcheng , it was said to number 200 @,@ 000 men . After a brief siege , on 9 November , Li Yuan 's troops stormed the capital . 
 This feat established Li Yuan as a major contender for the empire , but for the moment , despite the calls of his generals to proclaim himself emperor there and then , he still feigned to be a Sui loyalist : the Sui imperial family was kept safe and its dignity respected , and the young Yang You was enthroned as emperor Gong , with Yang himself delegated to the honorific position of " Retired Emperor " ( <unk> huang ) . It was not until 16 June 618 , exactly a year after he formally broke with Sui by executing his deputies , that Li Yuan deposed the puppet emperor and proclaimed himself the first emperor of the Tang Dynasty , with the temple name of Gaozu . The new dynasty still had to face the various local rebels and warlords that had sprung up throughout the Chinese Empire , but by 628 , with a judicious mixture of force and clemency , the Tang had succeeded in the pacification and consolidation of China under their rule . 
 = Brislington House = 
 Brislington House ( now known as Long Fox Manor ) was built as a private lunatic asylum . When it opened in 1806 it was one of the first purpose @-@ built asylums in England . It is situated on the Bath Road in Brislington , Bristol , although parts of the grounds cross the city boundary into the parish of Keynsham in Bath and North East Somerset . 
 The Palladian @-@ fronted building was originally seven separate blocks into which patients were allocated depending on their class . The buildings , estate and therapeutic regime designed by Edward Long Fox were based on the principles of moral treatment that was fashionable at the time . Brislington House later influenced the design and construction of other asylums and influenced Acts of Parliament . 
 The house and ancillary structures are listed buildings that have now been converted into private residences . The original grounds are Grade II * listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England and now include St. Brendan 's Sixth Form College , sports pitches and some farmland . They are now included on the Heritage at Risk register . 
 = = History = = 
 The asylum was established by Edward Long Fox and considered state of the art when it opened in 1806 , having been built on moral treatment ideas pioneered at the York Retreat , which had opened in 1796 . Fox had an extensive private practice in Bristol and served as a physician at Bristol Infirmary before taking over a madhouse at Cleeve Hill in 1792 . He had a range of different businesses locally and was able to pay £ 4 @,@ 000 for the Brislington Estate . The site had previously been Brislington Common , which had been enclosed in 1780 . The site , on the main road between Bristol and Bath , now the A4 , enabled him to attract wealthy clients from both cities . 
 Fox divided the patients at Brislington House according to social class , ' 1st ' , ' 2nd ' and ' 3rd ' class ladies and gentlemen , who were housed in different blocks , as well as behavioural presentation . Fox insisted that patients should be separated from their families as they needed to move away from the conventional authority of the head of the household following the madness of King George III . It had erroneously been suggested that the king become a patient at Brislington House . 
 Each block had access to courtyards , known as airing courts , and the asylum was surrounded by extensive grounds . At the end of each courtyard were stone rooms used to house <unk> patients , who slept on straw beds . All buildings were made from stone and iron , avoiding the use of wood because of the potential fire hazard . Hot and cold plunge baths were also included , as Fox saw their use as an important part of treatment , which may have been related to his Quaker beliefs and John Wesley 's advocacy of the practice . The total construction cost around £ 35 @,@ 000 . In addition to the wealthy private patients , paupers funded by parish funds were also admitted and kept in accommodation furthest from the central block , which was for the highest in society . 
 By 1844 there were 60 private patients . The building was refronted and a chapel added in 1851 . The design of the buildings and the therapeutic regime were seen as models to be followed elsewhere , including at the General Lunatic Asylum of Nottingham at <unk> , and the drafting of the 1808 County Asylums Act and Lunacy Act 1845 . 
 The asylum continued to be owned and run by physicians from the Fox family until the Second World War . The asylum did not become part of the National Health Service when it was formed in 1948 , being categorised as a " disclaimed hospital " . In 1951 it was sold to the Royal United Hospital , who used it as a nurses ' home until the 1980s , when it became a care home for the elderly . In the 1990s it was converted into flats and its name changed to Long Fox Manor . 
 = = = Patients = = = 
 John Thomas Perceval , the son of Spencer Perceval , spent about a year at Brislington House , from 1831 until February 1832 , followed by two years at Ticehurst House , Ticehurst in Sussex . In Brislington House Perceval experienced , in spite of the expense , a regime of deprivation , brutality and degradation . For eight months , during which time he was completely under the control of his voices , spirits and presences , he was kept under restraint , either in a straitjacket or tied down in bed . Treatment consisted of cold baths and an operation to sever his temporal artery . He was later one of the founders of the Alleged Lunatics ' Friend Society and acted as their honorary secretary for about twenty years . Perceval 's two books about his experience in asylums were republished by the anthropologist Gregory Bateson in 1962 , and in recent years he has been hailed as a pioneer of the mental @-@ health advocacy movement . 
 The artist Frank Miles was committed to Brislington House in 1887 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The front of the building is in the Palladian style , with a central block and two wings , all of which have slate roofs . The three @-@ storey central block has a Doric porch and a nine @-@ window range . The wings on either side have six @-@ window ranges . On the southern end is an attached pavilion and on the northern end is the chapel , which contains a window from St Luke 's Church , Brislington . The current layout was developed in the mid @-@ 19th century from the original separate blocks , which had been linked by a corridor at basement level . < 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The extensive grounds covered around 36 hectares ( 89 acres ) with 2 hectares ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) of kitchen gardens , 6 hectares ( 15 acres ) of pleasure grounds and gardens , with the remaining 25 hectares ( 62 acres ) being parkland , which is now largely covered with sports fields . They were laid out as part of the regimen of moral treatment that was in vogue when the asylum was built . They included pathways and walks including one along the cliff above the River Avon . There were also facilities for various recreational activities , including a bowling green and fives court , and later football and cricket pitches . The inclusion of a grotto and other eye @-@ catching features , along with attractive views , may have been seen as therapeutic and based on the ideas of Archibald Alison as expressed in his work Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste ( 1790 ) . He based these on the principle of " association " , which suggested that seeing objects of beauty could help to correct thought patterns . 
 There were several cottages on the estate , the first of which , The Beeches , was built for the Fox family . Swiss Cottage , which was built in 1819 , was originally known as <unk> Cottage , when the Earl of Carysfort was a patient there . Lanesborough Cottage was built as accommodation for Lord Lanesborough . The lodge house was originally called the wheelhouse as it contained the mechanism used to open and close the iron gates to the asylum . A garden alcove dating from around 1820 is a Grade II listed building . 
 In the late 1950s The Beeches and a large part of the grounds were sold for the establishment of St. Brendan 's Sixth Form College . The grounds , which are Grade II * listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England , are now on the Heritage at Risk register of Historic England . 
 = James Bryant Conant = 
 James Bryant Conant ( March 26 , 1893 – February 11 , 1978 ) was an American chemist , a transformative President of Harvard University , and the first U.S. Ambassador to West Germany . Conant obtained a PhD in Chemistry from Harvard in 1916 . During World War I he served in the U.S. Army , working on the development of poison gases . He became an assistant professor of chemistry at Harvard in 1919 , and the Sheldon Emery Professor of Organic Chemistry in 1929 . He researched the physical structures of natural products , particularly chlorophyll , and he was one of the first to explore the sometimes complex relationship between chemical equilibrium and the reaction rate of chemical processes . He studied the biochemistry of oxyhemoglobin providing insight into the disease methemoglobinemia , helped to explain the structure of chlorophyll , and contributed important insights that underlie modern theories of acid @-@ base chemistry . 
 In 1933 , Conant became the President of Harvard University with a reformist agenda that involved dispensing with a number of customs , including class rankings and the requirement for Latin classes . He abolished athletic scholarships , and instituted an " up or out " policy , under which scholars who were not promoted were terminated . His egalitarian vision of education required a diversified student body , and he promoted the adoption of the Scholastic Aptitude Test ( SAT ) and co @-@ educational classes . During his presidency , women were admitted to Harvard Medical School and Harvard Law School for the first time . 
 Conant was appointed to the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) in 1940 , becoming its chairman in 1941 . In this capacity , he oversaw vital wartime research projects , including the development of synthetic rubber , and the Manhattan Project , which developed the first atomic bombs . On July 16 , 1945 , he was among the dignitaries present at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range for the Trinity nuclear test , the first detonation of an atomic bomb , and was part of the Interim Committee that advised President Harry S. Truman to use atomic bombs on Japan . After the war , he served on the Joint Research and Development Board ( <unk> ) that was established to coordinate burgeoning defense research , and on the influential General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) of the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) . 
 In his later years at Harvard , Conant taught undergraduate courses on the history and philosophy of science , and wrote books explaining the scientific method to laymen . In 1953 he retired as President of Harvard and became the United States High Commissioner for Germany , overseeing the restoration of German sovereignty after World War II , and then was Ambassador to West Germany until 1957 . On returning to the United States , he criticized the education system in works such as The American High School Today ( 1959 ) , Slums and Suburbs ( 1961 ) and The Education of American Teachers ( 1963 ) . Between 1965 and 1969 , Conant , suffering from a heart condition , worked on his autobiography , My Several Lives ( 1970 ) . He became increasingly infirm , suffered a series of strokes in 1977 , and died in a nursing home the following year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Bryant Conant was born in Dorchester , Massachusetts , on March 26 , 1893 , the third child and only son of James Scott Conant , a <unk> , and his wife <unk> Orr née Bryant . Conant was one of 35 boys who passed the competitive admission exam for the Roxbury Latin School in West Roxbury in 1904 . He graduated near the top of his class in 1910 . Encouraged by his science teacher , Newton H. Black , in September of that year he entered Harvard College , where he studied physical chemistry under Theodore W. Richards and organic chemistry under Elmer P. Kohler . He was also an editor of The Harvard Crimson . He joined the Signet Society and Delta Upsilon , and was initiated as a brother of the Omicron Chapter of Alpha Chi Sigma in 1912 . He graduated Phi Beta Kappa with his Bachelor of Arts in June 1913 . He then went to work on his doctorate , which was an unusual double dissertation . The first part , supervised by Richards , concerned " The Electrochemical Behavior of Liquid Sodium <unk> " ; the second , supervised by Kohler , was " A Study of Certain <unk> Derivatives " . Harvard awarded Conant his Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1916 . 
 In 1915 , Conant entered into a business partnership with two other Harvard chemistry graduates , Stanley Pennock and Chauncey Loomis , to form the LPC Laboratories . They opened a plant in a one @-@ story building in Queens , New York , where they manufactured chemicals used by the pharmaceutical industry like benzoic acid that were selling at high prices on account of the interruption of imports from Germany due to World War I. In 1916 , the departure of organic chemist Roger Adams created a vacancy at Harvard that was offered to Conant . Since he aspired to an academic career , Conant accepted the offer and returned to Harvard . On November 27 , 1916 , there was an explosion at the plant . Pennock and two other workers were killed and the plant was completely destroyed . One of the contributing causes was Conant 's faulty test procedures . 
 Following the United States declaration of war on Germany , Conant was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Sanitary Corps on September 22 , 1917 . He went to the Camp American University , where he worked on the development of poison gases . Initially , his work concentrated on mustard gas , but in May 1918 Conant took charge of a unit concerned with the development of lewisite . He was promoted to major on July 20 , 1918 . A pilot plant was built , and then a full @-@ scale production plant in Cleveland , but the war ended before lewisite could be used in battle . 
 After the war ended , Conant was discharged from the Army and returned to Harvard , where he was appointed an assistant professor of chemistry on September 1 , 1919 . The following year he became engaged to Richards 's daughter , Grace ( Patty ) Thayer Richards . They were married in the Appleton Chapel at Harvard on April 17 , 1920 , and had two sons , James Richards Conant , born in May 1923 , and Theodore Richards Conant , born in July 1928 . 
 = = Chemistry professor = = 
 Conant became an associate professor in 1924 . In 1925 , he visited Germany , then the heart of chemical research , for eight months . He toured the major universities and laboratories there and met many of the leading chemists , including Theodor Curtius , Kazimierz Fajans , Hans Fischer , Arthur <unk> , Hans <unk> , Jakob <unk> , Hermann Staudinger , Adolf <unk> and Karl Ziegler . After Conant returned to the United States , Arthur Amos Noyes made him an attractive offer to move to Caltech . The President of Harvard , Abbott Lawrence Lowell , made a counter offer : immediate promotion to professor , effective September 1 , 1927 , with a salary of $ 7 @,@ 000 ( roughly equivalent to US $ 95 @,@ 358 as of 2016 ) and a grant of $ 9 @,@ 000 per annum for research . Conant accepted and stayed at Harvard . In 1929 , he became the Sheldon Emery Professor of Organic Chemistry , and then , in 1931 , the Chairman of the Chemistry Department . 
 Between 1928 and 1933 , Conant published 55 papers . Much of his research , like his double thesis , combined natural product chemistry with physical organic chemistry . Based on his exploration of reaction rates in chemical equilibria , Conant was one of the first to recognise that the kinetics of these systems is sometimes straightforward and simple , yet quite complex in other cases . Conant studied the effect of <unk> structure on the rate of substitution with inorganic iodide salts which , together with earlier work , led to what is now known as either the Conant @-@ Finkelstein reaction or more commonly simply the Finkelstein reaction . A recent application of this reaction involved the preparation of an <unk> polyvinyl chloride from regular PVC . A combination of Conant 's work on the kinetics of hydrogenation and George Kistiakowsky 's work on the enthalpy changes of these reactions supported the later development of the theory of <unk> . 
 Conant 's investigations helped in the development of a more comprehensive understanding of the nature of acids and bases . He investigated the properties of certain acids which were many times stronger than mineral acid solutions in water . Conant christened them " <unk> " and laid the foundation for the development of the Hammett acidity function . These investigations used acetic acid as the solvent and demonstrated that sodium acetate behaves as a base under these conditions . This observation is consistent with Brønsted – Lowry acid – base theory ( published in 1923 ) but cannot be explained under older Arrhenius theory approaches . Later work with George <unk> and extended by William Kirk McEwen looked at the properties of hydrocarbons as very weak acids , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Conant can be considered alongside Brønsted , Lowry , Lewis , and Hammett as a developer of modern understanding of acids and bases . 
 Between 1929 and his retirement from chemical research in 1933 , Conant published papers in Science , Nature , and the Journal of the American Chemical Society about chlorophyll and its structure . Though the complete structure eluded him , his work did support and contribute to Nobel laureate Hans Fischer 's ultimate determination of the structure in 1939 . Conant 's work on chlorophyll was recognised when he was inducted as a foreign Fellow of the Royal Society on May 2 , 1941 . He also published three papers describing the polymerisation of isoprene to prepare synthetic rubber . 
 Another line of research involved the biochemistry of the hemoglobin @-@ oxyhemoglobin system . Conant ran a series of experiments with electrochemical oxidation and reduction , following in the footsteps of the famous German chemist and Nobel laureate Fritz Haber . He determined that the iron centre in methemoglobin is a ferric ( <unk> ) centre , unlike the ferrous ( FeII ) centre found in normal hemoglobin , and this difference in oxidation state is the cause of methemoglobinemia , a medical condition which causes tissue hypoxia . 
 Conant wrote a chemistry textbook with his former science teacher Black , entitled Practical Chemistry , which was published in 1920 , with a revised edition in 1929 . This was superseded in 1937 by their New Practical Chemistry , which in turn had a revised edition in 1946 . The text proved a popular one ; it was adopted by 75 universities , and Conant received thousands of dollars in royalties . For his accomplishments in chemistry , he was awarded the American Chemical Society 's Nichols Medal in 1932 , Columbia University 's Chandler Medal in 1932 , and the American Chemical Society 's highest honor , the Priestley Medal , in 1944 . He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1924 , and the National Academy of Sciences in 1929 . Notable students of Conant 's included Paul Bartlett , George <unk> , and Frank Westheimer . In 1932 he was also honored by membership of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina . 
 After some months of lobbying and discussion , Harvard 's ruling body , the Harvard Corporation , announced on May 8 , 1933 , that it had elected Conant as the next President of Harvard . Alfred North Whitehead , Harvard 's eminent professor of philosophy disagreed with the decision , declaring : 
 " The Corporation should not have elected a chemist to the Presidency . " 
 " But , " Corporation member Grenville Clark reminded him , " Eliot was a chemist , and our best president too . " " I know , " replied Whitehead " but Eliot was a bad chemist . " 
 = = President of Harvard = = 
 On October 9 , 1933 , Conant became the President of Harvard University with a low @-@ key installation ceremony in the Faculty Room of University Hall . This set the tone for Conant 's presidency as one of informality and reform . At his inauguration he accepted the charter and seal presented to John Leverett the Younger in 1707 , but dropped a number of other customs , including the singing of Gloria Patri and the Latin Oration . This was a sign of things to come . While , unlike some other universities , Harvard did not require Greek or Latin for entrance , they were worth double credits towards admission , and students like Conant who had studied Latin were awarded an A.B. degree while those who had not , received an S.B. One of his first efforts at reform was to attempt to abolish this distinction , which took over a decade to accomplish . But in 1937 he wrote : 
 I do not see how one can make very much headway as a student ... of history and literature without a reading knowledge of Latin . I do not see how a person can go very far in any branch of science without a thorough understanding of mathematics , and if the underpinning was bad in school , probably the necessary calculus and so forth would not have been taken during the college years . I know that a man cannot be a research chemist without a reading knowledge of German . It is hard to acquire it as the first language in college . 
 Other reforms included the abolition of class rankings and athletic scholarships , but his first , longest and most bitter battle was over tenure reform , shifting to an " up or out " policy , under which scholars who were not promoted were terminated . A small number of extra @-@ departmental positions was set aside for outstanding scholars . This policy led junior faculty to revolt , and nearly resulted in Conant 's dismissal in 1938 . Conant was fond of saying : " Behold the turtle . It makes progress only when it sticks its neck out . " 
 Conant added new graduate degrees in education , history of science and public policy , and he introduced the Nieman Fellowship for journalists to study at Harvard , the first of which was awarded in 1939 . He supported the " meatballs " , as lower class students were called . He instituted the Harvard national scholarships for underprivileged students . Dudley House was opened as a place where non @-@ resident students could stay . Conant asked two of his assistant deans , Henry Chauncey and William Bender , to determine whether the Scholastic Aptitude Test ( SAT ) was a good measure of academic potential . When they reported that it was , Conant adopted it . He waged a ten @-@ year campaign for the consolidation of testing services , which resulted in the creation of the Educational Testing Service in 1946 , with Chauncey as its director . Theodore H. White , a Boston Jewish meatball who received a personal letter of introduction from Conant so that he could report on the Chinese Civil War , noted that " Conant was the first president to recognize that meatballs were Harvard men too . " 
 Instead of conducting separate but identical undergraduate courses for Harvard students and students from Radcliffe College , Conant instituted co @-@ educational classes . It was during his presidency that the first class of women were admitted to Harvard Medical School in 1945 , and Harvard Law School in 1950 . Lowell , Conant 's predecessor , had imposed a 15 percent quota on Jewish students in 1922 , something Conant had voted to support . This quota was later substituted with geographic distribution preferences , having the same effect of limiting Jewish admission . In the words of historians Morton and Phyllis Keller , " Conant 's pro @-@ quota position in the early 1920s , his preference for more students from small towns and cities and the South and West , and his cool response to the plight of the Jewish academic refugees from Hitler suggest that he shared the mild antisemitism common to his social group and time . But his commitment to meritocracy made him more ready to accept able Jews as students and faculty . " 
 In 1934 , Harvard @-@ educated German businessman Ernst Hanfstaengl attended the 25th anniversary reunion of his class of 1909 , and gave a number of speeches , including the 1934 commencement address . Hanfstaengl wrote out a check for 2 @,@ 500 Reichsmarks ( roughly equivalent to US $ 185 @,@ 735 as of 2016 ) to Conant for a scholarship to enable an outstanding Harvard student to study for a year in Germany . The President and Fellows of Harvard College rejected the offer due to Hanfstaengl 's Nazi associations . When the issue of Hanfstaengl 's scholarship came up again in 1936 , Conant turned the money down a second time . Hanfstaengl 's presence on campus prompted a series of anti @-@ Nazi demonstrations , in which a number of Harvard and MIT students were arrested . Conant made a personal plea for clemency that resulted in two girls being acquitted , but six boys and a girl were sentenced to six months in prison . 
 When the University of Berlin awarded an honorary degree in 1934 to American legal scholar and Dean of Harvard Law School Roscoe Pound , who had toured Germany earlier that year and made no secret of his admiration for the Nazi regime , Conant refused to order Pound not to accept it , and attended the informal award ceremony at Harvard where Pound was presented with the degree by Hans Luther , the German ambassador to the United States . While Conant declined to participate in the Emergency Committee in Aid of Displaced German Scholars , Harvard awarded honorary degrees to two notable displaced scholars , Thomas Mann and Albert Einstein , in 1935 . What Conant feared most was disruption to Harvard 's <unk> celebrations in 1936 , but there was no trouble , despite the presence of Franklin D. Roosevelt , the President of the United States , and a Harvard graduate of the class of 1904 , whom many Harvard graduates regarded as a socialist and a class traitor . It was only with difficulty that Lowell was persuaded to be presiding officer at an event at which Roosevelt spoke . 
 An incident took place during the 1941 Harvard – Navy lacrosse game , when the Harvard Crimson men 's lacrosse team attempted to field a player of African @-@ American descent . The Navy Midshipmen men 's lacrosse team 's coach then refused to field his team . Harvard 's athletic director , William J. Bingham , overruled his lacrosse coach , and had the player , Lucien Victor Alexis , Jr . , sent back to Cambridge on a train . Conant subsequently apologized to the Commandant of Midshipmen . After serving in World War II , Alexis was refused admittance to Harvard Medical School on the grounds that , as the only black student , he would have no one to room with . Alexis graduated from Harvard Business School instead . 
 = = National Defense Research Committee = = 
 In June 1940 , with World War II already raging in Europe , Vannevar Bush , the director of the Carnegie Institution of Washington , recruited Conant to the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , although he remained president of Harvard . Bush envisaged the NDRC as bringing scientists together to " " conduct research for the creation and improvement of <unk> , methods and materials of warfare . " Although the United States had not yet entered the war , Conant was not alone in his conviction that Nazi Germany had to be stopped , and that the United States would inevitably become embroiled in the conflict . The immediate task , as Conant saw it , was therefore to organize American science for war . He became head of the NDRC 's Division B , the division responsible for bombs , fuels , gases and chemicals . On June 28 , 1941 , Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8807 , which created the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , with Bush as its director . Conant succeeded Bush as Chairman of the NDRC , which was subsumed into the OSRD . Roger Adams , a contemporary of Conant 's at Harvard in the 1910s , succeeded him as head of Division B. Conant became the driving force of the NDRC on personnel and policy matters . The NDRC would work hand in hand with the Army and Navy 's research efforts , supplementing rather than supplanting them . It was specifically charged with investigating nuclear fission . 
 In February 1941 , Roosevelt sent Conant to Britain as head of a mission that also included Frederick L. Hovde from Purdue University and Carroll L. Wilson from MIT , to evaluate the research being carried out there and the prospects for cooperation . The 1940 Tizard Mission had revealed that American technology was some years behind that of Britain in many fields , most notably radar , and cooperation was eagerly sought . Conant had lunch with Prime Minister Winston Churchill and Frederick Lindemann , his leading scientific adviser , and an audience with King George VI at Buckingham Palace . At a subsequent meeting , Lindemann told Conant about British progress towards developing an atomic bomb . What most impressed Conant was the British conviction that it was feasible . That the British program was ahead of the American one raised the possibility in Conant 's mind that the German nuclear energy project might be even further ahead , as Germany was generally acknowledged to be a world leader in nuclear physics . Later that year , Churchill , as Chancellor of the University of Bristol , conferred an honorary Doctor of Laws degree on Conant in absentia . 
 Conant subsequently moved to restrict cooperation with Britain on nuclear energy , particularly its post @-@ war aspects , and became involved in heated negotiations with Wallace Akers , the representative of Tube Alloys , the British atomic project . Conant 's tough stance , under which the British were excluded except where their assistance was vital , resulted in British retaliation , and a complete breakdown of cooperation . His objections were swept aside by Roosevelt , who brokered the 1943 Quebec Agreement with Churchill , that restored full cooperation . After the Quebec Conference , Churchill visited Conant at Harvard , where Conant returned the 1941 gesture and presented Churchill with an honorary Doctor of Laws degree . After the United States entered the war in December 1941 , the OSRD handed the atomic bomb project , better known as the Manhattan Project , over to the Army , with Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves as project director . A meeting that included Conant decided Groves should be answerable to a small committee called the Military Policy Committee , chaired by Bush , with Conant as his alternate . Thus , Conant remained involved in the administration of the Manhattan Project at its highest levels . 
 In August 1942 , Roosevelt appointed Conant to the Rubber Survey Committee . Chaired by Bernard M. Baruch , a trusted adviser and confidant of Roosevelt , the committee was tasked with reviewing the synthetic rubber program . Corporations used patent laws to restrict competition and stifle innovation . When the Japanese occupation of Malaya , North Borneo and Sarawak , followed by the Japanese occupation of Indonesia , cut off 90 percent of the supply of natural rubber , the rubber shortage became a national scandal , and the development of synthetic substitutes , an urgent priority . Baruch dealt with the difficult political issues ; Conant concerned himself with the technical ones . There were a number of different synthetic rubber products to choose from . In addition to DuPont 's neoprene , Standard Oil had licensed German patents for a <unk> called Buna @-@ N and a related product , Buna @-@ S. None had been manufactured on the scale now required , and there was pressure from agricultural interests to choose a process which involved making raw materials from farm products . The Rubber Survey Committee made a series of recommendations , including the appointment of a rubber director , and the construction and operation of 51 factories to supply the materials needed for synthetic rubber production . Technical problems dogged the program through 1943 , but by late 1944 plants were in operation with an annual capacity of over a million tons , most of which was Buna @-@ S. 
 In May 1945 , Conant became part of the Interim Committee that was formed to advise the new president , Harry S. Truman on nuclear weapons . The Interim Committee decided that the atomic bomb should be used against an industrial target in Japan as soon as possible and without warning . On July 16 , 1945 , Conant was among the dignitaries present at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range for the Trinity nuclear test , the first detonation of an atomic bomb . After the war , Conant became concerned about growing criticism in the United States of the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by figures like Norman Cousins and Reinhold Niebuhr . He played an important behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role in shaping public opinion by instigating and then editing an influential February 1947 Harper 's article entitled " The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb " . Written by former Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson with the help of McGeorge Bundy , the article stressed that the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were used to avoid the possibility of " over a million casualties " , from a figure found in the estimates given to the Joint Chiefs of Staff by its Joint Planning Staff in 1945 . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 replaced the wartime Manhattan Project with the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) on January 1 , 1947 . The Act also established the General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) within the AEC to provide it with scientific and technical advice . It was widely expected that Conant would chair the GAC , but the position went to Robert Oppenheimer , the wartime director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory that had designed and developed the first atomic bombs . At the same time , the Joint Research and Development Board ( <unk> ) was established to coordinate defense research , and Bush asked Conant to head its atomic energy subcommittee , on which Oppenheimer also served . When the new AEC chairman David E. Lilienthal raised security concerns about Oppenheimer 's relationships with communists , including Oppenheimer 's brother Frank Oppenheimer , his wife Kitty and his former girlfriend Jean Tatlock , Bush and Conant reassured Lilienthal that they had known about it when they had placed Oppenheimer in charge at Los Alamos in 1942 . With such expressions of support , AEC issued Oppenheimer a Q clearance , granting him access to atomic secrets . 
 By September 1948 , the Red Scare began to take hold , and Conant called for a ban on hiring teachers who were communists , although not for the dismissal of those who had already been hired . A debate ensued over whether communist educators could teach apolitical subjects . Conant was a member of the Educational Policies Commission ( EPC ) , a body to which he had been appointed in 1941 . When it next met in March 1949 , Conant 's push for a ban was supported by the president of Columbia University , General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower . The two found common ground in their belief in ideology @-@ based education , which Conant called " democratic education " . He did not see public education as a side effect of American democracy , but as one of its principal driving forces , and he disapproved of the public funding of denominational schools that he observed in Australia during his visit there in 1951 . He called for increased federal spending on education , and higher taxes to redistribute wealth . His thinking was outlined in his books Education in a Divided World in 1948 , and Education and Liberty in 1951 . In 1952 , he went further and endorsed the dismissal of academics who invoked the Fifth under questioning by the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . 
 A sign of Conant 's declining influence occurred in 1950 , when he was passed over for the post of President of the National Academy of Sciences in favor of Detlev <unk> , the President of Johns Hopkins University , after a " revolt " by scientists unhappy with Conant . The GAC was enormously influential throughout the late 1940s , but the opposition of Oppenheimer and Conant to the development of the hydrogen bomb , only to be overridden by Truman in 1950 , diminished its stature . It was reduced further when Oppenheimer and Conant were not reappointed when their terms expired in 1952 , depriving the GAC of its two best @-@ known members . Conant was appointed to the National Science Board , which administered the new National Science Foundation , and was elected its chairman , but this body had little financial or political clout . In April 1951 , Truman appointed Conant to the Science Advisory Committee , but it would not develop into an influential body until the Eisenhower administration . 
 Conant 's experience with the Manhattan Project convinced him that the public needed a better understanding of science , and he moved to revitalize the history and philosophy of science program at Harvard . He took the lead personally by teaching a new undergraduate course , Natural Science 4 , " On Understanding Science " . His course notes became the basis for a book of the same name , published in 1948 . In 1952 , he began teaching another undergraduate course , Philosophy 150 , " A Philosophy of Science " . In his teachings and writing on the philosophy of science , he drew heavily on those of his Harvard colleague Willard Van Orman Quine . Conant contributed four chapters to the 1957 Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science , including an account of the overthrow of the phlogiston theory . In 1951 , he published Science and Common Sense , in which he attempted to explain the ways of scientists to laymen . Conant 's ideas about scientific progress would come under attack by his own protégés , notably Thomas Kuhn in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Conant commented on Kuhn 's manuscript in draft form . 
 = = High Commissioner = = 
 In April 1951 Conant had been approached by the Secretary of State , Dean Acheson , about replacing John J. McCloy as United States High Commissioner for Germany , but had declined . However , after Eisenhower was elected president in 1952 , Conant was again offered the job by the new Secretary of State , John Foster Dulles , and this time he accepted . At the Harvard Board of Overseers meeting on January 12 , 1952 , Conant announced that he would retire in September 1953 after twenty years at Harvard , having reached the pension age of sixty . 
 In Germany , there were major issues to be decided . Germany was still occupied by the Soviet Union , the United States , Great Britain and France . Dealing with the wartime allies was a major task for the high commissioner . West Germany , made up of the zones occupied by the three western powers , had been granted control of its own affairs , except for defense and foreign policy , in 1949 . While most Germans wanted a neutral and reunited Germany , the Eisenhower administration sought to reduce its defense spending by rearming Germany and replacing American troops with Germans . Meanwhile , the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee slammed Conant 's staff as communist sympathizers and called for books by communist authors held in United States Information Agency ( USIA ) libraries in Germany to be burned . 
 The first crisis to occur on Conant 's watch was the uprising of 1953 in East Germany . This brought the reunification issue to the fore . Konrad Adenauer 's deft handling of the issue enabled him to handily win re @-@ election as Chancellor of West Germany in September , but this also strengthened his hand in negotiations with Conant . Adenauer did not want his country to become a bargaining chip between the United States and the Soviet Union , nor did he want it to become a nuclear battlefield , a prospect raised by the arrival of American tactical nuclear weapons in 1953 as part of the Eisenhower administration 's New Look policy . Conant lobbied for the European Defense Community , which would have established a pan @-@ European military . This seemed to be the only way that German rearmament would be accepted , but opposition from France killed the plan . In what Conant considered a minor miracle , France 's actions cleared the way for West Germany to become part of NATO with its own army . 
 At noon on May 6 , 1955 , Conant , along with the high commissioners from Britain and France , signed the documents ending Allied control of West Germany , admitting it to NATO , and allowing it to rearm . The office of the United States High Commissioner was abolished and Conant became instead the first United States Ambassador to West Germany . His role was now to encourage West Germany to build up its forces , while reassuring the Germans that doing so would not result in a United States withdrawal . Being fluent in German , Conant was able to give speeches to German audiences . He paid numerous visits to German educational and scientific organizations . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Conant returned to the United States in February 1957 , and moved to an apartment on the Upper East Side of New York . Between 1957 and 1965 , the Carnegie Corporation of New York gave him over a million dollars to write studies of education . In 1959 he published The American High School Today . This became a best seller , resulting in Conant 's appearance on the cover of Time magazine on September 14 , 1959 . In it , Conant called for a number of reforms , including the consolidation of high schools into larger bodies that could offer a broader range of curriculum choices . Although it was slammed by critics of the American system , who hoped for a system of education based on the European model , it did lead to a wave of reforms across the country . His subsequent Slums and Suburbs in 1961 was far more controversial in its treatment of racial issues . Regarding busing as impractical , Conant urged Americans " to accept de facto segregated schools " . This did not go over well with civil rights groups , and by 1964 Conant was forced to admit that he had been wrong . In The Education of American Teachers in 1963 , Conant found much to criticize about the training of teachers . Most controversial was his defense of the arrangement by which teachers were certified by independent bodies rather than the teacher training colleges . 
 President Lyndon Johnson presented Conant with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , with special distinction , on December 6 , 1963 . He had been selected for the award by President John F. Kennedy , but the ceremony had been delayed , and went ahead after Kennedy 's assassination in November 1963 . In February 1970 , President Richard Nixon presented Conant with the Atomic Pioneers Award from the Atomic Energy Commission . Other awards that Conant received during his long career included being made a Commander of Legion d 'Honneur by France in 1936 and an Honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Britain in 1948 , and he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1957 . He was also awarded over 50 honorary degrees , and was posthumously inducted into the Alpha Chi Sigma Hall of Fame in 2000 . 
 Between 1965 and 1969 , Conant , suffering from a heart condition , worked on his biography , My Several Lives . He became increasingly infirm , and suffered a series of strokes in 1977 . He died in a nursing home in Hanover , New Hampshire , on February 11 , 1978 . His body was cremated and his ashes interred in the Thayer @-@ Richards family plot at Mount Auburn Cemetery . He was survived by his wife and sons . His papers are in the Harvard University Archives . Among them was a sealed brown Manila envelope that Conant had given the archives in 1951 , with instructions that it was to be opened by the President of Harvard in the 21st century . It was given to the 28th President of Harvard University , Drew Faust in 2007 . She broke the seal , and found that it contained a letter in which Conant expressed his hopes and fears for the future to his successor . " You will receive this note and be in charge of a more prosperous and significant institution than the one over which I have the honor to preside " , he wrote . " That [ Harvard ] will maintain the traditions of academic freedom , of tolerance for heresy , I feel sure . " 
 = = Graduate students = = 
 Former graduate students of Conant include : 
 Louis <unk> – organic chemist and professor emeritus at Harvard University renowned as the inventor of a militarily effective form of napalm . His award @-@ winning research included work on blood @-@ clotting agents including the first synthesis of vitamin K , synthesis and screening of quinones as antimalarial drugs , work with steroids leading to the synthesis of cortisone , and study of the nature of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons . 
 Benjamin S. Garvey – noted chemist at BF Goodrich who worked on the development of synthetic rubber , contributed to understanding of vulcanization , and developed early techniques for small scale evaluation of rubbers . 
 Frank Westheimer – was the Morris Loeb Professor of Chemistry Emeritus at Harvard University . 
 = Basarab I of Wallachia = 
 Basarab I ( Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , also known as Basarab the Founder ( Romanian : Basarab <unk> ) , was a voivode , and later the first independent ruler of Wallachia who lived in the first half of the 14th century . Many details of his life are uncertain . Although his name is of Turkic origin , 14th @-@ century sources unanimously state that he was a Vlach . Basarab came into power before 1324 , but the circumstances of his ascension are unknown . According to two popular theories , he succeeded either his father , Thocomerius , or the legendary founder of Wallachia , Radu Negru . 
 A royal charter issued on 26 July 1324 is the first document to reference Basarab . According to the charter , he was subject to Charles I of Hungary as the voivode of Wallachia . Basarab became " disloyal to the Holy Crown of Hungary " in 1325 . He seized the Banate of Severin and raided the southern regions of the Kingdom of Hungary . Basarab supported Michael Shishman of Bulgaria 's attack against the Kingdom of Serbia , but their united armies were defeated in the Battle of Velbazhd on 28 July 1330 . Soon after , Charles I of Hungary invaded Wallachia , but the Wallachians ambushed and almost annihilated the royal troops in the Battle of Posada , which occurred between 9 and 12 November 1330 . 
 The Battle of Posada ended Hungarian suzerainty in Wallachia , and the first independent Romanian principality was consequently founded . Basarab 's descendants ruled Wallachia for at least two centuries . The region of Bessarabia , situated between the rivers Dniester and Prut , was named for the Basarab dynasty . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Basarab was the son of Thocomerius , according to a charter written by Charles I of Hungary in 1332 . Thocomerius ' social position cannot be determined . A scholarly hypothesis states that he was descended from Seneslau , a mid @-@ 13th @-@ century Vlach lord . Historian Vlad Georgescu writes that Thocomerius was the probable successor to Bărbat , the late 13th @-@ century ruler of Oltenia . Historian Tudor Sălăgean says that Thocomerius was " a local potentate . " 
 Basarab 's name is of Turkic origin . Its first part is the present participle for the verb <unk> ( " press , rule , govern " ) ; the second part matches the Turkic honorific title <unk> or <unk> ( " father , elder kinsman " ) , which can be recognized in Cuman names , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Basarab 's name implies that he was of Cuman or Pecheneg ancestry , but this hypothesis has not been proven . At least four royal charters from the 14th century refer to Basarab as a Vlach . Charles I of Hungary referred to him as " Basarab , our disloyal Vlach " in 1332 . 
 Pope John XXII addressed Basarab as a " devout Catholic prince " in a letter written on 1 February 1327 . On the same day , the pope sent similar letters to Charles I of Hungary and his high officials , including Thomas Szécsényi , the Voivode of Transylvania , and Mikcs Ákos , the Ban of Slavonia , asking them to support the Dominicans ' actions against the " heretics " . According to scholar Neagu Djuvara , this correspondence with the Holy See proves that Basarab was a Catholic , which also testifies to Basarab 's Cuman origin , because the Cumans had been baptized according to Catholic rite . Historians Matei <unk> and Dan <unk> reject Djuvara 's theory , saying that all other sources prove that Basarab was an Eastern Orthodox . For instance , the Illuminated Chronicle , completed in the late 1350s , referred to Basarab as a " perfidious schismatic . " 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Charles I 's voivode = = = 
 The details of Basarab 's accession are obscure . Early Romanian chronicles attribute the establishment of Wallachia to the legendary Radu Negru . According to 17th @-@ century Wallachian chronicles , Negru , after departing from Făgăraș , arrived in Wallachia in either 1290 or 1292 , accompanied by " many peoples " . One of those chronicles , Istoria <unk> <unk> , states that " Basarab " was the surname of an Oltenian boyar family , who accepted Radu Negru 's suzerainty following his " dismounting " . Historian Neagu Djuvara tentatively associates Basarab ( or , alternatively , Basarab 's father ) with Radu Negru ; <unk> <unk> writes that Basarab either dethroned or peacefully succeeded Radu Negru between 1304 and 1324 . Other historians , such as Vlad Georgescu , state that Basarab succeeded his father , Thocomerius , around 1310 . 
 Basarab was first mentioned in a royal charter issued by Charles I of Hungary on 26 July 1324 , in which he was described as " our voivode of Wallachia " . This shows that Charles I regarded Basarab as a loyal vassal at that time . Historian István Vásáry states that Basarab only accepted Charles ' suzerainty after the king restored royal authority in the Banate of Severin , a Hungarian border province , in 1321 . In exchange for his loyalty , Basarab 's possession of Severin Fort was confirmed , according to historians Tudor Sălăgean and Attila <unk> . 
 = = = Towards independence = = = 
 A royal charter dated 18 June 1325 records that a person named Stephen , who was the son of a Cuman ispán in Hungary , stated that the king was weaker than Basarab and " did not even reach up to [ his ] ankle " . The same charter describes Basarab as " disloyal to the Holy Crown of Hungary " , showing that Basarab had betrayed the crown . A royal charter from 1329 listed Basarab , along with the Bulgarians , Serbs and Tatars , as an enemy who " [ made ] hostile inroads " around <unk> . Basarab seems to have entirely controlled the Banate of Severin between 1324 and 1330 , since royal charters did not mention a Ban of Severin during this period . In a letter written in 1327 , Pope John XXII alluded to " territories of the Kingdom of Hungary which were subjected " to Basarab . 
 Michael III Shishman , Tsar of Bulgaria , attacked Serbia in 1330 . He was accompanied by " the ruler of the Yas " , along with Vlach and " black Tatar " auxiliary troops . According to Serbian sources and a letter written by Stephen Dušan , who became King of Serbia in 1331 , Basarab personally led his army to Serbia to assist Shishman . The Serbs routed the united army of Michael Shishman and his allies at the Battle of Velbazhd on 28 July 1330 . Shishman was killed while fleeing from the battlefield . 
 Taking advantage of the weakened state of Basarab 's allies , Charles I of Hungary decided to restore his suzerainty in Wallachia . According to a royal charter issued two years after the events , Charles wanted to recapture " marginal lands " that Basarab " illegally " held in Wallachia . He invaded Oltenia , captured Severin Fort and appointed Denis Szécsi Ban of Severin in September 1330 . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , Basarab offered 7 @,@ 000 " marks of silver " as compensation , along with a yearly tribute to the king . He also promised to send one of his sons to the royal court in Visegrád . 
 However , Charles I refused Basarab 's offer , saying that " [ h ] e is the shepherd of my sheep , and I will drag him by his beard from his lair " . Charles continued his campaign , but he and his soldiers suffered from hunger while marching to Curtea de Argeș through a sparsely populated region . Charles was compelled to sign an armistice with Basarab , and the royal army started retreating from Wallachia . On 9 November , however , the Wallachians ambushed the king and his soldiers at a narrow pass in the Southern Carpathians . Standing on the cliffs above the valley , the Wallachians shot arrows and threw rocks upon the army . The battle lasted until 12 November . The royal army was decimated , and King Charles narrowly escaped . Historian Sălăgean writes that Basarab repelled Charles ' invasion without assistance from his allies . A charter written in 1351 by Louis I , Charles ' son and successor , states that pagan " neighbors and a troop formed of other subjects unfaithful " to Charles supported Basarab during the war , suggesting that Tatar auxiliaries fought for Basarab . However , the credibility of the report , written decades after the events , is uncertain . 
 = = = Independent ruler = = = 
 Archaeological research shows that after his capital of Curtea de Argeș was destroyed during Charles I 's campaign , Basarab moved his seat to Câmpulung . Basarab 's victory in the Battle of Posada enabled the introduction of an active foreign policy . He supported the efforts of his son @-@ in @-@ law , Ivan Alexander , to seize the Bulgarian crown , which he did in February 1331 . With Basarab 's support , Ivan Alexander successfully campaigned against the Byzantine Empire in 1331 and 1332 . According to Sălăgean , Basarab allegedly took possession of Severin Fort in the early 1330s . 
 The reconstruction of Curtea de Argeș started after 1340 , with the erection of new fortifications and a new palace . The construction of the Princely Church of St. Nicholas also commenced during Basarab 's rule , but it was completed after his death . Basarab seems to have made his son , Nicholas Alexander , his co @-@ ruler around 1344 . Louis I of Hungary , who had succeeded Charles I in 1342 , marched to southeastern Transylvania in the summer of 1344 . To prevent a campaign against Wallachia , Nicholas Alexander visited Louis I and swore loyalty to him , according to the nearly contemporaneous John of Küküllő 's chronicle . Wallachian troops supported Andrew Lackfi 's attack against the Mongols in 1345 , according to a Wallachian chronicle , but historian Victor Spinei rejects this report . According to a charter of his grandson , Vladislav I Vlaicu , Basarab died in the year <unk> of the Byzantine calendar , which is AD 1351 or 1352 . 
 = = Family = = 
 In his letter concerning the Battle of Velbazhd , Stephen Dušan mentioned that Basarab was " the father @-@ in @-@ law of Tsar Alexander of Bulgaria " , showing that Basarab 's daughter , Theodora , was Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria 's wife . Historian Vásáry states that Basarab married her to Ivan Alexander around 1323 to strengthen his alliance with Bulgaria . She gave birth to children , but Ivan Alexander abandoned her and married a converted Jew , Sarah @-@ Theodora , in the 1350s . Basarab 's son and successor , Nicholas Alexander , discontinued Basarab 's alliance with Bulgaria . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Basarab 's victory at the Battle of Posada was a turning point in the history of Wallachia . Sălăgean writes that the victory " sanctioned the independence of Wallachia from the Hungarian crown " and altered its international status . Georgescu describes Wallachia as the " first independent Romanian principality . " Although the kings of Hungary continued to demand loyalty from the voivodes of Wallachia , Basarab and his successors yielded to them only temporarily in the 14th century . 
 The descendants of Basarab ruled Wallachia for at least two centuries . Examples of his descendants include Mircea the Old and Vlad Dracula . Neagoe Basarab , a member of the <unk> boyar family , forged a genealogy to prove that he was a descendant of Basarab , and adopted " Basarab " as his family name after his accession in 1512 . 
 From the middle of the 14th century , Bulgarian , Hungarian , Moldavian and Serbian chronicles used the name " Basarab " when referring to Wallachia . From the next century onward , the southern region of the land between the Dniester and Prut rivers was named <unk> . After the Russian Empire annexed <unk> in 1812 , the region was renamed to Bessarabia . The region is now part of the Republic of Moldova . 
 = Rock Your Body = 
 " Rock Your Body " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his debut studio album , Justified ( 2002 ) . It was written by Timberlake along with The Neptunes ( consisting of Chad Hugo and Pharrell Williams ) , who also produced the track . The song was released on April 7 , 2003 by Jive Records as the third single from Justified . The track is an uptempo , disco groove , soul infused song containing influences from Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder . The female section of the track is sung by Vanessa Marquez . Originally intended to be featured on Jackson 's tenth studio album Invincible ( 2001 ) , the latter rejected the song along with several other tracks , which were instead given to Timberlake for his debut album . 
 " Rock Your Body " topped the Australian Singles Chart . It peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart , the third single from Justified to do so , following " Like I Love You " and " Cry Me a River " . It charted at number three on the Danish Singles Chart , number four on the New Zealand Singles Chart and Irish Singles Chart , and number five on the US Billboard Hot 100 . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 500 copies , respectively . The song received generally positive reviews , with music critics noting it as a stand @-@ out track , while complimenting its musical elements . 
 The accompanying music video for " Rock Your Body " , which was directed by Francis Lawrence , features Timberlake with several back @-@ up dancers performing choreography within a multi @-@ color lighted cube . Timberlake performed the song live several times , including the highly controversial performance at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show , where while performing with R & B singer Janet Jackson , Timberlake ripped off part of Jackson 's costume , momentarily exposing her right breast on live television . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Rock Your Body " was written and produced by Hugo and Williams , and bought by Timberlake for a writing credit . It was recorded at Master Sound Recording Studios and Windmark Recording , both located in Virginia Beach with Andrew Coleman serving as a recording engineer . It was mixed by Serban Ghenea at Windmark Recording , with Daniel <unk> and Tim Roberts aiding as additional engineers . John Hanes provided additional pro tools engineering . All the instrumentation was delivered by Hugo and Williams , with vocal arrangements handled by the latter and Timberlake . Vanessa Marquez provided additional vocals , which were recorded by Eddie Delena at the Record Plant located in Los Angeles . " Rock Your Body " was initially given to Michael Jackson for his tenth and final studio album Invincible ( 2001 ) , along with several other songs by The Neptunes . The singer did not want any of the tracks , and so all the material was passed onto Timberlake for his debut album , Justified . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 " Rock Your Body " has a running duration of four minutes and twenty @-@ seven seconds . The uptempo R & B , disco groove , soul infused song contains influences from both Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder . The song incorporates tinny , " keyboard @-@ set @-@ to @-@ emulate @-@ clavichord " synthesizers of The Neptunes ' late 90s productions , overlaid with " keys and a propulsive drum vamp " . Timberlake makes use of his falsetto range , and Vanessa Marquez sings the female section . Alex Needham of NME noted the track to contain characteristics from material within Jackson 's debut solo album Off the Wall ( 1979 ) . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Rock Your Body " is written in the key of E minor and has a tempo of 104 beats per minute . It follows the chord progression of F / G @-@ G / A @-@ Em , with Justin Timberlake 's vocal range spanning from the low note of B3 to the high note of D6 . Andy Kellman of AllMusic noted " Rock Your Body " as a stand @-@ out from Justified , as did Jane Stevenson of Jam ! , who interpreted its Jackson influence . Giving Justified a negative review , Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian noted " Rock Your Body " as " predictable " . Complex 's Tannis Spenser listed the song as the fifth best Justin Timberlake song , praising its " near perfect sing along chorus " and Timberlake 's vocals . 
 Pitchfork Media listed the song at 23 on their list of the best singles of 2003 , with editor Dominique Leone writing " Rock Your Body " is " an approximation of Off the Wall @-@ era MJ as I 've ever heard . The pleading falsetto is right on time , immediately preceded by tough talk about grabbing your girl ( and a " couple more " ) -- the drama ! " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week of March 22 , 2003 , " Rock Your Body " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 61 , earning the Hot Shot Debut honor . The following week , the song entered the top 40 at number 37 , and in its third week , reached number 28 . In its fourth week , the song charted at number 20 on the Hot 100 , and in its fifth week , rose further to number 13 . Within the its sixth week , it moved up two positions to number eleven , and reached number ten the following week . " Rock Your Body " eventually reached its peak at number five , where it remained for one week . The song remained on the Hot 100 for 22 weeks before dropping out . The song topped the US Mainstream Top 40 chart , where it remained for one week . It was less successful on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , where it peaked at number 45 . On February 5 , 2005 , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Internationally , the song was met with a similar response . " Rock Your Body " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number one . It dropped to number three the following week , where it remained in the top ten for six weeks ; it stayed on the chart for eleven weeks before dropping out . The song was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 70 @,@ 000 copies . On the UK Singles Chart , " Rock Your Body " became Timberlake 's third consecutive number two hit , following " Like I Love You " and " Cry Me a River " . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , " Rock Your Body " achieved its peak on the week of June 22 , 2003 , its second week on the chart at number four . The song remained on the chart for twenty weeks , and was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , for shipments of 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 It charted within the top five on the Danish Singles Chart and Irish Singles Chart , peaking at number three and four , respectively . It peaked at number six on Belgian Singles Chart ( Flanders ) , Finnish Singles Chart and Dutch Singles Chart . " Rock Your Body " was less successful in other territories . It charted within the top twenty on the Belgian Singles Chart ( Wallonia ) , French Singles Chart , Swedish Singles Charts and Norwegian Singles Chart . It charted outside the top twenty on the German Singles Chart , Swiss Singles Chart and Austrian Singles Chart ; the latter chart is the song 's lowest charting territory , where it peaked at number 56 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Francis Lawrence . The video opens within a black cube with an array of different colored lights with several people dancing . The video inter @-@ cuts to Justin Timberlake singing to the song . Timberlake then floats to the floor from an opening in the cubic 's ceiling , performing choreography with his supporting dancers and singing to the track 's first verse . Throughout the video , it inter @-@ cuts to Timberlake dancing by himself , with the sections sometimes featuring the camera panning around Timberlake 's face . Entering the second verse , Timberlake is in the cube on his own , manipulating the motion of the cube with his hands , with his legs following the moving platform . Timberlake then returns performing choreography again with his dancers . Following the second chorus , Timberlake is dancing with a female ( Staci Flood ) , who lip syncs Vanessa Marquez 's section . A break @-@ down of the song , where Timberlake is beatboxing , shows him dancing by himself . The breakdown then ends , with the video continuing with Timberlake and his back @-@ up dancers . The closing beat boxing section of the track features the camera panning around several duplicates of Timberlake beatboxing and talking in sync to the song 's lyrics . The video ends with the final Timberlake duplicate pointing and running towards the opposite direction . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Justin Timberlake performed " Rock Your Body " during his Justified World Tour and the Christina Aguilera conjoint tour Justified & Stripped Tour , both in support of his debut album Justified . Timberlake performed the song live on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live in October 2003 , where he served as host and musical guest . On February 1 , 2004 , Timberlake performed the song with pop singer Janet Jackson during her performance at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show . At the moment he sang the lyric " I 'll have you naked by the end of this song , " the singer ripped off part of Jackson 's outfit , momentarily exposing her right breast on live television . Timberlake distanced himself from the controversy while Jackson faced much criticism and backlash . He later commented that " America 's harsher on women ... [ and ] unfairly harsh on ethnic people . " Timberlake performed the song at the Hollywood Palladium , following his performance at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards on February 10 , 2013 . He performed " Rock Your Body " in a medley with other of his songs at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . In 2016 , the singer performed the song along with " Can 't Stop the Feeling ! " during the interval act of the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 grand finale . 
 " Rock Your Body " was featured on The Justified World Tour ( 2003 / 04 ) , Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) , Legends of the Summer ( 2013 ) and The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 / 14 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 David Betancourt – assistant engineer 
 Andrew Coleman – engineer 
 Eddie DeLena – vocal engineer 
 Serban Ghenea – mixing 
 Ian Green – engineer , programming 
 Chaz Harpe – mastering 
 Chad Hugo – instrumentation , producer 
 <unk> <unk> – producer 
 Sander Kleinenberg – producer , remixing 
 S. <unk> – producer 
 Paul Oakenfold – remixing 
 Herb Powers – mastering 
 Tim Roberts – assistant engineer 
 Justin Timberlake – primary artist , vocal arrangement , vocals 
 Pharrell Williams – instrumentation , producer , vocal arrangement , vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Cover versions and appearances in other media = = 
 Shawn Lee 's Ping Pong Orchestra performed an instrumental cover of the song on their album , Hits the Hits ! . 
 The song was regularly covered live by the experimental rock band Tub Ring , and was recorded as a B @-@ side to their 2007 album , The Great Filter . 
 The song was briefly featured in the ninth season of South Park episode " <unk> " . 
 The song appears in the 2007 video game Dance Dance Revolution <unk> 2 . 
 = SMS Nürnberg ( 1916 ) = 
 SMS Nürnberg was a Königsberg @-@ class light cruiser built during World War I by Germany for the Imperial Navy . She had three sisters : Königsberg , Karlsruhe , and Emden . The ship was named after the previous light cruiser Nürnberg , which had been sunk at the Battle of the Falkland Islands . The new cruiser was laid down in 1915 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , launched in April 1916 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in February 1917 . Armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns , the ship had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Nürnberg saw relatively limited service during the war , due to her commissioning late in the conflict . She participated in Operation Albion in October 1917 against the Russian Navy in the Baltic . The following month , she was engaged in the Second Battle of Helgoland Bight , but was not significantly damaged during the engagement . She was assigned to the final , planned operation of the High Seas Fleet that was to have taken place in the closing days of the war , though a major mutiny forced the cancellation of the plan . After the end of the war , the ship was interned in Scapa Flow . In the scuttling of the German fleet in June 1919 , British ships managed to beach Nürnberg and she was later refloated and sunk as a gunnery target in 1922 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Nürnberg was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Thetis " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1915 . She was launched on 14 April 1916 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 15 February 1917 . The ship was 151 @.@ 4 meters ( 497 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 96 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 7 @,@ 125 t ( 7 @,@ 012 long tons ; 7 @,@ 854 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by ten coal @-@ fired and two oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and a range of 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , two were located on either side amidships , and two were arranged in a super firing pair aft . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . Nürnberg also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 60 cm ( 24 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She also carried 200 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Nürnberg and the rest of the II Scouting Group , commanded by Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , provided the cruiser screen for the task force . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while the IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . After the beginning of the bombardment , Nürnberg entered Tagga Bay with the II Transport Section and began landing troops , while Königsberg covered the landing of the I Transport Section . On 18 – 19 October , the rest of the II Scouting Group covered minesweepers operating off the island of Dagö , but due to insufficient minesweepers and bad weather , the operation was postponed . On the 19th , Nürnberg , Königsberg , and Danzig were sent to intercept two Russian torpedo boats reported to be in the area . Reuter could not locate the vessels , and broke off the operation . By 20 October , the islands were under German control and the Russian naval forces had either been destroyed or forced to withdraw . The Admiralstab ordered the naval component to return to the North Sea . 
 = = = Second Battle of Helgoland Bight = = = 
 On 17 November , Nürnberg , Königsberg , Frankfurt , and Pillau were assigned to cover a minesweeping operation in the Helgoland Bight , still under the command of Reuter . The force was supported by two battleships — Kaiser and Kaiserin . Six British battlecruisers supported a force of light cruisers that attacked the German minesweepers . Königsberg and the other three cruisers covered the fleeing minesweepers before retreating under a smoke screen . Nürnberg opened fire on the British cruisers at 08 : 55 , at a range of 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) . Heavy smoke and fog obscured the British ships , however , and Nürnberg was quickly forced to cease firing . 
 At around 10 : 00 , Nürnberg came under heavy fire from the British cruisers , as well as the powerful battlecruisers Courageous and Glorious , armed with 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) guns . Nürnberg was not hit directly , but shell splinters from near misses rained down on her deck and killed one man and wounded four more , one of whom later died of his wounds . One of her rangefinders was also damaged by the shell fragments . She returned fire briefly before the haze again concealed the British ships . Kaiser and Kaiserin intervened at almost exactly the same time , prompting the British to break off the engagement immediately . Within an hour , the German forces were reinforced by several capital ships , including the battlecruiser Hindenburg ; after realizing the British had fled , the German forces returned to port . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 In October 1918 , Admirals Reinhard Scheer and Franz von Hipper planned a final , climactic attack on the British by the High Seas Fleet . The planned operation called for raids on Allied shipping in the Thames estuary and Flanders to draw out the Grand Fleet . The German fleet would then attack the Grand Fleet and do as much damage as possible in order to enhance Germany 's military position in the coming peace talks . Nürnberg , Karlsruhe and Graudenz were assigned to the force tasked with attacking Flanders . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest spread to the rest of the fleet and ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , under the command of Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Nürnberg was among the ships interned . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . British sailors used explosive charges to blast away Nürnberg 's anchor chains so she could be dragged aground before she sank . The ship was refloated in July and eventually expended as a target ship on 7 July 1922 off the Isle of Wight . 
 = My Lord John = 
 My Lord John is an unfinished historical fiction novel by the British author Georgette Heyer , published posthumously in 1975 after her death the previous year . It traces the early lives of the " young <unk> " – Harry , Thomas , John , and Humfrey – all sons of the future Lancastrian king Henry IV of England . They grow up amidst turbulent events including the 1394 pestilence , the exile of their father by Richard II , the death of their powerful grandfather John of Gaunt , and the seizure of the throne by their father . John of Lancaster serves as the novel 's main character . 
 Heyer intended the novel to be the first instalment in a trilogy covering the House of Lancaster at the peak of its power ( 1393 – 1435 ) , with John as its central character . She felt that John , now largely unknown today , was ideal because he was a " great man " who lived during the entirety of her selected time period and was the most trusted brother of Henry V. However , Heyer failed to complete the trilogy , finding herself distracted with the writing of her popular Regency novels to please her fans and offset her tax liabilities . She died in 1974 , and My Lord John was published by her family a year later . It covered only the early life of John of Lancaster , from 1393 to 1413 . 
 Upon its publication , My Lord John garnered a mostly negative reception from contemporary readers and literary critics , who felt that it lacked narrative flow and was inferior to Heyer 's Regency novels . Modern critics also have viewed the work critically . Featuring significant historical detail , it has been labelled " more serious " than her previous undertakings ; one reviewer felt it resembled a historical narrative more than a novel . A German translation was released in 1980 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Georgette Heyer is best known for writing romantic stories set in the Regency era , but her body of work encompassed many different historical periods , including the English Civil War and the Middle Ages . One of her favoured periods centred on the House of Lancaster 's peak of power , between 1393 and 1435 . In 1950 , Heyer began working on what she called " the magnum opus of my latter years " , a medieval trilogy intended to cover the House of Lancaster during that period . She estimated that she would need five years to complete this project . Her impatient readers continually clamoured for new books , however ; to satisfy them and her tax liabilities , Heyer interrupted herself to write Regency romances , such as April Lady ( 1957 ) and Charity Girl ( 1970 ) . 
 According to Heyer 's husband George Ronald Rougier , the Lancaster trilogy was to centre on John of Lancaster because he was Henry V 's most trusted brother , lived during the entirety of her selected time period , and " was a great man " little known today . In her novel , Heyer describes John as possessing the " best temper of all his family , and the greatest talent for peacemaking . " Rougier stated that the perfectionist Heyer prepared for the trilogy by embarking on holistic research that covered " every aspect of the period , " including its wars , social conditions , and heraldry . Heyer learned to read medieval English and created indexed files that catalogued every single day for the forty year time period . She and her husband travelled England and Scotland , where Heyer took copious notes while visiting seventy @-@ five castles and twenty @-@ three abbeys . 
 After each break taken to write another Regency novel however , Heyer found it difficult to return to writing the trilogy and " recapture the spirit of her main work , " as each time she had to refresh her knowledge of the era . As a result , she only managed to complete nearly a third of the trilogy , and My Lord John was the result of these efforts . It became her only completed volume of the series . Heyer died in 1974 , with a story that only covered a quarter of John of Lancaster 's life , from 1393 to 1413 . The novel 's structure is split into four parts , each covering a specific period of John 's life . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 The reign of Richard II of England forms the backdrop of the novel . Having become monarch at a young age , Richard has become a vain king " not universally held in high esteem . " In his minority , governance has been dominated by select favourites such as the 9th Earl of Oxford , who is deeply unpopular . In response to policies they deem bad for the realm , Henry of Bolingbroke , Earl of Derby and other members of the " Lords Appellant " , such as the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Arundel , successfully take up arms against Oxford at the Battle of Radcot Bridge and remove him from power . 
 Now twenty @-@ two , King Richard takes the reigns of government back into his own hands , appointing new favourites labelled " contemptible <unk> " by his uncle John of Gaunt , 1st Duke of Lancaster . Gaunt is , however , loyal and trusted by the King despite his disagreements with court favourites . As one of the most powerful men in the kingdom , Gaunt has been involved in an ongoing conflict with Arundel , an " <unk> " man whom Gaunt blames for inciting a rising in Cheshire . 
 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 The novel 's story begins in 1393 England . John of Lancaster – the third eldest son of Henry of Bolingbroke – resides at Kenilworth Castle with his mother Countess Mary and three brothers Harry , Thomas , and Humfrey . The boys are visited by their grandfather , John of Gaunt , and a large retinue that includes his mistress Katherine Swynford , his daughter Lady Elizabeth , and his three Beaufort sons . Mary privately worries to Katherine that the King will never forgive her husband 's participation at Radcot Bridge and the loss of his " dear friend " Oxford . 
 Mary and the children travel to London to greet the recently travelling Bolingbroke – " a handsome , jolly knight , richly caparisoned , splendidly horsed " – who is very popular with the city 's residents , unlike his father . The Earl of Derby pays homage to King Richard , who decides that Harry will become his squire . Gaunt succeeds in getting Arundel ousted from court . Mary dies of the plague , as does Queen Anne and Gaunt 's wife Constance . 
 Harry becomes King Richard 's squire while John is sent to live with the Countess Marshal at Framlingham Castle . There , he is lonely though kindly treated . John hears of the increasingly erratic behaviour of the king , who has had the body of Oxford embalmed and publicly displayed . Former members of the Lords Appellant are arrested , including Arundel , Gloucester , and Warwick . Richard also decides that those " who were of his own blood " will be raised to the status of dukes , and Henry of Bolingbroke is made Duke of Hereford . 
 Fearful of Hereford 's power , Richard unjustly orders that his cousin be banished from the realm for six years , to the dismay of the House of Commons and many others . Slowly dying of old age , Gaunt 's final advice to Richard , that he put aside his favourites and become a just king , falls on deaf ears . Gaunt dies soon after ; Richard becomes increasingly dictatorial and prevents Gaunt 's vast inheritance from being granted to Bolingbroke ; his banishment is converted to life , though his sons remain in the country . In the wake of these troublesome events , Richard leaves England for Ireland , a decision widely considered folly considering the turmoil England is in . Bolingbroke returns to England and many nobleman flock to his banner ; Richard is overthrown . 
 John watches as his father is crowned Henry IV of England and Harry is made Prince of Wales , but remains sceptical that his family has a more immediate claim to the crown than others in their family . The new king 's supporters insist Henry kill Richard and others who oppose him , but Henry resists the calls for violence . Henry deals with opposition to his rule in the form of rebellions , imposters , and men who expected him to right every wrong in the kingdom . Amidst these events , John grows up under the <unk> of various households . John is a talented student , but is more interested in the problems of the realm than mere writings of long dead men . He is the only one of Henry IV 's sons interested in crown finances , and acquires as much information on the running of government as possible . 
 As a teenager John proves his worth and is gradually granted positions of authority , first as Master of the Falcons , then as Lord Warden of the East Marches and Constable of England . He takes all three positions seriously , devoting himself to the <unk> of knowledge necessary for effective administration . He comes of age in the midst of these busy tasks , a ready pupil to the string of men sent to advise him . He helps his father withstand the Glyndŵr and Northern Risings , and wisely gives military command to his more experienced uncle Westmorland . He understands that his administrative skill is more useful than acting as a soldier , and earns the respect of the people under his control by not being unduly harsh with punishment and embarking on negotiations with the Scots . 
 The novel abruptly ends mid @-@ sentence , with John journeying north to negotiate a long truce with the Scots on behalf of his brother Harry . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 My Lord John , as one of Heyer 's few historical novels , marks a departure from her more popular Regency stories . It has been labelled " more serious " than her previous undertakings , and features extensive historical detail . Geneva Stephenson of the Columbus Dispatch likened My Lord John more to a historical narrative than a novel , only deciding on the latter category due to the work 's " in @-@ depth characterisation , movement , colour , [ and ] motivation . " 
 By featuring the life of John of Lancaster from early childhood to young adulthood , Heyer conveys a full glimpse of medieval life – court intrigues as well as the lives of ordinary people are part of the story . Furthermore , while near to major historical players , John 's <unk> from power allows Heyer to create a fuller depiction of his life without having to change major historical events . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Heyer 's family published My Lord John in 1975 , a year after Heyer 's death . Several days after its release , A. S. Byatt reported that The Bodley Head " have received their biggest paperback offer ever " for the novel . That publishing company released the novel in the United Kingdom , while its American release was handled by Dutton , a company based in New York . A German translation was released in 1980 . 
 In the period immediately following its publication , the novel received fourteen professional reviews – a number much larger than most of her other works . Critics gave largely negative reviews , and Mary Fahnestock @-@ Thomas writes that " many fans [ found My Lord John ] virtually unreadable . " The year of its release in 1975 , Library Journal contributor <unk> Singer praised it for being " well @-@ documented historical writing , " though she felt that " as a novel , it doesn 't have enough dramatic or narrative flow to keep it from being often boring . " Singer added that My Lord John " falls far short of that superb blending of history and compelling storytelling that characterizes successful examples of the genre . " Jane Aiken Hodge of History Today , while praising Heyer 's Regency novels as " triumphs of a language that never was on sea or land , " thought that My Lord John was " less successful . " The language of the novel , Aiken Hodge said , was grating and " scattered with too lavish a hand , " with words like <unk> and bel sire . Aiken Hodge also felt that while it contained " some happy moments of unmistakable Heyer humour , " it failed to contain enough to " hold a young reader for long . " 
 R.M. Franklin of The Times Literary Supplement opined that because the novel ended before the " most interesting parts of John of Bedford 's career , " it " has an air of anticlimax about it , and more than once themes are indicated which vanish inexplicably . " In a 2008 contribution for The Times , Hilary Rose praised Heyer 's Regency novels but found My Lord John to be " oddly difficult , possibly on account of it being concerned more with medieval history than masquerade balls at Vauxhall Gardens . " Writing for Tor.com in 2012 , Mari Ness opined that while Heyer hoped My Lord John would be her masterpiece , it instead " serves mainly as an illustration that authors are often terrible at determining which of their works is actually a masterpiece . My Lord John , absolutely not . " 
 = The Catlins = 
 The Catlins ( sometimes referred to as The Catlins Coast ) comprises an area in the southeastern corner of the South Island of New Zealand . The area lies between Balclutha and Invercargill , straddling the boundary between the Otago and Southland regions . It includes the South Island 's southernmost point , Slope Point . 
 A rugged , sparsely populated area , the Catlins features a scenic coastal landscape and dense temperate rainforest , both of which harbour many endangered species of birds , most notably the rare yellow @-@ eyed penguin . The coast attracts numerous marine mammals , among them New Zealand fur seals and Hooker 's sea lions . In general terms the area enjoys a maritime temperate climate . Its exposed location leads to its frequently wild weather and heavy ocean swells , which are an attraction to big @-@ wave surfers , and have also caused numerous shipwrecks . 
 People have lived in the area since around 1350 AD . Prior to European settlement , the region was sparsely inhabited by nomadic groups of Māori , most of whom lived close to river mouths . In the early days of European settlement the area was frequented by whalers and sealers , and saw milling became a major local industry from the mid @-@ 19th century until the 1930s . Ecotourism has become of growing importance in the Catlins economy , which otherwise relies heavily on dairy farming and fishing . 
 The region 's population has fallen to less than half its peak in the early 20th century . Some 1 @,@ 200 people now live in the Catlins , many of them in the settlement of Owaka . This is linked to population centres to the north and southwest via the area 's only major road , part of the Southern Scenic Route . Owaka contains the area 's main school , The Catlins Area School , catering for students from year 1 to year 13 . There are three other small primary schools throughout the Catlins district . Owaka also has a medical centre , the nearest hospital being in Balclutha . The Catlins is governed at local level as part of the Clutha and Southland Districts and is represented at national level as part of the Clutha @-@ Southland electorate . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Catlins area covers some 1 @,@ 900 km2 ( 730 sq mi ) and forms a rough triangular shape , extending up to 40 km ( 25 mi ) inland and along a stretch of coast 100 km ( 60 mi ) in extent . The mouths of two large rivers , the Clutha River in the northeast and the Mataura River in the west , mark its coastal limits . To the north and northwest , the rough bush @-@ clad hills give way to rolling pastoral countryside drained and softened by the actions of tributaries of these two rivers such as the <unk> River . 
 The rugged , scenic coastline of the Catlins features sandy beaches , blowholes , a petrified forest at Curio Bay , and the Cathedral Caves , which visitors can reach at low tide . Much of the coastline consists of high cliffs , up to 200 m ( 660 ft ) in height , and the land rises sharply from the coast at most points . For this reason , many of the area 's rivers cascade over waterfalls as they approach the ocean ( notably the iconic <unk> Falls on the short <unk> River ) . 
 The South Island 's southernmost point , Slope Point , projects near the southwestern corner of the Catlins . To the west of this lies Waipapa Point , often considered the boundary of the Catlins region , beyond which lies the swampy land around the mouth of the Mataura River at the eastern end of Toetoes Bay . But various people place the western boundary of the Catlins region in different places , and some more stringent definitions exclude even Slope Point . A proposed boundary circulated in 2009 by the New Zealand Geographic Board ran roughly north from Slope Point , then inland around the Catlins Ranges and east to Nugget Point . Tourist organisations objected , asking that the boundary be moved further west to include Fortrose . 
 Several parallel ranges of hills dominate the interior of the Catlins , separated by the valleys of the Owaka , Catlins and Tahakopa Rivers , which all drain southeastwards into the Pacific Ocean . The most notable of these ranges is the Maclennan Range . Between them , these hills are often simply referred to as the Catlins Ranges . Their northwestern slopes are drained by several tributaries of the Clutha and Mataura Rivers , most notably the <unk> River , which flows mainly westwards , reaching the Mataura close to the town of Wyndham . 
 The highest point in the Catlins , Mount Pye ( 720 m or 2 @,@ 360 ft ) stands 25 km ( 16 mi ) north @-@ northeast of Waikawa and close to the source of the <unk> River , and marks part of the Otago @-@ Southland border . Other prominent peaks above 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) include Mount Rosebery , Catlins Cone , Mount Tautuku , and Ajax Hill . The Catlins has several small lakes , notably scenic Lake Wilkie close to the Tautuku Peninsula . Catlins Lake , near Owaka , actually consists of the tidal estuary of the Catlins River . 
 Shipping has found the Catlins coast notoriously dangerous , and many shipwrecks have occurred on the headlands that jut into the Pacific Ocean here . Two lighthouses stand at opposite ends of the Catlins to help prevent further mishaps . The Nugget Point Lighthouse stands 76 m ( 249 ft ) above the water at the end of Nugget Point , casting its light across a series of eroded stacks ( the " nuggets " which give the point its name ) . It was built in 1869 – 70 . The Waipapa Point light , which stands only 21 m ( 69 ft ) above sea level , was the last wooden lighthouse to be built in New Zealand , and was constructed in 1884 in response to the tragic 1881 wreck of the Tararua . Both of these lighthouses are now fully automated . 
 Due to its position at the southern tip of New Zealand , the Catlins coastline lies exposed to some of the country 's largest ocean swells , often over 5 m ( 16 ft ) . The region has enjoyed a growing reputation for big wave surfing , with regular competitions , award @-@ winning rides , and coverage on the Discovery Channel gathering publicity for the sport . The Department of Conservation proposed protecting the Papatowai surf break in 2008 , citing its national significance for surfing . 
 The landscape of the Catlins features in many poems by celebrated poet Hone <unk> . Born in Northland , <unk> lived in Kaka Point from 1992 until his death in 2008 , and became one of the area 's best @-@ known inhabitants . His family plan to establish a writers ' retreat at his crib there . The film Two Little Boys , starring comedians Bret McKenzie and Hamish Blake , was filmed in the Catlins early in 2011 . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The Catlins has a cool maritime temperate climate , somewhat cooler than other parts of the South Island , and strongly modified by the effect of the Pacific Ocean . Winds can reach considerable strength , especially on the exposed coast ; most of the South Island 's storms develop to the south or southwest of the island , and thus the Catlins catches the brunt of many of these weather patterns . 
 The Catlins — and especially its central and southern areas — experiences considerably higher precipitation than most of the South Island 's east coast ; heavy rain occurs infrequently , but drizzle is common and the region averages around 150 days of rain per year . Rain days are spread fairly evenly throughout the year ; there is no particularly rainy season in the northern Catlins , and only a slight tendency towards more autumn rain in the southwest . The average annual rainfall recorded at the Tautuku Outdoor Education Centre is about 1 @,@ 300 mm ( 51 in ) , with little variation from year to year . 
 Fine days can be sunny and warm , and daily maxima may exceed 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) in mid @-@ summer ( January / February ) . A more usual daily maximum in summer would be 18 – 20 ° C ( 64 – 68 ° F ) . Snow is rare except on the peaks even in the coldest part of winter , though frost is quite common during the months of June to September . Typical daily maximum temperatures in winter are 10 – 13 ° C ( 50 – 55 ° F ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The first people known to live in the Catlins , Māori of the <unk> Mamoe , <unk> , and Kāi Tahu iwi ( tribes ) , merged via marriage and conquest into the iwi now known as Kāi Tahu . Archaeological evidence of human presence dates back to approximately 1350 AD . The area 's inhabitants were semi @-@ nomadic , travelling from Stewart Island / Rakiura in the south and inland to Central Otago . They generally dwelt near river mouths for easy access to the best food resources . In legend , the Catlins forests further inland were inhabited by <unk> ( wild giants ) . 
 The Catlins may have offered one of the last places where the giant flightless bird , the moa , could be hunted , and the timber of the forest proved ideal for canoe construction ( the name of the settlement Owaka means " Place of the canoe " ) . No formal Māori pa ( villages ) were located in the Catlins , but there were many hunting camps , notably at Papatowai , near the mouth of the Tahakopa River . 
 Europeans first sighted the area in 1770 when the crew of James Cook 's Endeavour sailed along the coast . Cook named a bay in the Catlins area Molineux 's Harbour after his ship 's master Robert Molineux . Although this was almost certainly the mouth of the Waikawa River , later visitors applied the name to a bay to the northeast , close to the mouth of the Clutha River , which itself was for many years known as the Molyneux River . 
 <unk> and whalers founded the first European settlements in the early years of the 19th century , at which time the hunting of marine mammals dominated European economic activity in New Zealand . A whaling station was established on the Tautuku Peninsula in 1839 , with smaller stations at Waikawa and close to the mouth of the Clutha River . 
 The Catlins take their name from the Catlins River , itself named for whaling captain Edward <unk> ( sometimes spelt Catlin ) . He purchased an extensive block of land along Catlins River on 15 February 1840 from Kāi Tahu chief Hone <unk> ( also known as " Bloody Jack " ) for muskets and £ 30 ( roughly NZ $ 3000 in 2005 dollars ) . New Zealand 's land commissioners declined to endorse the purchase , however , and the Māori received much of the land back after long negotiations ending more than a decade after <unk> 's death . 
 During the mid @-@ 19th century the area developed into a major saw @-@ milling region , supplying the newly developing town of Dunedin with timber shipped from the ports of Waikawa and Fortrose . A 70 m ( 230 ft ) -long jetty was built at Fortrose in 1875 , although this has long since disappeared . Several shipwrecks occurred along the treacherous coastline during this period . Most notably , one of New Zealand 's worst shipping disasters occurred here : the wreck of the passenger @-@ steamer Tararua , en route from Bluff to Port Chalmers , which foundered off Waipapa Point on 29 April 1881 with the loss of all but 20 of the 151 people aboard . 
 Another noted shipwreck , that of the Surat , occurred on New Year 's Day in 1874 . This ship , holed on rocks near <unk> 's Mistake eight kilometres southeast of Tautuku Peninsula , limped as far as the mouth of the Catlins River before its 271 immigrants abandoned ship . A beach at the mouth of the Catlins River is named Surat Bay in commemoration of this wreck . The schooner Wallace and steamer Otago were also both wrecked at or near <unk> 's Mistake , in 1866 and 1876 respectively , and a <unk> @-@ ton steamer , the Manuka , ran aground at Long Point north of Tautuku in 1929 . In all there were eight shipwrecks of note between 1839 and 1892 . 
 After a decline in the 1890s , the logging of native timber expanded into new areas made accessible by an extension of the railway , before petering out in the mid @-@ 20th century . One nail in the industry 's coffin came with a series of bushfires which destroyed several mills in 1935 . The cleared land was used primarily for pastoral sheep and dairy farming , which continues to be a mainstay of the Catlins ' economy . Much of the remaining forest is now protected by the Department of Conservation as part of the Catlins Conservation Park . 
 From the time of the Great Depression until the formation of the New Zealand Rabbit Board in 1954 , rabbits became a major pest in the area , and <unk> were employed to keep the creatures under control . The trapping of rabbits and auctioning of their skins in Dunedin became a minor but important part of the Catlins area 's economy during this time . 
 The area 's population has declined from a peak of around 2700 in 1926 to its current level of around 1200 . This decline has halted in recent decades , with 2008 figures being very similar to those of 1986 . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 The Catlins coast often hosts New Zealand fur seals and Hooker 's sea lions , and occasionally southern elephant seals can be seen . Several species of penguin also nest along the coast , notably the rare yellow @-@ eyed penguin ( <unk> ) , as do other seabirds including mollymawks and Australasian gannets , and the estuaries of the rivers are home to herons , stilts , godwits and oystercatchers . Bitterns and the threatened <unk> ( <unk> ) can also occasionally be seen along the reedy riverbanks . 
 In the forests , endangered birds such as the <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( New Zealand parakeet ) occur , as do other birds such as the tui , fantail ( <unk> ) , and kererū ( New Zealand pigeon ) . One of New Zealand 's only two native species of non @-@ marine mammal , the long @-@ tailed bat , lives in small numbers within the forests , and several species of lizard are also found locally , including the southern forest gecko . 
 Many species of fish , shellfish , and crustaceans frequent both the local rivers and sea , notably crayfish and paua . Nugget Point in the northern Catlins hosts a particularly rich variety of marine wildlife . The establishment of a marine reserve off the coast here , discussed in 1992 , 2004 and 2015 , has been controversial . Hector 's dolphins can often be seen close to the Catlins coast , especially at Porpoise Bay near Waikawa , which is protected as part of the Catlins Coast Marine Mammal Sanctuary , established in 2008 . Migratory southern right whales and humpback whales can be spotted along the coastline during winter . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The Catlins features dense temperate rainforest , dominated by podocarps . This is the largest area of native forest remaining on the South Island 's east coast , with over 500 square kilometres ( 190 sq mi ) of forest and neighbouring subalpine areas being protected in Catlins Conservation Park . The forest is thick with trees such as rimu , totara , silver beech , matai and kahikatea . Of particular note are the virgin rimu and totara forest remaining in those areas which were too rugged or steep to have been milled by early settlers , and an extensive area of silver beech forest close to the <unk> River . This is New Zealand 's most southerly expanse of beech forest . Many native species of forest plant can be found in the undergrowth of the Catlins forest , including young <unk> , orchids such as the spider orchid and perching Easter orchid , and many different native ferns . 
 Settlers cleared much of the Catlins ' coastal vegetation for farmland , but in some areas the original coastal plant life survives , primarily around cliff edges and some of the bays close to the Tautuku Peninsula , these being furthest from the landward edges of the forest . Plant life here includes many native species adapted to the strong salt @-@ laden winds found in this exposed region . The Catlins coastal daisy ( <unk> <unk> ) is unique to the region , and is related to New Zealand 's mountain daisies . <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> are common , as are native gentians , though sadly the endangered native sedge pingao can now rarely be found . In years when the southern rātā flowers well , the coastal forest canopy turns bright red . The rātā also thrives in some inland areas . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The geology of the Catlins dates back to over 150 million years ago , when the bedrock of the New Zealand continent was being assembled by thick sediments and volcanic arcs accreting onto the edge of the Gondwana supercontinent in a series of long thin terranes . The parallel hill ranges of the Catlins form part of the <unk> terrane , which extends inland through the <unk> Hills as far west as <unk> . This itself forms part of a larger system known as the Southland Syncline , which links to similar formations in Nelson ( offset by the Alpine Fault ) , the North Island and even New Caledonia , 3 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 200 mi ) away . 
 The north @-@ eastern boundary of this geologic region is marked by the <unk> escarpment , which runs along the southern edge of the dormant <unk> fault line . The Catlins ranges are strike ridges composed of Triassic and Jurassic sandstones , mudstones and other related sedimentary rocks , often with a high incidence of feldspar . Fossils of the late and middle Triassic <unk> and <unk> stages are found in the area . 
 Curio Bay features the petrified remains of a forest 160 million years old . This represents a remnant of the subtropical woodland that once covered the region , only to become submerged by the sea . The fossilised remnants of trees closely related to modern kauri and Norfolk pine can be seen here . 
 = = Population and demographics = = 
 The Catlins area has very few inhabitants ; the region as a whole has a population of only some 1200 people . Almost all of the Catlins ' population lies either close to the route of the former State Highway running from Balclutha to Invercargill ( which now forms part of the Southern Scenic Route ) , or in numerous tiny coastal settlements , most of which have only a few dozen inhabitants . 
 The largest town in the Catlins , Owaka , has a population of about 400 . It is located 35 km ( 22 mi ) southwest of Balclutha . The only other settlements of any great size are Kaka Point ( population 200 ) , Waikawa , Tokanui , and Fortrose , which lies at the western edge of the Catlins on the estuary of the Mataura River . Most of the area 's other settlements are either little more than farming communities ( such as <unk> , Maclennan , and <unk> ) or seasonally populated holiday communities with few permanent residents . An outdoor education centre , run by the Otago Youth Adventure Trust is located at Tautuku , almost exactly half way between Owaka and Waikawa . 
 The area 's population has predominantly European ancestry , with 94 @.@ 2 % of Owaka 's population belonging to the European ethnic group according to the 2001 Census , compared to 93 @.@ 7 % for the Otago region and 80 @.@ 1 % for New Zealand as a whole . The median income in the same census ranked considerably lower than for most of the country , although the unemployment rate was very low ( 3 @.@ 2 % , compared with 7 @.@ 5 % nationwide ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The early European economy of the Catlins during the 1830s and 1840s centred on whaling and sealing . The exploitation of the forests for timber started in the 1860s with the rapid growth of the city of Dunedin as a result of the goldrush of 1861 – 62 . In the early 1870s more timber cargo was loaded at Owaka than at any other New Zealand port . Forestry and sawmilling declined in the late 1880s once the easily accessible timber had been removed . The extension of the railway beyond Owaka breathed new life into these industries , however , with activity peaking during the 1920s . 
 The land cleared of trees largely became pasture . From the 1880s , clearing of land for dairy farming increased , especially in the areas around Tahakopa and the Owaka River valley . Considerable sheep and dairy farming continues on the cleared hills on the periphery of the region , and this accounts for much of the Catlins ' income . A rural polytechnic specialising in agricultural science ( Telford Rural Polytechnic ) is located south of Balclutha close to the northeastern edge of the Catlins . 
 Fishing and tourism now account for much of the area 's economy . The rugged natural scenery , sense of isolation , and natural attractions such as Cathedral Caves makes the Catlins a popular destination for weekend trips by people from Dunedin and Invercargill , the two nearest cities . A large number of cribs ( holiday cottages ) occur at places such as Jack 's Bay and <unk> . Ecotourism is becoming increasingly important to the area 's economy , with many of the visitors coming from overseas . Tourism added an estimated $ 2 @.@ 4 million to the region 's economy in 2003 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Southern Scenic Route links Fiordland and Dunedin via the Catlins . Here it runs northeast to southwest as an alternative road to State Highway 1 , which skirts the Catlins to the northwest . This section of the Southern Scenic Route — formerly designated State Highway 92 but no longer listed as a state highway — winds through most of the small settlements in the area , and was only completely sealed during the late 1990s ( a stretch of about 15 km ( 9 mi ) southwest of Tautuku was surfaced with gravel prior to that time ) . The settlements of Owaka , Maclennan , Papatowai , Tokanui , and Fortrose all lie on this route . A coastal route also parallels the inland highway between Waikawa and Fortrose , but only about two thirds of this road is sealed . 
 The remaining small roads in the district , all of which link with the former State Highway , have gravel surfaces . These roads mainly link the main route with small coastal settlements , although gravel roads also extend along the valleys of the Owaka and Tahakopa Rivers , linking the main Catlins route with the small towns of Clinton and Wyndham respectively . The gravelled Waikawa Valley Road crosses the hills to join the Tahakopa @-@ Wyndham route . 
 Several of the area 's coastal settlements have facilities for small boats , but generally only fishing and holiday craft use them ; no regular passenger or freight @-@ boat service runs to the Catlins . A railway line , the Catlins River Branch , linked the area with the South Island Main Trunk Line from the late 19th century . Construction of this line began in 1879 , but it did not reach Owaka until 1896 . Construction progressed slowly due to the difficult terrain , and the final terminus of the line at Tahakopa was not completed until 1915 . The economic viability of the line declined with the sawmills that it was built to serve , and the line was eventually closed in 1971 . Parts of the line 's route are now accessible as walkways , among them a 240 m ( 790 ft ) long tunnel ( " Tunnel Hill " ) between Owaka and <unk> . 
 = = Government = = 
 The Catlins forms part of the Clutha @-@ Southland electorate in the Parliament of New Zealand . Between 1996 and 2014 , the electorate was represented by Bill English of the National Party , who is Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand and a former Leader of the Opposition . The Catlins area is split between the Clutha and Southland Districts for local government purposes . 
 Most of the Catlins falls in the Clutha District , based in Balclutha , and one of the council 's fourteen representatives is elected directly from a Catlins Ward which is roughly coterminous with this area . The Clutha District is itself part of the Otago Region , controlled administratively by the Otago Regional Council ( ORC ) in Dunedin , 80 km ( 50 mi ) to the northeast of Balclutha . The Molyneux Constituency of the ORC , which covers roughly the same area as the Clutha District , elects two councillors to the 12 @-@ member Regional Council . 
 Approximately the westernmost one @-@ third of the Catlins area lies in the Southland District , based in Invercargill , 50 km ( 31 mi ) to the west of Fortrose . One of the council 's 12 elected members represents the Toetoes Ward , which contains this part of the Catlins , along with an area around Wyndham and extending along Toetoes Bay towards the Awarua Plain . The Southland District is itself part of the Southland Region , controlled administratively by the Southland Regional Council ( SRC ; also known as Environment Southland ) , which is also based in Invercargill . The Southern Constituency of the SRC , which covers the entire Toetoes Ward and extends across the Awarua Plain almost as far as Bluff in the west and Mataura in the north , elects one councillor to the 12 @-@ member Regional Council . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Catlins area hosts four co @-@ educational schools : Tahakopa School , Tokanui School , and <unk> School , all of which are primary schools ; The Catlins Area School , Owaka is a combined primary and secondary school . It is the only one of the four with more than 100 pupils . The nearest dedicated secondary schools are South Otago High School in Balclutha and Menzies College in Wyndham . 
 The nearest tertiary institution is Telford Rural Polytechnic , located at the edge of the Catlins at <unk> , south of Balclutha . Other than this , the nearest tertiary establishments are in Invercargill and Dunedin , the nearest university being the University of Otago in Dunedin . 
 = = Medical services = = 
 A hospital opened in Owaka in 1924 , offering a decreasing range of services until its closure during the 1980s . The building and grounds now host a youth hostel and holiday park . Today , Owaka is served by a medical centre and a pharmacy . The Southern District Health Board is responsible for most publicly funded health services in Otago and Southland , including the Catlins . 
 The nearest hospital to most of the area is the community owned Clutha Health First , in Balclutha . There is another small hospital in Gore , a secondary level hospital in Invercargill , and a tertiary level hospital ( Dunedin Public Hospital ) in Dunedin . The last two are also university teaching hospitals . 
 = Wignacourt Aqueduct = 
 The Wignacourt Aqueduct ( Maltese : L @-@ <unk> ta ' Wignacourt ) is a 17th @-@ century aqueduct in Malta , which was built by the Order of Saint John to carry water from springs in Dingli and Rabat to the newly @-@ built capital city Valletta . The aqueduct was carried through underground pipes and a system of arches along depressions in the ground . 
 The first attempts to build the aqueduct were made by Grand Master Martin Garzez in 1596 , but construction was suspended before being continued in 1610 . The watercourse was inaugurated five years later on 21 April 1615 . Several engineers took part in the project , including Bontadino de Bontadini , Giovanni Attard and Natale <unk> . The aqueduct was named after Grand Master Alof de Wignacourt , who partially financed its construction . 
 The aqueduct remained in use until the 20th century . Most of its arches still survive today , and can still be seen in the localities of Attard , <unk> , Birkirkara , Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys and Santa Venera . Other remains of the aqueduct include water towers at Santa Venera , Ħamrun and Floriana , and several fountains in Floriana and Valletta . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1566 , the capital city of Valletta was founded on the Sciberras Peninsula , which did not have a good water supply . Rainwater collected within the city was not enough to meet the needs of its population . Water had to be carted from springs to the city , but this became difficult by the end of the 16th century , when the city had become the largest settlement in Malta . At the time , there were also fears of an Ottoman attack on Malta , so a steady water supply to the capital was a priority for the military authorities in the case of a siege . 
 The order to build an aqueduct to carry water from springs in Dingli and Rabat to the capital was issued on 19 October 1596 . That year , Grand Master Grand Master Martin Garzez brought in the Jesuit Padre Giacomo to design the watercourse . His design was accepted and work was begun , but construction was suspended soon afterwards due to financial reasons . 
 On 9 January 1610 , works on the aqueduct continued under the direction of another Jesuit called Padre Natale <unk> . By this time , Garzez had died and was succeeded as Grand Master by Alof de Wignacourt . In July 1612 , the Bolognese hydraulic expert Bontadino de Bontadini took over the project , probably on the recommendation of Inquisitor Evangelista <unk> . Bontadini designed a new watercourse with water being carried through underwater pipes , and over stone arches when there were depressions in the ground . Bontadini was assisted by a Maltese <unk> Giovanni Attard and several other engineers . 600 local workers were employed in the construction of the aqueduct , which was completed in 1614 and inaugurated on 21 April 1615 . The aqueduct cost a total of 434 @,@ 605 scudi , most of which were paid by Grand Master Wignacourt . The aqueduct was therefore named in his honour . 
 Upon its completion , the aqueduct supplied 1 @,@ 400 m3 ( 49 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of water every day to around 30 @,@ 000 people . The constant supply of water brought about a rise in the populations of Valletta , Floriana and other towns and villages along the route of the aqueduct . 
 The aqueduct was improved by Grand Master Emmanuel de Rohan @-@ Polduc in 1780 . On 4 September 1798 , in the early stages of the Maltese uprising against the French , insurgents ambushed French soldiers near the aqueduct at <unk> , in the limits of Birkirkara . 
 In 1907 , there was a proposal to construct buildings on top of the aqueduct , with its arches effectively serving as an arcade . The Office of the Public Works drew up plans for these buildings , but eventually nothing materialized . The aqueduct remained in use until the early 20th century . 
 Between 2004 and 2005 , the aqueduct 's surviving arches were restored and a lighting system was installed , at a total cost of <unk> 140 @,@ 000 . Some of the arches are in need of restoration once again , mainly due to pollution since a major road is now located along the aqueduct . A section of the aqueduct was extensively damaged in December 2013 due to a car crash , but the damage has since been repaired . 
 Various sections of the aqueduct are scheduled by the Malta Environment and Planning Authority ( <unk> ) as grade 1 national monuments and are listed on the National Inventory of the Cultural Property of the Maltese Islands . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The aqueduct ran from the springs in Rabat and Dingli to the countryside near Attard through underwater pipes . From Attard onwards , the ground level was irregular so stone arches were constructed where there were depressions . The arches begin at present @-@ day Peter Paul Rubens Street ( Maltese : Triq Peter Paul Rubens ) in Attard , and are initially quite small . They continue through Mdina Road ( Maltese : Triq l @-@ <unk> ) in <unk> and Birkirkara , and the size of the arches gradually increases as the ground level drops . 
 At Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys , the aqueduct crossed the road , and the Wignacourt Arch was built to commemorate the project . The arches then continue through St. Joseph High Road ( Maltese : Triq il @-@ <unk> San <unk> ) in Santa Venera , until they stop at a small tower known as the Tower of St. Joseph . From this tower , water continued its journey to Ħamrun , <unk> l @-@ <unk> , Floriana and Valletta through underground pipes once again . Water inspection towers were also built at Ħamrun and Floriana . 
 = = = Wignacourt Arch / Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Gate = = = 
 The triumphal archway at the boundary between Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys and Santa Venera is known as the Wignacourt Arch or the Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Gate . It has three doorways , and it is adorned with Wignacourt 's coat of arms and three sculpted fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis , the heraldic symbols of Wignacourt . The suburb of Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys got its name from this arch , and fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis are featured on the flags and coat of arms of both Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys and Santa Venera . One of the original plaques on the arch gave due respect to the engineer Bontadino de Bontadini . The arch together with the aqueduct 's water towers and fountains were the first expression of baroque architecture in Malta . 
 The original arch was demolished in 1944 , and a roundabout was later built on its site . The construction of a replica of the arch was approved in 2012 . The local councils of Santa Venera and Birkirkara , as well as the Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Administrative Committee disagreed on what the arch 's name should be , and eventually agreed in 2014 that it should be called " The Wignacourt Arch Known As The Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Gate " . The arch was reconstructed in 2015 , and it was inaugurated on 28 April 2016 . 
 = = = Water inspection towers = = = 
 = = = = Santa Venera = = = = 
 The first inspection tower of the Wignacourt Aqueduct is located in present day Santa Venera . It is called the Tower of St. Joseph ( Italian : Torre di San Giuseppe ) , but it is commonly known as it @-@ <unk> in Maltese or the <unk> in Italian . The turret is linked to the aqueduct 's arches , and it has two floors with a buttressed lower level , giving it the resemblance of a coastal watchtower such as the De Redin towers . It is not clear if the present structure is the original one , since the original designs of the aqueduct show a slightly different tower . The tower had the following inscription ( no longer visible ) : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> DE <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = = Ħamrun = = = = 
 The second water inspection tower was built on the hill of St. Nicholas in Ħamrun , and it is known as il @-@ Monument tat @-@ Tromba or it @-@ <unk> ta ' <unk> . It has a round shape , and water originally flowed through an open tank in the tower . The tower contains Wignacourt 's coat of arms and a commemorative inscription which reads : 
 VT <unk> IN <unk> 
 SIC <unk> AB <unk> . ( meaning As there is life in water , life started from water ) 
 The tower still exists , but it is in a dilapidated state and it is surrounded by modern houses . 
 In 1780 , when the aqueduct was improved by De Rohan , a commemorative obelisk was erected some distance away from the tower . It is now found in a private backyard . It has a coat of arms which was damaged in World War II , and an inscription which means : 
 Emmanuel De Rohan made this aqueduct stronger for the collection of water , with a newer one better built by the kind hearted Prince for the health of his people in the year 1780 . 
 = = = = Floriana = = = = 
 The third and final water inspection tower was built in Floriana , and it became known as the Wignacourt Water Tower . It is located close to <unk> Botanical Gardens and the Sarria Church . It is a round structure supported by pilasters , and it also contains a fountain and a horse trough . The top of the tower contains a sculpted fleur @-@ de @-@ lis , and it is also decorated with the coat of arms of the Order of St. John and the personal arms of Wignacourt . Below the coats of arms is the following inscription : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> VT <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> DE <unk> , <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 The tower was included on the Antiquities List of 1925 . 
 The tower was restored between June 2015 and June 2016 by the Ministry for Transport and Infrastructure . 
 = = = Fountains = = = 
 With the completion of the Wignacourt Aqueduct , many fountains supplied by water from the aqueducts were built in Valletta . 
 = = = = Wignacourt Fountain = = = = 
 The first fountain which was connected to the aqueduct was the Wignacourt Fountain , located in St. George 's Square in Valletta , facing the Grandmaster 's Palace . The inauguration ceremony of the aqueduct on 21 April 1615 was held at this fountain . When the square became a parade ground for the British military , the fountain was relocated to St. Philip 's Gardens in Floriana , where it remains today . 
 The baroque fountain consists of a large circular basin with three smaller seashell @-@ like basins above it , supported on a pedestal containing sculpted dolphins . It is scheduled as a Grade 1 monument , but it is currently in a dilapidated state . 
 = = = = Fountain at the Valletta Marina = = = = 
 Another fountain was located at Valletta 's marina , just outside Del Monte Gate and near the fish market . It had an ornate basin , a marble cannon barrel @-@ shaped spout , topped by a bronze statue of Neptune holding a trident in one hand , with the other hand resting on an escutcheon containing Wignacourt 's coat of arms . The statue is based on the Portrait of Andrea Doria as Neptune . The marble of the spout has a latin inscription which translates to English saying " Why are you afraid little boat ? there is no fire here , but water instead of shot . " 
 According to Giovanni Bonello , the statue was sculpted by Leone Leoni in 1584 . Other sources erroneously attribute it to the Flemish sculptor Giambologna or to one of his pupils , generally Pietro <unk> . The fountain supplied excess water from the Wignacourt Fountain to ships anchored at the Grand Harbour . 
 In 1858 , the statue of Neptune was relocated to the Grandmaster 's Palace 's lower courtyard , which is now also known as Neptune 's Courtyard . The fountain 's spout is now located at the Malta Maritime Museum in Birgu . 
 The statue of Neptune is often described as a giant . The area around the original location of the fountain remained known as <unk> l – <unk> ( on the giant ) until well into the 20th century . 
 = = = = Omnibus Idem fountain = = = = 
 Another fountain , sometimes also known as the Wignacourt Fountain , was built close to Porta Reale in Valletta . It consists of a lion 's head pouring out water into a stone basin , topped by the coat of arms of Wignacourt and the Order and surrounded by a garland of flowers and interlocking seashells . Below the coats of arms is a radiating sun with the inscription Omnibus Idem ( meaning the same to all ) , indicating that the water was freely available to everyone . 
 This fountain was relocated a number of times throughout its history : first in 1874 when the building near which it was built was demolished , in the 1960s when the City Gate was rebuilt , in 2000 when Saint James Cavalier was renovated and converted into a cultural centre , and again in the early 2010s during the City Gate Project . Due to these relocations and restorations , nothing remains of the original fountain . 
 = = = Other fountains = = = 
 Other fountains built in subsequent centuries , such as the Lion Fountain in Floriana , which was built in 1728 during the magistracy of António Manoel de Vilhena , were also supplied by water from the aqueducts . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 The aqueduct is featured on a ceiling at the Archbishop 's Palace in Valletta . 
 The 400th anniversary of the aqueduct was commemorated on 21 April 2015 . A ceremony was held in Valletta , with schoolchildren carrying water from City Gate to St. George 's Square , where a re @-@ enactment of the inauguration of the aqueduct was held . 
 The anniversary was also commemorated by a silver coin minted by the Central Bank of Malta . The coin shows the aqueduct on the reverse and Grand Master Wignacourt on the obverse . 
 <unk> also issued a set of two stamps on 21 April 2015 . The stamps show Wignacourt Arch and the Wignacourt Water Tower in Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys and Floriana respectively . 
 = Mah Laqa Bai = 
 Mah Laqa Bai ( 7 April 1768 – 1824 ) , born Chanda Bibi , and sometimes referred to as Mah Laqa Chanda , was an Indian 18th century Urdu poet , courtesan and philanthropist based in Hyderabad . In 1824 , she became the first female poet to have a diwan ( collection of poems ) of her work , a compilation of Urdu Ghazals named Gulzar @-@ e @-@ Mahlaqa , published posthumously . She lived in a period when Dakhini ( a version of Urdu ) was making its transition into the highly <unk> Urdu . Her literary contributions provide insight on such linguistic transformations in southern India . She was an influential female courtesan of the Deccan ; the Nizam , ruler of Hyderabad , appointed her to the <unk> ( the highest nobility ) , and as a close affiliate at the court . In 2010 , her memorial in Hyderabad , that houses her tomb , was restored using funds donated by the Federal government of the United States . 
 = = Life = = 
 Mah Laqa Bai was born as Chanda Bibi on 7 April 1768 in Aurangabad in the present @-@ day Maharashtra . Her mother was Raj Kunwar – a courtesan who migrated from Rajputana , and father was Bahadur Khan , who served as a <unk> ( military official ) at Mughal Emperor Muhammad Shah 's court . Khan migrated from Delhi to Hyderabad Deccan where he met and married Raj Kunwar . Chanda Bibi was adopted by Kunwar 's childless sister <unk> Ma who was married to Nawab Rukn @-@ ud @-@ Daula , a Prime Minister of Nizam of Hyderabad . 
 Chanda Bibi 's adoptive father took personal interest in her education and provided her with the best teachers . While growing up , she had access to a well @-@ endowed library and was exposed to the vibrant culture of Hyderabad . By the time she was 14 , she excelled in horse riding and archery . Due to her skills , she accompanied the Nizam II ( Mir Nizam Ali Khan ) in three wars ; dressed in male attire , she was noted for bow and javelin skills in the wars . Owing to her contributions , the Nizams awarded her with <unk> ( lands ) on various occasions , that include the neighborhoods of <unk> , Chanda Nagar , Syed <unk> and <unk> . On one occasion , she was conferred the title of Mah Laqa — meaning " Visage of the Moon " . Though she never married , she was in love with Raja Rao <unk> Rao ( a Maratha military chief who led a cavalry of 600 army men , fought against Maratha Empire under the second Nizam and became his favourite ) , and used to admire Captain Sir John Malcolm ( an assistant of James Achilles Kirkpatrick , the British Resident at Hyderabad ) . 
 She was an influential woman in the court of the second and third Nizam of Hyderabad . At that time , she was the only woman to be given recognition publicly in Hyderabad State . In addition , she was appointed to the <unk> , the highest nobility . Mah Laqa was frequently consulted by the rulers of the state on policy matters . As a pride among the nobility in those times , a battalion of 500 soldiers was reserved to march with her while she visits any official . She was also a courtesan while the Nizams held court . She was a mistress of the Prime Ministers of the Nizams . She died in 1824 and bequeathed her properties that included land , gold , silver and diamond @-@ studded jewelery to homeless women . Her residence which was located in <unk> , Hyderabad , today had been converted into a Government aided girls degree college . Mah Laqa of Deccan was the contemporary of renowned poets like Mir Taqi Mir , Mirza Muhammad Rafi <unk> and Khwaja Mir <unk> in North India . 
 = = Accomplishments = = 
 Mah Laqa was influenced by the literary work of mystic poet Siraj <unk> ( 1715 – 1763 ) , and learned poetry from Nawab Mir Alam who later became the Prime Minister of Hyderabad State . Her first language was Urdu , and she was also fluent in Arabic , Persian and Bhojpuri languages . She was the first woman poet to author a diwan , a complete collection of Urdu ghazals . The collection , named Gulzar @-@ e @-@ Mahlaqa , comprises 39 ghazals , and each ghazal consists of 5 couplets . The collection was published in 1824 after her death . The Diwan e Chanda is a manuscript collection of Mah Laqa 's 125 Ghazals , compiled and calligraphed by her in 1798 . It was signed and gifted to Captain Malcolm on 18 October 1799 , during a dance performance at Mir Alam 's residence . It is now preserved in the British Museum . 
 Her <unk> de plume was Chanda . The Urdu words Bulbul ( songbird ) , Gul ( rosebud ) and <unk> ( one who serves wine ) recurred as themes in her ghazals . Her popularity in reading poetry made her the first poetess of the region to participate and present her <unk> in a <unk> ( poetic symposium ) which was earlier reserved for men . Along with her poetry , sometimes she sang the songs composed by the Mughal Emperor Muhammad Shah and Sultan of Bijapur Ibrahim Adil Shah II . From her Diwan of 39 Ghazal collection , one Ghazal " Hoping to blossom ( one day ) into a flower " translates as : 
 Mah Laqa learned singing and classical Indian music <unk> from <unk> hal Khan , a master musician of that time , and a great @-@ grandson of the Tansen , the maestro of Mughal court . She excelled in Ghazal singing in multiple raga ( melodic modes ) and Taal ( rhythms ) ; she was adept at the Yaman raga and <unk> <unk> which she use to sing at special occasions . Mah <unk> preferred using Bhimpalasi raga in romantic Ghazals . When singing Sufi songs she used Dhrupad raga mixed with taal <unk> and raga Bhairavi . Mah Laqa excelled in singing love lyrics accompanied by Deccani style of Kathak dance . She established a cultural centre in which 300 girls were trained by her along with other masters . Maha Laqa 's library contain manuscripts and books on poetry along with the arts and the science collections . She sponsored and supervised the publication of <unk> , a historical book about the revival period of Hyderabad State . Although Mah Laqa practiced Islam , she was influenced by the understanding of Hindu books and philosophy . One author studied her writings and said that " her verses had a distinct <unk> ring in which she eulogized the king and nobles , a common style employed by poets during the 17th and 18th centuries . " 
 = = Memorial in Hyderabad = = 
 Near a hillock in <unk> @-@ Ali , Hyderabad , Mah Laqa constructed a walled compound where she frequently held <unk> . Inside this compound , she built a tomb for her biological mother in 1792 . After her death , Mah Laqa was buried next to her mother . The tomb was constructed in the Mughal and Rajasthani architectures style in the Char Bagh pattern . Along with mausoleum , the complex contains a pavilion in centre that is decorated intricately with stucco work , the caravanserai , a mosque and two <unk> . On a carved <unk> over the door of her mausoleum , an inscription in Urdu can be seen which translates as : 
 Scott Kugle , a Professor of Emory University and a researcher , studied the life of Mah Laqa Bai . During his study , he came across this memorial in a dilapidated condition . Kugle proposed the idea of renovating it . In the year 2010 , by using funds from the US government through the Consulate General 's office in Hyderabad , the Center for Deccan Studies spearheaded the year @-@ long renovation project . The Muslim Educational , Social and Cultural Organization also provided support to the project . In this renovation project , the debris was cleared , water channels were rebuilt , trees , bushes , the buildings and their exquisite decorations were restored . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Abdul Halim Sharar ( 1860 – 1926 ) , an Urdu writer and novelist , presented Mah Laqa Bai in his novel <unk> Kay <unk> ( the robbers of beauty ) as a well @-@ informed lady who got benefits from the modern educational system . Sajjad Shahid , a Hyderabad @-@ based scholar writes in his series of articles published in The Times of India that Mah Laqa Bai was the inspiration for Mirza Hadi <unk> 's famed novel <unk> Jaan Ada , published in 1899 . <unk> , the author of the novel , had served briefly at Hyderabad 's " translation bureau " ( later merged to found the Osmania University ) , before he wrote the fictionalized account of a courtesan . <unk> Jaan Ada is referred to as the first true novel of Urdu literature . Narendra Luther , an expert on Hyderabad 's history , posits that Mah Laqa Bai , the first women poet of India whose anthology was ever published " brought much pride to Hyderabad " . Pallabi Chakravorty , a Kathak dancer and a professor in the Department of Music and Dance at Swarthmore College , US , and Scott Kugle told in the seminar " Mad and divine women " that Mah Laqa Bai , besides being an aristocratic courtesan , was a devoted mystic , and was enamored by Sufi and bhakti elements . In 2013 , during the Hyderabad heritage festival , a monologue stage play " Maha <unk> Bai Chanda " on the life of Mah Laqa was sponsored by Andhra Pradesh State Tourism Department . The play was directed by Vinay Varma ; <unk> Sant Keswani played the role of Mah Laqa bai . 
 = Anti @-@ predator adaptation = 
 Anti @-@ predator adaptations are mechanisms developed through evolution that assist prey organisms in their constant struggle against predators . Throughout the animal kingdom , adaptations have evolved for every stage of this struggle . 
 The first line of defence consists in avoiding detection , through mechanisms such as camouflage , living underground , or nocturnality . Alternatively , prey animals may ward off attack , whether by advertising the presence of strong defences in aposematism , by mimicking animals which do possess such defences , by startling the attacker , by signalling to the predator that pursuit is not worthwhile , by distraction , by using defensive structures such as spines , and by living in a group . Members of groups are at reduced risk of predation , despite the increased conspicuousness of a group , through improved vigilance , predator confusion , and the likelihood that the predator will attack some other individual . 
 Some prey species are capable of fighting back against predators , whether with chemicals , through communal defence , or by ejecting noxious materials . Finally , some species are able to escape even when caught by sacrificing certain body parts : crabs can shed a claw , while lizards can shed their tails , often distracting predators long enough to permit the prey to escape . 
 = = Avoiding detection = = 
 = = = Staying out of sight = = = 
 Animals may avoid becoming prey by living out of sight of predators , whether in caves , underground , or by being nocturnal . <unk> is an animal behavior characterized by activity during the night and sleeping during the day . This is a behavioral form of crypsis that can be used by animals to either avoid predation or to enhance prey hunting . Predation risk has long been recognized as critical in shaping behavioral decisions . For example , this predation risk is of prime importance in determining the time of evening emergence in echolocating bats . Although early access during brighter times permits easier foraging , it also leads to a higher predation risk from bat hawks and bat falcons . This results in an optimum evening emergence time that is a compromise between the conflicting demands . Another nocturnal adaptation can be seen in kangaroo rats , which exhibit moonlight avoidance . These rodents forage in relatively open habitats and reduce their activity outside their nest burrows in response to moonlight . During a full moon , they shift their activity towards areas of relatively dense cover to compensate for the extra brightness . In controlled experiments , artificial moon @-@ like illumination stimulates similar responses in their foraging behavior , suggesting that this behavior has evolved to reduce predation risk . 
 = = = Camouflage = = = 
 Camouflage uses any combination of materials , coloration , or illumination for concealment to make the organism hard to detect by sight . It is common in both terrestrial and marine animals . Camouflage can be achieved in many different ways , such as through resemblance to surroundings , disruptive coloration , shadow elimination , self @-@ decoration , cryptic behavior , or changeable skin patterns and color . Animals such as the flat @-@ tail horned lizard of North America have evolved to eliminate their shadow and blend in with the ground . The bodies of these lizards are flattened , and their sides thin towards the edge . This body form , along with the white scales fringed along their sides , allows the lizards to effectively hide their shadows . Additionally , these lizards hide any remaining shadows by pressing their bodies to the ground . 
 = = <unk> off attack = = 
 Many species make use of behavioral strategies to deter predators . 
 = = = Startling the predator = = = 
 Many animals , including moths , butterflies , mantises , phasmids , and cephalopods such as octopuses , make use of patterns of threatening or startling behaviour , such as suddenly displaying conspicuous eyespots , so as to scare off or momentarily distract a predator , thus giving the prey animal an opportunity to escape . 
 = = = Pursuit @-@ deterrent signals = = = 
 Pursuit @-@ deterrent signals are behavioral signals used by prey that convince predators not to pursue them . For example , gazelles stot , jumping high with stiff legs and an arched back . This is thought to signal to predators that they have a high level of fitness and can outrun the predator . As a result , predators may choose to pursue a different prey that is less likely to outrun them . Warning calls given by birds such as the Eurasian jay are similarly honest signals , benefiting both predator and prey : the predator is informed that it has been detected and might as well save time and energy by giving up the chase , while the prey is protected from attack . 
 = = = Playing dead = = = 
 Another pursuit @-@ deterrent signal is <unk> or playing dead . <unk> is a form of bluff in which an animal mimics its own dead body , feigning death to avoid being attacked by predators seeking live prey . <unk> can also be used by the predator in order to lure prey into approaching . An example of this is seen in white @-@ tailed deer fawns , which experience a drop in heart rate in response to approaching predators . This response , referred to as " alarm bradycardia " , causes the fawn 's heart rate to drop from 155 to 38 beats per minute within one beat of the heart . This drop in heart rate can last up to two minutes , causing the fawn to experience a depressed breathing rate and decrease in movement , called tonic immobility . Tonic immobility is a reflex response that causes the fawn to enter a low body position that simulates the position of a dead corpse . Upon discovery of the fawn , the predator loses interest in the " dead " prey . Additionally , other symptoms of alarm bradycardia , including salivation , urination , and defecation , can cause the predator to lose interest . 
 = = = Distraction = = = 
 Marine molluscs such as sea hares , cuttlefish , squid and octopuses give themselves a last chance to escape by distracting their attackers . To do this , they eject a mixture of chemicals , which may mimic food or otherwise confuse predators . In response to a predator , animals in these groups release ink , creating a cloud , and <unk> , affecting the predator 's feeding senses , causing it to attack the cloud . 
 Distraction displays attract the attention of predators away from an object , typically the nest or young , that is being protected . Distraction displays are performed by some species of birds , which may feign a broken wing while hopping about on the ground , and by some species of fish . 
 = = = Mimicry and aposematism = = = 
 Mimicry occurs when an organism ( the mimic ) simulates signal properties of another organism ( the model ) to confuse a third organism . This results in the mimic gaining protection , food , and mating advantages . There are two classical types of defensive mimicry : Batesian and Müllerian . Both involve aposematic coloration , or warning signals , to avoid being attacked by a predator . 
 In Batesian mimicry , a palatable , harmless prey species mimics the appearance of another species that is noxious to predators , thus reducing the mimic 's risk of attack . This form of mimicry is seen in many insects . The idea behind Batesian mimicry is that predators that have tried to eat the unpalatable species learn to associate its colors and markings with an unpleasant taste . This results in the predator learning to avoid species displaying similar colors and markings , including Batesian mimics . Some species of octopus can mimic a selection of other animals by changing their skin color , skin pattern and body motion . When a damselfish attacks an octopus , the octopus mimics a banded sea @-@ snake . The model chosen varies with the octopus 's predator and habitat . Most of these octopuses use Batesian mimicry , selecting an organism repulsive to predators as a model . 
 In Müllerian mimicry , two or more aposematic forms share the same warning signals , as in viceroy and monarch butterflies . Birds avoid eating both species because their wing patterns honestly signal their unpleasant taste . 
 = = = Defensive structures = = = 
 A spine is a sharp , needle @-@ like structure used to inflict pain on predators . An example of this seen in nature is in the Sohal surgeonfish . These fish have a sharp scalpel @-@ like spine on the front of each of their tail fins , able to inflict deep wounds . The area around the spines is often brightly colored to advertise the defensive capability ; predators often avoid the Sohal surgeonfish . Defensive spines may be detachable , barbed or poisonous . Porcupine spines are long , stiff , break at the tip , and are barbed to stick into a would @-@ be predator . In contrast , the hedgehog 's short spines , which are modified hairs , readily bend , and are barbed into the body , so they are not easily lost ; they may be jabbed at an attacker . 
 Many species of slug caterpillar , Limacodidae , have numerous protuberances and stinging spines along their dorsal surfaces . Species that possess these stinging spines suffer less predation than larvae that lack them , and a predator , the paper wasp , chooses larvae without spines when given a choice . 
 = = Safety in numbers = = 
 Group living can decrease the risk of predation to the individual in a variety of ways , as described below . 
 = = = Dilution effect = = = 
 A dilution effect is seen when animals living in a group " dilute " their risk of attack , each individual being just one of many in the group . George C. Williams and W.D. Hamilton proposed that group living evolved because it provides benefits to the individual rather than to the group as a whole , which becomes more conspicuous as it becomes larger . One common example is the shoaling of fish . Experiments provide direct evidence for the decrease in individual attack rate seen with group living , for example in Camargue horses in Southern France . The horse @-@ fly often attacks these horses , sucking blood and carrying diseases . When the flies are most numerous , the horses gather in large groups , and individuals are indeed attacked less frequently . Water striders are insects that live on the surface of fresh water , and are attacked from beneath by predatory fish . Experiments varying the group size of the water striders showed that the attack rate per individual water strider decreases as group size increases . 
 = = = Selfish herd = = = 
 The selfish herd theory was proposed by W.D. Hamilton to explain why animals seek central positions in a group . It refers to the idea of reducing the individual 's domain of danger . A domain of danger is the area within the group in which the individual is more likely to be attacked by a predator . The center of the group has the lowest domain of danger , so animals will constantly strive to gain this position . In a study testing Hamilton 's selfish herd effect , Alta De Vos and Justin O <unk> ( 2010 ) studied brown fur seal predation from great white sharks . Using decoy seals , the researchers varied the distance between the decoys to produce different domains of danger . The seals with a greater domain of danger had an increased risk of shark attack . 
 = = = Predator satiation = = = 
 A radical strategy for avoiding predators which may otherwise kill a large majority of the emerging young of a population is to emerge very rarely , at irregular intervals . This strategy is seen in dramatic form in the periodical cicadas , which emerge at intervals of 13 or 17 years . Predators with a life @-@ cycle of one or a few years are unable to reproduce rapidly enough in response to such an emergence , so predator satiation is a likely evolutionary explanation for the cicadas ' unusual life @-@ cycle . Predators may still feast on the emerging cicadas , but are unable to consume more than a fraction of the brief surfeit of prey . 
 = = = Alarm calls = = = 
 Animals that live in groups often give alarm calls that give warning of an attack . For example , vervet monkeys give different calls depending on the nature of the attack : for an eagle , a disyllabic cough ; for a leopard or other cat , a loud bark ; for a python or other snake , a " <unk> " . The monkeys hearing these calls respond defensively , but differently in each case : to the eagle call , they look up and run into cover ; to the leopard call , they run up into the trees ; to the snake call , they stand on two legs and look around for snakes , and on seeing the snake , they sometimes mob it . Similar calls are found in other species of monkey , while birds also give different calls that elicit different responses . 
 = = = Improved vigilance = = = 
 In the improved vigilance effect , groups are able to detect predators sooner than solitary individuals . For many predators , success depends on surprise . If the prey is alerted early in an attack , they have an improved chance of escape . For example , wood pigeon flocks are preyed upon by goshawks . <unk> are less successful when attacking larger flocks of wood pigeons than they are when attacking smaller flocks . This is because the larger the flock size , the more likely it is that one bird will notice the hawk sooner and fly away . Once one pigeon flies off in alarm , the rest of the pigeons follow . Wild ostriches in Tsavo National Park in Kenya feed either alone or in groups of up to four birds . They are subject to predation by lions . As the ostrich group size increases , the frequency at which each individual raises it head to look for predators decreases . Because ostriches are able to run at speeds that exceed those of lions for great distances , lions try to attack an ostrich when its head is down . By grouping , the ostriches present the lions with greater difficulty in determining how long the ostriches ' heads stay down . Thus , although individual vigilance decreases , the overall vigilance of the group increases . 
 = = = Predator confusion = = = 
 Individuals living in large groups may be safer from attack because the predator may be confused by the large group size . As the group moves , the predator has greater difficulty targeting an individual prey animal . The zebra has been suggested by the zoologist Martin Stevens and his colleagues as an example of this . When stationary , a single zebra stands out because of its large size . To reduce the risk of attack , zebras often travel in herds . The striped patterns of all the zebras in the herd may confuse the predator , making it harder for the predator to focus in on an individual zebra . Furthermore , when moving rapidly , the zebra stripes create a confusing , flickering motion dazzle effect in the eye of the predator . 
 = = Fighting back = = 
 Defensive structures such as spines may be used both to ward off attack as already mentioned , and if need be to fight back against a predator . Methods of fighting back include chemical defences , mobbing , defensive regurgitation , and suicidal altruism . 
 = = = Chemical defences = = = 
 Many animals make use of poisonous chemicals for self @-@ defence . These may be concentrated in surface structures such as spines or glands , giving an attacker a taste of the chemicals before it actually bites or swallows the prey animal : many toxins are bitter @-@ tasting . A last @-@ ditch defence is for the animal 's flesh itself to be toxic , as in the puffer fish , <unk> butterflies and burnet moths . Many insects acquire toxins from their food plants ; Danaus caterpillars accumulate toxic <unk> from milkweeds ( <unk> ) . The bombardier beetle has specialized glands on the tip of its abdomen that allows it to direct a toxic spray towards predators . The spray is generated explosively through oxidation of hydroquinones and is sprayed at a temperature of 100 ° C. Armoured crickets similarly release blood at their joints when threatened ( <unk> ) . Several species of grasshopper including <unk> pictus , <unk> donovani , <unk> miliaris , and Tegra novaehollandiae secrete noxious liquids when threatened , sometimes ejecting these forcefully . Spitting cobras squirt venom from their fangs when threatened ; it can blind a predator if it strikes the eye . 
 A few vertebrate species such as the Texas horned lizard are able to shoot squirts of blood from their eyes , by rapidly increasing the blood pressure within the eye sockets , if threatened . Because an individual may lose up to 53 % of blood in a single squirt , this is only used against persistent predators like foxes , wolves and coyotes ( Canidae ) , as a last defence . Canids often drop horned lizards after being squirted , and attempt to wipe or shake the blood out of their mouths , suggesting that the fluid has a foul taste ; they choose other lizards if given the choice , suggesting a learned aversion towards horned lizards as prey . 
 The slime glands along the body of the hagfish secrete enormous amounts of mucus when it is provoked or stressed . The gelatinous slime has dramatic effects on the flow and viscosity of water , rapidly clogging the gills of any fish that attempt to capture hagfish ; predators typically release the hagfish within seconds ( pictured above ) . Common predators of hagfish include seabirds , pinnipeds and cetaceans , but few fish , suggesting that predatory fish avoid hagfish as prey . 
 = = = Communal defence = = = 
 In communal defence , prey groups actively defend themselves by attacking or mobbing a predator , rather than allowing themselves to be passive victims of predation . Mobbing is the harassing of a predator by many prey animals . Mobbing is usually done to protect the young in social colonies . For example , red colobus monkeys exhibit mobbing when threatened by chimpanzees , a common predator . The male red colobus monkeys group together and place themselves between predators and the group 's females and juveniles . The males jump together and actively bite the chimpanzees . Fieldfares are birds which may nest either solitarily or in colonies . Within colonies , fieldfares mob and defecate on approaching predators , shown experimentally to reduce predation levels . 
 = = = Defensive regurgitation = = = 
 Some birds and insects use defensive regurgitation to ward off predators . The northern fulmar vomits a bright orange , oily substance called stomach oil when threatened . The stomach oil is made from their aquatic diets . It causes the predator 's feathers to mat , leading to the loss of flying ability and the loss of water <unk> . This is especially dangerous for aquatic birds because their water repellent feathers protect them from hypothermia when diving for food . 
 European roller chicks vomit a bright orange , foul smelling liquid when they sense danger . This repels prospective predators and may alert their parents to danger : they respond by delaying their return . 
 Numerous insects utilize defensive regurgitation . The eastern tent caterpillar regurgitates a droplet of digestive fluid to repel attacking ants . Similarly , larvae of the noctuid moth regurgitate when disturbed by ants . The vomit of noctuid moths has repellent and irritant properties that help to deter predator attacks . 
 = = = Suicidal altruism = = = 
 An unusual type of predator deterrence is observed in the Malaysian exploding ant . Social hymenoptera rely on altruism to protect the entire colony , so the self @-@ destructive acts benefit all individuals in the colony . When a worker ant 's leg is grasped , it suicidally expels the contents of its hypertrophied glands , expelling corrosive irritant compounds and adhesives onto the predator . These prevent predation and serve as a signal to other enemy ants to stop predation of the rest of the colony . 
 = = Escaping = = 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 The normal reaction of a prey animal to an attacking predator is to flee by any available means , whether flying , gliding , falling , swimming , running or jumping according to the animal 's capabilities . Escape paths are often erratic , making it difficult for the predator to predict which way the prey will go next : for example , birds such as snipe , ptarmigan and black @-@ headed gulls evade fast raptors such as peregrine falcons with zigzagging or jinking flight . In the tropical rain forests of Southeast Asia in particular , many vertebrates escape predators by falling and gliding . Among the insects , many moths turn sharply , fall , or perform a powered dive in response to the sonar clicks of bats . Among fish , the stickleback follows a zigzagging path , often doubling back erratically , when chased by a fish @-@ eating merganser duck . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some animals are capable of autotomy ( self @-@ amputation ) , shedding one of their own appendages in a last @-@ ditch attempt to elude a predator 's grasp or to distract the predator and thereby allow escape . The lost body part may be regenerated later . Certain sea slugs discard stinging papillae ; arthropods such as crabs can sacrifice a claw , which can be regrown over several successive moults ; among vertebrates , many geckos and other lizards shed their tails when attacked : the tail goes on writhing for a while , distracting the predator , and giving the lizard time to escape ; a smaller tail slowly regrows . 
 = Ernest Radcliffe Bond = 
 Ernest Radcliffe Bond , OBE , <unk> , ( 1 March 1919 – 20 November 2003 ) , also called Commander X , was a British soldier , and later policeman famous for his service in the Metropolitan Police Service . He married the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Mabel Laming at 16 , and they remained together until Mabel 's death in 1992 . 
 Bond experienced the Fraud Squad , the Flying Squad , the Murder Squad , and became the first commander of the newly formed Bomb Squad ( later the Anti @-@ Terrorist Branch , now merged into Counter Terrorism Command ) . His notable achievements in the bomb squad were negotiating the rise of The Angry Brigade , eventually jailing several members . The other major event he negotiated as commander with the Bomb Squad was the Balcombe Street siege , in which two people were taken hostage by four Irish Republican Army members , who demanded a plane to Ireland . Bond , answering the demands , refused saying that the police " are not going to make any deals " . The gunmen surrendered , the event a success for police with no casualties on either side . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ernest Radcliffe Bond was born on 1 March 1919 in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , where he lived in a " close @-@ knit community " at 58 John Street . His father , William Edward Bond , was a shipyard worker , and his mother was Annie Elizabeth Bond née Radcliffe . Bond was an apprentice French polisher after he left school . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Bond joined the British Army on 16 September 1935 , entering the 2nd battalion of the Scots Guards . His objective was to fight in any short engagement that he could , and then to become a police officer . He was sent to Palestine to help with the Arab Revolt . However , his plan was scuppered by the outbreak of World War II , and he stayed with his battalion , serving first in Norway as a sergeant . After a short time in No. 8 ( Guards ) Commando , where he served in a group of units under Robert Laycock 's command fighting in the Middle East in 1941 , by that time Bond had been promoted to the rank of sergeant . The unit was disbanded , and he journeyed to North Africa with his original battalion in the Scots Guards , fighting in the Eighth Army . 
 In 1941 , still in North Africa , Bond joined " L " Detachment in the Special Service Brigade , which became David Stirling 's Special Air Service . Bond was part of a parachute training mission in Kabrit , Egypt , against the airfields of Gazala and Tmimi . The conditions were " atrocious " , and his aeroplane crashed in desert . He became a prisoner of war for the remainder of the conflict . 
 He was reported to have spent four years in jail in his military career . 
 = = Police career = = 
 When Bond was released from his imprisonment by the Axis , he was demobilised in 1946 and entered the Metropolitan Police with the warrant number <unk> , realising his pre @-@ war ambition . He was ' on the beat ' for 2 years , working in Lambeth with ' M ' division . His division became ' E ' division , patrolling Holborn , when he decided to enter the Criminal Investigation Department ( CID ) in 1948 . He experienced another promotion in 1957 , to become a Detective Sergeant ; " he began to develop a reputation for his discerning skill as a detective . " Bond rapidly experienced both the Fraud Squad and the Flying Squad ; and in 1963 joined the Murder Squad at the rank of Detective Inspector . 
 Bond joined the Bomb Squad , newly formed in January 1971 due to concern over The Angry Brigade . Bond became the unit 's first commander on 23 June 1971 , being promoted to that position in 1969 . The unit served at Tintagel House , and Bond 's name was theoretically meant to be kept secret and he should be called ' Commander X ' , so that he was not bombed , but journalists have since claimed to have known his name within days of his appointment . The press lauded Commander X as a " mystery supremo to hunt down the Angry Brigade . " The Angry Brigade was a new political group ; " a small group [ around 200 ] of leftwing radicals and anarchists , " who claimed responsibility for about 20 small bombings which began on 20 November 1970 , with the bombing of a BBC van . At its formation , the Bomb Squad comprised around 30 men , one third from CID , the rest from Special Branch . The Angry Brigade 's decline came in 1971 , when various conspirators were arrested . At the 1971 – 72 trial , the nine conspirators were denied bail at Clerkenwell Court after Bond opposed the move , and the judge , J Purcell , " remanded all nine in custody for a week . " There were concerns that the police had " over @-@ reached themselves . " The Angry Brigade member John Barker later said that " the police framed a guilty man , " and Bond was called an " old @-@ fashioned plod " by a defendant . He told the Purcell that " I am quite certain that , sooner or later , we would have had somebody killed . " Due to his success , in 1972 he was awarded the Queen 's Police Medal and promoted to Deputy Assistant Commissioner ( Operations ) . 
 The Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) also had a bombing campaign ongoing , and in December 1975 Bond " saturated " the centre of London with plainclothes police officers . Four IRA members took two people hostage in Balcombe Street , following a police chase which involved a shoot out on 7 December . The terrorists called the police , in a call which was routed to Bond ; who refused their demands of a plane to fly to Ireland , proclaiming that 
 " They are not going anywhere and they are not getting any plane to Ireland . We are not going to make any deals at all . " 
 The gunmen gave up on 12 December , their surrender sparking fears of reprisals , after what Bond called a " rather humiliating episode , " Bond " masterminded " the operation to regain the hostages . He retired the following year , in 1976 , and received the Order of the British Empire in the New Year 's honours list . Upon his retirement in February 1976 , he had served in the police for 30 years , full of " exemplary conduct . " In his time , Bond received 12 Commissioner 's Commendations and 7 for " courage , diligence and determination in the course of investigations . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bond married the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Mabel Phoebe Isabell née Laming on 29 October 1935 , the daughter of a dock worker , Alfred Thomas Laming ( Bond was 16 at the time ) . They had two sons and two daughters together , who all survived both Ernest and Mabel . When Bond had retired , he indulged his interests in decorating and gardening , and remained a Freemason . Mabel died in 1992 , and on 20 November 2003 , Ernest died of prostate cancer in Welling ; in his home . 
