 Malaysia has a multi @-@ ethnic , multicultural , and multilingual society . The original culture of the area stemmed from indigenous tribes that inhabited it , along with the Malays who later moved there . Substantial influence exists from Chinese and Indian culture , dating back to when foreign trade began . Other cultural influences include the Persian , Arabic , and British cultures . Due to the structure of the government , coupled with the social contract theory , there has been minimal cultural assimilation of ethnic minorities . 
 In 1971 , the government created a " National Cultural Policy " , defining Malaysian culture . It stated that Malaysian culture must be based on the culture of the indigenous peoples of Malaysia , that it may incorporate suitable elements from other cultures , and that Islam must play a part in it . It also promoted the Malay language above others . This government intervention into culture has caused resentment among non @-@ Malays who feel their cultural freedom was lessened . Both Chinese and Indian associations have submitted memorandums to the government , accusing it of formulating an undemocratic culture policy . 
 Some cultural disputes exist between Malaysia and neighbouring countries , notably Indonesia . The two countries have a similar cultural heritage , sharing many traditions and items . However , disputes have arisen over things ranging from culinary dishes to Malaysia 's national anthem . Strong feelings exist in Indonesia about protecting their national heritage . The Malaysian government and the Indonesian government have met to defuse some of the tensions resulting from the overlaps in culture . Feelings are not as strong in Malaysia , where most recognise that many cultural values are shared . 
 = = = Fine arts = = = 
 Traditional Malaysian art was mainly centred on the areas of carving , weaving , and silversmithing . Traditional art ranges from handwoven baskets from rural areas to the <unk> of the Malay courts . Common artworks included ornamental kris , beetle nut sets , and woven batik and songket fabrics . Indigenous East Malaysians are known for their wooden masks . Each ethnic group have distinct performing arts , with little overlap between them . However , Malay art does show some North Indian influence due to the historical influence of India . 
 Traditional Malay music and performing arts appear to have originated in the Kelantan @-@ Pattani region with influences from India , China , Thailand and Indonesia . The music is based around percussion instruments , the most important of which is the <unk> ( drum ) . There are at least 14 types of traditional drums . Drums and other traditional percussion instruments and are often made from natural materials . Music is traditionally used for storytelling , celebrating life @-@ cycle events , and occasions such as a harvest . It was once used as a form of long @-@ distance communication . In East Malaysia , gong @-@ based musical ensembles such as agung and kulintang are commonly used in ceremonies such as funerals and weddings . These ensembles are also common in neighbouring regions such as in Mindanao in the Philippines , Kalimantan in Indonesia , and Brunei . 
 Malaysia has a strong oral tradition that has existed since before the arrival of writing , and continues today . Each of the Malay Sultanates created their own literary tradition , influenced by pre @-@ existing oral stories and by the stories that came with Islam . The first Malay literature was in the Arabic script . The earliest known Malay writing is on the Terengganu stone , made in 1303 . Chinese and Indian literature became common as the numbers of speakers increased in Malaysia , and locally produced works based in languages from those areas began to be produced in the 19th century . English has also become a common literary language . In 1971 , the government took the step of defining the literature of different languages . Literature written in Malay was called " the national literature of Malaysia " , literature in other bumiputera languages was called " regional literature " , while literature in other languages was called " sectional literature " . Malay poetry is highly developed , and uses many forms . The Hikayat form is popular , and the pantun has spread from Malay to other languages . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Malaysia 's cuisine reflects the multi @-@ ethnic makeup of its population . Many cultures from within the country and from surrounding regions have greatly influenced the cuisine . Much of the influence comes from the Malay , Chinese , Indian , Thai , Javanese , and Sumatran cultures , largely due to the country being part of the ancient spice route . The cuisine is very similar to that of Singapore and Brunei , and also bears resemblance to Filipino cuisine . The different states have varied dishes , and often the food in Malaysia is different from the original dishes . 
 Sometimes food not found in its original culture is assimilated into another ; for example , Chinese restaurants in Malaysia often serve Malay dishes . Food from one culture is sometimes also cooked using styles taken from another culture , For example , <unk> belacan ( shrimp paste ) are commonly used as ingredients by Chinese restaurants to create the stir fried water spinach ( <unk> belacan ) . This means that although much of Malaysian food can be traced back to a certain culture , they have their own identity . Rice is popular in many dishes . Chili is commonly found in local cuisine , although this does not necessarily make them spicy . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Malaysia 's main newspapers are owned by the government and political parties in the ruling coalition , although some major opposition parties also have their own , which are openly sold alongside regular newspapers . A divide exists between the media in the two halves of the country . Peninsular @-@ based media gives low priority to news from the East , and often treats the eastern states as colonies of the Peninsula . The media have been blamed for increasing tension between Indonesia and Malaysia , and giving Malaysians a bad image of Indonesians . The country has Malay , English , Chinese , and Tamil dailies . 
 Freedom of the press is limited , with numerous restrictions on publishing rights and information dissemination . The government has previously tried to crack down on opposition papers before elections . In 2007 , a government agency issued a directive to all private television and radio stations to refrain from broadcasting speeches made by opposition leaders , a move condemned by politicians from the opposition Democratic Action Party . Sabah , where all tabloids but one are independent of government control , has the freest press in Malaysia . Laws such as the Printing Presses and Publications Act have also been cited as curtailing freedom of expression . 
 = = = Holidays and festivals = = = 
 Malaysians observe a number of holidays and festivities throughout the year . Some are federally gazetted public holidays and some are observed by individual states . Other festivals are observed by particular ethnic or religion groups , and the main holiday of each major group has been declared a public holiday . The most observed national holiday is Hari Merdeka ( Independence Day ) on 31 August , commemorating the independence of the Federation of Malaya in 1957 . Malaysia Day on 16 September commemorates federation in 1963 . Other notable national holidays are Labour Day ( 1 May ) and the King 's birthday ( first week of June ) . 
 Muslim holidays are prominent as Islam is the state religion ; Hari Raya Puasa ( also called Hari Raya <unk> , Malay for Eid al @-@ Fitr ) , Hari Raya Haji ( also called Hari Raya <unk> , Malay for Eid ul @-@ Adha ) , <unk> Rasul ( birthday of the Prophet ) , and others being observed . Malaysian Chinese celebrate festivals such as Chinese New Year and others relating to traditional Chinese beliefs . Hindus in Malaysia celebrate Deepavali , the festival of lights , while Thaipusam is a religious rite which sees pilgrims from all over the country converge at the Batu Caves . Malaysia 's Christian community celebrates most of the holidays observed by Christians elsewhere , most notably Christmas and Easter . East Malaysians also celebrate a harvest festival known as Gawai , and another one known as <unk> . Despite most festivals being identified with a particular ethnic or religious group , celebrations are universal . In a custom known as " open house " Malaysians participate in the celebrations of others , often visiting the houses of those who identify with the festival . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Popular sports in Malaysia include football , badminton , field hockey , bowls , tennis , squash , martial arts , horse riding , sailing , and skate boarding . Football is the most popular sport in Malaysia and the country is currently studying the possibility of bidding as a joint host for 2034 FIFA World Cup . Badminton matches attract thousands of spectators , and since 1948 Malaysia has been one of four countries to hold the Thomas Cup , the world team championship trophy of men 's badminton . The Malaysian Lawn Bowls Federation was registered in 1997 . Squash was brought to the country by members of the British army , with the first competition being held in 1939 . The Squash <unk> Association Of Malaysia was created on 25 June 1972 . Malaysia has proposed a Southeast Asian football league . The men 's national field hockey team ranked 13th in the world as of December 2015 . The 3rd Hockey World Cup was hosted at Merdeka Stadium in Kuala Lumpur , as well as the 10th cup . The country also has its own Formula One track – the Sepang International Circuit . It runs for 310 @.@ 408 kilometres ( 192 @.@ 88 mi ) , and held its first Grand Prix in 1999 . Traditional sports include Silat Melayu , the most common style of martial arts practised by ethnic Malays in Malaysia , Brunei , and Singapore . 
 The Federation of Malaya Olympic Council was formed in 1953 , and received recognition by the IOC in 1954 . It first participated in the 1956 Melbourne Olympic Games . The council was renamed the Olympic Council of Malaysia in 1964 , and has participated in all but one Olympic games since its inception . The largest number of athletes ever sent to the Olympics was 57 to the 1972 Munich Olympic Games . Malaysian athletes have won a total of six Olympic medals , five in Badminton , one in Platform diving . The country has competed at the Commonwealth Games since 1950 as Malaya , and 1966 as Malaysia , and the games were hosted in Kuala Lumpur in 1998 . The most common martial arts are Silat Melayu and kickboxing or <unk> . 
 = Delightful Dolly = 
 Delightful Dolly is a 1910 American silent short comedy produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows Marie Allen , an orphan girl who lives with her grandfather , who sees a large doll in the window of the shop . At night , she sneaks out to visit the shop with the doll , but finds it gone . She sneaks into the shop and ends up hiding in the box , to prevent from being discovered by the store clerk . She is taken to the home of the rich little girl , Daisy . After taking the doll 's clothes , Marie hides in the box as Daisy approaches . When Daisy opens the box , Marie acts like a doll . When Daisy takes a break for food , Marie secretly takes the food and drink much to Daisy 's bewilderment . Marie 's grandfather arrives at the home and explains the situation and Marie receives the doll from the family . Little is known about the production or cast of the film , but Marie Eline played the role of Marie . The film was released on October 14 , 1910 and was met with some praise in trade publications . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from October 15 , 1910 . It states : " Little Marie Allen , a penniless orphan , lives with her granddad . Out for a walk she admires a huge doll in a shop window . That night , after her granddad has fallen asleep , she slips out to have another look at the doll . Arriving at the toy shop , she sees that the doll is gone . Unseen by anyone , she enters the store . She finds the wonderful doll and lifts it out of its box to admire it . Hearing a clerk approaching , she becomes frightened and gets into the doll box . The doll rolls under the counter . The clerk sends the errand boy off with the box , thinking it contains the doll , which has been ordered for Daisy Smythe , a rich little girl . Arriving at Daisy 's house , Marie steps out of the box as soon as the room is empty . She removes the doll clothes from the box and admires them greatly . She decides to try them on , and soon a little cap , shoes and garments are on her figure . Then she hears Daisy coming and retreats to the box . Daisy enters and takes the supposed doll from the box , falls in love with it instantly and enthusiastically works its arms and limbs . Marie lives up to her role well , imitating with stiff , jerky movements of the limbs that belong to real dolls . Then Daisy eats , and Marie grows hungry as she watches . When Daisy sets down her bowl of milk , Marie reaches over and drinks it down . Daisy is amazed when she misses the milk . Marie helps herself to all the food and Daisy 's wonderment is amusing to see . Finally Daisy falls asleep in her chair and Marie falls asleep on the floor . Here she is found by her granddad , who managed to trace her from the toy shop , and Daisy and her mother laugh so heartily over Marie 's adventure that they reward her cleverness with - the doll itself ! " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as Marie Allen 
 The roles of Daisy Smythe and the grandfather were likely played by members of the Thanhouser Company , but the roles were uncredited and apparently not given in trade publications . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The role of Marie was played by Marie Eline , but the other cast credits are unknown . Many 1910 Thanhouser productions have fragmentary cast credits . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel comedy , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on October 14 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with known theaters in North Carolina , Washington , Montana , Arizona , Kansas , and Minnesota . The film was also shown in Vancouver , Canada . 
 The review received barely a sentence from Walton of The Moving Picture News who stated it was : " Good from A to Z. " The Moving Picture World offers little more , highlighting that the film would please children and offered a brief summary devoid of criticism or praise . The New York Dramatic Mirror gave a much more substantial treatment of the subject and stated , " This film , intended for juvenile patrons , has yet a charm for older spectators as well , because it tells a pretty story in a pretty way . ... The narrative is frankly impossible in plot , but that makes it no less entertaining to the youthful . A little make @-@ believe is relished by the best of men . The acting of the wee heroine is really wonderful ; it is spontaneous , lively , resourceful , graceful , and charming . The part of the rich girl , however , although it is <unk> played , should have been entrusted to a smaller , if not to a younger , woman . The size of the actress makes the film look bizarre . The scenery is not all that might be desired , still it is passable . " The effect and usage of a living doll would be attempted again with The Spoiled Darling 's Doll , apparently with better success than Delightful Dolly . 
 = Carnival of Carnage = 
 Carnival of Carnage is the debut album by American hip hop group Insane Clown Posse , released on October 18 , 1992 , by Psychopathic Records . It is the first Joker Card in the first deck . Recording sessions for the album took place from 1991 to 1992 at Miller Midi Productions and The <unk> Studio . The album is the first Joker 's Card in the group 's Dark Carnival mythology . The album 's lyrics describe the Carnival of Carnage as a representation of the violence that occurs within the ghettos , which takes the form of a traveling carnival to enact the same brutality on the upper class . 
 Carnival of Carnage was the first album on which Insane Clown Posse collaborated with producer Mike E. Clark , who would work with the group throughout much of their career . It features guest appearances by popular Detroit rappers Esham and Kid Rock . The album features the only recorded appearances of member John Kickjazz , who left the group prior to the album 's release . Although the album did not initially sell well , it became eligible for gold certification by the RIAA in 2010 . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Joseph Bruce and Joseph Utsler formed a hip hop group in 1990 . Under the stage names Violent J , 2 Dope , and John Kickjazz , the group began performing at local night clubs under the name of their gang , Inner City Posse . By late 1991 , the group had invested more money into production than was covered by returns . They decided that their gangsta rap style was the cause of the problem : Most emcees at the time used similar styles , making it difficult for Inner City Posse to distinguish itself stylistically . Bruce suggested the band instead adapt a style similar to the hallucinatory , surrealistic " acid rap " of fellow Detroit rapper Esham , in a bid to have Detroit represent acid rap , much as Los Angeles represented gangsta rap . The group agreed , but not to copying the style of Esham closely . Instead , they suggested using horror @-@ themed lyrics as an emotional outlet for all their negative life experiences . They were also unanimous in deciding not to rap openly about Satan , which Esham often did . 
 After the change in musical style , the group decided that it needed a new name . Utsler suggested keeping the " I.C.P. " initials to inform the community that Inner City Posse was not defunct , an idea to which the group agreed . Several names were considered before Bruce recalled his dream of a clown running around in Delray , which became the inspiration for the group 's new name Insane Clown Posse . The other members agreed , deciding that they would take on this new genre and name , and would all don face paint due to the success of their former clown @-@ painted hype man . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Carnival of Carnage began recording at Miller Midi Productions in Detroit , Michigan with Chuck Miller producing and mastering the album . Miller charged the group US $ 6 @,@ 000 to produce the songs " Red Neck Hoe , " " Psychopathic , " " Your Rebel Flag , " and part of " Night of the Axe . " Seeing that they were being overcharged , Alex Abbiss made his first major managerial move by finding another producer , Mike E. Clark . The group finished recording the album with Clark at The <unk> Studio in Ferndale , Michigan . Clark mastered his part of the album at <unk> Studio , and continued to work with the group throughout their career . 
 Original group member John Kickjazz appeared on the songs " Your Rebel Flag , " " Psychopathic , " " <unk> ' Your Eyes , " " Wizard of the Hood , " " Red Neck Hoe , " and " Taste . " " Carnival of Carnage " was originally recorded by Esham at Hells Doors Studio , but he pronounced " carnage " as " <unk> " and refused to redo it . The final version of the song was recorded by Joseph Bruce over a reversed recording of the original . 
 Awesome Dre was originally going to do a verse on " Taste . " While Insane Clown Posse waited in the studio for him to arrive , Esham suggested that he appear on the track instead for the same amount of money , and the group allowed him to record a verse . Esham was paid $ 500 for his appearance . Kid Rock demanded a hundred more than Esham , and was paid $ 600 to appear on " Is That You ? " He showed up to record the song intoxicated , but re @-@ recorded his vocals and record scratching the following day . 
 = = = Joker 's Cards = = = 
 Carnival of Carnage is the first Joker 's Card in Insane Clown Posse 's Dark Carnival concept album series . The Dark Carnival is a concept of the afterlife in which souls are sent to a form of limbo while waiting to be sent to heaven or hell based on their individual actions . These concepts are related by Insane Clown Posse in a series of albums called the six Joker 's Cards . Each of the six Joker 's Cards relate to a specific character — an entity of the Dark Carnival — that tries to " save the human soul " by showing the wicked inside of one 's self . 
 This Joker 's Card is a representation of the ghettos and the violence that occurs within them . It takes the form of a traveling carnival which releases the same brutality on those who have ignored the inner cities ' cries for help . The Card issues a warning against the upper @-@ class and government 's negligence toward the lower classes . The cover of Carnival of Carnage was drawn by Joseph Utsler , who would later create artwork for the rest of the albums in the Joker 's Cards series . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Samples = = = 
 Mike Clark samples Johnny " Hammond " Smith 's " Big Sur Suite " , from Smith 's 1974 album Higher Ground , Black Sabbath 's " The Wizard " , from their 1970 debut album , and the Beastie Boys " Pass the Mic " from their 1992 album Check Your Head in his production of " Never Had It Made . " Joseph Bruce samples several clips from the film The Wizard of Oz in " Wizard of the Hood . " The song " Psychopathic " features a sample of " More Bounce to the Ounce " by Zapp and " Halloween theme " from the Halloween film franchise . The song " Redneck Hoe " features a sample from " City , Country , City " by WAR . The song " Taste " samples Esham 's " Word After Word " . 
 = = = Lyricism = = = 
 Joseph Bruce uses elements of political hip hop throughout the album . Many of his lyrics were derived from his experiences of growing up in a poor family that was neglected by the government . He and his brother Robert used to escape from their impoverished reality by gathering themselves in a forest called " Picker Forest " . Joe cites " Picker Forest " as a strong influence on the Dark Carnival mythology which began with this album . The themes of the Dark Carnival also derived from a dream Bruce had shortly after the group adopted its new name , in which spirits in a traveling carnival appeared to him . 
 " Red Neck Hoe " and " Your Rebel Flag " stem from the group 's anti @-@ bigotry philosophy , based on various experiences witnessed by Bruce . As a teenager , he had briefly lived in Bonnie Doone , North Carolina , a trailer park town just outside Fort Bragg , where his brother Robert had been staying with the U.S. Army . There , Joseph witnessed firsthand the hatred and open racism directed toward African American citizens , as well as the minorities serving in the Army , and became disgusted and infuriated with the actions that took place . " Wizard of the Hood " was originally written by Bruce sometime in the late 1980s . The first recorded version of the song appeared on the Intelligence and Violence EP under the name " Wizard of Delray . " The Carnival of Carnage version is derived from a 1991 recording which appeared on the EP Dog Beats . 
 = = Release = = 
 Just weeks prior to the release of their album , John left the group because he felt that it was " taking up too much of [ his ] life . " When Bruce and Utsler attempted to call a meeting to talk about the issues , John did not attend . Carnival of Carnage was released on October 18 , 1992 , with distribution within a 120 @-@ mile ( 190 km ) radius of Detroit . Carnival of Carnage sold 17 copies on its release date . The number would become a reoccurring theme in Insane Clown Posse 's work throughout much of the following decade . A condensed extended play featuring tracks from Carnival of Carnage was pressed on vinyl in hopes that DJs would play the songs in Detroit @-@ area nightclubs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although Carnival of Carnage was not reviewed at the time of its release , later reviews of the album have been unfavorable . Allmusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album three out of five stars , comparing the group 's performance on the album to " a third @-@ rate Beastie Boys supported by a cut @-@ rate Faith No More , all tempered with the sensibility that made GWAR cult heroes — only with [ ... ] more sexism and jokes that are supposed to be street , but wind up sounding racist " , but stating that the album would appeal to fans of the group . In The Great Rock Discography , Martin Charles Strong gave the album four out of ten stars . The album received one star out of five in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , in which Ben Sisario panned it , along with the rest of the group 's discography as " gangsta @-@ inspired <unk> posturing " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During a live performance of the song " The <unk> " in 1993 , Bruce addressed the audience as Juggalos , and the positive response resulted in the group using the word thereafter . The word has been the subject of criticism from both Sisario and Erlewine , who suggested the term is similar to the racial slur <unk> . In 1997 , Twiztid released a cover of the song " First Day Out " on the duo 's debut album , <unk> . In 1998 , the album was reissued by Island Records without the tracks " <unk> ' Your Eyes " and " Night of the Axe . " The original version continues to be sold by Psychopathic Records . By 2010 , the album had sold well enough to become eligible for gold certification by the RIAA . In the Aqua Teen Hunger Force episode " Juggalo " , Bruce and Utsler appear as themselves during a trial after Master Shake commits suicide . George Lowe asks " Mr. 2 Dope " to read lyrics from " <unk> ' Your Eyes " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Violent J – vocals , production 
 2 Dope – vocals , scratching 
 John Kickjazz – vocals 
 Nate The Mack – guest vocals 
 Kid Rock – guest vocals , scratching 
 Capitol E – guest vocals 
 <unk> – guest vocals 
 Esham – guest vocals , production 
 Mike E. Clark – production 
 Chuck Miller - production 
 = Wisden Trophy = 
 The Wisden Trophy is awarded to the winner of the Test cricket series played between England and the West Indies . It was first awarded in 1963 to commemorate the hundredth edition of Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack . Series are played in accordance with the International Cricket Council 's future tours programme , with varying lengths of time between tours . If a series is drawn then the country holding the Wisden Trophy retains it . 
 The trophy is named after the famous cricketing publisher Wisden and was presented by John Wisden & Co after gaining the approval of the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) and the West Indies Cricket Board ( WICB ) . The Wisden Trophy is presented to the victorious team as a symbol of its victory , but then returns to the MCC Museum at Lord 's . Since the 2000 Wisden Trophy series , the Malcolm Marshall Memorial Trophy has been awarded to the leading wicket taker in the series . 
 England currently hold the trophy . They held the trophy for nine years , after beating the West Indies 3 – 1 to regain it in 2000 ; they successfully defended the trophy three times . West Indies regained the trophy in the most recent series in the West Indies , winning 1 – 0 , in early 2009 . It was originally planned to consist of four Test matches . However an extra match was arranged when the second Test had to be abandoned after only a few overs play because the ground was unfit . England regained the trophy in May 2009 , winning a two Test series 2 – 0 . The tour , coming uncommonly soon after England toured the West Indies , replaced the previously announced tour by Sri Lanka , which in turn was arranged to replace the originally scheduled tour by Zimbabwe . 
 = = Trophies = = 
 = = = Wisden Trophy = = = 
 In 1963 John Wisden & Co . Ltd , with the approval of the MCC and the WICB , presented the first Wisden Trophy , to be contested in a similar manner to the Ashes . 
 The trophy is around 30 centimetres high , and a similar distance across its base . At the centre is an image of John Wisden . To Wisden 's left is a smaller figure of a batsman taking guard , while to Wisden 's right is a bowler in his delivery stride . Directly below Wisden is a plaque , on either side of which are the emblems of the English and West Indian teams . The plaque reads : 
 = = = Malcolm Marshall Memorial Trophy = = = 
 Named after the West Indian bowler Malcolm Marshall , this trophy has been awarded to the leading wicket taker of the series since 2000 . The player who wins it also receives £ 1 @,@ 360 , but if he surpasses Marshall 's record of 35 wickets set in 1988 he stands to earn £ 34 @,@ 000 . The table below lists all the players who have won this trophy . 
 = = History = = 
 See also : List of Wisden Trophy records for a full listing of all the Wisden Trophy records . 
 = = = 1963 Inaugural trophy = = = 
 With the growing Caribbean following in England , the West Indies entered the series as one of the most popular touring nations . Lance Gibbs ' 11 wickets at Old Trafford set up a commanding 10 wicket win for the West Indies . The second match at Lord 's was chiefly remembered for its dramatic ending ; all results were possible going into the final over of the match . England required eight runs to win but only had two wickets left . From the fourth ball of the over Derek Shackleton was run out , which meant that Colin Cowdrey had to come out with a broken arm with two balls of the match remaining . He did not have to face a ball , and the match ended in a draw . The third Test saw Fred Trueman claim 12 wickets ensuring England won by 217 runs . Charlie Griffith 's 6 / 36 in the fourth and Conrad Hunte 's 108 in the final Test meant the West Indies won the next two Tests and the series finished 3 – 1 . The final Test saw a pitch invasion when Basil Butcher scored the winning runs for the West Indies . 
 As a result of the great success of this series , England 's future home Test program was revised so that the West Indies could return in 1966 , much earlier than originally planned . This was done by introducing " twin tours " , in which two countries would each play three Tests against England in the course of a season . 
 = = = 1966 Garry Sobers ' series = = = 
 Garry Sobers was the captain for the West Indies , while England had three captains : Mike Smith ( first Test ) , Cowdrey ( second @-@ fourth Test ) and Brian Close ( fifth Test ) during the five Test series . The West Indies team was not as strong as in the previous series , but many of their deficiencies were glossed over by Sobers ' exceptional all @-@ round performance . He scored centuries in three Test matches and claimed five wicket innings hauls in two Tests . 
 The first Test went to the West Indies with England succumbing in both innings to Gibbs who claimed 10 wickets in the Test . Butcher ’ s 209 ensured the West Indies won the third to lead the series 2 – 0 . The fourth Test saw Sobers ' best performance , where he scored 174 runs and followed this up by taking 5 / 41 to give his team a 3 – 0 lead into the final Test . England gained a consolation victory , largely due to Tom Graveney ’ s 165 and a 128 tenth wicket partnership . 
 The main difference between the two teams was the outstanding all @-@ round performance of Sobers , who scored 722 runs at an average of 103 @.@ 14 , as well as taking 20 wickets and taking 10 catches . 
 = = = 1967 – 69 Early series = = = 
 This was the first of the Wisden Trophy series to take place in the West Indies . The series showed a more sinister side of the West Indies , with a riot occurring in the drawn second Test and the English team being attacked at the conclusion of the final Test . Despite these problems England were largely the better team , with Cowdrey ’ s leadership , Geoffrey Boycott ’ s batting and a weakened West Indian attack being the difference between the sides . 
 After a drawn first Test the second match was a game of two halves . England developed a 233 run lead at the half way stage and had the West Indies on 204 / 5 when Butcher was caught . This dismissal caused a riot and from this point onwards England struggled with the spin bowling of Sobers and Gibbs , narrowly avoiding defeat by two wickets . The third Test saw another drawn match due to the slow batting of the West Indies , taking over two days to score 349 runs which included a spell of four runs in one hour . England took a 1 – 0 lead after the fourth Test , in a game that they seemed least like winning . The win was mainly due to Sobers ' decision to declare on 92 / 2 in the West Indies second innings . Good batting by Alan Knott and a 127 sixth wicket partnership ensured the final game ended in a draw as England maintained their 1 – 0 lead to win the series . 
 The 1969 tour was a three Test series . The captains were Ray Illingworth for England and Sobers for the West Indies . The West Indies had an ageing team and , with Sobers suffering a loss of form , were always the weaker side . 
 England won the first Test with John Snow and David Brown claiming 13 wickets between them . A draw followed in Lord 's , but England won the final match in a dramatic fashion . The West Indies in a seemingly strong position of 219 / 3 required 84 runs for victory . They suffered a late innings collapse however as Butcher , Sobers and Lloyd fell within 16 minutes , which ultimately led to England winning by 30 runs to win the series 2 – 0 . It seemed that England would begin to dominate the West Indies , with many of the key West Indian players such as Butcher , Wes Hall and Charlie Griffith retiring in 1969 . Illingworth would be the last England captain to win the Wisden Trophy for 31 years . 
 = = = 1973 – 74 West Indies revival = = = 
 This three Test series saw the West Indies re @-@ establish themselves as the superior team . They won the first Test at The Oval by 158 runs , with Clive Lloyd 's 132 with the bat and Keith Boyce 's bowling ( 147 / 11 in the match ) being the main contributions to the win . The drawn match at Edgbaston was at risk of being abandoned when umpire Arthur Fagg threatened to withdraw after Kanhai disputed one of his decisions . The final Test match at Lord 's was dominated by the West Indies , with the team posting a huge total of 652 / 8 before declaring , Kanhai , Sobers and Bernard Julien all getting centuries . England never looked liked matching this total , and were dismissed for 233 in the first innings and 193 in the second , losing by an innings and 226 runs . This was England 's second biggest defeat in Test cricket . The series finished 2 – 0 to the West Indies , who regained the Wisden Trophy . 
 The 1974 series in the West Indies was of five Tests . The West Indian team were regarded as the better side , and for them to only draw the series was a surprise . After they won the first Test it had seemed that the series would become a one @-@ sided contest . This Test was notable for a controversial Alvin <unk> run out that triggered protests . England managed to secure draws in the next three Tests , thanks to Dennis <unk> ' 262 in the second Test and Keith Fletcher 's 129 in the third , while rain prevented a result in the fourth Test . The last match at Queen 's Park Oval was a close game , with England winning by 26 runs , primarily due to Tony Greig taking 13 wickets bowling off @-@ spin and Boycott scoring 212 runs in the match . England thereby levelled the series , which finished 1 – 1 . 
 = = = 1976 Viv Richards ' series = = = 
 England entered the series with great confidence , with English captain Greig saying that he had the players to make the West Indians " grovel " . This threat proved to be an empty one , as it soon became apparent that England had no answer to Viv Richards ' batting and Michael Holding 's bowling . 
 The first two Tests ended in draws , but from the third Test onwards the West Indies took full control , with Richards scoring 524 runs in the last three Tests . He was supported by Holding , who took 25 wickets over these three Tests , including 5 / 17 in the third Test and 14 / 149 in the final Test . The West Indies won the series 3 – 0 . 
 The series is mainly remembered for Richards ' batting . He scored 829 runs at an average of 118 @.@ 42 over four Test matches . In either the fourth or fifth Test in this series TMS commentator Brian Johnston allegedly said : 
 when describing the West Indian bowler Holding bowling to English batsmen Peter Willey . There are no records , according to Wisden , of Johnston or any other commentator saying this . Other sources have stated that Johnston had indeed said this and had prepared the line before saying it . 
 = = = 1980 – 81 A new era = = = 
 The late 70s and 80s was a golden era for the West Indies cricket team , with the team dominating all forms of cricket . The West Indies came into the 1980 series after recently winning the 1979 Cricket World Cup . They were generally regarded as the best team at Test level , and would lose only eight Test matches during the 1980s . 
 Ian Botham captained the England team while Lloyd skippered the West Indies in this five Test series . In a series that was hampered by rain , the only match to produce a positive result was the first Test at Trent Bridge . It was a close contest , with a dramatic ending which saw six dropped catches and the West Indies requiring 208 runs in the final 8 hours of play . The West Indies achieved this target with 2 wickets in hand , largely due to Desmond Haynes ' 64 . 
 England went to the West Indies for the 1981 five Test series . This became four Tests after the second Test abandonment caused by Robin Jackman 's visa being revoked by the Guyanese Government due to his involvement with South Africa 's apartheid regime . 
 The series was dominated by the West Indies bowlers Holding and Colin Croft , who claimed 41 wickets between them in the series . England suffered an innings defeat in the first Test , and lost the third by 298 runs as they failed to register an innings of over 250 in the first three Tests . Strong batting performances and rain enabled England to draw the final two Tests , and so the series ended 2 – 0 to the West Indies . 
 = = = 1984 – 86 " <unk> " series = = = 
 The " blackwash " series occurred in 1984 and 1985 – 86 . The West Indies beat England 5 – 0 in both series in a whitewash that was dubbed " blackwash " . The first blackwash occurred in England and the second in the West Indies . Instrumental in these wins were Richards ' batting and the bowling partnership of Malcolm Marshall and Joel Garner , which claimed 105 of the 200 England wickets to fall in the two series . Many players from the West Indies had taken part in the so @-@ called <unk> a few years earlier and as a result they were arguably fitter and better prepared due to having faced stronger opposition . The captains for these series were Lloyd and Richards for the West Indies , and David Gower , who had the ignominy of leading England to ten consecutive defeats against the men from the Caribbean . 
 The 1984 series began with Andy Lloyd being hit on the head , resulting in his being hospitalised . This would prove to be a common theme throughout the series , as the English batsmen struggled to cope with the West Indies bouncers . Whenever England threatened , a West Indian player would step up and take control of the match , as when Gordon Greenidge scored 214 after an England declaration to win the second Test . The series was decided at Leeds , where the West Indies gained an unassailable 3 – 0 lead . The final Test at The Oval saw the West Indies record the only whitewash by a visiting nation in a five Test series . This was the fifth whitewash in Test cricket and the first to be inflicted on England in England . 
 The 1985 – 86 series in the West Indies ended in another whitewash with the West Indies winning each Test comfortably , the closest match being a seven wicket victory . Like the previous series the English batsmen provided little resistance against the West Indian bowlers with only Gower averaging above 30 . Poor performances from Botham and Mike Gatting 's injury ensured an easy series win for the West Indies . England ’ s attitude also played a part in their defeat with big players such as Gower and Botham showing a certain reluctance to net training . The then chairman of selectors Peter May questioned the team 's attitude and called for greater resolve , a view that seemed to be shared by the general public at the time . 
 The West Indies won the first two Tests in a similar manner with England struggling with the bowling of Patrick Patterson and Marshall . By the third Test , England ’ s morale had dipped and they suffered an innings defeat which was largely due to their third day 's performance losing 15 wickets for 201 . A ten wicket defeat followed in the fourth while Richards produced the fastest century in Test cricket in the final Test . He reached his hundred in only 56 balls to confirm the West Indies superiority . As a result the West Indies had won ten consecutive Tests against England , and were the second team after Australia to achieve multiple home <unk> in five Test series . 
 = = = 1988 Summer of four captains = = = 
 This tour saw the beginning of a bowling partnership between Courtney Walsh and Curtly Ambrose that would trouble batsmen across the world for the next 12 years . England , on the other hand , had entered the series with low expectations and confidence . This was reflected in their team selections , with 23 players being used during the series . 
 England had four captains in Gatting , John Emburey , Chris Cowdrey and Graham Gooch , but each Test ended in West Indian dominance . They won each match except the first Test , which was drawn because of rain , and the series finished 4 – 0 . The West Indies pace attack was the main difference between teams with Marshall being the most dangerous bowler , taking 35 wickets at an average of 12 @.@ 65 . This included a 7 / 22 in the third Test which he bowled with a broken left hand . Marshall was supported by Ambrose 's bowling which yielded 22 wickets . After this series both teams would go into decline . Many of the great West Indian players such as Richards and Marshall would soon retire , and their dominance of the Test stage was nearing its end . 
 = = = 1989 – 91 England close the gap = = = 
 Throughout the late 70s and 80s , many of the series between the West Indies and England had been dominated by the West Indies who had won fourteen of the fifteen Tests , often by large margins . The next two series in 1989 – 90 season and 1991 would prove to be closer contests . 
 A 1989 – 90 series of two halves saw England close to taking a shock 2 – 0 lead in the series , only to be denied by a wet afternoon at Queens Park Oval . Injuries to their key bowler , Angus Fraser , and batsman , Gooch , changed the course of the series dramatically however , as the West Indies fought back to win the next two Tests , thanks to the pace attack of Ambrose and Ian Bishop . They eventually won the series 2 – 1 . An infamous incident occurred in the fourth Test of the series , when Rob Bailey was given out by umpire Lloyd Barker , who had allegedly been intimidated by Richards ' appeal . 
 Notable debutants in this series were Alec Stewart and Nasser Hussain , who both made their debuts in the first Test . Alec Stewart was not England 's wicket @-@ keeper in this Test series , as Jack Russell kept wicket . 
 A decline in the West Indies batting line @-@ up coupled by the loss of Greenidge ensured this series would be a closer contest . The tour was Richards ' last , as he retired at the end of the fifth Test . Graeme Hick and Mark Ramprakash made their debuts in the first Test at Headingley . 
 England won the first Test largely thanks to Gooch 's 154 in the second innings . This innings was rated by Wisden as the third greatest Test innings ever . After the second Test had been drawn , the West Indies won the next two matches due to Ambrose 's eight wickets in the third and Richie Richardson 's century in fourth match . Phil Tufnell and Robin Smith played key roles in the final Test , as England won by five wickets after forcing the West Indies to follow @-@ on for the first time in six years , to level the series 2 – 2 . In this Test commentator Jonathan Agnew famously described Botham 's hit wicket dismissal by saying : 
 = = = 1994 Lara enters the world stage = = = 
 The series was characterised by the opening pair of Stewart and new England captain Michael Atherton , which provided the greatest resistance against the West Indian attack of Ambrose and Walsh . The pair scored 987 runs in the series while Ambrose ended the series with 26 wickets at an average of 19 @.@ 96 and was awarded man of the series . 
 After England lost the first three Tests ( which included a 46 all out in the second innings of the third Test ) there was talk of another blackwash series . England secured a victory in the fourth Test however , with Stewart ’ s two centuries and Fraser ’ s eight wickets being the main contributors to the win . This was the first time in 59 years that a visiting nation had won at the Kensington Oval . The main highlight of the series was to come in the final Test at Antigua , where Brian Lara broke Sobers ' Test world record score of 365 not out , set 36 years earlier , by scoring 375 . Lara was congratulated by Sobers , who was present on the ground to see his record broken . 
 In the end Lara scored an exceptional 798 runs at an average of 99 @.@ 75 . Two months later Lara would go on to break the first @-@ class batting record of 499 runs by scoring 501 not out against Durham at Edgbaston . 
 <unk> Chanderpaul made his Test debut in the second Test of the series , when he made his maiden half @-@ century . Chanderpaul was Lara 's last batting partner when he made his record @-@ breaking 375 , scoring 75 not out himself and combining in a 219 fifth wicket partnership . 
 = = = 1995 – 98 Six Test series = = = 
 Both teams were evenly matched , with the West Indies not the force they had been , and England on the rise . The key players for the West Indies were Lara , Walsh and Bishop while England had a strong opening pair of Atherton and Graham Thorpe plus the young Dominic Cork who would be decisive in England 's two Test victories in this series . 
 The West Indies ' inconsistent performances saw them dominate one Test , only to play poorly and lose the next . Bishop 's and Walsh ’ s combined 26 wickets in the first and third Tests ensured the West Indies won these matches by commanding margins . Cork contributed greatly to England ’ s second and fourth Test victories , taking 7 / 43 in the second Test and a hat @-@ trick in the fourth in claiming the wickets of Richardson ( bowled ) , Junior Murray ( LBW ) and Carl Hooper ( LBW ) . The remaining two Tests were dominated by the batsmen , with five centuries being scored . The series finished 2 – 2 , with the West Indies retaining the trophy . 
 The men of the series were Atherton for England and Lara for the West Indies . The latter made 765 runs at an average of 85 . Cork made his debut in the second Test , where he achieved the best bowling figures for an English debutant . Nick Knight 's debut came in the fourth Test of series . 
 An ageing West Indian team relied increasingly on Ambrose and Walsh to provide wickets , while Lara was seen as the primary source of runs . Angus Fraser played an important role for England , and when his form dipped in the later Tests the side 's performance suffered . 
 The series started in a controversial fashion , with the first Test at Sabina Park being abandoned after the pitch was deemed to be too dangerous due to its highly irregular bounce . As a result of this abandoned match , an additional match was arranged with the series thereby being extended to six Tests . Two close matches followed , after which the teams were level at 1 – 1 . England faded in the second half of the series . The West Indies scored two decisive victories , winning the fourth by 242 runs and the last by an even wider margin of an innings and 52 runs , to take the series 3 – 1 . 
 = = = 2000 England regain the trophy = = = 
 Jimmy Adams was selected as the West Indies captain , while Hussain captained the England side . This five Test series was to be Ambrose 's last . It was dominated by the ball , with a bowler claiming a five wicket haul on seven occasions , while there were only three centuries . 
 The West Indies started well , winning the first Test comfortably by an innings and 93 runs , and led by 133 runs after the first innings of the second Test . The turning point came in the second innings of this match , as the West Indies were bowled out for 54 ( this was their third lowest innings at the time ) . England won this Test , and they seized the initiative in the series by winning the fourth and fifth Tests thanks to Andrew Caddick ’ s four wicket over and Atherton ’ s century , to regain the Wisden Trophy 3 – 1 after a period of 31 years . 
 Notable debutants were Matthew Hoggard and Marcus Trescothick , in the second and third Tests respectively . Trescothick had the highest batting average for any player in the series , with 47 @.@ 50 . 
 = = = 2003 – 04 Lara 's 400 = = = 
 England came to the West Indies for their first defence of the Wisden Trophy . The recently appointed captain for England was Michael Vaughan , Hussain having stepped down a few months previously . Lara led the West Indies challenge . 
 The series was dominated by England 's bowling attack of Stephen Harmison and Hoggard . Harmison 's bowling figures of 7 / 12 ( which were the best achieved in Sabina Park Tests ) were the main cause of the West Indian second innings collapse to 47 all out in the first Test . This was the lowest innings for West Indies at Test level . This pattern was repeated in the third Test , where the West Indies produced a good first innings only to bat poorly in the second . This was partly due to Hoggard 's hat @-@ trick of Ramnaresh Sarwan ( caught ) , Chanderpaul ( LBW ) and Ryan Hinds ( caught ) . The West Indies were facing a whitewash going into the final Test at Antigua , and were accused by Sobers of underestimating the English bowlers . The fourth Test saw Lara come to the crease with the score at 33 / 1 . He stayed for 778 minutes and faced 582 balls in the process of making his world record Test innings of 400 not out , before declaring at 751 / 5 . It was not enough for victory and the game ended in a draw . As a result of this drawn match Lara was criticised by Ricky Ponting who stated that the whole West Indies first innings revolved around Lara 's score who let the Test match slip for his own personal gain . The series finished 3 – 0 to England . 
 = = = 2004 – 2009 English dominance = = = 
 England dominated the 2004 series and claimed the first English whitewash in the Wisden Trophy 's history . England won each Test comfortably , as the West Indian bowlers struggled to get wickets . Only Chris Gayle and Dwayne Bravo had bowling averages lower than 30 . This whitewash meant that England had won seven consecutive Tests for the first time in 75 years . The series was the beginning of a run that would see England win the Ashes the following year . 
 Andrew Flintoff was the leading performer for England , averaging 64 @.@ 50 with the bat and claiming 14 wickets . Ashley Giles was the leading wicket taker in the series with 22 . This series saw Ian Bell make his Test debut in the final Test of the series , where he compiled his maiden half @-@ century . The main highlights for the West Indies were Chanderpaul 's batting performance in scoring 437 runs at an average of 72 @.@ 83 , the highest in the series , and Bravo 's 16 wickets . 
 With the recent retirement of Lara , Sarwan became the captain of the West Indies . Sarwan injured himself while fielding in the second Test , and the captaincy was given to Daren Ganga . Andrew Strauss was England skipper for the first Test , after which Vaughan returned from injury to lead for the remaining Tests . 
 England were largely the better team and , if not for the resilient batting of Chanderpaul , they would have won by an even larger margin . The West Indies suffered greatly from his absence in the second Test , losing the match by an innings and 283 runs , their biggest defeat in Test history . England retained the Wisden trophy at Old Trafford by taking an unbeatable 2 – 0 lead , They ultimately won the series 3 – 0 . 
 Chanderpaul , who was named the West Indian player of the series , scored 446 runs at an average of 148 @.@ 66 . Bravo also impressed with his all @-@ round performance in claiming 6 wickets , scoring 291 runs and taking 7 catches . England saw the emergence of Matt Prior , who became the first English wicket @-@ keeper to score a Test century on debut . Monty Panesar claimed the most wickets ( 23 ) and received the award of the Englishman of the series , while Ryan Sidebottom took 16 wickets . 
 = = = 2009 – present West Indies regains , then loses the trophy = = = 
 Despite England going into the series as the favourites , West Indies won the series 1 – 0 after winning the first match at Sabina Park . The remaining matches all ended in draws . The series was originally intended as a four Test series ; however the abandonment of the Second Test due to the conditions of the field at the SVR Stadium in Antigua led to the rapid inclusion of an additional game staged at the Antigua Recreation Ground , resulting in a five , rather than four match Test series . 
 In a two @-@ match series that replaced the originally scheduled tour by Zimbabwe , and the previously announced tour by Sri Lanka , England regained the Wisden Trophy with a 2 – 0 win . 
 = = Summary of results = = 
 See also : List of Wisden Trophy records for a full listing of all the Wisden Trophy records . 
 A team must win a series to hold the Wisden Trophy . A drawn series results in the previous holders retaining the trophy . To date , a total of 23 Wisden Trophy series have been played , with West Indies winning 13 and England 6 . The remaining 3 series were drawn , with West Indies retaining the Wisden Trophy on each occasion ( 1973 – 74 , 1991 and 1995 ) . In the series ' 44 @-@ year history the Wisden Trophy has changed hands on five occasions ( 1968 , 1973 , 2000 and twice in 2009 ) with England regaining the trophy in 1968 , 2000 and May 2009 , while the West Indies regained it in 1973 and April 2009 . 
 105 Test matches have been played , with West Indies winning 43 times , England 28 times , and 34 matches being drawn . Brian Lara is the top scorer in the Wisden Trophy series with <unk> runs , while Curtly Ambrose is the leading wicket taker with 164 wickets . 
 = = Match venues = = 
 The series usually alternates between England and West Indies , and within each country each of the matches is held at the following grounds . 
 In England the grounds used have been Old Trafford ( since 1963 ) , Lord 's ( 1963 ) , Edgbaston ( 1963 ) , Headingley ( 1963 ) , The Oval ( 1963 ) , Trent Bridge ( 1966 ) and Riverside Ground ( 2007 ) . 
 In the West Indies the grounds used have been Queen 's Park Oval ( since 1968 ) , Sabina Park ( 1968 ) , Kensington Oval ( 1968 ) , Bourda ( 1968 ) , Antigua Recreation Ground ( 1981 ) and Sir Vivian Richards Stadium ( 2009 ) . 
 = Carancahua Bay = 
 Carancahua Bay is a northern extension of Matagorda Bay located in Jackson and Matagorda counties in Texas , United States . It is oriented from the southeast to the northwest but meanders as it reaches the north to the confluence with Carancahua Creek . Generally slender , it is only about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in width north of its circular mouth . 
 The bay serves as a nursery for shrimp and as an ecosystem for diverse species of birds and fish . Shrimp farms have been established inland to circumvent restrictions on the bay . The area close to shore is prone to flooding , and can sometimes accumulate large populations of mosquitos . As a consequence , no major settlements have been founded on the bay . However , the small communities of Port Alto and Carancahua have been established on the western and eastern shores , respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Carancahua derives from the term that formerly referred to the Karankawa Indians , who resided on its shores . Texas ' Spanish Royal Governor , Martín de Alarcón was the first documented European to tour the bay while on a voyage with a Tejas guide and several others in the early 18th century . During the expedition , two Karankawa Indians were spotted near the bay going about their daily lives , but were frightened by the sight of Alarcón , and quickly swam across despite the guide 's reassurance to them that Alarcón meant no harm . The next day , the Indians came ashore from a sixteen @-@ passenger canoe ( which could hold 4 men , 4 women and 8 children ) , and notified the Tejas guide that they wished for Alarcón and his men to leave . As a peace offering , Alarcón presented the Indians with tobacco and clothing on behalf of the Spanish crown , which they accepted . In exchange , the Indians offered Alarcón dried fish , and warned him of the nearby French fort of St. Louis , believing he wanted to establish a colony on the bay . Alarcón declared the bay for Spain , but did not establish a permanent settlement . 
 Only a handful of settlements have been established on the bay . The town of Carancahua first formed as a small collection of cabins that were used in the 1880s as a stop for mail between <unk> and Matagorda . However , the bay 's propensity for flooding and malaria prevented growth . In fact , the bay was notorious for its swarms of mosquitos that would fly from the Colorado River delta , and documented by a late 19th @-@ century rancher : 
 A fairly strong easterly wind had been blowing for three days ; on the evening of the third day , the mosquitos arrived , flying high , about fifty feet , and looking like a cloud of mist over Carancahua Bay . At the ranch , they set everything on fire that had blood in it , and all work was suspended by unanimous consent ... little or nothing was done for nearly five days ; by this time the main body had passed , though plenty remained to make everything uncomfortable for about two weeks . This migration was from east to west and the line was about three miles wide . 
 Approximately 50 people lived at Carancahua in 1915 , but the population dwindled to 25 in the next decade . The town remains a community , but the current population is unknown . Across the bay , a settlement of about ten permanent residents , initially known as Persimmon Point , was renamed Port Alto in 1939 . The town grew , attracting retirees and vacationers who contributed to a peak summer population of 205 in 1961 . Hurricane Carla destroyed the town in September 1961 , but it was rebuilt five years later . In 1970 , a beachfront was constructed along the shoreline as the listed population reached 170 people . The 2000 census reported that 45 people lived in the town . Schicke Point , located near the mouth of Carancahua Bay at Carancahua Pass , is a small fishing village with approximately 70 residents , including legendary anglers Tyler Kurtz & James Malek and big trout specialist Russell Shelton . Cape Carancahua is an affluent gated residential community , located on the bay 's northern shore . 
 = = Features = = 
 The bay has two extensions near its mouth with Matagorda Bay at Carancahua Pass , including Redfish Lake to the southwest and Salt Lake , just above the former . On the bay 's eastern shore , the mouth is headed by Schicke Point , which curves north to the Schicke Point Community , where several private piers are located . About one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) inland from the community 's shoreline are the Piper Lakes . North from the Schicke Point community , the El Campo Club community is found , with several residences on a straight line along the coast with docks stretched into the water . Further north , the bay takes a sharp turn to the west past a swampy area then heads north and becomes more slender as it passes from Calhoun into Jackson County . The shoreline continues north and passes several oil wells to the town of Carancahua , where a few piers are scattered along the shore . Just north of the town , a small inlet is formed , at the base of which , the <unk> Draw is found , surrounded by swamps . To the north , several docks line the shore and continue until the bay winds to the west to a large swamp . Past the swamp , the width of the bay shrinks and continues southward along the shore of the Cape Carancahua community , surrounded by water on three sides . Past the cape , the bay turns to the north and is crossed by Texas State Highway 35 . It then heads west and north again , while gradually becoming narrower until it reaches the marsh at the mouth of Carancahua Creek . The East and West Carancahua Creeks , which merge before their confluence , feed the bay . West Carancahua Creek runs 28 miles ( 45 km ) south from its source near White Hall to meet with East Carancahua Creek , which runs southwest for 32 miles ( 51 km ) from its source in southern Wharton County . Both streams are intermittent in their upper reaches . The western shore mimics the shape of the east . As it moves south of the Carancahua Creek mouth , <unk> is formed , south of which , the shore counters Cape Carancahua and heads northeast past several oil wells to a sharp point . The shoreline continues directly south until it reaches a large swamp . Past the swamp is the town of Port Alto , where several docks and piers are located . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 Carancahua Bay is protected by the State of Texas and locally by the 300 @-@ member Carancahua Bay Protection Association . It is a nursery bay for shrimp , and is a habitat for shellfish including oysters . Finfish such as the redfish and black drum are commonly caught from the bay by recreational fishermen . Birds common to the bay include the wood ibis , roseate spoonbill , snowy egret , great @-@ tailed grackle , Louisiana heron , <unk> , black @-@ necked stilt , caracara and the black vulture . 
 During a 2004 assessment of Texas waterways , the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality found higher than normal levels of bacteria at the mouth of Carancahua Creek and alkaline pH levels , symptomatic of algal bloom . The issues discovered by the Commission were common in the water bodies examined for the study , and they noted that such issues would be addressed . 
 = = Industry = = 
 The bay is off limits to shrimping due to its legal status as a nursery , however shrimp farms have been established and approved along its shores . The harvest of shellfish , particularly oysters , is heavily regulated , but allowed at certain times and places . Whereas the main Matagorda Bay is an approved area for shellfish production , Carancahua Bay is divided between restricted and conditionally approved areas . The Texas Department of State Health Services described the areas conditionally approved as being from the mouth of the bay to a " beige house " on the eastern shore and cutoff across to a " grey barn " on the western shore , save for a small sliver of water that includes most of the shoreline of Port Alto , which is restricted . All areas north of the diagonal line are restricted as well . 
 Several oil and natural gas wells are scattered throughout the shoreline and a few are included in the waters of Carancahua Bay . The most notable include the wells of the Appling Field segment , a mile offshore from Port Alto , which is believed to contain 33 billion cubic feet ( 0 @.@ 93 billion cubic meters ) of natural gas . The field was first discovered in the 1950s , but later abandoned . Brigham Exploration is working with Royale Energy to develop ten reserves in the area , spotted during a seismic survey . 
 = U.S. Route 44 in New York = 
 U.S. Route 44 ( US 44 ) in the state of New York is a major east – west thoroughfare in the Hudson Valley region of the state . Its entire 65 @.@ 98 @-@ mile ( 106 @.@ 18 km ) length is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) , with the exception of the Mid @-@ Hudson Bridge , which is maintained by the New York State Bridge Authority . The portion of the route in New York begins at an intersection with US 209 and New York State Route 55 ( NY 55 ) near the hamlet of Kerhonkson and ends at the Connecticut state line near the village of Millerton . The road passes through rural parts of Ulster and Dutchess counties before crossing into Litchfield County , Connecticut . 
 Most of the route in Dutchess County was once part of the Dutchess Turnpike , an early road interconnecting Poughkeepsie to various settlements in Dutchess County . US 44 was designated c . 1935 and had no major changes in alignment until 2007 , when it was relocated onto New York State Route 44A , a highway that bypassed the village of Millbrook to the northwest . The NY 44A designation was deleted as a result of the relocation , and signage for NY 44A was taken down in April 2008 . US 44 's original alignment through Millbrook became NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 44 begins at an intersection with US 209 and NY 55 west of the hamlet of Kerhonkson in the town of <unk> in Ulster County . NY 55 , concurrent with US 209 southwest of this point , turns east onto US 44 , forming an overlap as the two routes proceed eastward across Ulster County . Midway between Kerhonkson and Gardiner and just north of NY 299 , US 44 and NY 55 traverse a hairpin turn made necessary by the surrounding Shawangunk Ridge . 
 Farther east , the road passes through the hamlets of Gardiner and <unk> , and meets US 9W in the hamlet of Highland . Just inside of Gardiner , the highway passes through Minnewaska State Park , a large state park in the Hudson Valley . US 44 and NY 55 join US 9W for roughly a half @-@ mile southward along the western bank of the Hudson River before separating at a trumpet interchange south of Highland . One mile east of US 9W , US 44 and NY 55 cross the Hudson on the Mid @-@ Hudson Bridge . 
 On the opposite bank in Dutchess County , US 44 and NY 55 enter the city of Poughkeepsie . In the downtown area , US 44 and NY 55 connect with US 9 by way of an interchange before splitting into a pair of parallel one @-@ way streets . At the eastern end of the parallel roadways in Arlington , just outside Poughkeepsie , US 44 and NY 55 split upon meeting Main Street at an interchange . NY 55 continues southeast through the junction as Manchester Road ; US 44 , however , joins Main Street to the northeast along what becomes the Dutchess Turnpike . West of the interchange , state maintenance continues along Main Street for an additional 0 @.@ 19 miles ( 0 @.@ 31 km ) to County Route 38 ( CR 38 , named Fairmont Avenue ) . This segment of Main Street is designated as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . Past CR 38 , Main Street becomes CR 114 . 
 From Arlington , Route 44 bends first to the north , then after 1 @.@ 5 miles northeast , through intermittently developed areas , woodlots , and farms to the next settlement along its route , Pleasant Valley . In its commercial center the road widens to include a center turn lane . After crossing Wappinger Creek , it returns to two lanes . 
 The road returns to a more easterly course for two miles , then straightens out as it climbs steadily past the Newcomb – Brown Estate . It crests just before the interchange with the Taconic State Parkway . A mile past it , at the state police Troop K barracks , NY 82 joins from the north and the two roads overlap . 
 This concurrency ends after another mile , when US 44 diverges along the route of the former NY 44A , going around the village of Millbrook past the Mary Flagler Cary Arboretum , home to the Institute of Ecosystem Studies . The highway returns to a more due @-@ east orientation as it passes north of the village , then gradually curves to the northeast again as it passes through a heavily farmed area . 
 Route 44 gradually descends into the upper Harlem Valley , with a sharp hairpin turn providing a panoramic view to the south . A gradual descent takes it into downtown Amenia . At the center of town , the highway turns north and replaces NY 343 as NY 22 's overlap . 
 A seven @-@ mile ( 11 km ) journey over increasingly rolling and open terrain takes the two highways into the town of North East and towards Millerton . Just south of the village , NY 199 reaches its eastern terminus . The road enters Millerton on South Elm Street , making a sharp turn north that necessitates a concrete barrier and lower speed limit just south of downtown . 
 At the traffic light just north of that bend , US 44 leaves NY 22 and turns right through Millerton 's historic downtown . Maple Avenue on the south marks the former northern terminus of NY 361 . After that junction , Route 44 leaves the village . It passes some strip development on the south , bends slightly to the north and crosses the Connecticut state line just past a car dealership on the south . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of US 44 between Poughkeepsie and Amenia was the main line of an early toll road known as the Dutchess Turnpike . The turnpike continued past Amenia into the Connecticut town of Sharon along modern NY 343 . Between the Wallkill River near the hamlet of Gardiner and the hamlet of <unk> , modern US 44 was also roughly located along another early toll road known as the Farmer 's Turnpike . The Farmer 's Turnpike continued east past <unk> to the village of Milton where a ferry across the Hudson River once existed . 
 In 1924 , when state highways were first marked by route numbers in New York , the main line of the Dutchess Turnpike was designated as NY 21 . Other portions of modern US 44 , aside from the overlap with NY 22 , were unnumbered in the 1920s . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the old NY 21 was partitioned into three numbered routes . Between Poughkeepsie and South Millbrook , old NY 21 became the western half of NY 200 , which continued east to Dover Plains using the Dover branch route of the Dutchess Turnpike ( modern NY 343 ) . The section from South Millbrook to Amenia became part of NY 82A , which continued past Amenia to Pine Plains . The easternmost section from Amenia to the Connecticut line was designated as NY 343 . West of the Hudson River , NY 55 was also designated in 1930 between Barryville and Pawling , running along the portion of modern US 44 between Kerhonkson and Poughkeepsie . 
 US 44 was assigned c . 1935 . West of the Hudson River , it was overlaid on the pre @-@ existing NY 55 , with US 44 officially beginning at US 209 , which was also extended into New York c . 1935 . East of the river , US 44 was routed on the original Dutchess Turnpike main line from Poughkeepsie to Amenia , supplanting NY 200 west of South Millbrook , NY 82A west of Amenia , and a short portion of NY 343 between NY 82A and the hamlet of Amenia . US 44 left the turnpike at Amenia and followed NY 22 north to Millerton , where it continued east on a short piece of former NY 199 into Connecticut . The alignments of NY 200 and NY 343 were flipped as part of US 44 's assignment . 
 US 44 originally entered the village of Millbrook via NY 82 , North Avenue , and Franklin Avenue . On April 1 , 1980 , the state of New York assumed ownership of a highway bypassing Millbrook to the west and north as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Dutchess County . The newly acquired roadway was designated as NY 44A . On June 5 , 2007 , NYSDOT announced that US 44 would be permanently realigned onto NY 44A . All shields along NY 44A were replaced with US 44 signage , and the NY 44A designation ceased to exist . NYSDOT will continue to perform maintenance on US 44 's former routing through Millbrook . The portion of the routing that did not overlap NY 82 is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = JetBlue Mint = 
 Mint is a premium airline product offered by JetBlue on some flights between the West Coast and the East Coast of the contiguous United States , and seasonally on some flights between the United States and Caribbean destinations . The service is operated with a fleet of Airbus A321 aircraft in a premium configuration , with lie @-@ flat seats in premium class . As of May 2016 , JetBlue is the only low cost airline in the Americas offering a dedicated premium product of this distinction . 
 = = History = = 
 JetBlue first announced its intention to introduce premium seats on some of its transcontinental flights in March 2013 . The company officially announced its Mint premium class product on September 30 , 2013 ; the aforementioned service was to be available on flights between New York and San Francisco and New York and Los Angeles , with fares for Mint @-@ class seats starting at US $ 599 each way . Dave Barger , JetBlue CEO at the time , said that the move was necessary for the airline to better compete with its competitors , which were operating lie @-@ flat seats in transcontinental markets , leaving JetBlue with an all @-@ economy class cabin . The routes were to be operated with new Airbus A321 aircraft , and feature Wi @-@ Fi connectivity . JetBlue 's all seven daily round @-@ trip flights between New York and Los Angeles were to feature the service by the fourth quarter of 2014 , and all five daily round @-@ trip flights between New York and San Francisco by early 2015 . The first Mint flight , from New York – JFK to Los Angeles , was to begin on June 15 , 2014 . 
 On March 15 , 2015 , JetBlue announced seasonal expansion of its Mint service to Caribbean routes , with service from JFK Airport to Aruba and Barbados . The service was to operate once daily per destination during the winter holiday season , and once weekly per destination for the rest of the winter season . JetBlue announced expansion of its Mint service to Boston in June 2015 , with year @-@ round service from Boston to Los Angeles and San Francisco , and seasonal Saturday @-@ only service from Boston to Barbados . Flights from Boston to San Francisco began on March 24 , 2016 , and flights from Boston to Los Angeles were to begin on October 20 , 2016 . 
 On April 12 , 2016 , JetBlue announced an expansion of its Mint service . New routes utilizing the Mint configuration were to be launched to Fort Lauderdale , Las Vegas , San Diego and Seattle , with service beginning during 2017 and 2018 . The announcement was made almost immediately after Alaska Air Group announced its intention to acquire Virgin America and merge it with Alaska Airlines . Either Alaska or Virgin operated in 4 out of 7 of JetBlue 's newly announced markets . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Mint <unk> consists of A321 aircraft with 159 seats , including 16 flat @-@ bed Mint seats . The Mint seat is a version of the Thompson Aero Vantage business class seat , customized to include extra storage and dual <unk> + USB power outlets at every seat . 4 of the 16 Mint seats are mini @-@ suites which include a sliding door for privacy . The seats have a width of up to 22 @.@ 3 inches and can convert to a flat bed of up to 6 ' 8 " in length . Pairs of non @-@ suite Mint seats alternate with single mini @-@ suite seats . The seats use air cushioning , allowing passengers to adjust the firmness of the seats . Economy class on Mint A321 aircraft uses B / E Aerospace Pinnacle slimline seats , with a seat pitch of 33 inches in the main cabin and up to 37 inches in the " Even More Space " extra legroom product . There are two power outlets per row of economy class seats . 
 A 15 @.@ 6 inch video screen provides Live TV 4 @.@ 0 , SiriusXM Radio , and a selection of films as in @-@ flight entertainment . The <unk> 4 @.@ 0 system provides about 100 DirecTV channels , up from about 30 channels offered on previous generations of JetBlue inflight entertainment systems . On flights outside the coverage range of satellite TV , such as flights to Caribbean destinations , TV channels and radio are not provided . In @-@ flight Wi @-@ Fi is provided via a Ka @-@ band satellite system named " Fly @-@ Fi " . 
 Passengers are provided with a choice of five offerings for meal service , including hot and cold options , and may choose three . <unk> kits are provided by <unk> , a cosmetics company based in New York . 
 = Jonas Quinn = 
 Jonas Quinn is a fictional character in the Canadian @-@ American television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 , a science fiction show about a military team exploring the galaxy via a network of alien transportation devices . Played by Corin Nemec , Jonas is introduced in the season 5 episode " Meridian . " Jonas fills Daniel Jackson 's empty spot on the SG @-@ 1 team in season 6 and the beginning of season 7 , and last appears in the mid @-@ season 7 episode " Fallout " . 
 Nemec 's character replaced Daniel Jackson ( portrayed by Michael Shanks ) during season 6 after Shanks had left the show amid controversy after season 5 . The producers based Jonas 's motivation to join Stargate Command on his momentary reluctance to actively prevent Daniel 's death , and his feelings of responsibility afterwards . Jonas was slowly integrated into the story in a prolonged transition stage over the first half of season 6 . Nemec was open to continue playing Jonas Quinn after season 6 , but a new contract was reached with Michael Shanks for Daniel to return in season 7 . The role of Jonas was reduced to recurring status in season 7 . 
 = = Role in Stargate SG @-@ 1 = = 
 = = = Character arc = = = 
 Jonas Quinn is introduced in the penultimate season 5 episode " Meridian " as a scientist of the human nation of Kelowna on Langara , a planet with an industrial level comparable to Earth of the 1940s , and that is also locked in a cold war with two rival states . He is an exceptionally quick learner , which becomes useful in memorizing SG mission reports and earth culture . The <unk> are experimenting with naqahdriah ( an unstable but extremely powerful native element related to <unk> ) to build a bomb against their two rival nations , <unk> and the <unk> Federation . Jonas is present when SG @-@ 1 team member Daniel Jackson gets radiation @-@ poisoned with naqahdriah in an attempt to prevent a catastrophe in Kelowna , but when the <unk> leaders respond with glee to Daniel 's imminent death , Jonas steals a small amount of naqahdriah and offers it to Earth for more peaceful uses . Still wracked by guilt in the season 6 premiere " Redemption " over his hesitation to step in , Jonas helps Major Samantha Carter find a solution to save Earth from an attack by the Goa 'uld Anubis . Although Colonel Jack O 'Neill is reluctant to add a new fourth member to SG @-@ 1 , he allows Jonas to join the team , partly to prevent a Russian from being assigned . 
 After several missions with SG @-@ 1 , Jonas is confronted with his past in " Shadow Play " and learns more of the effects of naqahdriah on people . In " Metamorphosis " , the Goa 'uld Nirrti learns via an Ancient DNA <unk> that Jonas is different from other humans , but she is killed before this is further investigated . In " Prophecy " , Nirrti 's experiments cause clairvoyant visions in Jonas , and the doctors remove a potentially lethal tumor from his brain . After SG @-@ 1 finds the de @-@ ascended Daniel on another planet in the season 7 premiere " Fallen " / " Homecoming " , Jonas and Daniel join forces and succeed in driving Anubis away from Kelowna . The three <unk> nations agree to meet for peace talks for the greater good of the planet , and Jonas decides to become a peace negotiator for his people . While Jonas returns to his planet , Daniel rejoins SG @-@ 1 . Jonas last appears in season 7 's " Fallout " to ask Earth for help saving his homeworld from the destructive powers of naqahdriah in the planet 's core . Season 10 's " Counterstrike " mentions that the Ori conquered Langara , Jonas 's homeworld . Langara 's story arc is resumed in Stargate Universe 's " Seizure " , where Earth eventually agrees to protect Langara from the Lucian Alliance , while the <unk> remove the Stargate from their facility . 
 = = = Characterization and relationships = = = 
 After Daniel 's death and Jonas 's subsequent move to Earth , Major Carter is the SG @-@ 1 team member around whom Jonas Quinn feels most comfortable . Nevertheless , Amanda Tapping ( Carter ) felt that " there is a hesitancy on [ Carter ] ' s part to be too familiar with Jonas [ or ] make this big emotional investment " in him because he is not Daniel . Jonas hopes that Carter and the alien SG @-@ 1 member Teal 'c can persuade Colonel O 'Neill to give him a chance to prove himself worthy of a place on the SG @-@ 1 team , but according to Richard Dean Anderson ( O 'Neill ) , " O 'Neill feels that Jonas is directly responsible for the demise or at least the damaging of Daniel Jackson [ and thus ] harbors some resentment towards Jonas " . Although O 'Neill is suspicious of aliens in general ( except of Teal 'c ) , O 'Neill begins to accept Jonas at the end of " Redemption " yet finds it hard to ever significantly warm up to Jonas , something which Nemec felt " makes things much more interesting " . Tapping added that Jonas inadvertently brings the three remaining SG @-@ 1 members closer together again . Jonas 's " easy @-@ going nature " later helps him to also establish relationships with the supporting characters Dr. Janet Fraiser and General George Hammond , whom Nemec regarded " very much [ as ] a father figure in Jonas 's eyes " . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 When actor Michael Shanks ( Daniel Jackson ) announced his decision to leave Stargate SG @-@ 1 at the end of season 5 for concerns over being under @-@ utilized , the Sci Fi Channel wanted to fill the void with a new character for season 6 . Corin Nemec happened to be at the courtyard of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's Santa Monica offices rehearsing audition dialog for an independent film when some casting agents recognized him from previous projects . They briefly mentioned Stargate SG @-@ 1 to him and informed Nemec 's manager of their strong interest in him the same afternoon . Although Nemec was familiar with the Stargate film , he had never watched the television show and was sent videotapes to familiarize himself with the series . Nemec was cast for the penultimate season 5 episode " Meridian " after several more meetings , but both sides agreed to await the character 's look on film before deciding on a long @-@ term involvement . 
 Producer Brad Wright announced in September 2001 that an actor had been cast and that the new character would be someone whom fans would recognize . An MGM Sci @-@ Fi newsletter revealed Corin Nemec to play the role of <unk> [ sic ] Quinn in " Meridian " in November 2001 , fueling fan speculation of the identity of the new character . Soon afterwards , producer Joseph Mallozzi revealed that Nemec 's character appears in the first five episodes of season 6 . Meanwhile , Nemec started to work out six days a week in @-@ between seasons and gained about 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) to look bigger around the tall SG @-@ 1 cast . 
 Mallozzi stated before the airing of season 6 that " Jonas will bring a unique alien perspective and ability to the team [ that ] will allow him to contribute in areas of expertise usually owned by [ Carter ] and Daniel . " Brad Wright hoped that " what Corin , as Jonas , will bring to the show is a renewed sense of amazement " of traveling around the galaxy although older characters have grown accustomed to it . The season 6 opening two @-@ parter " Redemption " intended to establish Jonas as a team player who can contribute ideas , although writer Robert C. Cooper felt the need to acknowledge and not " trivialize what the [ Daniel Jackson ] character meant to the team and to the show for five seasons " . The writers incorporated the initial viewer resistance to the change by making O 'Neill the most resistant to Jonas ' presence , allowing viewers to grieve Daniel and gradually come to terms with his absence . The producers based Jonas 's motivation to join SG @-@ 1 on his former reluctance to shut off the machine that indirectly killed Daniel , and his feelings of responsibility for Daniel 's death . Jonas was slowly integrated into the story in a prolonged transition stage over the first half of season 6 . 
 Nemec was open to continue playing Jonas Quinn after season 6 or in a feature film or a spin @-@ off series , but a new contract was reached with Michael Shanks for Daniel to return in season 7 . The role of Jonas was therefore reduced to recurring status in season 7 . Nemec welcomed the producers ' openness for story pitches and offered several story ideas . He wrote the mid @-@ season @-@ 7 episode " Fallout " and considered pitching more stories afterwards , but he became busy with other projects . Jonas is seldom mentioned in the series after this point but after Season 10 's " Counterstrike " stated that the Ori conquered Jonas 's homeworld , Stargate producer Joseph Mallozzi said in his blog that " in [ his ] mind , Jonas went underground and is still alive somewhere , resisting the Ori army . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The audience reception of Jonas Quinn was sparked with controversy over Michael Shanks ' departure from the show . When rumors began late in 2001 that Showtime would also not be renewing Stargate SG @-@ 1 after its fifth season , panicking fans rallied to save the show and Daniel 's character , starting massive write @-@ in campaigns and setting up websites such as the " Save Daniel Jackson " site . The SciFi Channel eventually ordered a sixth season of the show , but the character of Jonas continued to be distrusted by loyal fans , who were concerned that Daniel 's death might cause the SG @-@ 1 team to lose its moral compass . Robert C. Cooper summarized that " there 's been quite a bit of ire directed by fans towards Daniel 's replacement " after the airing of " Meridian " , but he hoped that the character would grow on fans eventually . Producer Joseph Mallozzi claimed at the beginning of season 6 to still get the " odd incoherent rambling death threat passed along to me from the [ Save Daniel Jackson ] site " . 
 Amanda Tapping admitted that it had been easier to establish relationships with her co @-@ stars at the beginning of the series , comparing Nemec 's situation to " being the new kid in school ; we 're still trying to make [ Corin ] comfortable , but it 's not the same " . Nevertheless , the Stargate SG @-@ 1 actors and producers complimented Corin Nemec and the character . Richard Dean Anderson was impressed with Nemec 's performance in " Meridian " , saying " he really struck me as a bright guy , very respectful of the dynamic of the set , but with an awareness of what he wanted to bring . " Don S. Davis ( General Hammond ) noted during the filming of season 6 that " Corin is a wonderful [ and well @-@ liked ] young man with a tremendous personality and he 's had a great deal of experience in the business " , agreeing with writer Robert C. Cooper that Nemec had done a " fine " and " wonderful " job . 
 TV Zone 's Jan Vincent @-@ Rudzki expected Jonas to be " pushed out of the way " in season 7 's " Fallen " / " Homecoming " , but considered the character 's departure as " keeping with previous events " and " quite plausible " . The writers ' decision to team up Jonas with Daniel for a significant part of the two @-@ part episode " gives credence to Jonas 's exit " , although " it 's a great shame that this new ' partnership ' couldn 't have continued " since " the two [ characters ] worked so well together " . Nemec stated in a 2008 interview that " the initial backlash from a very small core , outspoken group of the fandom had a bit of a volatile reaction to it , which is totally natural ... I 'd say 95 @-@ plus percent of the fan base grew to like the character and accepted the character overall . Especially by the time season 6 ended , I think people were pretty much , ' Eh , OK — I 'm cool with that . ' For the most part . " 
 = Apollo 18 ( album ) = 
 Apollo 18 is the fourth studio album by American alternative rock duo They Might Be Giants . It was released in 1992 through Elektra Records and was named after the cancelled Apollo 18 mission which was scheduled to have followed Apollo 17 . The album was also associated with International Space Year , for which They Might Be Giants were declared the official " musical ambassadors " by NASA . 
 The album marked the first conscious effort by John Linnell and John Flansburgh to branch out of their early sound , opting for more traditional rock rhythms and fuller arrangements . The duo adopted a backing band with live drums during the supporting tour . It was their last album recorded as a duo , and the band expanded to include a regular rhythm guitarist , bass player , and saxophone player for their subsequent releases . Apollo 18 also includes the " Fingertips " suite , a series of twenty @-@ one songs , each under thirty seconds long . The album generated three singles , " The Statue Got Me High " , " The Guitar ( The Lion Sleeps Tonight ) " and " I Palindrome I " , although only the first charted . 
 The album received mostly positive reviews from music critics , with many commending the band for making music with a darker tone . However , the album was criticized for lacking a stand @-@ out lead single . Commercially , the album was not as successful as Flood ( 1990 ) , peaking at number 99 on the Billboard 200 and spending only six weeks on that chart . In addition , some fans were upset that and Flansburgh and Linnell opted to use a backing band for the album 's tour , with some even boycotting shows . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After the major success of Flood ( 1990 ) , Elektra sought out Elvis Costello to produce Apollo 18 ; however , John Linnell and John Flansburgh elected to produce the album themselves as they had originally planned . Prior to recording , the band upgraded many of their instruments ; Flansburgh purchased a Marshall amp and Linnell bought several new saxophones . The album was recorded at The Magic Shop in New York City , in approximately ten weeks . Although the band recorded Apollo 18 primarily as a duo , its production is much less sparse when compared to previous releases . This is reflected in the fact that the album 's associated tour , the Don 't Tread on the Cut @-@ Up Snake World Tour 1992 , was the band 's first to utilize a live backing band , rather than a tape deck playing backing tracks . Linnell later noted that this led to much more complicated and deliberate rehearsals . 
 = = Style and composition = = 
 The music found on Apollo 18 is slightly darker in tone and mood than the songs found on Flood . When it came to writing songs for the album , Linnell and Flansburgh used " old standbys " , such as producing harmonies through improvisation and generating melodies by sampling sounds in varying cycles . According to the album 's press @-@ release , however , Flansburgh and Linnell both sought to expand their horizons and incorporate new sounds and " extreme song arrangements " . 
 The album 's opening track , " Dig My Grave " has been described by Parry Gettelman of the Orlando Sentinel as " an angry , fuzzed @-@ out rocker " . The vocals for the track were recorded through a guitar fuzz @-@ box in order to distort them . " I Palindrome I " , is the final single that was released to promote Apollo 18 . The circular nature of the song 's lyrical themes is reinforced by its title and use of <unk> . In fact , the song is notable for featuring a word @-@ by @-@ word palindrome in one of the verses : " ' Son , I am able ' , she said , ' though you scare me . ' ' Watch ' , said I. ' Beloved " , I said , ' watch me scare you , though . ' Said she , ' Able am I , son . ' " " She 's Actual Size " was written by Flansburgh after he contemplated that the imagery of someone viewing a departing person in a mirror ; he felt that the symbolism was a " really succinct way of talking about leaving somebody behind " . The band later expressed disappointment with the " definitive " version featured on this album , largely because the song continued to develop as the band played it live . Flansburgh called the album version " timid " and noted that " later performance versions of [ the song ] have so much more spirit than the recorded version . " Although Linnell and Flansburgh usually write songs individually , " My Evil Twin " was an example of the two collaborating . Linnell wrote the musical structure of the song , rendering it as a MIDI file , Flansburgh then wrote the melody and the lyrics . " Mammal " revolves around the idea that all mammals have hair at some point in their lifespan . According to Linnell , most of the scientific information in the song was gathered from an encyclopedia . 
 The first single released from the album was " The Statue Got Me High " . The titular lyrics originally started out as the dummy line " The Apple of My Eye " . However , Linnell soon conceived the line that would become the title , and he was amused at the juxtaposition of a statue — something " utterly immobile and … in the past " — completely " blowing somebody 's mind " . " Spider " is an eclectic song that was made when Flansburgh and Linnell were experimenting with a sampler . Linnell provided almost all of the voices , save for the line , " must stop ! " which was spoken by Flansburgh . Flansburgh himself was responsible for the bongos , horns , and various sound effects . The second single from the album , " The Guitar ( The Lion Sleeps Tonight ) " , was spawned from a jam session of The Tokens song " The Lion Sleeps Tonight " . The song was also originally intended to simply be titled " The Guitar " . Due to the legal ramifications of including the " Lion Sleeps Tonight " motif , Elektra required the band to add the name of the original song to the title . The song features Laura Cantrell on the chorus . " Dinner Bell " references Ivan Pavlov , and his experimentations in classical conditioning by using a dinner bell to cause his dog to salivate . According to Rolling Stone , " Narrow Your Eyes " is a " touching breakup song that pays vocal tribute to The Beatles and The Four Seasons " . Spin magazine called the song " the most direct lyrically and simplest musically . " The opening line of " See the Constellation " — described by Rolling Stone as " a psychedelic / New Wave potion " — references railroad tracks and was inspired by a promotional photo of an Elektra recording artist who was resting on tracks . Flansburgh was struck by the " contrary elements of the image " , and he wondered , " How relaxing can that kind of rest be unless you ’ ve given up on everything else ? " 
 " Fingertips " is a series of twenty @-@ one short tracks ranging in duration from 0 : 04 to 1 : 01 seconds , totaling 4 : 35 . The liner notes , in reference to these tracks , include the message " the indexing of this disc is designed to complement the Shuffle Mode of modern CD players " . According to John Flansburgh , listening to the album on shuffle made a collage of songs , with the short fingertips interspersed among tracks of regular length . Arnold Aronson argued that this element made the album " a stunning declaration of post @-@ modernism " due to its heavy use of " rupture , dissociation , and pastiche " . The songs were written to resemble short fragments of pop songs . The format was inspired by advertisements for collections of music , which only included samples of choruses . The " Fingertips " suite features vocal cameos from Peter <unk> , who founded The Holy Modal Rounders , and Brian Dewan , who crafted the shrine that appeared on They Might Be Giants 's 1988 album Lincoln . Due to a mastering error , the European and Australian issues of the CD include " Fingertips " as one continuous track , while on the US edition , it is correctly split into 21 tracks . This concept of including extremely short songs on an album was later somewhat recycled for the band 's sixteenth album , Nanobots , which contains twenty @-@ five songs , nine of which run under one minute each . The album concludes with " Space Suit " , a jazz @-@ influenced song with synthesizer elements . The song had been written to make use of chords that Flansburgh had learned under the tutelage of Jack DeSalvo . The song originally was titled " I 'll Remember 3rd Street " , a nod to its " jazzy origins " , but once the keyboard elements were added , the band decided to give it a name that was more " spacey " . 
 = = Title and packaging = = 
 The title of the album references NASA 's aborted Apollo 18 mission , originally planned to land in the moon 's <unk> 's Valley in February 1972 . The album 's cover depicts a giant squid locked in combat with a sperm whale in space , using graphics which the Johns came across while searching the NASA Archive Center for images to use in media art surrounding the album . The Dial @-@ A @-@ Song phone number is misprinted as 718 @-@ 963 @-@ <unk> on the back of the album , and the phone number written leads to a warehouse . The album liner notes and artwork for the album 's singles include a number of photographs from NASA , and the packaging was designed by John Flansburgh , under the pseudonym " Rolf Conant " , with Barbara Lipp . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Between 1992 and 1993 , Bo Orloff , the band 's assistant manager at the time , sent out various informational updates via email to the band 's mailing list . These included a full track listing prior to the album 's release , as well as a press release and biography of the band . The bulletins also included information on the album 's associated tour . 
 The band appeared as a musical guest on numerous talk shows to promote Apollo 18 . " The Guitar ( The Lion Sleeps Tonight ) " and " The Statue Got Me High " were performed on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and " I Palindrome I " on Late Night with David Letterman . Their appearance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on 19 May 1992 was the television debut of They Might Be Giants 's new backing band . 
 = = = International Space Year = = = 
 The band became associated with the International Space Year ( ISY ) , designated as 1992 by the United Nations to promote peaceful and collaborative space exploration , when Linnell and Flansburgh were searching the NASA Archive Center for appropriate photographs and visual materials for the album artwork . Staff members at the NASA facility took notice of the duo and inquired about their research . Linnell responded that they " were in this band , we 're making this record , and we 're going to start touring next year ... They were particularly interested in that , because they said that 1992 was ISY . It was the first time we ever heard of that , but they said because we were a band going to be touring around the world in 1992 they wondered if we wanted to be <unk> for the ISY . So we said why not ? " 
 The band was soon declared the official " musical ambassadors " for the year , although , according to Linnell , it was more of an informal arrangement . The band had originally planned to create short videos called " Space Minutes " which would have aired on an unspecified cable television station that was affiliated with ISY , but the plans never came to fruition . In support of the designation , the logo for ISY is included on the back cover of the album . The band was scheduled for concerts to endorse ISY , and mentioned in promotional material from NASA , which headed the celebration in the United States . Commenting on the success of the designation of International Space Year , however , Linnell pointed out that he " [ didn 't ] think most people have heard that this is International Space Year " . 
 = = = Don 't Tread on the Cut @-@ Up Snake World Tour = = = 
 In support of Apollo 18 , They Might Be Giants embarked on a tour across the United States , Europe , and Asia . The tour was named the " Don 't Tread on the Cut @-@ Up Snake World Tour 1992 " , a reference to the Gadsden flag and the " Join , or Die " cartoon , with the " world tour " affix appended by Elektra Records . The band 's largest tour up to that point , spanning the length of 1992 , the Don 't Tread on the Cut @-@ Up Snake tour was also associated with ISY . Although they were initially hesitant about using live backing musicians , it was also the first tour for which Linnell and Flansburgh were joined by a live band , consisting of a rhythm section and saxophonist . They were encouraged to adopt the larger touring outfit by their Elektra A & R representative , Susan Drew . The band also expanded to include a regular rhythm guitarist , bass player , and saxophone player for their subsequent studio recordings . 
 The band 's " O Tannenbaum " single was recorded during a sound check on the tour . The track would later reappear on the They Might Be Giants in <unk> EP , released in 2001 . 
 = = = Promotional video = = = 
 A short video promoting Apollo 18 was produced by Elektra Records , in the vein of the previous Flood promo . In the video , graphic and video illustrations of certain songs are presented , in addition to samples of some of the songs . The video is arranged to resemble a traditional slide show presentation . The video also introduced the concept of the three " Power Spheres " , from which the compilation album A User 's Guide to They Might Be Giants : Melody , Fidelity , Quantity ( 2005 ) would take its subtitle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Apollo 18 garnered positive reviews from critics . Writing for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album 4 out of 5 stars and stated that it was more " consistent " than predecessors , making note of its darker tone . However , Erlewine also felt that the album was " lacking a standout single " . Robert Christgau , who assigned the album an A – , praised the first five tracks especially , asserting that the remaining thirty @-@ three were more experimental in nature . Christgau acclaimed the album melodically , while stating that the lyrics were pleasant but " meaningless " . Ira Robbins , reviewing for Rolling Stone magazine , gave Apollo 18 4 out of 5 stars . Similar to Christgau , Robbins called the lyrics throughout the album " whimsy " , and said that they were not too complex to weigh down melodies . Robbins also praised the album 's eclecticism , observing that " ' Turn Around ' mimics Forties swing ; the funky bass groove of ' The Guitar ' interpolates a rewrite of ' The Lion Sleeps Tonight ' , <unk> sung by Laura Cantrell . Another wry science lesson , ' See the Constellation ' , mixes a psychedelic / New Wave potion for a bouncy space trip . " Robbins was critical of the disorganized " Fingertips " selections . A review by Craig Tomashoff , published in People , lauded the variety found in " Fingertips " . Tomashoff also made note of the wide vocabulary employed in the lyrics ( citing , specifically , " Turn Around " and " I Palindrome I " ) , concluding that the album was " totally cool " . 
 = = = Consumer response = = = 
 On April 11 , 1992 , Apollo 18 peaked at number 99 on the Billboard 200 . It spent six weeks on that chart . " The Statue Got Me High " , the first single from the album , peaked at number 24 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart on March 21 , 1992 , and spent eight weeks on the chart . The album 's other singles failed to chart . 
 Apollo 18 debuted on the Australian ARIA albums chart at number 60 on April 26 , 1992 , before peaking at number 59 the following week ; it spent 6 weeks in the top 100 . 
 Although Apollo 18 received a positive response from consumers and critics , some fans were upset that the duo of Linnell and Flansburgh had been augmented to include a full band for the album 's tour . In rebuttal , some fans stopped attending live concerts , even taking the aggressive approach of trying to discourage others from entering venues for shows . Despite these reactions , the live band was generally well received . In a New York Times review of a contemporaneous live show , Jon Pareles observed that the band was " just as tricky as ever " , and still delighted its audience . They Might Be Giants continues to record and tour with a full backing band . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by They Might Be Giants , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = = Release history = = 
 Apollo 18 was released on CD and cassette in the United States , Australia , and Canada and on CD , LP , and cassette formats in European markets by Elektra Records . In 2013 , a two @-@ part CD compilation collected Apollo 18 and some contemporary B @-@ sides along with the band 's other Elektra studio albums and surrounding material . The album was also released on LP in the United States and Canada by Asbestos Records in 2014 as part of a series of LP reissues spanning They Might Be Giants 's period on the Elektra label . 
 = Oda of Canterbury = 
 Oda ( or Odo ; died 958 ) , called the Good or the Severe , was a 10th @-@ century Archbishop of Canterbury in England . The son of a Danish invader , Oda became Bishop of Ramsbury before 928 . A number of stories were told about his actions both prior to becoming and while a bishop , but few of these incidents are recorded in contemporary accounts . After being named to Canterbury in 941 , Oda was instrumental in crafting royal legislation as well as involved in providing rules for his clergy . Oda was also involved in the efforts to reform religious life in England . He died in 958 and legendary tales afterwards were ascribed to him . Later he came to be regarded as a saint , and a hagiography was written in the late 11th or early 12th century . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Oda 's parents were Danish , and he may have been born in East Anglia . His father was said to have been a Dane who came to England in 865 , together with the Viking army of Ubba and Ivar , and presumably settled in East Anglia . Oda 's nephew Oswald of Worcester later became Archbishop of York . It is possible that Oswald 's relatives Oscytel , afterwards Archbishop of York , and <unk> , an abbot , were also relatives of Oda , but this is not known for sure . 
 In Byrhtferth of Ramsey 's Life of Saint Oswald , Oda is said to have joined the household of a pious nobleman called Æthelhelm , whom he accompanied to Rome on pilgrimage . While on pilgrimage , Oda healed the nobleman 's illness . Other stories , such as those by the 12th @-@ century writer William of Malmesbury , describe Oda as fighting under Edward the Elder and then becoming a priest , but these statements are unlikely . Other statements in the Life have Oda being named " Bishop of Wilton " by the king , who is stated to have been Æthelhelm 's brother . The appointment to Wilton is likely to be false , as no English king of the period had a brother named Æthelhelm . Some sources state that he became a monk at Fleury @-@ sur @-@ Loire in France . 
 = = Bishop of Ramsbury = = 
 Oda was consecrated Bishop of Ramsbury sometime between 909 and 927 , not to Wilton as stated by both William of Malmesbury and the Life . The appointment was most likely made by King Æthelstan , and the first securely attested mention in documents of the new bishop occurs in 928 , when he is a witness to royal charters as bishop . According to the late tenth @-@ century chronicler , Richer of Rheims , in 936 Æthelstan sent Oda to France to arrange the return to the throne of France of King Louis IV . Louis was Æthelstan 's nephew and had been in exile in England for a number of years . However , this story is not related in any contemporary records . Oda was said to have fought alongside Æthelstan at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 . It was at this battle that Oda is said to have miraculously provided a sword to the king when the king 's own sword slipped out of its scabbard . A Ramsey chronicle records that in the 1170s , the sword was still preserved in the royal treasury , although the chronicler carefully states the story " as is said " rather than as fact . There are no contemporary records of Oda 's appearance at the battle . In 940 , Oda arranged a truce between Olaf III Guthfrithson , king of Dublin and York , and Edmund I , king of England . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 In 941 Oda was named Archbishop of Canterbury . During his time as archbishop , he helped King Edmund with the new royal law @-@ code , which had a number of laws concerned with ecclesiastical affairs . The archbishop was present , along with Archbishop Wulfstan of York , at council that proclaimed the first of these law codes and which was held by Edmund at London , over Easter around 945 or 946 . Oda also settled a dispute over the Five Boroughs with Wulfstan . 
 Oda also made constitutions , or rules , for his clergy . His Constitutions of Oda are the first surviving constitutions of a 10th @-@ century English ecclesiastical reformer . Oda reworked some statutes from 786 to form his updated code , and one item that was dropped were any clauses dealing with paganism . Other items covered were relations between laymen and the clergy , the duties of bishops , the need for the laity to make canonical marriages , how to observe fasts , and the need for tithes to be given by the laity . The work is extant in just one surviving manuscript , British Museum Cotton Vespasian A XIV , folios <unk> to <unk> . This is an 11th @-@ century copy done for Wulfstan II , Archbishop of York . 
 At the death of King Eadred of England in 955 , Oda was one of the recipients of a bequest from the king , in his case a large amount of gold . He was probably behind the reestablishment of a bishopric at Elmham , as the line of bishops in that see starts with Eadwulf of Elmham in 956 . Oda crowned King Eadwig in 956 , but in late 957 the archbishop joined Eadwig 's rival and brother Edgar who had been proclaimed king of the Mercians in 957 , while Eadwig continued to rule Wessex . The exact cause of the rupture between the two brothers that led to the division of the previously united kingdom is unknown , but may have resulted from Eadwig 's efforts to promote close kinsmen and his wife . The division was peaceful , and Eadwig continued to call himself " King of the English " in contrast to Edgar 's title of " King of the Mercians " . In early 958 Oda annulled the marriage of Eadwig and his wife Ælfgifu , who were too closely related . This act was likely a political move connected to the division between Eadwig and Edgar , as it is unlikely that the close kinship between Eadwig and Ælfgifu had not been known before their marriage . 
 Oda was a supporter of Dunstan 's monastic reforms , and was a reforming agent in the church along with Cenwald the Bishop of Worcester and Ælfheah the Bishop of Winchester . He also built extensively , and re @-@ roofed Canterbury Cathedral after raising the walls higher . In 948 , Oda took Saint Wilfrid 's relics from Ripon . Frithegod 's verse Life of Wilfrid has a preface that was written by Oda , in which the archbishop claimed that he rescued the relics from Ripon , which he described as " decayed " and " thorn @-@ covered " . He also acquired the relics of St Ouen , and Frithegod also wrote , at Oda 's behest , a verse life of that saint , which has been lost . He was also an active in reorganizing the diocesan structure of his province , as the sees of Elmham and Lindsey were reformed during his archbishopric . 
 The archbishop died on 2 June 958 and is regarded as a saint , with a feast day of 4 July . Other dates were also commemorated , including 2 June or 29 May . After his death , legendary tales ascribed miracles to him , including one where the Eucharist dripped with blood . Another was the miraculous repair of a sword . There is no contemporary evidence for veneration being made to Oda , with the first indication of cult coming in the hagiography written by Byrhtferth about Oswald , but no hagiography specifically about Oda was written until Eadmer wrote the Vita sancti <unk> sometime between 1093 and 1125 . Oda was known by contemporaries as " The Good " and also became known as Severus " The Severe " . 
 = John W. Johnston = 
 John Warfield Johnston ( September 9 , 1818 – February 27 , 1889 ) was an American lawyer and politician from Abingdon , Virginia . He served in the Virginia State Senate , and represented Virginia in the United States Senate when the state was readmitted after the American Civil War . He was United States Senator for 13 years . In national politics , he was a Democrat . 
 Johnston had been ineligible to serve in Congress because of the Fourteenth Amendment , which forbade anyone who had sworn allegiance to the United States and subsequently sided with the Confederacy during the Civil War from holding public office . However , his restrictions were removed at the suggestion of the Freedmen 's Bureau when he aided a sick and dying former slave after the War . He was the first person who had sided with the Confederacy to serve in the United States Senate . 
 Several issues marked Johnston 's senatorial career . He was caught in the middle during the debate over the Arlington Memorial . The initial proposal to relocate the dead was distasteful to Johnston , yet the ensuing debate caused him to want to defend the memory of Robert E. Lee ; the need to stay quiet for the sake of the Democratic Party , however , proved decisive . Johnston was an outspoken opponent of the Texas @-@ Pacific Bill , a sectional struggle for control of railroads in the South , which figured in the Compromise of 1877 . He was also an outspoken Funder during Virginia 's heated debate as to how much of its pre @-@ War debt the state ought to have been obliged to pay back . The controversy culminated in the formation of the Readjuster Party and the appointment of William Mahone as its leader ; this marked the end of Johnston 's career in the Senate . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Johnston was born in his paternal grandfather 's house , " <unk> " , near Abingdon , Virginia . He was the only child of Dr. John Warfield Johnston and Louisa Smith Bowen . His grandfather was Judge Peter Johnston , who had fought under Henry " Light Horse Harry " Lee during the Revolutionary War , and his great @-@ grandmother was the sister of Patrick Henry . His mother was the sister of Rees T. Bowen , a Virginia politician , and his paternal uncles included Charles Clement Johnston and General Joseph Eggleston Johnston . His first cousin was U. S. Congressman Henry Bowen . Johnston 's ancestry was Scottish , English , Welsh , and Scots @-@ Irish . 
 Johnston attended Abingdon Academy , South Carolina College at Columbia , and the law department of the University of Virginia at Charlottesville . He was admitted to the bar in 1839 and commenced practice in Tazewell , Virginia . 
 On October 12 , 1841 , he married Nicketti Buchanan Floyd , the daughter of Governor John Floyd and Letitia Preston , and the sister of Governor John Buchanan Floyd . His wife was Catholic , having converted when young ; Johnston converted after the marriage . 
 In 1859 , he moved his family to Abingdon , Virginia , and lived at first on East Main Street . An Abingdon resident noted that " it was a delightful home to visit and the young men enjoyed the cordial welcome that they received from the old and the young . " While there , the family started construction of a new home called " Eggleston " , three miles ( 5 km ) east of town ; the family 's affectionate name for it was " Castle Dusty " . They moved in sometime after August 1860 . 
 Johnston and Nicketti Buchanan Floyd had twelve children , one of whom was Dr. George Ben Johnston , prominent physician in Richmond who is credited with the first antiseptic operation performed in Virginia . Both the Johnston Memorial Hospital in Abingdon and the Johnston @-@ Willis Hospital in Richmond are named after him . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Johnston served as commonwealth attorney for Tazewell County between 1844 and 1846 . In 1846 , he was elected to serve the remainder of the 1846 – 1847 term in the Virginia Senate , representing Tazewell , Wythe , Grayson , Smyth , Carroll , and Pulaski counties . He was re @-@ elected for the 1847 – 1848 session . 
 During the Civil War , he held the position of Confederate States receiver , and was also elected as a councilman for the town of Abingdon in 1861 . Not much is known of his activities during the war , but he did send a letter to Brigadier @-@ General John Echols that the Order of Heroes of America , was " growing fearfully " in southwest Virginia . This secret order was composed of Union sympathizers . This information was used in conjunction with other reports to request a suspension of habeas corpus so that the military could make arrests . 
 After the war , in 1867 , he founded the Villa Maria Academy of the Visitation in Abingdon for the education of girls . He was judge of the Circuit Superior Court of Law and Chancery of Virginia in 1869 – 1870 . Also around 1869 , he formed a law partnership with a young local attorney , and his future son @-@ in @-@ law , Daniel Trigg . In 1872 , they set up their offices in a small building near the courthouse which became known as the Johnston @-@ Trigg Law Office . 
 In November 1868 , he wrote a letter to his daughter , which revealed that butter was scarce and that he doubted he would get a supply for the winter , but that " when we have spare ribs , sausages & <unk> bread , we can do without butter . The fact is I begin to consider butter a luxury anyhow , that poor people have no business with . " 
 = = Senatorial career = = 
 Virginia by 1869 was essentially a military zone . Gilbert C. Walker was elected as governor in this year and ushered in a moderate conservatism , with Whiggish roots . The new General Assembly ratified the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to end Reconstruction and also elected two people as representatives for the U. S. Senate , including Johnston . He was to serve the unexpired portion of a six @-@ year term that started in March 1865 . Johnston received a letter from William Mahone , sent on October 18 , 1869 , that he must go to Richmond " without fail , by the first train . You are Senator . " 
 Johnston was one of the few Virginia men eligible to hold office : at the time , anyone who had fought for , or served , the former Confederacy was ineligible to hold office under the Fourteenth Amendment until their " political disabilities " were removed by Congress by a two @-@ thirds vote . Johnston 's were removed because word had reached the local Abingdon Freedmen 's Bureau officer that he had helped care for an elderly former slave , Peter , who had passed through Abingdon on his way to Charlotte County , Virginia from Mississippi . 
 The Norfolk and Western Railroad passed 200 yards ( 180 m ) from Johnston 's house , and former slaves used the tracks as a guide to return home from where they had been sold . In the summer of 1865 Johnston aided many with food and shelter , and in August of that year he found Peter near death in a stable near the railroad ; Johnston carried him to the house , where he stayed at least a month . 
 When Peter regained enough strength he told his story , which Johnston later wrote down and is now kept with his papers at Duke University . Peter had been a slave of a Mr. Read in Charlotte County , a neighbor of John Randolph . He had been sold ( apparently because of Read 's debts ) to a trader , leaving behind a wife and young daughter to work a cotton field for thirty @-@ five years in Mississippi . When he was freed , Peter walked from Mississippi until he reached Abingdon in his quest to return home . Johnston wrote : " It was evident to me and my wife that all our care could not rebuild that worn @-@ out body , and that death was near at hand . He weakened rapidly ... His life was weary , <unk> , and full of trouble . But surely the Lord has rewards for such as he , and will give him rest in all eternity , and permit him to see Susy and his Mammy and Daddy . " Peter died of tuberculosis . 
 The Freedmen 's Bureau agent wrote to Congressman William Kelley of Pennsylvania requesting the removal of Johnston 's disabilities because of his charity . Kelly did so and the bill passed both houses of Congress . Johnston only discovered all of this when he read about the passage of the bill in the newspaper . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Johnston went to Washington in December in hopes that Virginia would be readmitted to the Union . It was , however , not until January 26 , 1870 , that Virginia was readmitted ; Johnston was able to take his seat shortly afterward . The delay was due to a Congressional need to pass an act that would allow Virginia representation in the body . 
 When Johnston arrived on January 28 to take his seat , he had some difficulty . George F. Edmunds of Vermont questioned whether he was the right Mr. Johnston and thought a fraud was being perpetrated until <unk> T. Willey of West Virginia vouched for Johnston 's identity , allowing his qualification . Later , he was in the process of signing a document put before him , but without having read it . This was the ironclad oath , that required all white males to swear they had never borne arms against the Union or supported the Confederacy . If the senator sitting next to Johnston , Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware , had not noticed , Johnston would likely have been " disgraced ... forever in the eyes of the people of Virginia " . The oath had been deemed unconstitutional in 1867 , but its use was not effectively ended until 1871 . At this time , Johnston was the only senator who had sided with the Confederacy — all the rest were either Northerners by birth or had been " Union men " . 
 At the time he joined the Senate , the two parties in Virginia were the Conservatives and the Radicals . Johnston was a Conservative , which was an alliance of pre @-@ War Democrats and Whigs . The Democrats had once been bitter rivals of the Whigs and would not join a party of that name , giving rise to the Conservative party . Which direction Johnston would vote in the national arena was unknown , but mattered little because the Senate was overwhelmingly Republican . There were only 10 Democrats at the time out of 68 senators . There was speculation that Johnston might side with the Republicans and " turn traitor to his party and state ... for patronage " based on a letter he had written to the new Virginia governor . These doubts were settled when Johnston declined a formal invitation to join the Republican caucus and went to a joint meeting of House and Senate Democrats ; it was declared that " a Conservative in Virginia was a democrat in Washington " . 
 Johnston served from January 26 , 1870 , to March 4 , 1871 , and was re @-@ elected on March 15 , 1871 , for the term beginning March 4 , 1871 . He was re @-@ elected again in 1877 and served until March 4 , 1883 . He was a member Committee on Revolutionary Claims , and later served as its chairman during the Forty @-@ fifth and Forty @-@ seventh Congresses . He was also chairman of the Committee on Agriculture during the Forty @-@ sixth Congress . 
 In November 1881 , Johnston served on the Committee on Foreign Relations . It is recorded that when Clara Barton 's plea to President Chester Arthur to sign the First Geneva Convention ( establishing the International Red Cross ) , Arthur 's favorable reply was referred to this committee and Johnston was named as one of the members . 
 = = Political issues = = 
 = = = Arlington Memorial controversy = = = 
 On December 13 , 1870 , Thomas C. McCreery ( D ) of Kentucky introduced a resolution regarding the Arlington House , the former home of the Confederate leader Robert E. Lee , that brought down a firestorm of objections . Arlington House had been captured by Union forces during the Civil War and its grounds were used as a cemetery for 16 @,@ 000 soldiers by the end of the war . The resolution called for an investigation to establish its ownership and the possibility of returning it to Mrs. Robert E. Lee . In addition , McCreery proposed the government fix up the premises , return any Washington relics discovered , and determine whether a suitable location nearby existed to relocate the dead . Johnston described the excitement caused as the most pronounced he would see in his thirteen years in the Senate . It put him in " the most painful and embarrassing position of my life " . and he was vehemently opposed : 
 There was something very <unk> to me in the idea of making a job of digging up and carting away the remains of thousands of people — especially as they were gallant men who had died on the field of battle . Not only was the substance of the resolution displeasing but its tone was equally so . It seemed to say : " Here , whitewash these fences , scour these floors , fix up this house and grounds , dig up these bones , and hand the premises over to the owners . " 
 However , in the course of the speeches opposing the resolution , Johnston felt Lee 's memory had been attacked and he felt duty bound to defend him . The Democratic Party , knowing his views and that of his state , approached him and asked him to keep silent for the sake of the party and the relief of Virginia . Johnston correctly predicted that he would be attacked at home . He was up for re @-@ election , and the opposing candidates used his position against him . A delegation from the Virginia General Assembly travelled to Washington to talk with the Democrats and assess the situation and were satisfied by the reports they received . 
 Later , Johnston made a speech on behalf of Mrs. Lee and her Memorial proposal . His first attempt to speak was objected to and he was denied permission . Near the end of the session , when an unrelated bill was under discussion , Johnston made a motion related to it and then used the opportunity , which was allowed to Senators , to make his speech ; this caused " great indignation and impatience on the floor " . The Lee family and their advisors desired that the " true facts about the sale of Arlington and the nature of her claim to the property , should be placed before the country " so that , if found in her favor , she could receive compensation and then donate the property to the government . Eventually the Supreme Court of the United States did find in the family 's favor in 1882 . 
 = = = Texas @-@ Pacific Bill = = = 
 When Johnston was up for re @-@ election in 1877 , he was involved in the controversial Texas @-@ Pacific Bill , a battle between Northern and Southern railroad interests . Johnston was opposed to Tom Scott 's Texas and Pacific Railway , and the bill , which favored Scott 's interests . Scott was trying to persuade Southern states to accept his railroad so that they would subsequently appoint senators who would vote for the bill . Johnston 's seat was vulnerable if Scott succeeded in influencing the Virginia legislature , as it was known that he opposed the bill . As Johnston wrote in a letter , " ... what I have done about the Pacific road is before the people and I cannot recall it if I would . It would not be policy to retreat from my position nor am I inclined to do so , if was policy . I thought & I think that I was right & am therefore ready to take the consequences . I intend to fight it out on that line . " William Mahone worked to prevent his re @-@ election . Most Southern states went along with Scott , but Virginia and Louisiana did not , and Johnston was re @-@ elected . 
 The Texas @-@ Pacific Bill remained a bargaining chip in the Compromise of 1877 , following the 1876 Presidential election crisis . Later , Johnston gave a speech in 1878 in Congress against the railroad , specifically Bill No. 942 , which he viewed as " a positive menace to the commercial interests of the South " . 
 = = = Funder and Readjuster debate = = = 
 Another issue that marked Johnston 's career was the Funder vs. Readjuster debate . <unk> maintained that the state was obligated to pay back its entire pre @-@ War debt , whereas the Readjusters suggested differing , lesser figures , regarding how much was owed . The controversy culminated in the end of the Conservative Party in Virginia and the formation of the Readjuster Party and the Democratic Party . William Mahone was chosen as head of the Readjusters and they gained control of the state legislature in 1879 , but not the governorship . The legislature then elected Mahone as the successor to Democrat Robert E. Withers in the U. S. Senate . However , without a sympathetic governor , they could not enact their reforms . Their next chance came in the election of 1881 ; their aim was to elect a governor , but most importantly to maintain control of the state legislature , since it would elect " a successor to the Hon. John W. Johnston ... " Their party succeeded and the legislature elected prominent Readjuster , and Mahone 's " intimate friend " , Harrison H. <unk> to replace Johnston , eighty @-@ one to forty @-@ nine . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After serving in the Senate , Johnston resumed his legal practice . He died in Richmond , Virginia , on February 27 , 1889 , aged seventy . He was conscious until his death and was aware that he was dying . On March 1 , his family brought his body from Richmond to Wytheville , where he was buried in St. Mary 's Cemetery . 
 On May 11 , 1903 , a ceremony was held to install the portraits of deceased judges in the Washington County Courthouse . David F. Bailey was the speaker that presented the portrait of Johnston . In his speech , he described Johnston : 
 He was not an orator , but a strong debater — powerful in clean cut argument . He was a dangerous opponent . You never caught him asleep . You never saw him demoralized ... He was temperate in all things . In nothing was he a fanatic . He was the friend of the poor . Need I say this in Washington County ? His liberality was limited only by his ability to bestow . He was at all times the young lawyer 's friend . 
 Johnston was outlived by his wife , Nicketti , who died on June 9 , 1908 , aged eighty @-@ nine . 
 = = Works = = 
 The True Southern Pacific Railroad Versus the Texas Pacific Railroad : Speech of Hon. John W. Johnston 1878 
 <unk> in Virginia , The North American Review . Volume 134 , Issue 303 . University of Northern Iowa , Cedar Falls , Iowa . February 1882 . 
 Railway Land @-@ grants , The North American Review . Volume 140 , Issue 340 . University of Northern Iowa , Cedar Falls , Iowa . March 1885 
 The True South vs the Silent South , The Century . Volume 32 , Issue 1 , New York . May 1886 
 = Holkham National Nature Reserve = 
 Holkham National Nature Reserve is England 's largest national nature reserve ( NNR ) . It is on the Norfolk coast between Burnham Overy Staithe and Blakeney , and is managed by Natural England with the cooperation of the Holkham Estate . Its 3 @,@ 900 hectares ( 9 @,@ 600 acres ) comprise a wide range of habitats , including grazing marsh , woodland , salt marsh , sand dunes and foreshore . The reserve is part of the North Norfolk Coast Site of Special Scientific Interest , and the larger area is additionally protected through Natura 2000 , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) and Ramsar listings , and is part of both an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) and a World Biosphere Reserve . Holkham NNR is important for its wintering wildfowl , especially pink @-@ footed geese , Eurasian wigeon and brant geese , but it also has breeding waders , and attracts many migrating birds in autumn . A number of scarce invertebrates and plants can be found in the dunes , and the reserve is one of the only two sites in the UK to have an antlion colony . 
 This stretch of coast originally consisted of salt marshes protected from the sea by ridges of shingle and sand , and Holkham 's Iron Age fort stood at the end of a sandy spit surrounded by the tidal wetland . The Vikings navigated the creeks to establish Holkham village , but access to the former harbour was stopped by drainage and reclamation of the marshes between the coast and the shingle ridge which started in the 17th century , and was completed in 1859 . The Holkham estate has been owned by the Coke family , later Earls of Leicester since 1609 , and their seat at Holkham Hall is opposite the reserve 's Lady Anne 's Drive entrance . The 3rd Earl planted pines on the dunes to protect the pastures reclaimed by his predecessors from wind @-@ blown sand . The national nature reserve was created in 1967 from 1 @,@ 700 hectares ( 4 @,@ 200 acres ) of the Holkham Estate and 2 @,@ 200 hectares ( 5 @,@ 400 acres ) of foreshore belonging to the Crown . 
 The reserve has over 100 @,@ 000 visitors a year , including birdwatchers and horse riders , and is therefore significant for the local economy . The NNR has taken steps to control entry to the fragile dunes and other areas important for their animals or plants because of the damage to sensitive habitats that could be caused by unrestricted access . The dunes are an essential natural defence against the projected rises in sea level along this vulnerable coast . 
 = = Description = = 
 The reserve lies to the north of A149 coast road , starting just west of Burnham Overy Staithe and extending west past Holkham to Beach Road , Wells @-@ next @-@ the @-@ Sea . It also includes the tidal salt marshes continuing further east to Blakeney . Its total area of about 3 @,@ 900 hectares ( 9 @,@ 600 acres ) makes it the largest NNR in England . The reserve can be accessed by footpaths from Wells and the local villages including the Peddars Way / Norfolk Coast long @-@ distance trail that traverses the main part of the reserve , and National Cycle Route 1 loops through the core of the NNR between Holkham and Wells . There is a car park near Holkham village at the north end of Lady Anne 's Drive that gives access to two bird hides , and another parking area at the end of Beach Road in Wells . To the east of the Wells channel , the reserve is mainly salt marshes and mud flats , and is difficult and potentially dangerous to access , although a public footpath runs along the southern edge of these tidal areas . 
 The salt marshes on this coast are stated in the Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) notification document to be " among the best in Europe ... the flora is exceptionally diverse " . Holkham also has good examples of sand dunes , and the pines planted on the dunes have provided shelter for other trees and shrubs to become established , making this the only substantial area of woodland in the North Norfolk Coast SSSI . The dunes are created and altered by the elements , and the sand islands in Holkham Bay have formed only within the last 60 years . The flat ground inland from the dunes is reclaimed salt marsh that was used as pasture until the 1940s , but converted to arable land during World War II . The value of the fields to wildlife was reduced by the resulting lower water table , but Natural England 's management measures have raised the water levels , attracting breeding and wintering birds . Water management can also be used to ensure a high water table in summer , benefiting breeding waders , and drier conditions in winter , preferred by the geese . The management of water levels and grassland increased the numbers of breeding wetland birds from 120 pairs of ten species in 1986 to 795 pairs of 26 species in 1994 , and the number of wintering birds of four key wildfowl species rose from 1 @,@ 215 to 17 @,@ 305 in the decade from 1983 / 84 . 
 = = History = = 
 Norfolk has a long history of human occupation . Both modern and Neanderthal people were present in the area between 100 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago , before the last glaciation , and humans returned as the ice retreated northwards . The archaeological record is poor until about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , partly because of the then prevailing very cold conditions , but also because the coastline was much further north than at present . As the ice retreated during the Mesolithic ( 10 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 BCE ) , the sea level rose , filling what is now the North Sea . This brought the Norfolk coastline much closer to its present line , so that many ancient sites are now under the sea in an area now known as Doggerland . 
 The coast at Holkham originally consisted of salt marshes protected from the sea by ridges of shingle and sand . A large Iron Age fort at the end of a sandy spit in the marshes could only be approached along the spit ; it enclosed 2 @.@ 5 hectares ( 6 @.@ 2 acres ) and remained in use until the defeat of the Iceni in 47 AD . The Vikings navigated the tidal creeks to establish Holkham , the name deriving from the Danish for " ship town " . 
 The Holkham Estate has been owned by the Coke family since 1609 , and Holkham Hall , built by Thomas Coke , 1st Earl of Leicester between 1734 and 1764 , is opposite the NNR entrance . Until the 17th century , ships could navigate the tidal creeks to reach the <unk> ( harbour ) at Holkham village , but local landowners began to reclaim the marshes from 1639 , and the final embankment at Wells was constructed by the 2nd Earl in 1859 , completing the conversion of about 800 hectares ( 2 @,@ 000 acres ) to farmland . The 3rd Earl planted Corsican , maritime and Scots pines on the dunes in the late 19th century to shelter the agricultural land from wind @-@ blown sand , which is carried inland when the wind speed exceeds three metres ( 10 ft ) per second and blows from directions between northwest to northeast . 
 The Holkham National Nature Reserve was created in 1967 from 1 @,@ 700 hectares ( 4 @,@ 200 acres ) of the Holkham Estate and 2 @,@ 200 hectares ( 5 @,@ 400 acres ) of intertidal sand and mud flats belonging to the Crown Estate . In 1986 the NNR was subsumed into the newly created 7 @,@ 700 hectares ( 19 @,@ 000 acres ) North Norfolk Coast SSSI . The larger area is now additionally protected through Natura 2000 , Special Protection Area ( SPA ) and Ramsar listings , and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The coast from Holkham NNR to Salthouse , together with Scolt Head Island , is a Biosphere Reserve . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 As many as 50 @,@ 000 pink @-@ footed geese , 13 @,@ 000 Eurasian wigeon and 7 @,@ 000 brent geese winter at Holkham , making it of international importance for these species . Up to 400 white @-@ fronted geese and a few tundra bean geese may join the wildfowl flocks , and the odd peregrine falcon , short @-@ eared owl , merlin , marsh harrier or hen harrier may hunt over the fields . The shingle banks and foreshore hold wintering flocks of shore larks , snow buntings and twite , and waders like knots , curlews , <unk> and grey plover probe for invertebrates in the mud flats . 
 Spring migration is relatively quiet , although sightings of ring ouzel and firecrest are possible amongst the more common arrivals . Breeding birds include lapwings , common snipe , pied avocets , common redshanks and marsh harriers on the grazing marshes , ringed plovers and little terns on the beach , and black @-@ headed , herring and lesser black @-@ backed gulls on the salt marsh . The small grey heron colony has been joined by little egrets , and , from 2010 , by Eurasian spoonbills . The pines may occasionally have nesting siskins or common crossbills , and parrot crossbills bred in 1984 and 1985 . 
 Holkham 's north @-@ facing coastal location can attract large numbers of migrating birds in autumn if the weather conditions are right , especially with a north to north @-@ east wind . The common species may be accompanied by a wryneck , red @-@ backed shrike or greenish warbler in August , with goldcrests , thrushes and finches later in the season , and perhaps red @-@ breasted flycatchers and yellow @-@ browed warblers . Vagrant rarities such as Pallas 's , Radde 's or dusky warblers may occur ; a red @-@ breasted nuthatch in 1989 was the first , and , as of 2012 , the only individual of its species to be recorded in the UK . 
 = = = Other animals and plants = = = 
 Brown hares and European otters are found all along the north Norfolk coast , but red squirrels disappeared from the Holkham pines by 1981 . The rare natterjack toad breeds at Holkham , one of only two sites along this coast , although the common frog , common toad and common lizard are widespread in appropriate habitats . 
 The green hairstreak , purple hairstreak , comma , hummingbird hawk @-@ moth , broad @-@ bordered bee hawk @-@ moth and ghost moth are sometimes seen in the woods with the common butterfly and moth species , and a clouded yellow or Camberwell beauty may also occur in some years . Grayling , small heath and common blue butterflies can be found in the dunes , where there is also a large antlion colony , making Holkham one of only two locations for this predatory insect in the UK . Dragonflies include the migrant hawker , southern hawker and ruddy darter . 
 On exposed parts of the coast , the muds and sands are scoured by the tides , and have no vegetation except possibly algae or eelgrass , but where the shoreline is more protected , internationally important salt marshes can form , with several uncommon species . The salt marsh contains glassworts and annual <unk> in the most exposed regions , with a succession of plants following on as the marsh becomes more established : first sea aster , then mainly sea lavender , with sea purslane in the creeks and smaller areas of sea plantain and other common marsh plants . Scrubby sea @-@ blite and matted sea lavender are characteristic plants of the drier upper salt marsh here , although they are uncommon in the UK away from the Norfolk coast . 
 Grasses such as sea couch grass and sea poa grass are important in the driest areas of the marshes , and on the coastal dunes , where marram grass , sand couch @-@ grass , lyme @-@ grass and red fescue help to bind the sand . Sea holly and sand sedge are other specialists of this arid habitat , and <unk> is a nationally rare bryophyte found on damper dunes . Bird 's @-@ foot trefoil , pyramidal orchid , bee orchid , lesser centaury and carline thistle flower on the more stable dunes , where the rare Jersey <unk> and grey hair @-@ grass are also found . The narrow 5 @-@ km ( 3 @-@ mi ) belt of pines shelters creeping lady 's tresses and yellow bird 's nest orchids . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 A 2005 survey at Holkham and five other North Norfolk coastal sites found that 39 per cent of visitors gave birdwatching as the main purpose of their visit . The 7 @.@ 7 million day visitors and 5 @.@ 5 million who made overnight stays in the area in 1999 are estimated to have spent £ 122 million , and created the equivalent of 2 @,@ 325 full @-@ time jobs . Holkham NNR is one of three sites within the SSSI that attract 100 @,@ 000 or more visitors annually , the others being Titchwell Marsh and Cley Marshes . The large number of visitors at coastal sites sometimes has negative effects . Wildlife may be disturbed , a frequent difficulty for species that breed in exposed areas such as Ringed Plovers and Little Terns , and also for wintering geese . Plants can be trampled , which is a particular problem in sensitive habitats such as sand dunes and vegetated shingle . The discovery of the nationally rare tiny earthstar fungus at Holkham led its finders to state that " The survival of this species in Britain would undoubtedly benefit from the construction of a boardwalk across this fragile and frequently @-@ visited habitat . " 
 The Little Tern colony at Holkham , holding seven per cent of the British population , is cordoned off in the breeding season , with signs explaining why people are excluded from the area . The dune vegetation can be damaged by too many people walking over it , leading to blowout , the rapid wind erosion of the sand . <unk> and steps enable visitors to reach the beach on foot without harming the dunes , and horse riders and naturists are asked to stay on the beach and keep off the dunes . As the climate becomes warmer in the future , there is likely to be more tourism pressure on the coasts , but the effects of this may be mitigated by a move towards lower @-@ impact activities like bathing . 
 The Norfolk Coast Partnership , a grouping of conservation and environmental bodies , divide the coast and its hinterland into three zones for tourism development purposes . Holkham dunes , along with Holme Dunes and Blakeney Point , were considered to be sensitive habitats already suffering from visitor pressure , and were designated as red @-@ zone areas with no development or parking improvements to be recommended . The rest of the NNR is placed in the orange zone , for locations with fragile habitats but less tourism pressure . 
 = = Threats = = 
 The underlying geology of the North Norfolk coast is Cretaceous chalk , exposed at Hunstanton cliffs just to the west of the SSSI , but buried by soft Quaternary glacial debris for the entire length of the SSSI coast . Unlike the soft , rapidly eroding cliffs further east , the coast of the SSSI has shown a less consistent pattern , with a net accretion of beach material between 1880 and 1950 . However , this coastline is threatened by climate change , with sea level rising an estimated 1 – 2 mm per year for the last 100 years , increasing the risk of flooding and coastal erosion . 
 Half the area of the salt marshes that formed in the lee of Scolt Head Island has been reclaimed in the last 300 years , creating ecologically important , but very fragile , grazing marshes . Although Holkham is low @-@ lying and can flood in severe weather conditions , it is protected by the spit that developed at the Holkham Gap in the 1990s and the dunes along the coast , which are increasingly being stabilised by vegetation . The Environment Agency 's management plan until 2105 is to rely on the natural protection of the dunes , intervening only if work is necessary to maintain their effectiveness in the face of a potential sea level rise of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 ft ) by that date . The shingle that makes up Scolt Head Island is moving westwards and southwards at up to 3 @.@ 5 m ( 10 ft ) per year . This may affect the movement of sediment , and lead to some erosion of the dunes and beaches at Holkham , but should not destroy their effectiveness as a sea defence unless the island reattaches to the mainland at some date in the distant future . 
 = 2015 Il Lombardia = 
 The 2015 Il Lombardia ( also known as the Giro di Lombardia or the Tour of Lombardy ) was a one @-@ day cycling classic that took place around Lake Como in Lombardy in northern Italy on 4 October 2015 . It was the 109th edition of the Il Lombardia one @-@ day cycling race and was the final cycling monument of the 2015 season , as well as being the final race of the 2015 UCI World Tour . The race was organised by RCS Sport , who also organise the Giro d 'Italia . 
 The course was difficult , taking in several hard climbs over the 245 @-@ kilometre ( 152 mi ) route , including the famous Madonna del Ghisallo climb . It started in Bergamo and reached the coast of Lake Como about halfway through the race . The final 75 kilometres ( 47 mi ) contained most of the climbing , with the final climb coming in the last 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . This was followed by a descent to the finish line in Como itself . 
 There was aggressive racing from the climb of the Madonna del Ghisallo and the very difficult Muro di Sormano that followed it . A small group came to the final climbs together . Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) , who had targeted the race following his expulsion from the Vuelta a España , attacked on the penultimate descent . Despite losing some time to the chasers on the final climb , he came to the finish line alone to take his first ever Monument victory . Daniel Moreno ( Team Katusha ) was second , with Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ ) third . 
 = = Background = = 
 Il Lombardia was the final race in the 2015 UCI World Tour . This was a change from recent years , when the Tour of Beijing was the final race . The individual victory in the World Tour had already been won by Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) . Valverde had won two of the one @-@ day classics that took place early in the season ( La Flèche Wallonne and Liège – Bastogne – Liège ) and took top ten places in both the Tour de France and the Vuelta a España . Team Katusha were leading the team rankings ahead of Movistar and Team Sky , while Spain were leading the country rankings ahead of Colombia and Great Britain . 
 Il Lombardia was also the last of a series of Italian classics . The most important of these came in two groups of three . The first three races formed the Trittico Lombardo : these were the Coppa Ugo Agostoni , the Coppa <unk> and the Tre Valli <unk> . Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) came second to Davide Rebellin ( CCC – Sprandi – Polkowice ) in the Coppa Ugo Agostoni , then won the remaining two races . The second group was the Trittico di <unk> : these were the Milano – Torino , the Gran Piemonte and Il Lombardia itself , which was the only one of the races to be part of the World Tour . Diego Rosa , Nibali 's teammate , won the Milano – Torino . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The seventeen UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited and obliged to attend the race . The race organisers , RCS Sport , also invited eight UCI Professional Continental teams to take part as wildcard entries . These included the five wildcard teams from the Giro d 'Italia , four of which were Italian @-@ based . UnitedHealthcare and Colombia received entries after being rejected for the Giro , with Bora – Argon 18 receiving the final place . Each team was expected to enter eight riders . Two riders failed to start the race , so the peloton initially comprised 198 riders . 99 riders finished the race . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Route = = 
 The route for the 2015 Il Lombardia was announced on 11 September 2015 , a little over three weeks before the race took place , with numerous changes from the previous year 's route . The race took place in Lombardy in northern Italy on 4 October over a course that was 245 kilometres ( 152 mi ) in length , with most of the difficult hills coming in the second half . 
 The route began in Bergamo , where the 2014 race had finished , on the Viale Papa Giovanni XXIII . There was a neutral zone that took the riders south and out of the city , before the racing started on the Via San Bernardino . After first heading south , the route turned to the east and then to the north . After 43 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 27 @.@ 1 mi ) the riders reached <unk> , where they joined the main valley road heading north @-@ east . The roads up to this point were almost entirely flat . 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) after joining the valley road , however , the route turned to the west to cross the first climb of the day , the Colle Gallo ( 7 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) at an average gradient of 6 % ) . After the descent from the climb , the route continued west and returned to the outskirts of Bergamo . By this point the riders had completed 79 kilometres ( 49 mi ) of racing . 
 The route left Bergamo again , this time to the north @-@ west , and went past <unk> . After this the course turned west to come to the second climb of the day , the Colle <unk> . This was a moderate climb ( approximately 3 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 4 mi ) at 4 % ) and the descent was followed by more flat roads that took the riders north towards <unk> , where they came to the shore of Lake Como for the first time . Here the course turned gradually back to the south , to pass along the eastern coast of the Lago di <unk> and around its southern tip . This was approximately the half @-@ way point in the race . The roads travelled north again , through <unk> and to Bellagio , again riding along the coast of Lake Como . By this point the riders had covered 172 kilometres ( 107 mi ) . The remaining 73 kilometres ( 45 mi ) were by far the hilliest and most difficult of the race . 
 The first climb was the Madonna del Ghisallo . This is an 8 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) climb , with an average gradient of 6 @.@ 2 % . The middle 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of the climb are flat , however , so the remaining 5 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) had an average gradient of over 9 % and sections as steep as 14 % . Immediately after the descent , the riders faced the Colma di Sormano . The first 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) of the climb had an average gradient of 6 @.@ 6 % . After this came the Muro di Sormano ( the " wall of Sormano " ) , which was a 1 @.@ 9 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) section of road with an average gradient of 15 @.@ 8 % and sections of almost 30 % . At the top of the climb there were 50 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 31 @.@ 3 mi ) to the finish line . 
 After the descent back to the shores of Lake Como , there were around 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) of flat roads that took the riders south @-@ west into Como itself . The riders only got as far as the eastern outskirts , however , before they turned to the east for the day 's penultimate climb . This was the Civiglio ( 4 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 6 mi ) at 9 @.@ 7 % ) , the summit of which came with 16 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 3 mi ) to the finish . The riders then descended back into Como , which they reached with 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining . The route left the town to the west and climbed the San Fermo della Battaglia ( 2 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) at 7 @.@ 2 % ) . The summit came with 5 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . There was then a descent back into town . The descent ended as the riders went under the flamme rouge with 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) remaining . There was a final corner with 600 metres ( 1 @,@ 970 ft ) to the finish line , which was on the Lungo Lario Trento on the shore of the lake . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 The defending champion in the race was Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) , who won the 2014 edition with a late attack . He had crashed during the Vuelta a España , however , and had been forced to retire from the race due to injury . After recovering from the injury , he had raced just once since the crash : he finished in 14th place in Milano – Torino . His form before the race was therefore unclear , especially as Il Lombardia is both longer and more difficult than Milano – Torino . Il Lombardia was the final race of Martin 's season and also his final race for the Cannondale @-@ Garmin team . 
 With Martin 's form uncertain , the favourite for the race was Alejandro Valverde . As well as performing strongly in the early @-@ season hilly classics in the 2015 season , he had been close to success in Il Lombardia in the past : he finished second in both 2013 and 2014 . Max Sciandri , a directeur sportif for the BMC Racing Team , said that the increased difficulty of the 2015 edition suited Valverde : " now it suits the climbers and good descenders rather the Classics riders ... [ Valverde ] can climb , can descend and is even fast in a sprint finish . " Cycling Weekly suggested that Valverde 's ability to recover from the Vuelta in time for Il Lombardia would work in his favour . Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) would also have been a strong favourite for the race : he won the 2012 and 2013 editions and had come second in the Vuelta . However , he injured his knee when he hit a sign post while training and was forced to withdraw from the race . 
 Vincenzo Nibali was also cited as a potential winner of the race , following a difficult season . He had struggled during the Tour de France and was subsequently thrown out of the Vuelta for holding on to a team car . He had therefore made Il Lombardia a significant target . Nibali had performed strongly in the other late @-@ season Italian classics , while his team had shown its strength in supporting Diego Rosa to victory in Milano – Torino . Fabio Aru , who had won the Vuelta , was not present : he was riding the Tour of Almaty instead . 
 With Rodríguez absent , two other former champions started the race : these were Philippe Gilbert ( BMC ) , the winner in 2009 and 2010 , and Damiano Cunego ( Nippo – Vini Fantini ) , who won in 2007 and 2008 . Gilbert in particular was considered a potential winner of the race . Other favourites for the race victory included Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ ) , Rui Costa and Diego Ulissi ( Lampre @-@ Merida ) , Simon Gerrans ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) , Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Robert Gesink ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Warren Barguil ( Giant – Alpecin ) , Domenico Pozzovivo and Romain Bardet ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Tim Wellens ( Lotto – Soudal ) . 
 = = Race report = = 
 The race began in Bergamo with grey skies and rain falling . The race began with a succession of attacks ; eventually an eleven @-@ rider group escaped to form the day 's principal breakaway . These were Stefan Schumacher ( CCC – Sprandi – Polkowice ) , Enrico Barbin ( Bardiani – CSF ) , Jan Polanc ( Lampre @-@ Merida ) , Matteo <unk> ( Southeast Pro Cycling ) , Dennis van Winden ( LottoNL @-@ Jumbo ) , Simon Geschke ( Giant @-@ Alpecin ) , <unk> De Negri ( Nippo @-@ Vini Fantini ) , Marco Canola ( UnitedHealthcare ) , Cesare Benedetti ( Bora @-@ Argon 18 ) , Jérôme Coppel ( IAM Cycling ) and Oscar Gatto ( Androni Giocattoli ) . The break had a lead that extended to over eight minutes after the Colle <unk> , while the peloton was controlled principally by Astana , with some assistance from Movistar and Team Sky . By the foot of the Madonna del Ghisallo , the lead had been cut to just two and a half minutes . 
 The Madonna del Ghisallo was the location for several attacks . In the breakaway , Benedetti , Canola , van Winden and Barbin broke away from the other riders . Michał Kwiatkowski was the first to attack from the peloton : he was then joined by Matteo Trentin , Carlos Verona , Łukasz <unk> ( all Etixx @-@ Quick Step ) , Tom @-@ Jelte Slagter ( Cannondale @-@ Garmin ) , Jon Izagirre ( Movistar ) , Robert Gesink , Timo Roosen ( Lotto NL @-@ Jumbo ) , Giacomo Nizzolo ( Trek Factory Racing ) and Tim Wellens . After this climb came the Muro di Sormano . Benedetti and Canola led at the beginning of the climb , but they were soon passed by Kwiatkowski and Wellens . Wellens had to struggle to keep up with Kwiatkowski . Meanwhile , Astana rode hard in the main peloton , reducing it to around 20 riders . Philippe Gilbert and Dan Martin were among the riders unable to stay with the group and , despite Gilbert 's efforts , they were unable to regain contact . 
 On the descent from the Sormano , Kwiatkowski and Wellens led , while Diego Rosa led the peloton on behalf of Nibali . The leading pair 's advantage was reduced on the descent and then further on the flat section leading towards Como . As the climb of the Civiglio started with approximately 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) remaining , Kwiatkowski attacked alone ; he was caught , however , by the peloton just 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 mi ) later . Astana continued to lead the peloton ; their pace reduced the front group to just seven riders . Rosa was among the riders to be dropped , but he worked with Sergio Henao ( Sky ) to return to the group . He was then one of several riders to attack towards the top of the Civiglio , along with Mikel Nieve ( Sky ) , Nibali and Pinot . None of the attacks were successful , as Daniel Moreno ( Katusha ) brought the other riders back to the leaders , and the group came to the top of the climb together . 
 Nibali attacked again just after the summit and rode alone down the descent . Despite almost colliding with a race motorbike at one point , he used his strong descending skills to gain an advantage over the rest of the group . He used the whole width of the road and coming very close to the crash barriers at various moments . Rosa , meanwhile , came to the head of the group in an attempt to slow the chase down . Nibali 's lead at the foot of the descent was around 40 seconds . 
 As the final climb began with 7 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining , Nibali was still over 40 seconds ahead of the group behind . Pinot attacked but was soon caught and passed by Moreno , who set off alone in pursuit of Nibali . Moreno made up some time during the ascent , but was unable to catch him . On the descent towards the finish line in Como , Nibali 's superior skill at descending allowed him to stay ahead of Moreno and he reached the finish line alone to take the victory . Moreno finished 21 seconds later , with Pinot a further 11 seconds behind . Valverde won the sprint for fourth ahead of Rosa and Nieve . 
 = = Result = = 
 = = Post @-@ race analysis = = 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Nibali said after the race that his victory in Il Lombardia made his expulsion from the Vuelta a " good thing " as it helped him find some anger . He went on to say that his success had got his season back on track , particularly as he was the first Italian to win one of the Monuments in a long time . The last Italian to win any of the cycling Monuments was Damiano Cunego in the 2008 Giro di Lombardia . Nibali described the victory as being as good as a win in Liège – Bastogne – Liège ; he said also that , despite the risks he took on the descent from the Civiglio , Peter Sagan was " crazier " than him when descending . 
 Pinot described himself as " proud " at the end of the race , as Il Lombardia had been a major goal for him . He described Nibali as " the strongest , the smartest and the sneakiest " rider in the race . It was the first time Pinot had finished in the top ten of a Monument . Dan Martin , who had been unable to follow the leading riders on the Muro di Sormano , finished the race in order to repay his team 's faith in him following his injury earlier in the season . He finished 52nd , nearly ten minutes behind Nibali , and said that he had not been strong enough to follow the attacks on the climb . 
 = = = UCI World Tour rankings = = = 
 Despite the points won by Moreno 's second @-@ place finish , Katusha were not able to win enough points to win the UCI World Tour rankings . The 60 points that Valverde won were enough to secure the overall victory in the team 's competition , as well as increasing his own margin of victory in the individual classification . Pinot 's third @-@ place finish earned him 70 points and moved him up to tenth place in the World Tour rankings , while the success of the Italian riders moved Italy ahead of both Colombia and Great Britain to finish second behind Spain in the national rankings . 
 = Promos ( The Office ) = 
 " Promos " is the eighteenth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 193rd overall . The episode was written by Tim McAuliffe and directed by Jennifer Celotta . It originally aired on NBC on April 4 , 2013 . The episode guest stars sports star Ryan Howard , Chris Diamantopoulos , Nora Kirkpatrick , and Allan <unk> . Former lead actor Steve Carell also appears through archival footage . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , everyone in the office is excited when international promos for the documentary surface , but are soon horrified to discover how much candid filming has taken place . While everyone panics about their secrets being revealed , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) reflects upon how much she and Jim ( John Krasinski ) have changed over the past nine years . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) makes Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) jealous when he starts dating a Brussels sprout farmer . Meanwhile , at Athlead 's office in Philadelphia , Jim and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) have a big meeting with baseball player Ryan Howard , who pitches a bizarre sci @-@ fi sports movie about himself . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics ; many felt that while the episode had an interesting theme and that much of the drama was successful , the humor was too broad or forced . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 44 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 8 / 5 percent rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked fourth in its timeslot , and it was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night , though it was lowest rated episode of The Office at the time of airing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The office is excited to see promos for the upcoming documentary " The Office : An American Workplace " , which consists of the footage of them that has been compiled over the past nine years . However , many of the workers are dismayed to learn just how much of their activities have been recorded ; for instance , Dwight and Angela 's affair that occurred a year ago was captured . Several excuse themselves and go to the warehouse to talk , turning off their microphones in an unsuccessful effort to keep the discussion private . Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) suggests that Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) talk to dismissed crew member Brian ( Chris Diamantopoulos ) to learn more . At Brian 's house , Pam tells him that upon seeing the old footage she thinks Jim 's feelings for her have largely faded , and Brian agrees . When she asks about what the crew filmed , he tells her that every important moment was captured even when not wearing their microphones . Realizing the extent to which their privacy has been violated , Pam storms out of Brian 's house . On re @-@ watching the promo , Pam decides she is glad that the history of her relationship with Jim has been captured . 
 Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) and Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) call Angela 's husband Senator Robert Lipton ( Jack Coleman ) to inform him that the documentary will probably out him and reveal that Angela slept with Dwight . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) becomes obsessed with online comments regarding his brief appearance in the promo , posting lengthy replies and even uploading his own video in response to negative reactions . The documentary crew discovers that Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) has left at least some of the negative comments , taking pleasure in Andy 's annoyance . 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) starts dating a Brussels sprout farmer , Esther Bruegger , while negotiating the purchase of a tractor with her father . Dwight does poorly in the negotiations , yielding to all of Mr. Bruegger 's terms . During the haggling , Esther 's sisters flirt with Clark Green and try to coax him into buying farming equipment . Clark stops Dwight from signing the papers and takes him aside to tell him that he thinks Esther and her sisters are too physically attractive to be interested in men like them , and that Esther is probably just dating him so that her father can take advantage of him on the tractor deal . Dwight sees the logic in Clark 's suspicion . However , Esther appears and tells Dwight that he shouldn 't sign the contract and negotiate for a better deal . Dwight realizes that Esther does care for him after all , much to Angela 's dismay . 
 At the Athlead offices , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) have a meeting with Major League Baseball player Ryan Howard ( himself ) . The meeting ends up with Darryl and Jim reading Ryan 's self @-@ written screenplay of a baseball player turned superhero . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Promos " was written by consulting producer Tim McAuliffe , his first writing credit for the series . It was directed by former series writer , director , and co @-@ showrunner Jennifer Celotta , her third such credit for the series . The episode features Philadelphia Phillies star Ryan Howard playing himself . This marks the second time a major sports star has played themselves for the season , as former Philadelphia 76ers star Julius Erving portrayed himself in the episode " Lice " . Robinson later said that Ryan " killed it " and that " He ’ s pretty damn funny in real life , which doesn ’ t always translate to TV " . He also joked that Howard is " definitely a better actor than John Krasinski . Without a doubt . " The titular promos are composed of stock footage from The Office , primarily from early seasons of the series . They feature the departed characters Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the cold open , Phyllis is seen listening to an audiobook of the erotic romance novel Fifty Shades of Grey on her iPod , which makes everyone uncomfortable due to her arousal . Ryan Howard makes reference to the restaurant Subway 's slogan , " Eat Fresh " , a reference to the fact that he is a spokesman for the franchise . During the table read of Howard 's screenplay , he mentions that it is of utmost importance for them to secure the rights to the name Darth Vader from the popular space movie series Star Wars . Oscar notes that Angela 's husband — when he was dressed as former US president Ronald Reagan for Halloween — kissed him like former president John F. Kennedy . The title of the in @-@ series documentary , The Office : An American Workplace , is the name given to the series itself when it was broadcast in the UK to differentiate it from the British version of the show . In the context of the series and episode , it is revealed that the documentary is scheduled to air on WVIA @-@ TV , the actual Scranton PBS affiliate . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Promos " originally aired on April 4 , 2013 on NBC . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 44 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 percent share . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " The Farm " . The Office ranked fourth in its timeslot , being beaten by an entry of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 2 @.@ 8 / 8 percent rating , an episode of the CBS police procedural Person of Interest which received a 2 @.@ 7 / 8 percent rating , and an installment of the Fox comedy series New Girl which earned a 2 @.@ 0 / 6 rating . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He noted that it " represents a tipping point for The Office " because it eliminates the fact that — while the characters have known they were on camera — many of the people that the documentary is following have not realized the extent to which the camera people have been following and recording them . " Adams said that strong plots such as Pam 's realization about her relationship were rushed and that other plots , like Dwight 's , were made to " [ run ] out the clock " . M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " B – " . 
 Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the episode a 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 , denoting a " good " episode . She argued the episode had a " cohesive , united feel " , even though Jim and Darryl were separated from the main action , that " past , present , and ( possible ) future combined together nicely " , and that " the emotion wasn 't overplayed " . However , she said that this was not the " funniest episode of The Office that we 've ever seen " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , and criticized the reintroduction of Brian , saying it felt " forced " and that it ruined " something so innately interesting " . 
 Nick Campbell of TV.com wrote that the quality of the episode hinged on whether or not the viewer could accept the fact that the characters were unaware of the extent of the footage that the camera crew caught . He wrote that " If you can ride with the Scranton branch not understanding what ' being filmed all the time ' means , this might have been a pretty funny episode . If you can 't ... then the premise of this episode is pretty awful . " He concluded that while " Promos " had " its moments " , it was not the most solid of the series ' episodes . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix felt that " there was good idea hiding inside of ' The Promo ' [ sic ] " , but that much of the episode was undermined by the broad nature of the humor . 
 = Abd al @-@ Rahim al @-@ Hajj Muhammad = 
 Abd al @-@ Rahim al @-@ Hajj Muhammad ( Arabic : عبد <unk> <unk> محمد ; 1892 – 23 March 1939 ) , also known by his kunya Abu Kamal , was a prominent Palestinian Arab commander of rebel forces during the 1936 – 39 Arab revolt against British Mandate rule and increased Jewish settlement in Palestine . Most of his activities were based in the areas of Tulkarm , Nablus and Jenin ( modern @-@ day northern West Bank ) . In September 1938 , he became the official General Commander of the Revolt , although he shared the post in rotation with Arif Abd al @-@ Raziq . In February 1939 , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was given sole title to the post by the revolt 's political leadership . He was later killed in a firefight with British forces in March . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was born in the village of Dhinnaba ( today a part of Tulkarm city ) in 1892 . He belonged to the landowning clan of Samara , itself a part of the larger tribal confederation of al @-@ Barqawi , which had a long history of activity in the area of Tulkarm . During the invasion of Syria by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1798 – 99 , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's great @-@ grandfather fought in the Ottoman defense of the country , but was later sentenced to death . Another of his great @-@ grandfathers participated in the 1834 peasants ' revolt against Ibrahim Pasha 's rule in Palestine . 
 Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was initially educated in Dhinnaba 's <unk> , a traditional elementary school . In 1899 – 1900 he was enrolled in a primary school in Tulkarm . Later , he would work the fields of his lands alongside his father and occasionally traveled with him from place to place , selling their agricultural products . During World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) he was conscripted into the Ottoman army ( a requirement for male Ottoman citizens ) , posted outside of Palestine in Tripoli and Beirut . He returned following the Ottomans ' defeat by British forces and their Hashemite Arab allies . His father had died sometime during the war . In 1920 Britain , which had already been in control of the area , established a mandate over Palestine under the auspices of the League of Nations . 
 = = Career during British rule = = 
 Upon his return to Palestine in 1918 , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad supervised his family 's land possessions and entered the trade business . He became one of the prominent local grain traders in Palestine during the early years of the Mandate . Coinciding with this period , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad became an ardent opponent of Zionism and British support for that movement . The 1920 Nebi Musa riots , unrest in 1923 and the 1929 Palestine riots all extended into Tulkarm and al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was angered at the coercive manner in which the British authorities quelled the Palestinian Arab participants . His business eventually went bankrupt after the Mandate adopted new economic policies that saw the import of cheaper , foreign wheat at the expense of local produce . His disaffection of British economic policies partly motivated his future participation in the Palestinian Arab revolt in 1936 . 
 The local connections al @-@ Hajj Muhammad established as a grain merchant would become beneficial in his later recruitment efforts . The web of the al @-@ Barqawi 's tribal loyalties proved resourceful , providing him with fighting men and provisions . During the 1930s , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad set up base in the vicinity of Bal 'a , near Tulkarm , and began recruiting and training fighters from the area , including former Ottoman soldiers who brought additional expertise in combat and firearms . Under his command , this group of men would launch minor raids against Jewish settlements and British security personnel . One of the main targets were the orange orchards of newly established Jewish settlements in the Wadi al @-@ <unk> area west of Tulkarm . These places had mostly been built on the lands of absentee landlords and their peasant tenants had been evicted . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad had a criminal record with the Mandatory authorities . According to Israeli historian Yehoshua Porath , his alleged crime was committing fraud in a land transaction with a Jewish buyer . However , author and anthropologist Ted Swedenburg wrote Porath 's claim was never mentioned by other sources that discussed al @-@ Hajj Muhammad . 
 In 1934 , his wife Badia 'a died and al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was left with his four sons . With the killing of Izz al @-@ Din al @-@ Qassam , a Muslim revivalist preacher and anti @-@ colonial militant by British forces , tensions between the Palestinian Arab population , among whom al @-@ Qassam was popular , and the authorities rose significantly . His sympathizers grew in number and the notion of armed struggle against British rule and British sponsorship of Zionism became increasingly popular as an alternative to the diplomatic negotiations between the Palestinian leadership and the British government . The negotiations were ultimately seen by the local population as a futile effort that bore no tangible results . When al @-@ Hajj Muhammad actively took part in the upcoming revolt , he entrusted his children with his sister Halima , a widow . According to his eldest son Kamal , she too was a grain merchant , who later traded in textiles . She also financially supported the children 's education . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad would normally meet with his sons for one or two days in different villages . His children would be escorted to his location by one of al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's rebels . 
 = = Commander in the revolt = = 
 = = = Early stage = = = 
 The revolt started in Nablus with the Palestinian general strike in April 1936 . The strike spread to a number of cities throughout Palestine , including Tulkarm where al @-@ Hajj Muhammad helped organize the campaign . By the summer of that year , several Palestinian Arab rebel bands had sprung up , including the forces of al @-@ Hajj Muhammad . The latter used existing social networks and the complex web of local clan politics to build alliances both with the middle classes of the major towns , particularly the well @-@ educated activists , and the rural clan elders to build a solid base of resistance against the British . In order to avoid detection , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad refrained from commanding a large unit of troops . Instead , he raised small , semi @-@ permanent bands of volunteers called fasa 'il ( sing. <unk> ) as he moved from one area to another . They normally launched nighttime attacks against specific targets . 
 In the earliest stage of the revolt , in the early summer , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's fighters primarily operated in the Wadi al @-@ Sha 'ir area between Nablus and the coastal plain . Most of their actions consisted of attacks against British Army and police patrols between Tulkarm and Nablus . On 21 June al @-@ Hajj Muhammad and his fasa 'il ambushed a British Army force protecting a Jewish convoy passing near the village of Bal 'a . Three British bomber planes were dispatched to aid the ambushed convoy . The ensuing battle lasted about seven hours and ended with the deaths of three rebels and one British soldier . A further 21 rebels and two British soldiers were wounded . The authorities consequently issued an arrest warrant for al @-@ Hajj Muhammad . 
 The rebel bands had worked independently of each other until July , when al @-@ Hajj Muhammad , Arif Abd al @-@ Raziq and Fakhri Abd al @-@ Hadi decided to coordinate the actions of their respective militias . Abd al @-@ Raziq was based in the Bani Sa 'b area around <unk> , while Abd al @-@ Hadi operated in Sha <unk> , around Arraba . All of their areas of operation were concentrated in the north @-@ central highlands . Another meeting between the leaders was held in August to designate official areas of operation and specific targets to attack . The Jerusalem @-@ area militia of Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni was absent from both of these meetings , making it increasingly difficult to form a solid military command among rebels across the country . 
 The arrival of the well @-@ known Arab nationalist volunteer commander Fawzi al @-@ Qawuqji in August , and his assumption of the rebels ' leadership , further damaged the revolt 's coherence , despite his attempts to unify rebel ranks . Although al @-@ Qawuqji was an experienced field commander , relations between him and the Palestinian political and military leadership was one of general mistrust . Local rebels resented the delegation of command positions to non @-@ Palestinians and al @-@ Qawuqji 's references to the area as " Southern Syria " instead of " Palestine . " Nonetheless , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad and al @-@ Qawuqji fought together in a second major confrontation with British forces in Bal 'a in September . The battle went on for six hours and according to Mandatory figures , three British military personnel were killed and four wounded . One of the fatalities was a British pilot whose plane was downed by rebels , who suffered ten dead and six wounded . 
 In October 1936 , rebel operations temporarily ceased after the Arab Higher Committee ( AHC ) , the revolt 's political leadership , accepted calls by the generally pro @-@ British royals of Jordan , Iraq and Saudi Arabia for a cessation of hostilities . In return , the Arab royals would lobby the British Mandatory authorities to address Palestinian Arab concerns about Zionist activity in Palestine . That month , al @-@ Qawuqji left Palestine . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad followed suit and headed for Damascus to evade arrest ; the British had placed a bounty of 500 pounds on him . While in Damascus , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad raised funds and purchased weapons for the revolt . He also began working with Syrian and Lebanese nationalists to smuggle the arms into Palestine . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad later left Damascus for the Lebanese mountain village of <unk> east of Beirut . From there , he maintained regular communications with his forces . 
 = = = Renewal of rebellion = = = 
 While fighting was on hold , the British government announced it would not restrict Jewish immigration to Palestine and instead proposed a partition of Palestine into separate Jewish and Arab states as put forward by the Peel Commission ( November 1936 – January 1937 . ) These moves antagonized the Palestinian leadership whose principal concern was increased Jewish settlement . Thus , they boycotted the commission from the time it began its work . The AHC under the chairmanship of Amin al @-@ Husayni , the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem , requested rebel leaders return and resume military activities in Palestine to pressure the authorities . To that end , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad returned to Palestine in April to command his fasa 'il in the Tulkarm @-@ Jenin @-@ Nablus region , which was referred to by the authorities as the " Triangle of Terror " due to the concentration of rebel activity in the area . 
 With the renewal of the revolt , efforts were made to unify rebel ranks and establish a hierarchical command structure . In late 1937 , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad summoned the village elders in Tulkarm 's vicinity and requested that they each provide him with one armed man . He was generally successful and recruited a 50 @-@ man force . The last quarter of the year saw increased attacks against British military targets , buses carrying Jews , the Iraqi Petroleum Company pipeline in Palestine and telecommunication lines . At this stage , the revolt had developed into an organized effort across Palestine , with each area 's fasa 'il having a hierarchy of some sort . In the case of al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's forces , there were four brigades , each led by a commander and designated funds . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad appointed Ahmad Massad as his deputy to whom the other commanders were subordinate . This military order contrasted with the early phase of the revolt where al @-@ Hajj Muhammad had been the sole field commander . 
 During a confrontation between rebels and British forces at the village of an @-@ <unk> ash @-@ Sharqiya in early December 1937 , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was wounded , but managed to evade capture when the mukhtar ( village headman ) escorted him to safety in a nearby cave . Four of al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's men died in the battle . After the British withdrew from the area , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was treated by local doctors until January 1938 when he received more advanced care in Damascus . He returned to Palestine later that month . By early 1938 , the rebels consolidated control over much of the countryside and the rural roads . These areas became increasingly dangerous for British forces , who were mostly concentrated in the main towns . 
 = = = General commander = = = 
 Local rebel commanders were generally suspicious of outside Arab military leaders , such as al @-@ Qawuqji , and of the AHC , particularly after many members of the latter joined the Damascus @-@ based Central Committee of Jihad following the AHC 's dissolution by the authorities in October 1937 . The Central Committee had been founded in late 1937 by Izzat Darwaza , and officially served as the revolt 's political leadership , fundraising body and arms supplier . On the ground in Palestine , competition for the role of the rebels ' general command became increasingly tense between al @-@ Hajj Muhammad and Abd al @-@ Raziq . They engaged in a serious rivalry , which coincided with acrimonious relations between their families over influence in the Tulkarm area 's social and political spheres . 
 To smooth over differences , the revolt 's leaders held a summit in Deir Ghassaneh in September 1938 and established the Bureau of the Arab Revolt in Palestine as the armed body of the Central Committee , with al @-@ Hajj Muhammad and Abd al @-@ Raziq rotating as general <unk> . The other two commanders on the Bureau were Abu Ibrahim al @-@ Kabir of the Upper Galilee and Yusuf Abu <unk> of the Haifa @-@ Wadi Ara region . The British Army , backed by bomber planes , assaulted Deir Ghassaneh after gaining knowledge of the meeting , and sought to arrest or kill the commanders . A battle ensued in which a prominent commander , Muhammad al @-@ Salih ( known as Abu Khalid ) was slain . Despite the Bureau 's formation , the rivalry between al @-@ Hajj Muhammad and Abd al @-@ Raziq continued and undermined its purpose . 
 The Central Committee settled the leadership dispute when it conferred the title of general <unk> solely to al @-@ Hajj Muhammad in February 1939 . He was already in Damascus at the time , having moved back in October 1938 . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was also given an assurance of support after tensions between him and the Central Committee resulted in the latter 's withholding of supplies and funding to al @-@ Hajj Muhammad at one point in 1938 . The rebellion was also entering a different stage with the establishment of British @-@ sponsored and Zionist @-@ supported anti @-@ rebel forces known as " peace bands " . They were commanded by al @-@ Husayni 's political rivals , chief among them the Nashashibi clan , and launched counterattacks against rebel forces and a campaign to harass rebel sympathizers and pressure local leaders to end the revolt . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On 23 March 1939 , on his return to Palestine after being officially confirmed as the rebellion 's general commander , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was killed by the British Army in the village of Sanur , located between Jenin and Nablus . He had entered the village with two of his subordinate commanders and a few of his fighters . A peace band set up by Farid Irsheid had been surveilling him . Irsheid had sought revenge for the killing of his brothers Ahmad and Muhammad in May 1938 , which were generally attributed to al @-@ Hajj Muhammad . The information Irsheid 's band of informants collected on al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's movements were then passed to British intelligence . A large force from the British Army subsequently arrived at and sealed off Sanur . Irsheid 's band served alongside the army unit . The village 's residents had reportedly pleaded with al @-@ Hajj Muhammad to escape from Sanur undercover , but he and his fighters entered the adjacent Marj Sanur plain and clashed with British troops . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was killed in the firefight along with one of his deputy commanders . According to some residents who witnessed the clash , the British officer who headed the operation , Jeffrey Motrin , removed his hat and covered al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's face with a handkerchief in a sign of respect . Motrin later wrote " Abdul Rahim had a special respect among his people , and among us . " 
 Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was buried in Sanur , but two weeks later members of his fasa 'il exhumed his body and transported it to Dhinnaba . There , he was buried in a ceremonial manner " befitting his stature in the revolt , " according to author Sonia Nimr . As news of his death proliferated , a general strike was held throughout Palestine for a number of days in honor of al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's efforts in the anti @-@ colonial and anti @-@ Zionist struggle . His death made the headlines of various newspapers in Palestine and other parts of the Arab world . The Municipality of Tulkarm commemorates al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's death annually in March and the 70th anniversary of his death was also honored by the city 's <unk> Institute in March 2009 . A boys ' school in Dhinnaba is named after al @-@ Hajj Muhammad as is a major street in Amman , Jordan . 
 According to historian Hillel Frisch , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's death was a " reflection of how much the rebels were then bereft of an area that could serve as a sanctuary or from which they could renew operations . " The revolt had largely dissipated by the time al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was killed , his demise being a significant blow . He was succeeded by Ahmad al @-@ Hasan , but the latter was unable to maintain the momentum of the revolt , which ended in late 1939 . 
 = = Ideology and relationship with the Central Committee = = 
 According to Swedenburg , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad was the " most respected commander , was renowned for his nationalist convictions , for his opposition to political assassination , and for his tirelessness as a fighter " . He operated more or less independently from the political leadership of the rebellion , including those based in Palestine , such as al @-@ Husayni , and the Damascus @-@ based Central Committee . Despite his tacit alliance with al @-@ Husayni , al @-@ Hajj Muhammad had refused to assassinate local leaders who rivaled the al @-@ Husayni family for political power , once remarking " I don 't work for <unk> ( " <unk> @-@ ism " ) , but for <unk> ( patriotism ) . " 
 Political assassinations , attempted or successful , commonly occurred throughout the revolt . Al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's refusal to participate did not seriously damage his relations with al @-@ Husayni or the Central Committee , an organization which he depended on for war material . He frequented Damascus to obtain weapons and supplies as well as to discuss the situation in Palestine . However , an intelligence document from the British Mandatory authorities revealed that al @-@ Hajj Muhammad left Palestine for Syria in October 1938 after being disaffected with the Central Committee 's activities . The report states that he refused to send funds to the Committee , remarking " The shoe of the most insignificant mujahid ( fighter ) is nobler than all the members of the Society , who have indulged in pleasure , while their brethren suffer in the mountains . " At one point , tensions emanating from al @-@ Hajj Muhammad 's refusal to carry out the killings of several men provided to him in a hit list by Da 'ud al @-@ Husayni on behalf of the Committee resulted in the cutting off of financial and material support for a certain period of time in 1938 . This forced al @-@ Hajj Muhammad to go to Jerusalem 's chamber of commerce and the Ramallah municipality for funds . Another reason for his departure was the increased presence of informants within rebel ranks , making it hard for him to continue military activities . 
 His personal assistant Abu Shahir depicted al @-@ Hajj Muhammad as a " genuine nationalist , " in contrast to the self @-@ proclaimed nationalist leaders whom Abu Shahir accused of adhering to " narrow factional interests " . He claimed that al @-@ Hajj Muhammad saw Palestinian unity as being all @-@ inclusive and incompatible with political assassinations , particularly killings that would fuel divisions within the ranks of the rebellion 's leadership . A possible exception to his anti @-@ assassination policy was his alleged responsibility in the killings of Ahmad and Muhammad Irsheid , landowners who supported Nashashibi @-@ led opposition to al @-@ Husayni 's leadership . Because of the widely @-@ disputed circumstances surrounding the <unk> ' deaths and its general attribution to al @-@ Hajj Muhammad , the killings were rarely mentioned in Palestinian narratives of the revolt . 
 = Louise of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz = 
 Duchess Louise of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz ( Luise Auguste Wilhelmine Amalie ; 10 March 1776 – 19 July 1810 ) was Queen consort of Prussia as the wife of King Frederick William III . The couple 's happy , though short @-@ lived , marriage produced nine children , including the future monarchs Frederick William IV of Prussia and German Emperor Wilhelm I. 
 Her legacy became cemented after her extraordinary 1807 meeting with French Emperor Napoleon I at Tilsit – she met with the emperor to plead unsuccessfully for favorable terms after Prussia 's disastrous losses in the Napoleonic Wars . She was already well loved by her subjects , but her meeting with Napoleon led Louise to become revered as " the soul of national virtue " . Her early death at the age of thirty @-@ four " preserved her youth in the memory of posterity " , and caused Napoleon to reportedly remark the king " has lost his best minister " . The Order of Louise was founded by her grieving husband four years later as a female counterpart to the Iron Cross . In the 1920s conservative German women founded the Queen Louise League , and Louise herself would be used in Nazi propaganda as an example of the ideal German woman . 
 = = Duchess of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz 1776 – 1793 = = 
 Duchess Luise Auguste Wilhelmine Amalie of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz ( Louise in English ) was born on 10 March 1776 in a one story villa , just outside the capital in Hanover . She was the fourth daughter and sixth child of Duke Charles of Mecklenburg and his wife Landgravine Friederike of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt , a granddaughter of Louis VIII , Landgrave of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt . Her maternal grandmother , Landgravine Marie Louise of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt , and her paternal first @-@ cousin Princess Augusta Sophia of the United Kingdom served as sponsors at her baptism ; her second given name came from Princess Augusta Sophie . 
 At the time of her birth , Louise 's father was not yet the ruler of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz ( he would not succeed his brother as Duke until 1794 ) , and consequently she was not born in a court , but rather in a less formal home . Charles was field marshal of the household brigade in Hanover , and soon after Louise 's birth he was made Governor @-@ General of that territory by his brother @-@ in @-@ law George III , king of the United Kingdom and Hanover ( husband of his sister , Queen Charlotte ) . The family subsequently moved to <unk> , the residence of Hanoverian kings , though during the summer they usually lived at Herrenhausen . 
 Louise was particularly close to her sister Frederica , who was two years younger , as well as with their only brother George . Louise and her siblings were under the care of their governess Fraulein von Wolzogen , a friend of their mother 's . When Louise was only six years old , her mother died in childbirth , leaving a permanent mark on the young duchess ; she would often give away pocket change to other children who experienced similar losses , stating " she is like me , she has no mother " . After Duchess Charles ' death , the family left <unk> for Herrenhausen , sometimes called a " miniature Versailles " . Duke Charles remarried two years later to his first wife 's younger sister Charlotte , producing a son , Charles . Louise and her new stepmother became close until Charlotte 's early death the year after their marriage . The twice widowed and grieving duke went to Darmstadt , where he gave the children into the care of his mother @-@ in @-@ law and Louise 's godmother , the widowed Landgravine Marie Louise . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Their grandmother preferred to raise them simply , and they made their own clothes . A new governess from Switzerland , Madame <unk> , was appointed , giving the children lessons in French ; as was common for royal and aristocratic children of the time , Louise became fluent and literate in the language , while neglecting her own native German . She received religious instruction from a clergyman of the Lutheran Church . Complementary to her lessons was an emphasis on charitable acts , and Louise would often accompany her governess when visiting the houses of the poor and needy . Louise was encouraged to give out as much as was in her means , although she often got into trouble with her grandmother for donating too much for charity . From the age of ten until her marriage at 17 , Louise spent most of her time in the presence of her grandmother and governess , both well @-@ educated and refined . When only nine years old , Louise was present when the poet Friedrich Schiller read from the first act of " Don Carlos " for the entertainment of the assembled court , thus sparking her love for German as a literary language , especially works of Schiller . Louise loved history and poetry , and not only enjoyed reading Schiller , but also came to like the works of Goethe , Paul , Herder and Shakespeare , as well as ancient Greek tragedies . 
 In 1793 , Marie Louise took the two youngest duchesses with her to Frankfurt , where she paid her respects to her nephew King Frederick William II . Louise had grown up into a beautiful young woman , possessing " an exquisite complexion " and " large blue eyes , " and was naturally graceful . Louise 's uncle , the Duke of Mecklenburg , hoped to strengthen ties between his house and Prussia . Consequently , on one evening carefully planned by the Duke , seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Louise met the king 's son and heir , Crown Prince Frederick William . The crown prince was twenty @-@ three , serious @-@ minded , and religious . She made such a charming impression on Frederick William that he immediately made his choice , desiring to marry her . Frederica caught the eye of his younger brother Prince Louis Charles , and the two families began planning a double betrothal , celebrating a month later , on 24 April 1793 in Darmstadt . Frederick and Louise were subsequently married on 24 December that same year , with Louis and Frederica marrying two days later . 
 = = Crown Princess of Prussia 1793 – 1797 = = 
 In the events leading up to her marriage , Louise 's arrival in Berlin , the Prussian capital , caused quite a sensation , and she was greeted with a grand reception by the city 's joyful citizens . When she broke protocol and stooped to pick up and kiss a child , Prussian writer Friedrich de la Motte <unk> remarked that " The arrival of the angelic Princess spreads over these days a noble splendor . All hearts go out to meet her , and her grace and goodness leaves no one <unk> . " Another wrote " The more perfectly one becomes acquainted with the Princess the more one is captivated by the inner nobility , and the angelic goodness of her heart . " 
 Louise 's father @-@ in @-@ law King Frederick William II gave the couple Charlottenburg Palace , but the crown prince and his new wife preferred to live at Paretz Palace , just outside Potsdam , where Louise kept herself busy with household affairs . Paretz was far from the bustle of court , as the couple were most content in the " rural retirement " of a country life . The marriage was happy , and Louise was well @-@ beloved by the king , who called her " the princess of princesses " and gave her a palace in Oranienburg . The crown princess saw it as her duty to support her husband in all his pursuits , and the couple enjoyed singing together and reading from Shakespeare and Goethe . Louise soon became pregnant , disappointingly giving birth to a stillborn girl on 1 October 1794 . Nine healthy children would follow in quick succession , though two died in childhood : Crown Prince Frederick William ( 1795 ) , Prince William ( 1797 ) , Princess Charlotte ( 1798 ) , Princess Frederica ( 1799 ) , Prince Charles ( 1801 ) , Princess Alexandrine ( 1803 ) , Prince Ferdinand ( 1804 ) , Princess Louise ( 1808 ) , and Prince Albert ( 1809 ) . The couple also used the Crown Prince 's Palace in the capital . 
 Louise 's charitable giving continued throughout her life , and on one occasion , while attending a harvest festival , she purchased presents and distributed them to local children . On her first birthday after her marriage in Berlin , when King Frederick William II asked his daughter @-@ in @-@ law what she desired for a present , Louise replied she wanted a handful of money to let the city 's people share her joy ; he smilingly gave her a large quantity for the task . 
 = = Queen consort of Prussia 1797 – 1810 = = 
 On 16 November 1797 , her husband succeeded to the throne of Prussia as King Frederick William III after the death of his father . Louise wrote to her grandmother , " I am now queen , and what rejoices me most is the hope that now I need no longer count my benefactions so carefully . " The couple had to abandon their solitude at Paretz and begin living under the restraints of a royal court . They began a tour of the country 's eastern provinces for two purposes : the king wanted to acquaint himself with their new subjects , and despite the <unk> of a consort accompanying the king further than the capital , Frederick William wanted to introduce the queen as well to their people . Louise was received everywhere with festivities . For the first time in Prussian history , the queen emerged as a celebrated public personality in her own right , as she occupied a much more prominent role than her predecessors . Louise 's presence on her husband 's eastern journey was a break from the traditional role of the consort – importantly however the queen 's power and enduring legacy did not stem from holding a separate court and policy than her husband 's , but rather the opposite : she subordinated her formidable intelligence and skill for her husband 's sole advantage . She also became a fashion icon , for instance starting a trend by wearing a neckerchief to keep from getting ill . 
 After her husband 's accession , Louise developed many ties to senior ministers and became a powerful figure within the government as she began to command universal respect and affection . The queen went out of her way to stay informed about political developments at court , and from the very beginning of his reign the new king consulted Louise on matters of state . Frederick William was hesitant and cautious , and hated war , stating in 1798 , " I abhor war and ... know of nothing greater on earth than the preservation of peace and tranquility as the only system suited to the happiness of human kind " . In keeping with the later foreign policy of his father 's , Frederick William favored neutrality during the early years of the conflict with the revolutionary French First Republic , which evolved into the Napoleonic Wars ( 1803 – 15 ) ; he refused the various pressures to pick a side in the War of the Second Coalition . Louise supported this view , warning that if Prussia were to side with the coalition powers of Austria , Great Britain , and Russia , it would lead to dependence on the latter power for military support . She foresaw that because Prussia was by far the weakest of the great powers , and it would not have been able to ensure it benefited from the results of such an alliance . French aggression caused the king to eventually consider entering the wars , but his indecision prevented him from choosing a side , either France or the coalition powers . He consulted the many differing opinions of Queen Louise and his ministers , and was eventually compelled into an alliance with Napoleon , who was recently victorious from the Battle of Austerlitz ( 1805 ) . 
 Baron vom Stein , a member of the bureaucracy , having abhorred the country 's former neutrality , sought to reform the organization of the government from favor @-@ based cronyism into a responsible ministerial government . He prepared a document for the king detailing in strong language what administrative reforms were needed , such as establishing clearer lines of responsibility among ministers ; this work however never reached Frederick William , as Stein passed it first to General Ernst von <unk> , who in turn passed it onto the queen in the spring of 1806 . Though Louise agreed with its contents , she thought it " too violent and passionate " for the king , and consequently helped suppress it . 
 = = = War with France = = = 
 Among the king 's advisers , members of his family , such as the queen ( an open advocate of war ) and Prince Louis Ferdinand , led the militaristic faction in favor of war against France ; those against neutrality but in favor of reform were led by Baron vom Stein and Karl August von Hardenberg . Knowing the temperament of the king , Hardenberg appealed directly to the queen for desired reform – wisely as it turned out , as Frederick William viewed the demands to remove his trusted advisers in the Kabinett as a " mutiny " similar to the Fronde . 
 Though Prussia had not fought in a war since 1795 , its military leaders confidently expected that they could win against Napoleon 's troops . After a small incident concerning an anti @-@ French pamphlet occurred , King Frederick William was finally pressured by his wife and family to break off his uneasy peace and enter the war against the French emperor . Prussian troops began mobilizing , culminating in the October 1806 Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstedt , which was a disaster for Prussia , as the ability of its armed forces to continue the war were effectively wiped out . The king and queen had accompanied their troops into battle at Jena ( with Louise apparently dressed " like an Amazon " ) , but had to flee from French troops . 
 Napoleon himself occupied Berlin , causing the king , queen and the rest of the royal family to flee , despite Louise 's illness , in the dead of winter to Memel in the easternmost part of the kingdom . On the journey there , there was no food or clean water , and the king and queen were forced to share the same sleeping arrangements in " one of the wretched barns they call houses " , according to one witness traveling with them . 
 After various events took place , Napoleon demanded , from a highly superior position , peace terms in what was to be called the Peace of Tilsit ( 1807 ) . In the midst of these negotiations , the emperor agreed to keep half of Prussia intact . The men were joined by Queen Louise ; Frederick William had sent for his pregnant wife to beg for a better settlement for Prussia , with Louise advising her husband , " For God 's sake no shameful peace ... [ Prussia ] should at least not go down without honor . " As the king felt that her presence might put Napoleon in a " more relaxed mood " ; Louise reluctantly agreed to meet the emperor at Tilsit , but only to save " her Prussia " . Napoleon had previously attempted to destroy her reputation by questioning Louise 's marital fidelity , but the queen met him anyway , attempting to use her beauty and charm to flatter him into more favorable terms . Formerly Louise had regularly referred to him as " the Monster " , but nevertheless made a request for a private interview with the emperor , whereon she threw herself at his feet ; though he was impressed by her grace and determination , Napoleon refused to make any concessions , writing back to his wife Empress Joséphine that Louise " is really charming and full of coquettishness toward me . But don 't be jealous ... it would cost me too dearly to play the gallant . " Napoleon 's attempts to destroy Louise 's reputation failed however , and they only made her more beloved in Prussia . Queen Louise 's efforts to protect her adopted country from French aggression secured for her the admiration of future generations . 
 = = = Remaining years = = = 
 Harsh restrictions were imposed on Prussia , such as a massive indemnity of one hundred and twenty million francs and the quartering of troops . At the time , one hundred and twenty million francs was equivalent to the entire yearly budget of Prussia . As the perceived symbol of Prussia 's former grandeur and pride , the French occupation of Prussia had a particularly devastating effect upon Louise , as the queen endured personal insults – Napoleon himself callously called her " the only real man in Prussia " . The queen recognized that her adopted country depended on her for moral strength , and as a consequence Louise regained her old sense of optimism , often taking time to prepare their eldest son for his future role as king . In the following few years Louise supported the reforming efforts of government carried out by Stein and Hardenberg , as well as those of Gerhard von Scharnhorst and August Neidhardt von Gneisenau , to reorganize the army . After the disaster at Tilsit , Louise was instrumental in Stein 's reappointment ( the king had previously dismissed him ) , telling Frederick William " [ Stein ] is my last hope . A great heart , an encompassing mind , perhaps he knows remedies that are hidden to us . " 
 By 1808 it was still considered unsafe to return to Berlin , and the royal family consequently spent the summer near Königsberg ; Louise believed that the hard trials of her children 's early lives would be good for them : " If they had been reared in luxury and prosperity they might think that so it must always be . " In the winter of 1808 , Tsar Alexander I invited the king and queen to St. Petersburg , where she was treated to sumptuously decorated rooms ; " Nothing dazzles me anymore " , she exclaimed on her return to Germany . Near the birth of her youngest child Princess Louise in 1809 , Louise wrote to her father , " <unk> ... the calamities which have befallen us have not forced their way into our wedded and home life , rather have strengthened the same , and made it even more precious to us . " Louise was sick for much of that year , but returned with the king to Berlin near the end of it after an absence of three years ; the queen arrived in a carriage accompanied by her two daughters Charlotte and Alexandrine and younger son Charles , and was greeted by her father at Charlottenburg Palace – the residence was ransacked however , as Napoleon and his commanders had stripped its rooms of paintings , statues , manuscripts , and antiquities . Returning to a much different Prussia than she left , a preacher observed that " our dear queen is far from joyful , but her seriousness has a quiet serenity ... her eyes have lost their former sparkle , and one sees that they have wept much , and still weep " . 
 On 19 July 1810 , while visiting her father in Strelitz , the Queen died in her husband 's arms from an unidentified illness . The queen 's subjects attributed the French occupation as the cause of her early death . " Our saint is in heaven " , exclaimed Prussian general Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher . Louise 's untimely death left her husband alone during a period of great difficulty , as the Napoleonic Wars and need for reform continued . Napoleon reportedly remarked the king " has lost his best minister . " 
 Louise was buried in the garden of Charlottenburg Palace , where a mausoleum , containing a fine recumbent statue by Christian Daniel Rauch , was built over her grave . Frederick William did not remarry until 1824 , when he entered into a morganatic marriage with his mistress Auguste von Harrach , explaining " <unk> companionship and sympathy have become necessary to me , therefore I must marry again . " After his death on 7 June 1840 , Frederick William was buried by her side . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Queen Louise was revered by her subjects as the " soul of national virtue " , and some historians have written that Louise was " Prussian nationalism personified . " According to Christopher Clark , Louise was " a female celebrity who in the mind of the public combined virtue , modesty , and sovereign grace with kindness and sex appeal , and whose early death in 1810 at the age of only thirty @-@ four preserved her youth in the memory of posterity . " Her reputation as a loving and loyal supporter of her husband became crucial to her enduring legacy ; the cult that eventually surrounded Louise became associated with the " ideal " feminine attributes : prettiness , sweet nature , maternal kindness , and wifely virtue . 
 On the anniversary of her birth , in 1814 , the widowed King Frederick William instituted the Order of Louise ( <unk> ) as a complementary decoration for the Iron Cross . Its purpose was to be given to those women who had made a significant contribution to the war effort against Napoleon , though it was subsequently awarded to future members of the House of Hohenzollern unrelated to the French emperor , such as her granddaughter @-@ in @-@ law , Empress Victoria of Germany , and her great @-@ granddaughter , Queen Sophia of Greece . In 1880 a statue of Queen Louise was erected in the Tiergarten in Berlin . 
 Louise inspired the establishment of a conservative women 's organization known as Königin @-@ Luise @-@ Bund , often shortened to <unk> ( " Queen Louise League " ) in which her person achieved an almost cult @-@ like status . The group 's main purpose was to promote patriotic feelings among German women , and it emphasized the family and German morality . The Königin @-@ Luise @-@ Bund was active during the time of the Weimar Republic and the first years of the Third Reich . Despite having actively supported the National Socialist movement since its early stages all through their accession to power in 1933 , the Queen Louise League was nonetheless disbanded by the Nazis in 1934 , as they viewed it as a hostile organization . 
 Significantly , Louise and Maria Theresa of Austria were the only two historical women used in Nazi propaganda , as the regime felt Louise was the " personification of womanly qualities , " which the government was trying to integrate into German schools . While the queen 's resistance and defiance of the French kept the " Prussian spirit " alive , her husband was cast as a " pathetically embarrassing " king who would rather have lived in peace than revenge himself on Napoleon . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 The character of Queen Louise was the popular subject of countless films released in German cinema . These included Der Film von der Königin Luise ( 1913 ) , Die elf <unk> <unk> ( 1926 ) , and Vivat – Königin Luise im <unk> ( 2005 ) , Luise – Königin der Herzen ( 2010 documentary ) . She was played by <unk> Christians in the 1927 silent film Queen Louise , by Henny Porten in Louise , Queen of Prussia ( 1931 ) and by Ruth <unk> in the 1957 film Queen Louise . 
 She was also briefly portrayed in an extremely reverential manner in the 1945 propaganda film Kolberg . The German warship sunk in Lake Victoria in the film The African Queen is called the Königin Luise ( the " Queen Louise " ) . 
 Louise became the subject of a series of novels by nineteenth century German historical fiction writer Luise <unk> , which included Louisa of Prussia and her Times and Napoleon and the Queen of Prussia . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 10 March 1776 – 24 December 1793 : Her Serene Highness Duchess Louise of Mecklenburg , Princess of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz 
 24 December 1793 – 16 November 1797 : Her Royal Highness The Crown Princess of Prussia 
 16 November 1797 – 19 July 1810 : Her Majesty The Queen of Prussia 
 = = Issue = = 
 By Frederick William III of Prussia ( 3 August 1770 – 7 June 1840 ) ; married on 24 December 1793 . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Nobelium = 
 Nobelium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol No and atomic number 102 . It is named in honor of Alfred Nobel , the inventor of dynamite and benefactor of science . A radioactive metal , it is the tenth transuranic element and is the penultimate member of the actinide series . Like all elements with atomic number over 100 , nobelium can only be produced in particle accelerators by bombarding lighter elements with charged particles . A total of twelve nobelium isotopes are known to exist ; the most stable is 259No with a half @-@ life of 58 minutes , but the shorter @-@ lived 255No ( half @-@ life 3 @.@ 1 minutes ) is most commonly used in chemistry because it can be produced on a larger scale . 
 Chemistry experiments have confirmed that nobelium behaves as a heavier homolog to ytterbium in the periodic table . The chemical properties of nobelium are not completely known : they are mostly only known in aqueous solution . Before nobelium 's discovery , it was predicted that it would show a stable + 2 oxidation state as well as the + 3 state characteristic of the other actinides : these predictions were later confirmed , as the + 2 state is much more stable than the + 3 state in aqueous solution and it is difficult to keep nobelium in the + 3 state . 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , many claims of the discovery of nobelium were made from laboratories in Sweden , the Soviet Union , and the United States . Although the Swedish scientists soon retracted their claims , the priority of the discovery and therefore the naming of the element was disputed between Soviet and American scientists , and it was not until 1997 that International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) established nobelium as the official name for the element and credited the Soviet team with the discovery . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The discovery of element 102 was a complicated process and was claimed by groups from Sweden , the United States , and the former Soviet Union . The first complete and incontrovertible report of its detection only came in 1966 from the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research at Dubna ( then in the Soviet Union ) . 
 The first announcement of the discovery of element 102 was announced by physicists at the Nobel Institute in Sweden in 1957 . The team reported that they had bombarded a curium target with carbon @-@ 13 ions for twenty @-@ five hours in half @-@ hour intervals . Between bombardments , ion @-@ exchange chemistry was performed on the target . Twelve out of the fifty bombardments contained samples emitting ( 8 @.@ 5 ± 0 @.@ 1 ) MeV alpha particles , which were in drops which eluted earlier than fermium ( atomic number Z 
 = 100 ) and californium ( Z = 
 98 ) . The half @-@ life reported was 10 minutes and was assigned to either <unk> or <unk> , although the possibility that the alpha particles observed were from a presumably short @-@ lived mendelevium ( Z = 101 ) isotope created from the electron capture of element 102 was not excluded . The team proposed the name nobelium ( No ) for the new element , which was immediately approved by IUPAC , a decision which the Dubna group later characterized in 1968 as being hasty . The following year , scientists at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory repeated the experiment but were unable to find any 8 @.@ 5 MeV events which were not background effects . 
 In 1959 , the Swedish team attempted to explain the Berkeley team 's inability to detect element 102 in 1958 , maintaining that they did discover it . However , later work has shown that no nobelium isotope lighter than 259No ( no heavier isotopes could have been produced in the Swedish experiments ) with a half @-@ life over 3 minutes exist , and that the Swedish team 's results are most likely from thorium @-@ 225 , which has a half @-@ life of 8 minutes and quickly undergoes triple alpha decay to polonium @-@ 213 , which has a decay energy of 8 @.@ <unk> MeV . This hypothesis is lent weight by the fact that thorium @-@ 225 can easily be produced in the reaction used and would not be separated out by the chemical methods used . Later work on nobelium also showed that the divalent state is more stable than the trivalent one and hence that the samples emitting the alpha particles could not have contained nobelium , as the divalent nobelium would not have eluted with the other trivalent actinides . Thus , the Swedish team later retracted their claim and associated the activity to background effects . 
 The Berkeley team , consisting of Albert Ghiorso , Glenn T. Seaborg , John R. Walton and Torbjørn <unk> , then claimed the synthesis of element 102 in 1958 . The team used the new heavy @-@ ion linear accelerator ( HILAC ) to bombard a curium target ( 95 % 244Cm and 5 % 246Cm ) with 13C and 12C ions . They were unable to confirm the 8 @.@ 5 MeV activity claimed by the Swedes but were instead able to detect decays from fermium @-@ 250 , supposedly the daughter of 254102 ( produced from the curium @-@ 246 ) , which had an apparent half @-@ life of ~ 3 s . Later 1963 Dubna work confirmed that 254102 could be produced in this reaction , but that its half @-@ life was actually 50 ± 10 s . In 1967 , the Berkeley team attempted to defend their work , stating that the isotope found was indeed 250Fm but the isotope that the half @-@ life measurements actually related to was californium @-@ 244 , granddaughter of <unk> , produced from the more abundant curium @-@ 244 . Energy differences were then attributed to " resolution and drift problems " , although these had not been previously reported and should also have influenced other results . 1977 experiments showed that <unk> indeed had a 2 @.@ 3 @-@ second half @-@ life . However , 1973 work also showed that the 250Fm recoil could have also easily been produced from the isomeric transition of <unk> ( half @-@ life 1 @.@ 8 s ) which could also have been formed in the reaction at the energy used . Given this , it is probable that no nobelium was actually produced in this experiment . 
 In 1959 the team continued their studies and claimed that they were able to produce an isotope that decayed predominantly by emission of an 8 @.@ 3 MeV alpha particle , with a half @-@ life of 3 s with an associated 30 % spontaneous fission branch . The activity was initially assigned to 254No but later changed to <unk> . However , they also noted that it was not certain that nobelium had been produced due to difficult conditions . The Berkeley team decided to adopt the proposed name of the Swedish team , " nobelium " , for the element . 
 244 
 96Cm + 12 
 6C → 256 
 102No * → 252 
 102No + 4 1 
 0n 
 Meanwhile , in Dubna , experiments were carried out in 1958 and 1960 aiming to synthesize element 102 as well . The first 1958 experiment bombarded plutonium @-@ 239 and <unk> with oxygen @-@ 16 ions . Some alpha decays with energies just over 8 @.@ 5 MeV were observed , and they were assigned to 251 @,@ 252 @,@ <unk> , although the team wrote that formation of isotopes from lead or bismuth impurities ( which would not produce nobelium ) could not be ruled out . While later 1958 experiments noted that new isotopes could be produced from mercury , thallium , lead , or bismuth impurities , the scientists still stood by their conclusion that element 102 could be produced from this reaction , mentioning a half @-@ life of under 30 seconds and a decay energy of ( 8 @.@ 8 ± 0 @.@ 5 ) MeV . Later 1960 experiments proved that these were background effects . 1967 experiments also lowered the decay energy to ( 8 @.@ 6 ± 0 @.@ 4 ) MeV , but both values are too high to possibly match those of 253No or 254No . The Dubna team later stated in 1970 and again in 1987 that these results were not conclusive . 
 In 1961 , Berkeley scientists claimed the discovery of element 103 in the reaction of californium with boron and carbon ions . They claimed the production of the isotope 257103 , and also claimed to have synthesized an alpha decaying isotope of element 102 that had a half @-@ life of 15 s and alpha decay energy 8 @.@ 2 MeV . They assigned this to <unk> without giving a reason for the assignment . The values do not agree with those now known for 255No , although they do agree with those now known for 257No , and while this isotope probably played a part in this experiment its discovery was inconclusive . 
 Work on element 102 also continued in Dubna , and in 1964 , experiments were carried out there to detect alpha @-@ decay daughters of element 102 isotopes by synthesizing element 102 from the reaction of a uranium @-@ 238 target with neon ions . The products were carried along a silver catcher foil and purified chemically , and the isotopes 250Fm and 252Fm were detected . The yield of 252Fm was interpreted as evidence that its parent <unk> was also synthesized : as it was noted that 252Fm could also be produced directly in this reaction by the simultaneous emission of an alpha particle with the excess neutrons , steps were taken to ensure that 252Fm could not go directly to the catcher foil . The half @-@ life detected for <unk> was 8 s , which is much higher than the more modern 1967 value of ( 3 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 2 ) s . Further experiments were conducted in 1966 for 254102 , using the reactions 243Am ( 15N , 4n ) 254102 and 238U ( 22Ne , <unk> ) 254102 , finding a half @-@ life of ( 50 ± 10 ) s : at that time the discrepancy between this value and the earlier Berkeley value was not understood , although later work proved that the formation of the isomer <unk> was less likely in the Dubna experiments than at the Berkeley ones . In hindsight , the Dubna results on 254102 were probably correct and can be now considered a conclusive detection of element 102 . 
 One more very convincing experiment from Dubna came in 1966 , again using the same two reactions , which concluded that 254102 indeed had a half @-@ life much longer than the 3 seconds claimed by Berkeley . Later work in 1967 at Berkeley and 1971 at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory fully confirmed the discovery of element 102 and clarified earlier observations . In December 1966 , the Berkeley group repeated the Dubna experiments and fully confirmed them , and used this data to finally assign correctly the isotopes they had previously synthesized but could not yet identify at the time , and thus claimed to have discovered nobelium in 1958 to 1961 . 
 238 
 92U + 22 
 10Ne → 260 
 102No * → 254 
 102No + 6 1 
 0n 
 In 1969 , the Dubna team carried out chemical experiments on element 102 and concluded that it behaved as the heavier homologue of ytterbium . The Russian scientists proposed the name <unk> ( Jo ) for the new element after Irène Joliot @-@ Curie , who had recently died , creating an element naming controversy that would not be resolved for several decades , which each group using its own proposed names . 
 In 1992 , the IUPAC @-@ IUPAP Transfermium Working Group ( TWG ) reassessed the claims of discovery and concluded that only the Dubna work from 1966 correctly detected and assigned decays to nuclei with atomic number 102 at the time . The Dubna team are therefore officially recognised as the discoverers of nobelium although it is possible that it was detected at Berkeley in 1959 . This decision was criticized by Berkeley the following year , calling the reopening of the cases of elements 101 to 103 a " futile waste of time " , while Dubna agreed with the IUPAC 's decision . 
 In 1994 , as part of an attempted resolution to the element naming controversy , the IUPAC ratified names for elements 101 – 109 . For element 102 , it ratified the name nobelium ( No ) on the basis that it had become entrenched in the literature over the course of 30 years and that Alfred Nobel should be commemorated in this fashion . Because of outcry over the 1994 names , which mostly did not respect the choices of the discoverers , a comment period ensued , and in 1995 IUPAC named element 102 flerovium ( Fl ) as part of a new proposal , after either Georgy Flyorov or his eponymous Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions . This proposal was also not accepted , and in 1997 the name " nobelium " was restored . Today , the name " flerovium " , with the same symbol , now refers to element 114 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 In the periodic table , nobelium is located to the right of the actinide mendelevium , to the left of the actinide lawrencium , and below the lanthanide ytterbium . Nobelium metal has not yet been prepared in bulk quantities , and bulk preparation is currently impossible . Nevertheless , a number of predictions and some preliminary experimental results have been done regarding its properties . 
 The lanthanides and actinides , in the metallic state , can exist as either divalent ( such as europium and ytterbium ) or trivalent ( most other lanthanides ) metals . The former have fn + 1s2 configurations , whereas the latter have <unk> configurations . In 1975 , Johansson and Rosengren examined the measured and predicted values for the cohesive energies ( enthalpies of crystallization ) of the metallic lanthanides and actinides , both as divalent and trivalent metals . The conclusion was that the increased binding energy of the [ Rn ] <unk> configuration over the [ Rn ] <unk> configuration for nobelium was not enough to compensate for the energy needed to promote one 5f electron to 6d , as is true also for the very late actinides : thus einsteinium , fermium , mendelevium , and nobelium were expected to be divalent metals , although for nobelium this prediction has not yet been confirmed . The increasing predominance of the divalent state well before the actinide series concludes is attributed to the relativistic stabilization of the 5f electrons , which increases with increasing atomic number : an effect of this is that nobelium is predominantly divalent instead of trivalent , unlike all the other lanthanides and actinides . In 1986 , nobelium metal was estimated to have an enthalpy of sublimation between 126 kJ · mol − 1 , a value close to the values for einsteinium , fermium , and mendelevium and supporting the theory that nobelium would form a divalent metal . Like the other divalent late actinides ( except the once again trivalent lawrencium ) , metallic nobelium should assume a face @-@ centered cubic crystal structure . Divalent nobelium metal should have a metallic radius of around 197 pm . Nobelium 's melting point has been predicted to be 827 ° C , the same value as that estimated for the neighboring element mendelevium . Its density is predicted to be around 9 @.@ 9 ± 0 @.@ 4 g · cm − 3 . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 The chemistry of nobelium is incompletely characterized and is known only in aqueous solution , in which it can take on the + 3 or + 2 oxidation states , the latter being more stable . It was largely expected before the discovery of nobelium that in solution , it would behave like the other actinides , with the trivalent state being predominant ; however , Seaborg predicted in 1949 that the + 2 state would also be relatively stable for nobelium , as the No2 + ion would have the ground @-@ state electron configuration [ Rn ] 5f14 , including the stable filled 5f14 shell . It took nineteen years before this prediction was confirmed . 
 In 1967 , experiments were conducted to compare nobelium 's chemical behavior to that of terbium , californium , and fermium . All four elements were reacted with chlorine and the resulting chlorides were deposited along a tube , along which they were carried by a gas . It was found that the nobelium chloride produced was strongly adsorbed on solid surfaces , proving that it was not very volatile , like the chlorides of the other three investigated elements . However , both <unk> and <unk> were expected to exhibit nonvolatile behavior and hence this experiment was inconclusive as to what the preferred oxidation state of nobelium was . Determination of nobelium 's favoring of the + 2 state had to wait until the next year , when cation @-@ exchange chromatography and coprecipitation experiments were carried out on around fifty thousand 255No atoms , finding that it behaved differently from the other actinides and more like the divalent alkaline earth metals . This proved that in aqueous solution , nobelium is most stable in the divalent state when strong oxidizers are absent . Later experimentation in 1974 showed that nobelium eluted with the alkaline earth metals , between Ca2 + and Sr2 + . 
 Nobelium 's complexing ability with chloride ions is most similar to that of barium , which complexes rather weakly . Its complexing ability with citrate , oxalate , and acetate in an aqueous solution of 0 @.@ 5 M ammonium nitrate is between that of calcium and strontium , although it is somewhat closer to that of strontium . 
 The standard reduction potential of the E ° ( No3 + → No2 + ) couple was estimated in 1967 to be between + 1 @.@ 4 and + 1 @.@ 5 V. The positive value shows that No2 + is more stable than No3 + and that No3 + is a good oxidizing agent . While the quoted values for the E ° ( No2 + → <unk> ) and E ° ( No3 + → <unk> ) vary among sources , the accepted standard estimates are − 2 @.@ 61 and − 1 @.@ 26 V. It has been predicted that the value for the E ° ( <unk> + → No3 + ) couple would be + 6 @.@ 5 V. The Gibbs energies of formation for No3 + and No2 + are estimated to be − 342 and − 480 kJ · mol − 1 , respectively . 
 = = = Atomic = = = 
 A nobelium atom has 102 electrons , of which three can act as valence electrons . They are expected to be arranged in the configuration [ Rn ] <unk> ( ground state term symbol <unk> ) , although experimental verification of this electron configuration had not yet been made as of 2006 . In forming compounds , all the three valence electrons may be lost , leaving behind a [ Rn ] <unk> core : this conforms to the trend set by the other actinides with their [ Rn ] 5fn electron configurations in the tripositive state . Nevertheless , it is more likely that only two valence electrons may be lost , leaving behind a stable [ Rn ] 5f14 core with a filled 5f14 shell . The first ionization potential of mendelevium was measured to be at most ( 6 @.@ 65 ± 0 @.@ 07 ) eV in 1974 , based on the assumption that the 7s electrons would ionize before the 5f ones ; this value has since not yet been refined further due to nobelium 's scarcity and high radioactivity . The ionic radius of <unk> and <unk> No3 + had been preliminarily estimated in 1978 to be around 90 and 102 pm respectively ; the ionic radius of No2 + has been experimentally found to be 100 pm to two significant figures . The enthalpy of hydration of No2 + has been calculated as 1486 kJ · mol − 1 . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Twelve isotopes of nobelium are known , with mass numbers 250 – 260 and 262 ; all are radioactive . Additionally , nuclear isomers are known for mass numbers 251 , 253 , and 254 . Of these , the longest @-@ lived isotope is 259No with a half @-@ life of 58 minutes , and the longest @-@ lived isomer is <unk> with a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 7 seconds . However , the still undiscovered isotope <unk> is predicted to have a still longer half @-@ life of 170 min . Additionally , the shorter @-@ lived 255No ( half @-@ life 3 @.@ 1 minutes ) is more often used in chemical experimentation because it can be produced in larger quantities from irradiation of californium @-@ 249 with carbon @-@ 12 ions . After 259No and 255No , the next most stable nobelium isotopes are 253No ( half @-@ life 1 @.@ 62 minutes ) , 254No ( 51 seconds ) , 257No ( 25 seconds ) , 256No ( 2 @.@ 91 seconds ) , and <unk> ( 2 @.@ 57 seconds ) . All of the remaining nobelium isotopes have half @-@ lives that are less than a second , and the shortest @-@ lived known nobelium isotope ( <unk> ) has a half @-@ life of only 0 @.@ 25 milliseconds . The isotope 254No is especially interesting theoretically as it is in the middle of a series of prolate nuclei from 231Pa to <unk> , and the formation of its nuclear isomers ( of which two are known ) is controlled by proton orbitals such as 2f5 / 2 which come just above the spherical proton shell . 
 The half @-@ lives of nobelium isotopes increase smoothly from <unk> to 253No . However , a dip appears at 254No , and beyond this the half @-@ lives of even @-@ even nobelium isotopes drop sharply as spontaneous fission becomes the dominant decay mode . For example , the half @-@ life of 256No is almost three seconds , but that of <unk> is only 1 @.@ 2 milliseconds . This shows that at nobelium , the mutual repulsion of protons poses a limit to the island of relative stability of long @-@ lived nuclei in the actinide series . The even @-@ odd nobelium isotopes mostly continue to have longer half @-@ lives as their mass numbers increase , with a dip in the trend at 257No . 
 = = Preparation and purification = = 
 The isotopes of nobelium are mostly produced by bombarding actinide targets ( uranium , plutonium , curium , californium , or einsteinium ) , with the exception of nobelium @-@ 262 , which is produced as the daughter of lawrencium @-@ 262 . The most commonly used isotope , 255No , can be produced from bombarding curium @-@ 248 or californium @-@ 249 with carbon @-@ 12 : the latter method is more common . <unk> a 350 μg cm − 2 target of californium @-@ 249 with three trillion ( 3 × 1012 ) 73 MeV carbon @-@ 12 ions per second for ten minutes can produce around 1200 nobelium @-@ 255 atoms . 
 Once the nobelium @-@ 255 is produced , it can be separated out in a similar way as used to purify the neighboring actinide mendelevium . The recoil momentum of the produced nobelium @-@ 255 atoms is used to bring them physically far away from the target from which they are produced , bringing them onto a thin foil of metal ( usually beryllium , aluminium , platinum , or gold ) just behind the target in a vacuum : this is usually combined by trapping the nobelium atoms in a gas atmosphere ( frequently helium ) , and carrying them along with a gas jet from a small opening in the reaction chamber . Using a long capillary tube , and including potassium chloride aerosols in the helium gas , the nobelium atoms can be transported over tens of meters . The thin layer of nobelium collected on the foil can then be removed with dilute acid without completely dissolving the foil . The nobelium can then be isolated by exploiting its tendency to form the divalent state , unlike the other trivalent actinides : under typically used elution conditions ( bis- ( 2 @-@ ethylhexyl ) phosphoric acid ( HDEHP ) as stationary organic phase and 0 @.@ 05 M hydrochloric acid as mobile aqueous phase , or using 3 M hydrochloric acid as an eluant from cation @-@ exchange resin columns ) , nobelium will pass through the column and elute while the other trivalent actinides remain on the column . However , if a direct " catcher " gold foil is used , the process is complicated by the need to separate out the gold using anion @-@ exchange chromatography before isolating the nobelium by elution from chromatographic extraction columns using HDEHP . 
 = Lepiota castaneidisca = 
 Lepiota castaneidisca is a species of agaric fungus in the family Agaricaceae . Formally described in 1912 , it was for a long time considered the same species as the similar Lepiota cristata until molecular analysis reported in 2001 demonstrated that it was genetically distinct . It is most common in coastal and northern California , and has also been recorded in Mexico . A saprobic species , it is usually found under redwood and Monterey cypress . Its fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have white caps with an orange @-@ red to orange @-@ brown center that measure up to 3 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) wide . The cream @-@ colored to light pink stems are up to 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) thick , and have a ring . L. castaneidisca can be distinguished from other similar Lepiota species by differences in habitat , macroscopic , or microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 The species was first described as new to science by mycologist William Alphonso Murrill in 1912 . Murrill collected the type material growing near redwoods near <unk> Lake , California , in December 1911 . In 1914 , Murrill decided that the species was the same as Lepiota cristata ( which he called Lepiota <unk> ( <unk> . ) Morgan ) ; this opinion was later corroborated by Walter Sundberg in 1989 after he studied the type collection and concluded that the microscopic characteristics of both were the same . Using molecular analysis based on comparing DNA sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region , mycologist Else Vellinga determined that despite the lack of distinguishing micro @-@ morphological characteristics , the two species were distinct . 
 The epithet castaneidisca refers to the chestnut @-@ colored center of the cap . Lepiota means " the scaly one " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Lepiota castaneidisca have white , bell @-@ shaped to convex caps 0 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) in diameter , with an orange @-@ reddish to pale orange @-@ brown center . Mature specimens fade and lose the reddish shades . The cap surface develops small pale pink or cream patches ( especially on the outermost zone ) on a white background that has radially arranged fibrils . The gills are somewhat crowded to moderately distant , with typically 40 – 45 full length gills , and 1 – 5 tiers of interspersed lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) . They are slightly ventricose , measuring 2 @.@ 5 – 5 mm wide , and have a white fringed or irregular edge . Whitish when young and cream @-@ colored in age , they have a free gill attachment to the stem . The stem is 25 – 65 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) long by 2 – 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) thick , cylindrical , slightly widened at the base , hollow , and fibrillose . Its color is pinkish in the lower part , and it stains reddish where damaged , especially in older specimens . The flesh is whitish , sometimes with cream tones , or reddish @-@ brown in mature specimens . There is a ring that points upward in young specimens , but in maturity it degrades to remnants that are left behind on the stem . It has a sharp odor similar to rubber or cod liver oil . The mushroom is not known to be poisonous , but consumption is not recommended due to the risk of possible confusion with Lepiota species that contain deadly amatoxins . 
 The smooth , dextrinoid spores are in side view triangular with a spurred base , in frontal view oblong , and typically measure 5 – 9 by 3 – 4 μm . Staining with <unk> blue shows them to be somewhat metachromatic , and binucleate . Cystidia on the gill edge ( cheilocystidia ) are club @-@ shaped to cylindric or sometimes spheropedunculate ( somewhat spherical with a stem ) , and have dimensions of 20 – 44 by 6 @.@ 5 – 13 @.@ 5 μm . Basidia are 18 – 30 by 5 – 8 μm , mostly four @-@ spored , and are absent on the gill edge . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are absent . The cap cuticle is a hymeniderm ( lengthened cells arranged side by side ) with mostly colorless elements of different lengths , measuring 16 – 62 by 8 – 18 μm . The stipitipellis ( outer covering of the stem ) comprises a layer of colorless hyphae measuring about 2 – 3 μm wide . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of all parts of the fungus . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Lepiota castaneidisca closely resembles L. cristata ( with which it has commonly been confused ) , but it has a more rounded cap , lacks an umbo , and is reddish- or pinkish @-@ brown , rather than orange @-@ brown . L. cristata , which is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , prefers habitats where the natural <unk> cover has been disturbed by humans , or in the beds of rivers and creeks ; in contrast , L. castaneidisca is found in natural , undisturbed habitats . Other similar species in similar habitats with which L. castaneidisca could be confused include L. thiersii and L. <unk> ; in contrast to L. castaneidisca , both of the latter two species have ellipsoid spores . The fruit bodies of L. thiersii appear from November through April , and grow scattered or in groups under cypress . It usually lacks the reddish color in the center of the cap associated with L. castaneidisca , and its spores are not as long , with dimensions of 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 3 by 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 9 μm . L. <unk> is a rare species , but more widely distributed in the United States than L. castaneidisca , as it has been reported from Ohio and Michigan in addition to California . It also fruits under cypress , usually between December and April . This mushroom is most readily distinguished from L. castaneidisca by the dark brown to blackish @-@ brown color of the cap center . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Lepiota castaneidisca is a saprobic fungus . Fruit bodies appear in the late fall and winter ( November to February ) , where they grow gregariously near cypress , redwood or in mixed coast live oak forests . The fungus is common in coastal and northern California , and is often found in the San Francisco Bay Area . The northern limit of its distribution is Washington State and southern British Columbia , and it has been recorded as far south as Mexico . 
 = Washington quarter = 
 The Washington quarter is the present quarter dollar or 25 @-@ cent piece issued by the United States Mint . The coin was first struck in 1932 ; the original version was designed by sculptor John Flanagan . 
 As the United States prepared to celebrate the 1932 bicentennial of the birth of its first president , George Washington , members of the bicentennial committee established by Congress sought a Washington half dollar . They wanted to displace for that year only the regular issue Walking Liberty half dollar ; instead Congress permanently replaced the Standing Liberty quarter , requiring that a depiction of Washington appear on the obverse of the new coin . The committee had engaged sculptor Laura Gardin Fraser to design a commemorative medal , and wanted her to adapt her design for the quarter . Although Fraser 's work was supported by the Commission of Fine Arts and its chairman , Charles W. Moore , Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon chose a design by Flanagan , and Mellon 's successor , Ogden L. Mills , refused to disturb the decision . 
 The new silver quarters entered circulation on August 1 , 1932 ; and continued to be struck in silver until the Mint transitioned to copper @-@ nickel clad coinage in 1965 . A special reverse commemorating the United States Bicentennial was used in 1975 and 1976 , with all pieces bearing the double date 1776 – 1976 ; there are no 1975 @-@ dated quarters . Since 1999 , the original eagle reverse has not been used ; instead that side of the quarter has commemorated the 50 states , the nation 's other jurisdictions , and National Park Service sites — the last as part of the America the Beautiful Quarters series , which will continue until 2021 . The bust of Washington was made smaller beginning in 1999 ; in 2010 it was restored to bring out greater detail . 
 = = Inception = = 
 On December 2 , 1924 , Congress created the United States George Washington Bicentennial Commission . The 200th anniversary of the birth of Washington , the first President of the United States , would occur in 1932 , and Congress wished to plan for the event well in advance . President Calvin Coolidge was ex officio chairman of the commission , which included government officials as well as prominent private citizens such as automobile manufacturer Henry Ford . In 1929 , the Secretary of Commerce , Herbert Hoover , succeeded Coolidge both as president and in his commission role . By that time , however , the commission had become inactive , doing little after sending out an initial flurry of press releases . A new group , the George Washington Bicentennial Committee was established by Act of Congress in February 1930 . 
 Hoover was concerned about the large numbers of designs used for commemorative coins in the 1920s ; he feared that confusion would aid counterfeiters . When a commemorative coin bill was sent to him by Congress , Hoover vetoed it on April 21 , 1930 . In a lengthy veto message delivered to Congress with the returned bill , Hoover noted his counterfeiting concerns , and stated that the coins were selling badly anyway — large quantities of Oregon Trail Memorial half dollars remained unsold . 
 The Bicentennial Committee wanted a commemorative Washington half dollar , and sought to assuage Hoover 's concerns by proposing that all 1932 half dollars depict Washington instead of bearing the usual Walking Liberty design . The Depression had decreased demand for coin in commerce ; no half dollars had been struck in 1930 , and none would be until 1933 . Most commemorative coins at the time were struck in a quantity of a few thousand . The half dollar was seen as the largest and most prominent design — the Peace dollar was not then being struck and did not circulate in much of the country . Other commemoratives had been sold at a premium , the Washington half dollar would , for one year , be the normal Mint issue . Although it had not yet received congressional approval , the committee went ahead and began a competition . The committee anticipated that the same artist would first design the committee 's medal and then the coin . The obverse of both medal and coin were to be based on the well @-@ known bust of Washington by French sculptor Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon ; the artist was not restricted as to the reverse design . By law , coinage designs were approved by the Secretary of the Treasury , at that time Andrew W. Mellon , a noted art collector and connoisseur ; it was anticipated he would interpose no objection to the plan . 
 After reviewing the entries , both the Bicentennial Committee and Fine Arts Commission agreed on designs by Laura Gardin Fraser . The wife of James Earle Fraser , designer of the Buffalo nickel , Laura Fraser was a notable coin designer in her own right , having designed several commemorative coins , including the Oregon Trail Memorial pieces . With a right @-@ facing Washington , Fraser 's designs were to be used for the medal , and , as those involved expected , the half dollar as well . 
 On February 9 , 1931 , New Jersey Representative Randolph Perkins introduced legislation for a Washington quarter , to the dismay of the Bicentennial Committee and Fine Arts Commission . The House of Representatives Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures issued a memorandum stating that the design of the existing Standing Liberty quarter had been found to be unsatisfactory , and that the new piece would not only be struck for 1932 , it would permanently replace the older design . Thus , a new quarter would both be a tribute to Washington on his bicentennial , and relieve the Mint of the burden of having to coin a difficult @-@ to @-@ strike piece . On February 12 , Fine Arts Commission Chairman Charles W. Moore wrote to the House Committee , objecting to the change of denomination , and proposing that they mandate that Laura Fraser 's design for the medal also appear on the coin . Moore was ignored , and Congress passed authorizing legislation for a Washington quarter on March 4 , 1931 . The act provided that Washington 's image , to appear on the obverse , was to be based on the " celebrated bust " of the former president by Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon ; Fraser had based her design on Houdon 's work . 
 = = Competitions = = 
 On July 14 , 1931 , Assistant Mint Director Mary Margaret O 'Reilly wrote to Moore , asking the Commission 's advice on a design competition for the new quarter . Moore replied , stating that as Fraser had won the competition for the medal , she should adapt her design for the quarter . Secretary Mellon responded to Moore , stating that as the Treasury had been no party to the earlier design agreement , it was not bound by it , and would not follow it . The Treasury proceeded to hold a design competition , and when the Fine Arts Commission met to consider the submitted designs in an advisory role , it selected those submitted by Fraser . The designs were submitted to Mellon in November 1931 ; he selected Flanagan 's design and notified Moore of the decision . Moore and commission member Adolph Weinman ( who had designed the Mercury dime and Walking Liberty half dollar ) attempted to get Mellon to change his mind , but only got him to agree to allow the various sculptors more time to improve their entries — they had asked for more time just for Fraser . On January 20 , 1932 , following <unk> , the commission affirmed its support of the Fraser designs . 
 Mellon left office on February 12 , 1932 ; he was succeeded by Ogden L. Mills . With a new Secretary of the Treasury in office , Moore renewed his protest , sending Mills a letter on March 31 deprecating Flanagan 's design and urging the new secretary to accede to the commission 's recommendation . Mills had already been briefed by O 'Reilly on the quarter matter , and responded to Moore on April 11 . Secretary Mills informed Moore that the chairman 's letter had caused him to request changes from the sculptor , but that he would not override Mellon 's decision . On April 16 , the selection of Flanagan 's designs was publicly announced . 
 Mellon was aware of which artists had submitted which designs , and has been accused of discriminating against Fraser as a woman . Numismatic historian Walter Breen stated , " it has been learned that Mellon knew all along who had submitted the winning models , and his male chauvinism partly or wholly motivated his unwillingness to let a woman win . " Bowers , however , noted that Mellon had approved Fraser 's designs for commemorative coins several times , as well as those by other women , and that no contemporary source speaks to any bias on Mellon 's part . Bowers called the belief " modern numismatic fiction " . Fraser 's design was used in 1999 as a commemorative half eagle issued 200 years after Washington 's death . 
 = = Flanagan 's design = = 
 As originally struck , the quarter depicts a head of Washington facing left , with " Liberty " above the head , the date below , and " In God We Trust " in the left field . On the reverse , an eagle with wings outspread perches on a bundle of arrows framed below by two olive branches . 
 = = = Houdon bust = = = 
 In 1785 , the French sculptor Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon was commissioned by the Virginia General Assembly to sculpt a bust of Washington , who had led the nascent United States to victory in the American Revolutionary War . Houdon had been recommended by the recently returned United States Minister to France , Benjamin Franklin . The retired general sat for Houdon at Mount Vernon , the Washington family home in Fairfax County , Virginia between October 6 and 12 , 1785 . The sculptor took a life mask of the general 's face — Washington 's adopted granddaughter Nelly Custis , aged six at the time , later recalled her shock in seeing Washington lying on a table , as she thought dead , covered by a sheet and by the plaster for the mask . She was told that two quills extended into his nostrils , providing him with air . A bust at Mount Vernon today testifies to that visit . On his return to Paris , Houdon used his visage of General Washington in a number of sculptural settings , including the commissioned statue for the General Assembly , which still stands in marble in the Virginia State Capitol . 
 Portraits of Washington on medals and in other media subsequent to the sculptor 's visit were most often based on Houdon 's work , beginning with the 1786 " Washington Before Boston " medal engraved by Pierre Simon <unk> . Although only one American , Abraham Lincoln , had appeared on a circulating US coin by the 1920s , the Houdon bust had been used as the basis of the portrait of Washington on the commemorative Lafayette dollar dated 1900 and on the Sesquicentennial half dollar of 1926 . According to coin dealer and numismatic historian Q. David Bowers , the Houdon bust , even then , was the most common representation of Washington on coins and medals . Little is known of Flanagan 's creative process , although models of Flanagan 's quarter with a different portrayal of Washington , facing right , and with a different eagle , have come on the market . Flanagan 's adaptation differs from the Houdon bust in some particulars : for example , the shape of the head is different , and there is a roll of hair on the quarter not found on the bust . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule said of Flanagan 's quarter , " a die designer could do little wrong in having Houdon 's Neoclassic image as his prototype ... Still , it might be asked whether or not it was fair to force an ideal [ ized ] portrait of Washington made in 1785 on an artist working in 1932 . There is something cold and lifeless about the results . " Vermeule suggests that the quarter started a trend of similar portrait coins issued by the United States , notably the Jefferson nickel and Franklin half dollar . The historian preferred Laura Fraser 's version , and termed Flanagan 's reverse " a stiff bit of heraldry amid too large a wreath and too much or too large lettering " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Silver strikings ( 1932 – 1964 ) = = = 
 In early July 1932 , newspapers announced that the Washington quarter was being struck and would be issued at the end of the month , once there were sufficient pieces for a nationwide distribution . They stressed that the new quarter was not a commemorative . 
 The quarter was released into circulation on August 1 , 1932 . There was no great need for the coins in commerce ; despite that , it was announced that six million pieces would be struck in honor of the Washington bicentennial . The coins were generally well received , though the reverse prompted discussion as to whether a bald eagle was depicted , or some other sort of eagle . An eagle expert consulted by The New York Times concluded it was a bald eagle . 
 About 6 @.@ 2 million quarters were struck in 1932 , of which 5 @.@ 4 million were coined at the Philadelphia mint . Production runs of just over 400 @,@ 000 each occurred at the Denver and San Francisco mints ; these are still the low mintages of the series . The small mintage of the 1932 Denver piece meant that few were available to be hoarded by coin dealers , leading to present @-@ day scarcity in mint state or uncirculated condition ; the mint marks on the 1932 @-@ D and 1932 @-@ S have been counterfeited . No quarters were struck at any mint in 1933 , as there was an oversupply caused by the 1932 issue . 
 Unlike many earlier coins , the Washington quarter struck exceptionally well , bringing out its full details . This sharpness is possible because the designs of both sides were spread out , with no points of high relief . Nevertheless , the Mint repeatedly adjusted the design . In the first three years of striking ( 1932 , 1934 and 1935 ) , three different varieties of the obverse are known . They are generally called after the appearance of " IN GOD WE TRUST " , to the left of Washington 's head : the Light Motto , Medium Motto , and Heavy Motto . The Heavy Motto apparently proved most satisfactory to the Mint , as beginning in 1936 , only pieces bearing the Heavy Motto were struck . For unknown reasons , the original reverse hub was used only in 1932 ; a new hub was used when coining resumed in 1934 . The original style had a high rim around the reverse design , protecting it from wear so well that 1932 quarters in lower grade generally are about equally worn on either side . In later years , with a lowered rim , circulated silver pieces tend to be more worn on the reverse . 
 The fine @-@ tuning of the design continued through the end of silver production with pieces dated 1964 . During that time , the obverse was modified six times . One revision , in 1944 , left Flanagan 's initials , on the cutoff of the bust , distorted ; this was adjusted the following year . Beginning in 1937 , and continuing until the end of silver circulation production with pieces dated 1964 , a very slightly different reverse was used for proof coins , as opposed to circulation pieces . This is most evident in examining the letters " es " in " States " which almost touch on circulation strikes , and display a separation on proofs . 
 The piece was struck in numbers exceeding 100 million in some years through 1964 . The San Francisco Mint ceased striking coins after 1955 ; it struck no quarters that year or in 1949 . 
 = = = Clad composition with Flanagan reverse ( 1965 – 1998 ) = = = 
 In 1964 , there was a severe shortage of coins . Silver prices were rising , and the public responded by hoarding not only the wildly @-@ popular new coin , the Kennedy half dollar , but the other denominations , including the non @-@ silver cent and nickel . Hopeful that issuing more 1964 @-@ dated coins would counter the speculation in them , the Treasury obtained Congressional authorization to continue striking 1964 @-@ dated coins into 1965 . 
 The Mint 's production of coins rapidly depleted the Treasury 's stock of silver . Prices for the metal were rising to such an extent that , by early June 1965 , a dollar in silver coin contained 93 @.@ 3 cents ' worth of it at market prices . On June 3 , 1965 , President Lyndon Johnson announced plans to eliminate silver from the dime and quarter in favor of a clad composition , with layers of copper @-@ nickel on each side of a layer of pure copper . The half dollar was changed from 90 % silver to 40 % . Congress passed the Coinage Act of 1965 in July , under which the Mint transitioned from striking 1964 @-@ dated silver quarters to striking 1965 @-@ dated clad quarters . Beginning on August 1 , 1966 , the Mint began to strike 1966 @-@ dated pieces , and thereafter it resumed the normal practice of striking the current year 's date on each piece . 
 The new clad quarters were struck without mint mark in 1965 – 1967 , regardless of the mint of origin . Beginning in 1968 , mint marks were restored . The San Francisco Mint had reopened , but from 1968 , it struck quarters only for collectors , for the most part proof coins . The Mint adjusted both sides of the coin for the initiation of clad coinage , lowering the relief ( the modified reverse design exists on some 1964 @-@ dated silver quarters ) . The obverse was slightly changed in 1974 , with some details sharpened . Mint marks on post @-@ 1965 pieces are found on the lower right of the obverse , to the right of Washington 's neck . 
 In January 1973 , Representative Richard C. White introduced legislation for commemorative dollars and half dollars for the 1976 United States Bicentennial . On June 6 , Mint Director Mary Brooks testified before a congressional committee , and responding to concerns that only the two least @-@ popular denominations would be changed , agreed to support the temporary redesign of the quarter as well . On October 18 , 1973 , President Richard Nixon signed legislation mandating a temporary redesign of the three denominations for all coins issued after July 4 , 1975 and struck before January 1 , 1977 . These pieces would bear the double date 1776 – 1976 . In addition to circulation pieces , Congress mandated that 45 million Bicentennial coins be struck in 40 % silver . Fearful of creating low @-@ mintage pieces which might be hoarded as the cent recently had been , thus creating a shortage of quarters , in December 1974 the Mint obtained congressional approval to continue striking 1974 @-@ dated quarters , half dollars and dollars until Bicentennial coinage began . Accordingly , there are no 1975 @-@ dated quarters . Almost two billion Bicentennial quarters were struck , as the Mint sought to assure that there would be plenty of souvenirs of the anniversary . The Mint sold the silver sets , in both uncirculated and proof , for more than a decade before ending sales at the end of 1986 . Jack L. Ahr 's colonial drummer , which had appeared on the Bicentennial quarter , was replaced after 1976 by Flanagan 's original reverse . 
 Beginning in 1976 , and continuing over the following twenty years , Mint engravers modified the design a number of times . The Philadelphia Mint 's mint mark " P " was used beginning in 1980 . Coins dated 1982 and 1983 , both from Philadelphia and Denver , command a large premium over face value when found in near @-@ pristine condition . Beginning in 1992 , the Mint began selling silver proof sets , including a quarter struck in .900 silver ; this has continued to the present day . Although President George H.W. Bush signed authorizing legislation for these pieces in 1990 , coinage did not begin until 1992 due to difficulty in obtaining sufficient coinage blanks in .900 silver . 
 = = = Commemorative ( 1999 – present ) = = = 
 The Mint traces the origins of the 50 State Quarters program to a congressional hearing in June 1995 , at which Mint Director Philip N. Diehl , as well as prominent numismatists , urged Congress to pass legislation allowing a series of circulating commemorative coins similar to the quarters Canada had recently struck for its provinces . In response , Congress passed the United States Commemorative Coins Act of 1996 , which was signed by President Bill Clinton on October 20 , 1996 . The act directed the Mint to study whether a series of commemorative quarters would be successful . The Mint duly studied the matter , and reported favorably . Although the act had given Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin the authority to carry out the report by selecting new coin designs , Secretary Rubin preferred to await congressional action . The resulting 50 States Commemorative Coin Program Act was signed by President Clinton on December 1 , 1997 . Under the act , each of the fifty states would be honored with a new quarter , to be issued five a year beginning in 1999 , with the sequence of issuance determined by the order the states had entered the Union . The act allowed the Secretary to determine the position of the required legends , such as " IN GOD WE TRUST " on the coin : To accommodate a large design on the reverse , " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " and " <unk> DOLLAR " were moved to the obverse , and the bust of Washington shrunken slightly . A state 's design would be selected by the Treasury Secretary on the recommendation of the state 's governor . 
 As part of the series , the Mint sold collector 's versions in proof , including pieces struck in .900 silver . The Mint also sold a large number of numismatic items , including rolls and bags of coins , collector 's maps , and other items designed to encourage coin collecting among the general public . The Mint estimated that the government profited by $ 3 billion through seignorage on coins saved by the public and through other revenues , over what it would otherwise have earned . 
 Legislation to extend the program to the District of Columbia and the territories had been four times passed by the House of Representatives , but the Senate had failed to consider it each time . Provisions authorizing such a program were inserted into an urgent appropriations bill , and passed in December 2007 . The resultant 2009 District of Columbia and U.S. Territories Quarters Program maintained the Washington obverse but on the reverse displayed designs in honor of the District of Columbia , Puerto Rico , Guam , American Samoa , Virgin Islands , and the Northern Mariana Islands , all minted in 2009 . 
 In 2008 , Congress passed the America 's Beautiful National Parks Quarter Dollar Coin Act . This legislation called for 56 coins , one for each state or other jurisdiction , to be issued five per year beginning in 2010 and concluding in 2021 . Each coin features a National Park Service site , one to a jurisdiction . Flanagan 's head of Washington was restored to bring out detail . In addition to the circulating pieces and collector 's versions , bullion pieces with 5 troy ounces ( 155 g ) of silver are being struck with the quarter 's design . 
 In February 2012 , President Barack Obama included in his 2013 budget a provision , inserted at the behest of Mint officials , which if enacted would mandate that the silver dimes , quarters , and half dollars produced for collectors be a minimum of .900 silver , rather than requiring that exact fineness . If the provision becomes law , the Mint intends to strike the collector 's coins from .999 silver . Alloy which is .900 fine is now being used by the Mint only for these pieces ; .999 silver , which is also used for bullion pieces , would be cheaper for the Mint to produce . Customers would pay an additional charge to reflect the extra silver content . In May of that year , the Mint announced plans to strike the first circulation @-@ quality quarters at the San Francisco Mint since 1954 , to be sold only at a premium in bags and rolls . All five 2012 designs were struck , the first circulation @-@ quality coins struck at San Francisco since 1983 ( when Lincoln cents were struck without mint mark ) , and the first with the S mint mark since the Anthony dollar in 1981 ( struck for mint sets only ) . 
 = = = Number minted = = = 
 = Imelda Marcos = 
 Imelda Romuáldez Marcos ( born 2 July 1929 ) is the widow of the Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos , the 10th president . She served as First Lady from 1965 to 1986 during the dictatorship of her husband . She remains one of the richest politicians in the Philippines through her collection of clothing , artwork , and jewelry , along with money in offshore bank accounts under the pseudonym " Jane Ryan " . As a result , she has been called a <unk> by her critics who accuse her of plunder . 
 Marcos was born in Manila but moved to Tacloban prior to World War II after the death of her mother . She returned to Manila in 1950 to pursue a career as a singer and as a beauty queen . In 1954 , she married Ferdinand Marcos , who became president of the Philippines in 1965 , and in 1972 declared martial law . As first lady , she built developments in and around the metropolis of Manila while spending much of her time abroad on state visits and shopping sprees . 
 The assassination of opposition leader Benigno Aquino Jr. in 1983 caused mass protests that eventually led to the People Power Revolution . The Marcos family were forced into exile , and Aquino 's widow Corazon was installed as president . After the death of her husband Ferdinand , she returned to the Philippines and was later elected four times to the House of Representatives as a congresswoman for Leyte in 1995 and for Ilocos Norte in 2010 , 2013 and 2016 . 
 Marcos is infamous for her extravagance . This included owning more than a thousand pairs of shoes , some of which are now housed in a museum in Marikina . She worked as a fashion designer and model . She has sometimes been referred to as the " Steel Butterfly " , by her supporters . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Imelda Remedios <unk> Romuáldez y Trinidad was born on July 2 , 1929 , in Manila , Philippines to Remedios Trinidad ( died 1938 ) and Vicente Romuáldez . Her uncle was Philippine Supreme Court Associate Justice Norberto Romuáldez . The Romuáldez paternal ancestors were from a land @-@ owning family in Tolosa , Leyte with mixed Visayan and Spanish ancestry . She has five other siblings , including Benjamin Romualdez ( 1930 – 2012 ) . After their mother died in 1938 , the family moved to Tacloban . She claimed to have met Douglas MacArthur when he landed in Palo , Leyte at the end of World War II . She speaks Tagalog and English , the languages of Manila , as well as Waray , the language of Leyte . She is Roman Catholic . 
 She returned to Manila in 1950 at the request of her cousin Daniel Z. Romualdez , where she worked in a music store on <unk> street as a singer to attract customers . She entered the Miss Manila beauty pageant in which she came second but was named the Muse of Manila after contesting the result . She briefly dated Benigno Aquino , Jr. in the early 1950s before she met her future husband . On May 1 , 1954 , she married Ferdinand Marcos , a Nacionalista Party congressman from Ilocos Norte . The marriage resulted in four children : <unk> ( born on November 12 , 1955 ) , Ferdinand Jr . ( born on September 13 , 1957 ) , and Irene ( born on September 16 , 1960 ) , and an adopted girl named Aimee . 
 = = First Lady = = 
 Marcos served as First Lady after her husband Ferdinand was elected on November 9 , 1965 as the 10th President of the Philippines . Her role in the presidency was controversial partly because she was involved in altercations with celebrities . One such was with The Beatles when the band allegedly snubbed her invitation for a state dinner at the presidential palace . Another such was with Dovie Beams because of the actress ' alleged relations with Ferdinand . On September 23 , 1972 , Ferdinand declared martial law and rewrote the constitution of the country . 
 As First Lady , she became " the other half of the conjugal dictatorship . " She stirred controversy after an assassination attempt against her occurred on December 7 , 1972 , when an assailant tried to stab her with a bolo knife but was shot by the <unk> motive appeared to have been her role in her husband 's presidency but human rights dissidents believed it was staged by the government . 
 Marcos orchestrated public events using national funds to bolster her and her husband 's image . She secured the Miss Universe 1974 pageant in Manila , which required the construction of the Folk Arts Theater in less than three months . She organized the <unk> ng Lahi , a festival showcasing Philippine history . She also initiated social programs , such as the Green Revolution , which was intended to address hunger by encouraging the people to plant produce in household gardens , and created a national family @-@ planning program . During the early 1970s , she took control of the distribution of bread called <unk> , which actually came from the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) . 
 In 1978 , she was appointed a member of the Interim Batasang Pambansa ( National Congress ) representing Region IV @-@ A. She was also appointed as Ambassador Plenipotentiary and Extraordinary , allowing her to tour the United States , the Soviet Union , Yugoslavia , and Cuba . Throughout her travels , she became friends with Richard Nixon , Muammar Gaddafi , Saddam Hussein , Fidel Castro , and Joseph Tito . She traveled to Iraq to secure oil and to Libya for a peace treaty with the Moro National Liberation Front . 
 Imelda Marcos held the position of Minister of Human Settlements , allowing her to construct the Cultural Center of the Philippines , the Philippine Heart Center , the Lung Center of the Philippines , the Philippine International Convention Center , the Coconut Palace , the Manila Film Center , and the <unk> Safari Park . She purchased property in Manhattan in the 1980s , including the US $ 51 million Crown Building , the Woolworth Building in 40 Wall Street , and the US $ 60 million Herald Centre . She declined to buy the Empire State Building because she felt it was " too ostentatious . " 
 = = Power struggle = = 
 Imelda Marcos was instrumental in the 1980 exile of opposition leader Benigno Aquino , Jr . , who had suffered a heart attack during his imprisonment . Martial law in the Philippines was later lifted in 1981 but Ferdinand Marcos continued to be president . While her husband began to suffer from lupus erythematosus , she effectively ruled in his place . Aquino returned in 1983 but was assassinated at the Manila International Airport upon his arrival . With accusations against her beginning to rise , Ferdinand created the <unk> Commission , a fact @-@ finding committee , to investigate her , ultimately finding her not guilty . 
 On February 7 , 1986 , snap elections were held between Ferdinand Marcos and Corazon Aquino , the widow of Benigno Aquino Jr . Despite her husband claiming to have won the elections , allegations of vote rigging led to mass protests that would be later known as the People Power Revolution . On February 25 , the Marcos family fled to Hawaii . After she left Malacañang Palace , she was found to have left behind 15 mink coats , 508 gowns , 1 @,@ 000 handbags , and pairs of shoes . The exact number of her shoes varies with estimates of up to 7 @,@ 500 pairs . However , Time reported that the final tally was only 1 @,@ 060 . The location where her shoes and jewelry were destroyed and the contents stolen . 
 In October 1988 , Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos , together with eight associates ( including Adnan Khashoggi , a Saudi Arabian businessman and weapons smuggler believed to have been involved with her husband 's regime ) , were indicted by a federal grand jury in Manhattan on charges of racketeering , conspiracy , fraud and obstruction of justice . Tobacco heiress Doris Duke posted $ 5 million bail for the former First Lady . The Marcos couple 's defense team was led by criminal defense attorney Gerry Spence . Actor George Hamilton , an unindicted co @-@ conspirator , testified at trial under a grant of immunity , acknowledging that he had received a $ 5 @.@ 5 @-@ million loan from an associate of hers . In July 1990 , following a three @-@ month trial , she was acquitted of all charges . By that time , Ferdinand had died in exile in Hawaii on September 28 , 1989 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Marcos was allowed to return to the Philippines by Corazon Aquino on November 4 , 1991 . The following year , she ran for president in the presidential elections on May 11 , 1992 , finishing 5th out of 7 candidates . On May 8 , 1995 , she was elected as a congresswoman of Leyte , representing the first district , despite facing a disqualification lawsuit in which the Supreme Court ruled in her favor . She sought the presidency again on May 11 , 1998 , but later withdrew to support the eventual winner Joseph Estrada and she finished 9th among 11 candidates . In November 2006 , she started her own business , a fashion label that included designing jewelry . In March 2008 , she was acquitted of charges of having illegally taken money from the country by the Manila Regional Trial Court due to reasonable doubt . 
 Marcos ran for the second district of Ilocos Norte in the elections on May 10 , 2010 to replace her son , Ferdinand Jr . , who ran for Senate under the Nacionalista Party . During her term , she held the position of Millennium Development Goals chairwoman in the Lower House . In 2011 , the <unk> 's Fifth Division ordered her to return US $ 280 @,@ 000 in government funds taken by her and her husband from the National Food Authority . She won re @-@ election on May 14 , 2013 in a bid to renew her term . On May 9 , 2016 , she was re @-@ elected again for her third and final term . 
 = = Wealth = = 
 Marcos allegedly owned assets worth US $ 10 billion . On one occasion , she spent $ 2 @,@ 000 on chewing gum at the San Francisco International Airport and , on another , she forced a plane to do a U @-@ turn mid @-@ air just because she forgot to buy cheese in Rome . Her collection of shoes , now lies partly in the National Museum of the Philippines and partly in a shoe museum in Marikina . Typhoon Haiyan ( Yolanda ) damaged her ancestral home in Tacloban , which also serves as a museum , although she still retains homes in Ilocos Norte and Makati , where she resides . 
 She allegedly owns Swiss bank accounts under the pseudonym " Jane Ryan " . Her claimed fortune came from Yamashita 's gold , a semi @-@ mythical treasure trove that is widely believed in the Philippines to be part of the Japanese loot in World War II . Her property used to include jewels and a 175 @-@ piece art collection , which included works by Michelangelo , Botticelli , Canaletto , Raphael , as well as Monet 's L <unk> et La Seine à <unk> ( 1881 ) , Alfred Sisley 's Langland Bay ( 1887 ) , and Albert <unk> 's Le <unk> de <unk> Sidi Said ( 1946 ) . 
 Switzerland 's federal tribunal ruled in December 1990 that cash in Swiss banks would only be returned to the Philippine government if a Philippine court convicted her . In March 2008 , a judge in Manila in the Philippines acquitted her of 32 counts of illegal transfers of funds to Swiss bank accounts between 1968 and 1976 , determining that the government had failed to prove its case . In 2012 , she declared her net worth to be US $ 22 million and she was listed as the second @-@ richest Filipino politician behind boxer and politician Manny Pacquiao . 
 In October 17 , 2013 , the attempted sale of two Claude Monet paintings , L 'Eglise de <unk> and Le Bassin Aux <unk> , became the subject of a legal case in New York against Vilma Bautista , a one @-@ time aide to Imelda Marcos . Bautista was sentenced in 2014 to 2 – 6 years in prison for attempting to sell " valuable masterpieces that belonged to her country " . On January 13 , 2014 , three collections of Imelda Marcos 's jewelry : the <unk> collection , the <unk> collection , and the Hawaii collection ; along with paintings of Claude Monet were seized by the Philippine government . In 2015 , a rare pink diamond worth $ 5 million was discovered in her jewelry collection . On February 16 , 2016 , the government of the Philippines announced that the three collections , valued at about $ 21 million , were to be auctioned off before the end of Benigno Aquino III 's term on June 30 , 2016 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Marcos influenced fashion in the Philippines , although her role as a patroness of the arts and fashion is still controversial . The second track of Mark Knopfler 's 1996 album Golden Heart , is a sardonic song about her . She was the subject of the 2003 documentary film , Imelda . In 2010 , British producer Fatboy Slim and musician David Byrne released a concept album about her life called Here Lies Love , which later became a rock musical . In Manila , local performance artist Carlos <unk> performs his Living La Vida Imelda walking tour , which was also performed in Dubai during 2012 . 
 Foreign honors 
 Jordan : Gran Cordon ( 1st Class ) of the Supreme Order of the Renaissance ( March 1 , 1976 ) 
 Romania : Order of August 23 , 1944 ( April 9 , 1975 ) 
 Sovereign Military Order of Malta : Dame Grand Cross of the Order pro <unk> <unk> 
 Spain : Dame Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic ( February 18 , 1974 ) 
 = The Cenotaph , Southampton = 
 The Southampton Cenotaph is a stone memorial at Watts Park in Southampton , England , originally dedicated to the casualties of the First World War . The memorial was designed by Edwin Lutyens and features a cenotaph on a plinth atop a gently curved pillar . The monument was intended to be abstract and graceful , encouraging a perception of the soldier having fallen in a peaceful , " beautiful death " . Decisions over which names should be engraved on the Southampton Cenotaph proved controversial in the 20th century , but the design was heavily influential in determining the form of Lutyens ' more famous Cenotaph in Whitehall . Long @-@ term weather damage to the memorial led to a glass wall being built alongside it in 2011 , incorporating the names of those Southampton citizens who died in subsequent conflicts . 
 = = History = = 
 The First World War between 1914 and 1918 caused casualties on a massive scale . Shortly after the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , a public meeting was held in the city of Southampton which voted to construct a memorial " to those who have fallen in the Great War " . A committee , headed by the Lord Mayor of Southampton , Sidney Kimber , was elected and discussions began as to what form such a memorial should take . The committee decided that their preferred option would be to construct a single , high @-@ quality memorial in a good location within Southampton and began to consider architects and locations , with a proposed budget of £ 10 @,@ 000 . Alfred <unk> , an architect on one of the sub @-@ committees , knew and recommended the architect Edwin Lutyens ; at this time Lutyens had been involved in the design of several war cemeteries but only one war memorial , which he had designed for South Africa . 
 Elements of the committee met with Lutyens in January 1919 to discuss options for the memorial . Lutyens argued against the committee 's initial proposed location on Asylum Green in favour of Watts Park , which the committee agreed to . <unk> 's initial design consisted of a large ceremonial pillar with a substantial archway on either side , each archway supporting a soldier lying on a sarcophagus . This was rejected due to the likely cost and instead <unk> suggested a single empty sarcophagus or cenotaph , supported by a plinth on top of a pillar , with pine cones mounted on urns standing on each side . This was agreed to at a public meeting in September and detailed work on the project began . The London firm of Holloway Brothers were selected as the contractor for the memorial ; the project was completed to time at a total cost of £ 9 @,@ 845 . 
 The Cenotaph was opened by General John Seely at a public ceremony on 6 November 1920 that included the playing of the Last Post and a two @-@ minute silence . Kimber was very pleased with both the project and Lutyens , and he hoped to build a second war memorial in Southampton using the architect , although this project never came to fruition . The Southampton Cenotaph was influential in later designs for war memorials both in England and abroad ; it was the first such cenotaph to be built and simpler versions of the same design were widely used to commemorate the First World War , including famously at the Cenotaph in Whitehall , London . 
 Issues arose after the erection of the memorial concerning the names inscribed on the Cenotaph . The committee had identified 1 @,@ 793 names of Southampton men , and a number of women , who had died during the war and these had been inscribed on the Cenotaph . After the unveiling of the monument various relatives approached the committee requesting that additional names be added ; after a newspaper campaign in the Southern Daily Echo newspaper , Kimber agreed to this and 203 additional names were inscribed in 1921 . Another name was added in 1922 , bringing the total to 1 @,@ 997 . More controversy surrounded the exclusion of the Jewish war dead from the memorial . Jews in Southampton had donated to the committee on the understanding that the memorial would commemorate not only Christian casualties but Jewish ones as well : one in ten adult male Jews in Southampton died during the conflict , twice the proportion for Southampton as a whole . Following the final decision on the design of the Cenotaph , however , which featured a prominent Christian cross , Jewish names were predominantly excluded from the memorial and only one Jewish name was finally inscribed on it . 
 By the start of the 21st century it became evident that the soft stone of the Cenotaph was deteriorating badly as a result of water damage and frost . <unk> the names on the monument was discounted as a solution due to the long term damage this repeated work would cause to the Cenotaph 's structure : the decision was made to expand the war memorial instead . A glass wall consisting of eight large panels 2 @.@ 85 m ( 9 ft ) by 1 @.@ 2 m ( 4 ft ) in size , was built alongside the Cenotaph at a cost of £ 130 @,@ 000 . The panels were engraved with the names of the World War I casualties and , in addition , those from Southampton who had died in later conflicts . The Memorial Wall included a total of 2 @,@ 368 names from the First World War , 927 from the Second World War and three from subsequent conflicts . This addition to the Cenotaph was opened on 11 December 2011 . 
 = = Design and symbolism = = 
 Lutyens final design for the Southampton Cenotaph reused elements of his previous work . The central pillar on which the plinth supporting the sarcophagus rests is a variant of the War Stone intended for the War Shrine in Hyde Park , which Lutyens designed in 1918 but which was never taken forward . The pillar is in fact slightly curved in imitation of the pillars at the Parthenon in Athens , and a similar effect is later repeated by Lutyens at the Whitehall Cenotaph . The urns on either side of the Cenotaph are drawn from Lutyens ' design for the military cemetery at Étaples , where the same design is used , but without the additional pine cones . Unlike Lutyens ' later work , the Southampton memorial is relatively heavily carved , including a large cross , the Southampton city crest , the arms of the different Armed Services , two lions and a sword , as well as the dedication to " Our Glorious Dead : Their Name <unk> For Evermore " . The thin sheets of white Portland stone on the outside of the monument hide an inner brick core . 
 Lutyens ' design predominantly draws on a cleaner , more streamlined version of the classical symbolism used in earlier monuments . Earlier monuments of the Second Boer War typically included figures of soldiers , sometimes falling in conflict , but always passing away heroically in a " beautiful death " with classical symbolism often used to distance the event of death from the observer , as typified in William Colton 's work at Worcester . Lutyens ' work at Southampton reacted to the criticism of this sometimes cluttered approach by adopting cleaner architectural forms , but still retaining the ideal of a peaceful , " beautiful death " . The Southampton Cenotaph makes use of an abstract , beautiful design intended to remove the viewer from the real world , and focus them on an idealised sense of self @-@ sacrifice and death . 
 = Pedro Afonso , Prince Imperial of Brazil = 
 Dom Pedro Afonso ( 19 July 1848 – 10 January 1850 ) was the Prince Imperial and heir apparent to the throne of the Empire of Brazil . Born at the Palace of São Cristóvão in Rio de Janeiro , he was the second son and youngest child of Emperor Dom Pedro II and Dona Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies , and thus a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza . Pedro Afonso was seen as vital to the future viability of the monarchy , which had been put in jeopardy by the death of his older brother Dom Afonso almost three years earlier . 
 Pedro Afonso 's death from fever at the age of one devastated the Emperor , and the imperial couple had no further children . Pedro Afonso 's older sister Dona Isabel became heiress , but Pedro II was unconvinced that a woman could ever be accepted as monarch by the ruling elite . He excluded Isabel from matters of state and failed to provide training for her possible role as empress . With no surviving male children , the Emperor started to believe that the imperial line was destined to end with his own death . 
 = = Infancy and early death = = 
