 = = = Birth = = = 
 Pedro Afonso was born at 08 : 00 on 19 July 1848 in the Palace of São Cristóvão in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . His full name was Pedro Afonso Cristiano Leopoldo Eugênio Fernando Vicente Miguel Gabriel Rafael Gonzaga . Through his father , Emperor Pedro II , he was a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza and was referred to using the honorific Dom ( Lord ) from birth . He was the grandson of Emperor Dom Pedro I and the nephew of the reigning Queen of Portugal , Dona Maria II . Through his mother , Teresa Cristina , he was a grandson of Don Francesco I ( Francis I ) and nephew to Don Ferdinando II ( Ferdinand II ) , who ruled as kings of the Two Sicilies in turn . 
 Following the birth , Pedro II received official congratulations at a formal reception held later that day , which according to a contemporary was an event " more splendid and better attended " than any since the Emperor was declared of age in 1840 . News of the birth of a male heir was received with rejoicing among the Brazilian people . Celebrations included <unk> and artillery salutes . City streets were illuminated for days after the birth , and an elaborate gala was held at court . The birth of Pedro Afonso was widely welcomed , as a male heir was regarded as imperative for the Empire 's continuation , even though the constitution allowed for female succession . Writer Manuel de Araújo Porto Alegre ( later Baron of Santo <unk> ) considered the birth of Pedro Afonso a " triumph " that had secured the succession . 
 Pedro Afonso 's baptism took place on 4 October 1848 . The ceremony was held privately in the Imperial Chapel , followed by public celebrations . The godparents were his granduncle Emperor Ferdinand I of Austria and his step @-@ grandmother Amélie of Leuchtenberg . Prime Minister and former regent Pedro de Araújo Lima ( then @-@ Viscount and later Marquis of Olinda ) and Mariana de Verna , Countess of Belmont represented the godparents , who were not present . Fireworks entertained the crowds , and a band shell that could hold more than a hundred musicians was raised for the festivities that followed . According to historian Hendrik <unk> , royal baptisms in imperial Brazil " stressed that the princes and princesses secured the dynasty 's future " . As the sole surviving male child , Pedro Afonso took precedence in the line of succession over his two older sisters , Dona Isabel and Dona Leopoldina . Pedro Afonso , as heir apparent to the Brazilian throne , was styled " Prince Imperial " from birth . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In 1847 and the two following years , Pedro II and his family spent the summer at Petrópolis . The traditional summer residence of the imperial family was at Santa Cruz Estate , a rural property that had belonged to the <unk> for generations . The shift to Petrópolis seemed an unwelcome novelty among members of the court , " who disliked any change that threatened the established ways and interests " . Bowing to tradition , the Emperor decided to again summer at Santa Cruz in 1850 . During the imperial family 's stay at the rural estate , Pedro Afonso and his sister Isabel were struck by fever . The princess eventually recovered , but the Prince Imperial died of convulsions at 04 : 20 on 10 January . Contemporaries argued that either encephalitis or a congenital disorder may have caused his death . 
 Pedro II regarded the death of his son as " the most fatal blow that I could ever receive , and certainly I would not have survived were it not that I still have a wife and two children " . The Emperor wrote to his brother @-@ in @-@ law Dom Fernando II , King @-@ consort of Portugal : " By the time you receive this , you will certainly have learnt of the grievous loss I have undergone ... God who has made me pass though so hard a testing , will in his mercy give me grounds to console my sorrows . " Pedro II had already lost another son , Dom Afonso , almost three years earlier . He revealed his inner turmoil in a sonnet : " Twice already I have suffered death , for the father dies who sees his son is dead . " Except for brief inspection visits , the Emperor avoided Santa Cruz thereafter . 
 A grand funeral was held for the Prince Imperial two days after his death . The streets were crowded with ordinary people who greatly mourned the prince 's death . So remarkable was the event that tourists paid for the privilege of watching the funeral procession from a hotel in downtown Rio de Janeiro . Pedro Afonso was buried in the mausoleum of the Convento de Santo Antônio ( Convent of Saint Anthony ) in Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão ( later Marquis of Paraná ) , one of Brazil 's leading politicians and then serving as president ( governor ) of the province of Pernambuco , summarized the prevalent view among Brazil 's ruling elite regarding the succession of the Empire when he addressed the Provincial Assembly : " It is my painful duty to inform you of the death of the Prince Imperial D. Pedro Afonso , which occurred on 10 January of the current year . It is the second time we lose the heir presumptive of the crown . " Honório Hermeto continued : " It must serve as a consolation to us , the certainty of [ good ] health of H [ is ] . M [ <unk> ] . the Emperor and his august wife . Both in the prime of their years , and full of life , still promise both numerous fruits from their conjugal bed as well as a male succession to the crown , as required for both the consolidation of our still recent institutions and the restless spirit of the century . " 
 What no one could foresee was that Pedro II and Teresa Cristina would have no more children . The reason is unknown , although scholars think it is probably because they no longer had sexual intercourse . The Emperor was devastated by the death of Pedro Afonso and was never able to cope with it entirely . According to historian Roderick J. Barman , Pedro II was " deeply affected , emotionally and intellectually " . The Emperor wrote a sonnet that expressed his feelings : 
 In the Emperor 's eyes , the deaths of his sons seemed to presage the end of the imperial system . His younger son had represented his future and that of the monarchy . Although the Emperor still had a legal successor in his daughter Isabel , he had little confidence that a woman could rule Brazil in the male @-@ dominated social climate of the time . He did nothing to prepare Isabel for the responsibilities of ascending the throne , nor did he attempt to encourage acceptance of a female ruler among the political class . The lack of a male heir caused him to lose motivation in promoting the imperial office as a position to be carried on by his descendants ; he increasingly saw the imperial system as so inextricably linked to himself that it could not survive him . 
 = = Titles , styles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 19 July 1848 – 9 January 1850 : His Imperial Highness The Prince Imperial 
 The prince 's full style and title was " His Imperial Highness Dom Pedro , Prince Imperial of Brazil " . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 The Prince Imperial was a recipient of the following Brazilian Orders : 
 Major Commander of the Order of Christ 
 Major Commander of the Order of Saint Benedict of Aviz 
 Major Commander of the Order of Saint James of the Sword 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Pedro I 
 Grand Cross and Grand Major Dignitary of the Order of the Rose 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Santa 's Little Helper = 
 Santa 's Little Helper is a recurring character in the American animated television series The Simpsons . He is the pet greyhound of the Simpson family . The dog was introduced in the first episode of the show , the 1989 Christmas special " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , in which his owner abandons him for finishing last in a greyhound race . Homer Simpson and his son Bart , who are at the race track in hope of winning some money for Christmas presents , see this and decide to adopt the dog . 
 Santa 's Little Helper has since appeared frequently on The Simpsons and the plots of many episodes center on him . During the course of the show , he has , for example , fathered litters of puppies , passed obedience school , had surgery for bloat , replaced Duffman as the mascot for Duff Beer , and been trained as a police dog at Springfield 's Animal Police Academy . Some of the episodes that focus on Santa 's Little Helper have been inspired by popular culture or real experiences that staff members of the show have gone through . 
 Although cartoon animals are often anthropomorphized , Santa 's Little Helper generally exhibits canine behavior . Cast member Dan Castellaneta currently provides the dog 's sounds on the show , although voice artist Frank Welker has also voiced him . Santa 's Little Helper has become a popular character following his appearances on The Simpsons . He ranked 27th in Animal Planet 's 2003 television special 50 Greatest TV Animals that was based on popularity , name recognition , and the longevity of the shows . He has also been featured in merchandise relating to The Simpsons , such as video games , board games , and comics . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 Santa 's Little Helper is a greyhound that appears on the animated television series The Simpsons and is the pet dog of the Simpson family . He can often be seen on the show in minor appearances , although there have been some episodes that feature him heavily , including the first episode of The Simpsons . In that episode , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " ( season one , 1989 ) , Homer discovers that he has no money to buy Christmas presents for the family . Desperate for a miracle , he and Bart go to the greyhound racing track on Christmas Eve in hopes of earning some money . Although Homer has inside information on which dog is the most likely to win , he instead bets on a last @-@ minute entry , Santa 's Little Helper , believing the dog 's Christmas @-@ inspired name to be a sign . However , the greyhound finishes last . As Homer and Bart leave the track , they watch the dog 's owner abandon him for losing the race . Bart pleads with Homer to keep the dog as a pet and he agrees after it affectionately licks him on the cheek . When Bart and Homer return home , Santa 's Little Helper is assumed by the rest of the family to be a Christmas present . 
 In various episodes , Santa 's Little Helper can be seen chewing on newspapers and other objects in the Simpsons ' household , destroying furniture , and digging holes in the backyard . In " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " ( season two , 1991 ) , he manages to infuriate the entire family by destroying valued items in the home . As a result , Homer and Marge want to get rid of the dog , but Bart and Lisa convince them that he can be trained at an obedience school . Santa 's Little Helper does not do well there as Bart is unwilling to use a choke chain suggested by the instructor . The night before the final exam , Bart and Santa 's Little Helper play , thinking it will be their last few hours together . This bonding breaks down the communication barrier , allowing the dog to understand Bart 's commands , and consequently pass the obedience school . 
 Santa 's Little Helper has fathered several puppies . In " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " ( season six , 1995 ) , he runs away to the dog racing track where he mates with a female greyhound named She 's the Fastest . She later gives birth to 25 puppies and when the Simpsons cannot take care of them any longer , they decide to sell them ; however , Mr. Burns steals the puppies and decides to make a tuxedo out of them . Before he does this , however , he becomes emotionally touched by them . This convinces him to never wear fur again and instead raise the puppies to be world @-@ class racing dogs . Santa 's Little Helper sires another litter of puppies with Dr. Hibbert 's poodle in the episode " Today I Am a Clown " ( season 15 , 2003 ) . These puppies are given away to townspeople . 
 The dog has been neglected or treated unfavorably by the family in some episodes . In " Dog of Death " ( season three , 1992 ) , he nearly dies of bloat and they decide to make budget cuts in order to pay for the required operation . Although the dog 's life is saved , the family begins to feel the strain of their sacrifices and starts treating him badly , causing him to run away . He ends up in the possession of Mr. Burns , who trains him to become a vicious attack dog . Several days later , Bart stumbles upon the trained Santa 's Little Helper and is attacked , but the greyhound eventually recognizes his old friend and stops . In " The Canine Mutiny " ( season eight , 1997 ) , Bart uses a fake charge card to buy a well @-@ trained rough collie named Laddie from a mail @-@ order catalog . Laddie learns many tricks that Santa 's Little Helper is completely unable to perform , and the Simpson family nearly forgets about their old pet . Bart eventually gives Santa 's Little Helper away instead of Laddie when repo men take back everything he fraudulently purchased . Feeling guilty about this disloyalty and bored with his too perfect new dog , Bart tries to get him back . When he finally finds him , Santa 's Little Helper is serving as a seeing @-@ eye dog for a blind man , but eventually decides to return to the family . 
 In " Stop or My Dog Will Shoot " ( season 18 , 2007 ) , Santa 's Little Helper becomes a local hero after finding a lost Homer , and the Simpsons decide to enroll him in the Animal Police Academy . However , his new crime @-@ fighting job makes him jaded and one day at home he bites Bart. The Simpsons must therefore send the dog away to live with officer Lou . However , he gets to return after saving Bart from a toxic smoke cloud at school and then leaving the police force . In " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " ( season 22 , 2010 ) , after Santa 's Little Helper devours a pigeon with a broken leg that Bart was nursing , Bart gets mad at the dog and is unable to forgive him . The Simpsons therefore give him away to an ostrich farm . There , Bart says goodbye to him and explains that he should never , ever devour a bird . Bart then gets into a fight with an angry ostrich . After remembering that he was told that it 's wrong to kill birds , he ceases to aid Bart in the fight , confused at his own loyalty ( for Bart 's sake or his orders ) leaving Bart to strangle the ostrich to death . Bart then realizes that he could not help killing the pigeon and apologizes . Afterwards , the family goes back home with the dog . 
 The dog once replaced Duffman as the mascot for Duff Beer in the episode " Old Yeller Belly " ( season 14 , 2003 ) , after he was seen drinking from a can of beer by balancing it on his nose . He becomes known as <unk> McDuff and boosts sales of Duff Beer , making the family 's fortunes explode . However , this prompts his original sleazy owner and racing trainer to visit the Simpsons and prove that he 's the owner of the dog . The family later figures that if they can get Duffman to replace <unk> as the Duff mascot , they can get their dog back . They plan to turn Duffman into a hero at a Duff Beer @-@ sponsored beach volleyball event ; however , their plan fails and a drunk shark that 's discovered at the event becomes the new mascot instead . Santa 's Little Helper gladly returns to the Simpson family . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Santa 's Little Helper 's initial appearance on The Simpsons was in the first episode of the series , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , which aired on Dec. 17 , 1989 . Since then , he has become a recurring character . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening told TV Guide in 2000 that " we [ the staff ] painted ourselves into a corner with our Christmas episode . Once we wrote the dog into the show , we were stuck with him . " The name " Santa 's Little Helper " was chosen because , according to writer Al Jean in the same TV Guide article , " we needed a name that would inspire Homer to bet on him , an omen , a Christmas name since he was betting on Christmas Eve . But , at that point , nobody was thinking long @-@ term . We weren 't considering what might happen in ten years , when we 've got to use this name . " Although " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " was the first episode of the series to air on TV , it was the eighth episode produced by the staff . It was chosen to air first because there were animation problems with the others . Jean told the Houston Chronicle in 2001 that after the first episode was broadcast and " the next seven didn 't have the dog , people wondered why . " He also said in 2003 that the staff enjoyed the first episodes that centered on him , particularly " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , which is the reason that more episodes about him were written . 
 Writer John Swartzwelder has noted that the staff members of the show write the character Homer in the same way that they write Santa 's Little Helper : " Both are loyal . Both have the same emotional range . And both will growl and possibly snap if you try to take their food . " Although animals in cartoons often behave with " semi @-@ human awareness " , Groening said on the DVD audio commentary for the episode " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " that he prefers animals in cartoons to behave exactly the way they do in real life . As a result , Santa 's Little Helper is depicted in this way on the show . There have , however , been some exceptions for gags , but most of the time the staff of The Simpsons tries to keep animals acting realistically . Several journalists have commented on the greyhound 's lack of intelligence . In an article that compared The Simpsons to the animated series Family Guy , Todd Camp of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram noted that " though Santa 's Little Helper may be the only Simpson who 's dumber than Homer , the Griffins ' pooch [ Brian Griffin ] is the brainiest member of the household " . In 1991 , Copley News Service 's Alison Ashton described Santa 's Little Helper as a " sweet and stupid dog " . Tom Coombe of The Morning Call wrote in 2002 that " fans of The Simpsons will tell you that the cartoon family 's dog [ ... ] is often dumb , disobedient and skittish . Fans of the real @-@ life breed will paint a different picture — of dogs that are peaceful , affectionate , [ and ] not given to drooling , panting " . 
 Some ideas for episodes featuring Santa 's Little Helper come from reality . The plot of " Dog of Death " was based on Swartzwelder 's experiences with his own dog , which had also suffered from bloat . However , unlike the events in the episode , Swartzwelder 's dog did not receive treatment as the operation was too expensive and the dog was too old . The Gold Coast Bulletin 's Ryan <unk> commented in 2005 that the Simpson family 's dilemma with the cost of the veterinary procedure is a realistic dilemma faced by many families who own dogs . Other episode ideas come from popular culture . For example , Santa 's Little Helper fathering 25 puppies in " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " is a parody of the Disney film One Hundred and One Dalmatians , and Mr. Burns ' technique of brainwashing him into an attack dog in " Dog of Death " parodies A Clockwork Orange . Susan McHugh , who teaches theories of animals , literature , and culture at the University of New England , wrote in her 2004 book Dog that , " remaining loyal to his unlikely saviours , the boy Bart and his father Homer , this greyhound has prompted satires of contemporary dog culture , from Barbara Woodhouse 's authoritarian training methods [ in " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " ] to Lassie 's flawless service to the status quo [ in " The Canine Mutiny " ] . " 
 = = = Sounds = = = 
 Although cast member Dan Castellaneta occasionally voiced Santa 's Little Helper for bit parts , American voice artist Frank Welker most often provided the sounds of the dog and other animals on the show from " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " , which aired on March 7 , 1991 , to " Home Sweet Homediddly @-@ Dum @-@ Doodily " , which aired on October 1 , 1995 . He said on his official website in 2007 that he liked portraying Santa 's Little Helper because the dog was a " sympathetic " character . Welker has been praised by staff members for his performances on the show . David Mirkin has noted that " he can do anything , and it fits perfectly . You forget you 're listening to a guy , and he 's a pleasure to work with . " Groening has commented that he was " unbelievably good " at doing animal noises . After 1995 , Castellaneta voiced Santa 's Little Helper on his own while Welker performed other animal noises until his full departure in 2002 , when he was denied a pay raise . In the " questions and answers " section on his website , Welker revealed that the reason he stopped performing as Santa 's Little Helper was because " The producers thought ... ' Hmmm , Dan barks pretty good , and we are already paying him and he seems to like doing the dog thing ... why do we need to pay Welker who comes in here , spends less than an hour , eats all the doughnuts , refuses to come to rehearsals ... let 's just give the damn dog to Dan ! ' " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Santa 's Little Helper has become a well @-@ known dog because of his appearances in the series . A writer for The Grand Rapids Press wrote in 2002 that " we all know who Homer , Marge , Bart , Lisa and Maggie are — heck , most Americans probably recognize their pets , Santa 's Little Helper and Snowball II " . McHugh wrote in Dog that while Master McGrath was the most famous greyhound of the 19th century , " the most popular greyhound a hundred years later " is Santa 's Little Helper . In the television special 50 Greatest TV Animals that was hosted by Mario Lopez and aired on Animal Planet in 2003 , the dog ranked 27th . Other dogs featured on the list were Lassie ( first ) , Eddie ( fifth ) , Snoopy ( sixth ) , Scooby @-@ Doo ( 13th ) , Rin Tin Tin ( 14th ) , Max ( 20th ) , Triumph , the Insult Comic Dog ( 24th ) , Buck ( 29th ) , Chipper ( 44th ) , and Tiger ( 50th ) . According to a writer for McClatchy News Service , the rankings were " determined by popularity , name recognition and how long the show lasted . " 
 Among fans and critics , Santa 's Little Helper has been mostly well received . He ranked seventh in a 2008 poll by Dog Whisperer 's Cesar Millan that determined the " best @-@ loved television dog of all time . " Lassie ranked first in the poll . In addition , he was voted the tenth favorite Simpsons character by readers of Simpsons Comics in the United Kingdom in 2010 . In a list of their top twelve favorite dogs from cartoons , comics , and animation , writers for The Tampa Tribune listed Santa 's Little Helper at number six , writing : " We admire his upbeat nature even after having his legs broken by Mr. Burns and being abandoned by Bart for another dog , Laddie . " He also ranked 75th on <unk> author Robert Berry 's list of " The 100 Greatest Dogs of Pop Culture History " in 2006 . The character has attracted some criticism too , though . While reviewing the episode " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " in 2010 , Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club wrote : 
 " As cartoon dogs go , Santa ’ s Little Helper is spectacularly unspectacular . In a realm of aggressively anthropomorphic canines , some of whom , admittedly , have strong speech impediments , he doesn ’ t talk or wisecrack or engage in shenanigans . His abilities and powers begin and end with masticating , defecating , and regular napping . You know , just like a real dog . Consequently , episodes devoted to Santa ’ s Little Helper tend to be a little on the sleepy side , even the Simpsons Christmas special that launched the series . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Since his first appearance on The Simpsons , Santa 's Little Helper has appeared in merchandise relating to the show . On the board art of The Simpsons Clue , a 2000 board game by USAopoly based on Clue , he is shown drinking Duff Beer that has been spilled on the floor . In another board game published by USAopoly called The Simpsons Monopoly , based on Monopoly and released in 2001 , the dog is featured as one of the six pewter playing pieces . Santa 's Little Helper has also appeared in issues of Simpsons Comics , in the 2007 film The Simpsons Movie , and in video games based on The Simpsons such as Night of the Living Treehouse of Horror and The Simpsons Game . In addition , the dog has been made into action figures by McFarlane Toys , action figures by Playmates Toys in the World of Springfield series , and plush toys . 
 Santa 's Little Helper has made an impact on real life in that an espresso @-@ based drink has been named after him at the award @-@ winning restaurant and bar Bambara in Salt Lake City 's Hotel Monaco . Bartender Ethan Moore told The Salt Lake Tribune in 2004 that it is " one of the most popular holiday drinks " at Bambara . In addition , a dog walking and pet sitting company in New York City , called " Santa 's Little Helper Dog Walking and Pet Sitting " , has been named after him . The greyhound has also appeared by himself on the cover of the October 16 , 2000 issue of TV Guide . This issue was released with 24 different covers , all featuring different characters from The Simpsons . 
 = Jugband Blues = 
 " Jugband Blues " is a song by the English psychedelic rock band Pink Floyd , and is featured on their second album , A Saucerful of Secrets , released in 1968 . Written by Syd Barrett , it was his sole compositional contribution to the album , as well as his last published for the band . Barrett and Pink Floyd 's management wanted the song to be released as a single , but were vetoed by the rest of the band and producer Norman Smith . " Jugband Blues " is directed towards anyone within Barrett 's proximity . A video was filmed for the song for the Central Office of Information . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Jugband Blues " was written around the same time as " Vegetable Man " . Both songs contain the same cynical humour , but while on " Vegetable Man " Barrett focuses his humour on himself , on " Jugband Blues " it is directed towards those around him . " Jugband Blues " was recorded on 19 October 1967 at De Lane Lea Studios . Barrett wanted a Salvation Army band to play on the track . He told them he wanted them to simply " play whatever they want " regardless of the rest of the group , while Norman Smith insisted on recorded parts . Eventually both versions were recorded and used . About The Salvation Army , band manager Andrew King said that Barrett " wanted a massive Salvation Army freak @-@ out , but that 's the only time I can remember Norman [ Smith ] putting his foot down . " The song features a distinctive three @-@ tiered structure : starting off in 3 / 4 meter , then into 2 / 4 and finishing off in 4 / 4 . 
 = = Video = = 
 The promotional video for the song was filmed in December 1967 , for the Central Office of Information in London . The video was supposed to be about Britain , and was meant to be distributed in the US and Canada . The video features Barrett ( shown with an acoustic guitar for the first time ) and the group miming to the song in a more conventional stage setting , with psychedelic projections in the background . The original audio to the promo is lost , and most versions use the BBC recording from late 1967 , consequently causing sync issues most evident as Barrett sings the opening verse . Barrett and Waters first watched the promo video during the second week of December 1967 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Barrett , along with Pink Floyd 's managers , Peter Jenner and King , wanted to release the song as a single in the new year , before being vetoed by both the band and Norman Smith . Jenner said that " Jugband Blues " , along with two others that he wrote around this time , ( " Scream Thy Last Scream " and " Vegetable Man " ) were " amazing songs . " When compared to " Bike " and " The Scarecrow " , Jenner said " You think , ' Well , OK , those are all right , but these are powerful disturbing art . ' I wouldn 't want anyone to have to go as mad and disturbed as Syd did to get that , but if you are going to go that disturbed give me something like that . That 's great art . " Jenner had also called " Jugband Blues " " an extraordinary song , the ultimate self @-@ diagnosis on a state of schizophrenia , [ and ] the portrait of a nervous breakdown . " 
 Barrett , by the beginning of the recording sessions for A Saucerful of Secrets , was already shrinking into a delirious state of mind , exacerbated by his feelings of alienation from the rest of the band . The common interpretation of the lyrics is that they reflect his schizophrenia and it has been argued that they could also be read as a criticism of the other band members for forcing him out . King said of the song : " The most alienated , extraordinary lyrics . It 's not addressed to the band , it 's addressed to the whole world . He was completely cut off . " Jenner said " I think every psychiatrist should be made to listen to those songs [ " Jugband Blues " , " Scream Thy Last Scream " and " Vegetable Man " ] . I think they should be part of the curriculum of every medical college along with those Van Gogh paintings like The Crows . " 
 " Jugband Blues " is one of two songs ( the other being " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " ) from A Saucerful of Secrets that were later included on the compilation album Echoes : The Best of Pink Floyd . The song was preceded on the compilation by " Wish You Were Here " , with lyrics by Roger Waters written in tribute to Barrett . The band Opal released a cover of the song on the Barrett tribute album Beyond the Wildwood in 1987 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Syd Barrett – acoustic guitar , electric guitar , lead vocals 
 Richard Wright – keyboards , tin whistle 
 Roger Waters – bass guitar 
 Nick Mason – drums , percussion , kazoo 
 with : 
 The Salvation Army band 
 = Siege of Malta ( 1798 – 1800 ) = 
 The Siege of Malta , also known as the Siege of Valletta or the French Blockade ( Maltese : L @-@ <unk> tal @-@ <unk> ) , was a two @-@ year siege and blockade of the French garrison in Valletta , the largest city and main port on the Mediterranean island of Malta , between 1798 and 1800 . Valletta had been captured by a French expeditionary force during the Mediterranean campaign of 1798 , and garrisoned with 3 @,@ 000 men under the command of Claude @-@ Henri Belgrand de Vaubois . When the French Mediterranean Fleet was destroyed at the Battle of the Nile on 1 August 1798 , the British Royal Navy was able to initiate a blockade of Malta , assisted by an uprising among the native Maltese population against French rule . Forced to retreat to Valletta , the French garrison faced severe food shortages , exacerbated by the effectiveness of the British blockade : although small quantities of supplies arrived in early 1799 , there was no further traffic until early 1800 , by which time starvation and disease was having a disastrous effect on health , morale , and combat capability of the French troops . 
 In February 1800 , a significant convoy under Contre @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Perrée sent from Toulon made a determined effort to resupply the garrison . The blockade squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Lord Nelson intercepted the convoy within sight of the starving troops on Malta and in the ensuing , but brief , battle , Perrée was killed and his flagship captured . The following month , the ship of the line Guillaume Tell set sail from Valletta to Toulon , laden with soldiers , but this too was intercepted and in a hard @-@ fought battle was forced to surrender to a larger British squadron . These defeats rendered the French position on Valletta untenable , and its surrender inevitable . Although Vaubois held out for another five months , he eventually surrendered on 4 September , by which time the garrison mortality from malnourishment and typhus had reached 100 men a day . Malta was retained by Britain , and control of the island was a factor in the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars in 1803 . Ultimately it remained under British government for 164 years , gaining independence in 1964 . 
 = = French invasion of Malta = = 
 On 19 May 1798 , a French fleet sailed from Toulon , escorting an expeditionary force of over 30 @,@ 000 men under General Napoleon Bonaparte . The force was destined for Egypt , Bonaparte seeking to expand French influence in Asia and force Britain to make peace in the French Revolutionary Wars , which had begun in 1792 . Sailing southeast , the convoy collected additional transports from Italian ports and at 05 : 30 on 9 June arrived off Valletta , the heavily fortified port @-@ city on the island of Malta . At this time , Malta and its neighbouring islands were ruled by the Knights of St. John , an old and influential feudal order weakened by the loss of most of their revenue during the French Revolution . The order was composed of men from across Europe , including a significant proportion of Frenchmen , who ruled over the majority Maltese population of the islands . The head of government was Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim , refused Bonaparte 's demand that his entire convoy be allowed to enter Valletta and take on supplies , insisting that Malta 's neutrality meant that only two ships could enter at a time . 
 On receiving this reply , Bonaparte immediately ordered his fleet to bombard Valletta and on 11 June General Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers directed an amphibious operation in which several thousand soldiers landed at seven strategic sites around the island . The French Knights deserted the order , and the remaining Knights failed to mount a meaningful resistance . Approximately 2 @,@ 000 native Maltese militia resisted for 24 hours , retreating to Valletta once the city of Mdina fell to General Claude @-@ Henri Belgrand de Vaubois . Although Valletta was strong enough to hold out against a lengthy siege , Bonaparte negotiated a surrender with Hompesch , who agreed to turn Malta and all of its resources over to the French in exchange for estates and pensions in France for himself and his knights . Bonaparte then established a French garrison on the islands , leaving 4 @,@ 000 men under Vaubois while he and the rest of the expeditionary force sailed eastwards for Alexandria on 19 June . 
 = = = Battle of the Nile = = = 
 Bonaparte 's convoy was pursued across the Mediterranean by a British fleet of 14 ships under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson , who learned of the invasion of Malta while anchored off Sicily , and subsequently attempted to intercept the French on their passage to Egypt . Nelson 's force overtook the French fleet on the night of 22 June in the dark without discovering their presence , and arrived off Alexandria on 28 June ahead of Bonaparte . Believing that the French must have had a different objective , Nelson turned northwards the following day to investigate the coast of Anatolia and missed Bonaparte 's arrival on 30 June by less than 24 hours . Unopposed , Bonaparte landed his army and marched on Alexandria , capturing the city and turning inland . The fleet was ordered to anchor in nearby Aboukir Bay and await further instructions . On 1 August , Nelson returned to the Egyptian coast and discovered the French fleet at anchor . Attacking immediately , Nelson 's ships managed to capture nine French ships of the line and destroy two , including the flagship Orient with only moderate damage to themselves . The destruction of the French Mediterranean fleet granted control of the sea to the Royal Navy , soon joined by the navies of Portugal , Naples , the Russian Empire and the Ottoman Empire as part of the hastily organised Second Coalition against France . 
 = = Maltese uprising = = 
 On Malta , the French had rapidly dismantled the institutions of the Knights of St. John , including the Roman Catholic Church . Church property was looted and seized to pay for the expedition to Egypt , an act that generated considerable anger among the deeply religious Maltese population . On 2 September , this anger erupted in a popular uprising during an auction of church property , and within days thousands of Maltese irregulars had driven the French garrison into Valletta . Valletta was surrounded by approximately 10 @,@ 000 irregular Maltese soldiers led by Emmanuele Vitale and Canon Francesco Saverio Caruana . The Maltese were armed with 23 cannon and a small squadron of coastal gunboats . Although there was intermittent skirmishing between the garrison and the Maltese , the fortress was too strong for the irregulars to assault . 
 In mid @-@ September , a squadron of Portuguese ships had arrived at the island . They included the Príncipe Real ( 90 cannons ; Captain <unk> ) , Rainha de Portugal ( 74 ; Captain Thomas Stone ) , São Sebastião ( 74 ; Captain Mitchell ) , Afonso de Albuquerque ( 74 ; Captain Donald Campbell ) , and the brig Falcão ( 24 ; Captain Duncan ) . Four of the captains were British , and all were under the command of Domingos Xavier de Lima , Marquess of Niza . In addition , the British ship HMS Lion ( Captain Manley Dixon ) and the fireship HMS Incendiary ( Captain George Baker ) were attached to the squadron . The Portuguese government had sent this force from the Tagus to augment Nelson 's fleet . After a brief stay off Malta the squadron continued to Alexandria . There Nelson sent the squadron back to blockade Malta . 
 Late in September , a British convoy consisting of 13 battered ships under Captain Sir James Saumarez appeared off the island . Survivors of the Battle of the Nile , they were in urgent need of repair and unable to directly assist in the siege . Nevertheless , Saumarez met with representatives of the Maltese and on 25 September , sent an offer of truce to Vaubois on their behalf . Vaubois replied " Vous <unk> , sans <unk> , <unk> que des Français sont dans la place . Le sort des <unk> [ sic ] ne vous regarde pointe . Quant à votre <unk> , les <unk> français ne sont point <unk> à ce style " ( " You might have forgotten that the French hold this place . The fate of the inhabitants is none of your concern . As for your ultimatum , French soldiers are not accustomed to such a tone " ) . Unable to persuade the French to give in , Saumarez instead provided the Maltese forces with 1 @,@ 200 muskets with which to continue the siege . Saumarez , unable to delay repairs any longer , sailed for Gibraltar at the end of the month . 
 On 12 October , the British ships of the line HMS Alexander under Captain Alexander Ball , HMS Culloden under Captain Thomas Troubridge and HMS Colossus under Captain George Murray joined Niza 's ships off Malta , marking the formal start of the blockade . On the same day , Vaubois withdrew the last of his soldiers into the fortified new city of Valletta , accompanied by approximately 100 Maltese nationals who had joined the French forces . The garrison numbered over 3 @,@ 000 men and initially at least was well supplied . In the harbour lay the ships of the line <unk> and <unk> and the frigate <unk> , all of which were former ships of the Maltese Navy , as well as the newly arrived Guillaume Tell and frigates Justice and Diane , survivors of the Battle of the Nile under Rear @-@ Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve , which had reached Malta at the end of September . 
 = = = Capture of Gozo = = = 
 On 24 October , after a ten @-@ day passage from Naples , Nelson joined the blockade squadron in HMS Vanguard accompanied by HMS Minotaur . On 28 October , Ball successfully completed negotiations with the French garrison on the small island of Gozo , the 217 French soldiers there agreeing to surrender without a fight and transferring the island , its fortifications , 24 cannon , a large quantity of ammunition and 3 @,@ 200 sacks of flour to the British . Although the island was formally claimed by King Ferdinand of Naples , it was administered by British and Maltese representatives , whose first action was to distribute the captured food supplies to the island 's 16 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Malta and the surrounding islands were not self @-@ sufficient and quickly the challenge of feeding the population became a strain on the islands ' resources , particularly with so many men under arms , Although now formally in command of the islands , King Ferdinand refused to assist with supplies , and the responsibility was left to Ball and his captains to arrange for the transport of supplies from Italy . By the end of the year , the number of Maltese troops in the field had fallen from 10 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 , supported by 500 British and Portuguese marines from the blockade squadron . The blockade fleet , consisting of five British and four Portuguese ships , operated from St. Paul 's Bay and Marsa Sirocco ( now Marsaxlokk ) on the island of Malta itself . 
 = = Blockade = = 
 1799 was a frustrating year for the British and Maltese forces deployed against Malta , as efforts to secure sufficient forces to prosecute the siege were repeatedly denied . Major @-@ General James St Clair @-@ Erskine , commander of British Army forces in the Mediterranean , considered the ongoing War of the Second Coalition in Italy and the defence of Minorca to be higher priorities than Ball 's siege , while the defeated Neapolitans continued to refuse assistance . A Russian squadron under Admiral Fyodor Fyodorovich Ushakov briefly appeared off the island in January , but was almost immediately ordered to join the Russian and Turkish forces besieging the island of Corfu . In addition to the difficulties the Allies faced in obtaining food for the Maltese population , the French succeeded in bringing supplies through the blockade in the early part of the year : in January 1799 a schooner reached Valletta from Ancona , and in February the frigate <unk> evaded the blockade and entered the port with supplies from Toulon . In May , a major French expedition under Admiral Etienne Eustache Bruix entered the Western Mediterranean , forcing Nelson to recall his scattered fleet from across the region , temporarily raising the blockade of Malta . During this operation a number of French supply ships took advantage of the absence of the British squadron to enter Valletta . 
 However , despite these occasional supply ships , the French garrison was rapidly running out of food . To conserve resources , the French forced the civilian population out of the city ; the civilian population dropped from 45 @,@ 000 in 1799 to 9 @,@ 000 by 1800 . Nelson himself took nominal command of the blockade , while Ball was made president of the Maltese National Congress . As liaison between the Maltese military and civilian commanders , he directed the distribution of supplies to the Maltese population , which was beginning to suffer from disease brought about by food shortages . He was replaced on Alexander by his first lieutenant , William Harrington . On 1 November Nelson again offered terms of surrender to Vaubois , and was again rebuffed , with the reply " <unk> de <unk> l <unk> de votre nation , comme vous <unk> celle de la <unk> , nous <unk> <unk> <unk> cette <unk> <unk> 'à l <unk> " ( " Keen to deserve the esteem your nation , as you seek that of ours , we are resolved to defend this fortress until the end " ) . By this point , Nelson was conducting the blockade at a distance , based at the Neapolitan court in Palermo . There he indulged in gambling and social engagements , becoming closer and closer to Emma , Lady Hamilton , wife of the ambassador Sir William Hamilton . His behaviour was heavily criticised , not just by his commanding officer Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Keith , who had recently replaced Earl St Vincent , but also by old friends such as Thomas Troubridge , who wrote to him " If you knew what your friends feel for you I am sure you would cut out all the nocturnal parties . . . I beseech your Lordship , leave off " . In December 1799 , Erskine was replaced by Lieutenant @-@ General Henry Edward Fox , who immediately redistributed 800 troops from the garrison at Messina to Malta under Brigadier @-@ General Thomas Graham . These troops filled the gap left by the withdrawal of Portuguese forces , which had been ordered to return to Lisbon . Disease began to spread within the city as rations became scarcer . The arrival of an aviso in January 1800 with the news of the events of 18 Brumaire that made Bonaparte First Consul of France prompted a brief respite and a public statement from Vaubois that the city would never be surrendered , although conditions continued to deteriorate . 
 = = Starvation and relief = = 
 = = = Convoy battles = = = 
 At the beginning of February 1800 , the Neapolitan government , reinstated in Naples after being expelled the year before , finally agreed to participate in the siege and 1 @,@ 200 troops were embarked on a squadron led by Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Keith 's flagship HMS Queen Charlotte and landed on Malta . For a time , both Keith and Nelson remained with the blockade squadron , which consisted of six ships of the line , along with a few Neapolitan Ships of The Line , and several British and Neapolitan frigates . On 17 February a message arrived with the squadron from the frigate HMS Success , which had been stationed off Sicily to watch for French reinforcements . Captain Shuldham Peard reported that he was shadowing a squadron of six or seven French ships sailing in the direction of Malta . These vessels were a relief squadron , sent from Toulon with extensive food supplies and 3 @,@ 000 additional troops under Contre @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Perrée in Généreux , one of the ships of the line that had escaped at the Nile two years earlier . On 18 February , the convoy was sighted by lookouts on Alexander . In the ensuing chase , Success captured a French transport and attacked the much larger Généreux . Although the frigate was damaged in the exchange , Success ' second broadside mortally wounded Perrée and delayed the ship of the line long enough for HMS Foudroyant , under Lord Nelson , and HMS Northumberland to join the battle . Heavily outnumbered , Généreux surrendered . 
 Shortly after the capture of the Généreux , Keith returned to the Italian coast in Queen Charlotte , where his flagship was lost in a fire that killed more than 700 of its crew , although Keith was ashore at the time . Before departing , Keith issued strict instructions to Nelson that he was not to return to Palermo , but was to confine any shore leave in Sicily to Syracuse . Nelson ignored the order and by late March was in Palermo conducting an open love affair with Emma Hamilton . In his absence , Troubridge took over command of the blockade , delegating temporarily to Captain Manley Dixon . Dixon led the squadron on 31 March when Guillaume Tell attempted to break out on Valletta under Decrés . Spotted by the frigate HMS Penelope under Captain Henry Blackwood , Guillaume Tell was chased northwards and engaged by first Penelope and then by Dixon 's HMS Lion , driving both ships back but suffering severe damage . Eventually the arrival of the powerful Foudroyant under Captain Sir Edward Berry proved too much for Decrés , but he continued fighting for another two hours before he was forced to surrender his battered and dismasted ship ; in the engagement , he lost more than 200 men killed and wounded . 
 = = = Nelson 's cruise = = = 
 In the aftermath of these defeats at sea , and with the food supply in Valletta dwindling , the British sent another demand for capitulation . Vaubois again refused , with the reply " Cette place est en trop bon état , et je suis moi @-@ même trop jaloux de bien servir men <unk> de <unk> mon honneur , por écouter vos propositions . " ( " This place is in too good a situation , and I am too conscious of the service of my country and my honour , to listen to your proposals " ) . In reality , the situation was dire : during February , prices of basic foodstuffs stood at 16 francs for a fowl , 12 francs for a rabbit , 20 sous for an egg , 18 sous for a lettuce , 40 sous for a rat and six francs per pound for fish . For the civilian typhus patients , the only food available was a horse @-@ flesh soup . 
 On 23 April , Nelson departed Palermo in Foudroyant , with both Sir William and Emma Hamilton on board as his guests . The party visited Syracuse and then travelled on to Valletta , where Berry took Foudroyant so close to the harbour that the ship came under fire from the French batteries . No hits were scored , but Nelson was furious that Emma had been taken into danger and immediately ordered Berry to withdraw . His anger was exacerbated by Emma 's refusal to retire from the quarterdeck during the brief exchange . From there , Foudroyant anchored at Marsa Sirocco , where Nelson and Emma lived together openly and were hosted by Troubridge and Graham . Sir William Hamilton , a prominent antiquarian as well as a diplomat , spent his time exploring the island . By early June , Nelson and his party had returned to Palermo , the beginning of a lengthy overland journey across Europe to Britain . Nelson also detached Foudroyant and Alexander from the blockade , again in defiance of Keith 's explicit orders , to assist the Neapolitan royal family in their passage to Livorno . Enraged at Nelson 's disobedience , Keith publicly remarked that " Lady Hamilton has had command of the fleet long enough " . In May , Troubridge returned to Britain and was replaced in command by Captain George Martin , while Graham was superseded by Major @-@ General Henry Pigot . 
 = = = Surrender = = = 
 The British blockade continued to prevent French efforts to resupply Valletta during the early summer of 1800 , and by August the situation was desperate : no horses or pack animals , dogs , cats , fowls or rabbits still lived within the city , the cisterns had been emptied and even firewood was in short supply . So desperate was the need for wood that the frigate <unk> , trapped by the blockade , was broken up for fuel by the beleaguered garrison . With defeat now inevitable , Vaubois gave orders that the frigates Diane and Justice were to attempt a breakout for Toulon , the frigates given minimal crews of approximately 115 men each . On 24 August , when the wind was favourable and the night dark enough to obscure their movements , the frigates put to sea . Almost immediately , lookouts on HMS Success sighted them and Captain Peard gave chase , followed by HMS Genereux and Northumberland . Diane under Captain Solen was too slow and Peard soon overhauled the under strength French ship , which surrendered after a brief exchange of shot . The frigate later became HMS Niobe . Justice , under Captain Jean Villeneuve , was faster however and outran its pursuers , eventually making Toulon , the only ship from Malta to do so during the siege . 
 On 3 September , with his men dying of starvation and disease at the rate of more than 100 a day , Vaubois called a council of his officers at which they unanimously decided to surrender . The next day , envoys were sent to the British and in the afternoon General Pigot and Captain Martin signed the agreed terms with Vaubois and Villeneuve . The Maltese were excluded from negotiations entirely , although their commander , Alexander Ball , subsequently became the first Civil Commissioner of Malta . The terms of the surrender were absolute : the island , its dependencies , fortifications and military supplies were all turned over to British control . This included the ships of the line <unk> and <unk> and the frigate <unk> ( these were all French ships previously captured from the Order ) , although only <unk> was of sufficient standard to be incorporated into the Royal Navy , becoming HMS <unk> . The other ships were broken up in their berths . Two merchant ships and a variety of smaller warships also were taken . 
 The capture of Malta returned control of the central Mediterranean to Britain and was an important step in the invasion and liberation of Egypt from French rule in 1801 . An essential condition of the Treaty of Amiens in the same year , which brought an end to the French Revolutionary War , was that the British leave Malta . Russian Tsar Alexander I had a long standing claim to the island as titular head of the Knights of St. John , and demanded that it be turned over to Russian control before agreeing any alliance with Britain . Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger flatly refused , and the Napoleonic Wars with France began soon afterwards , in part due to the failure of Britain to comply with this clause of the treaty . The island subsequently remained in British hands until its independence in 1964 . 
 = <unk> = 
 A tunicate is a marine invertebrate animal , a member of the subphylum Tunicata , which is part of the Chordata , a phylum which includes all animals with dorsal nerve cords and <unk> . The subphylum was at one time called Urochordata , and the term <unk> is still sometimes used for these animals . Some tunicates live as solitary individuals , but others replicate by budding and become colonies , each unit being known as a zooid . They are marine filter feeders with a water @-@ filled , sac @-@ like body structure and two tubular openings , known as siphons , through which they draw in and expel water . During their respiration and feeding , they take in water through the incurrent ( or inhalant ) siphon and expel the filtered water through the excurrent ( or exhalant ) siphon . Most adult tunicates are sessile and are permanently attached to rocks or other hard surfaces on the ocean floor ; others , such as salps , <unk> and <unk> , swim in the pelagic zone of the sea as adults . Various species are commonly known as sea squirts , sea pork , sea livers , or sea tulips . 
 The earliest unequivocal species of tunicate appears in the fossil record in the early Cambrian period . Despite their simple appearance and very different adult form , their close relationship to the vertebrates is evidenced by the fact that during their mobile larval stage , they possess a notochord or stiffening rod and resemble a tadpole . Their name derives from their unique outer covering or " tunic " which is formed from proteins and carbohydrates and acts as an exoskeleton . In some species , it is thin , translucent , and gelatinous , while in others it is thick , tough , and stiff . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 About 2 @,@ 150 species of tunicate exist in the world 's oceans , living mostly in shallow water . The most numerous group is the ascidians , and fewer than 100 species of these are found at depths greater than 200 m ( 660 ft ) . Some are solitary animals leading a sessile existence attached to the seabed , but others are colonial and a few are pelagic . Some are supported by a stalk , but most are attached directly to a substrate , which may be a rock , shell , coral , seaweed , mangrove root , dock , piling , or ship 's hull . They are found in a range of solid or translucent colours and may resemble seeds , grapes , peaches , barrels , or bottles . One of the largest is a stalked sea tulip , <unk> <unk> , which can grow to be over 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) tall . 
 The Tunicata were established by Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck in 1816 . In 1881 , Francis Maitland Balfour introduced a second name for the same group , " <unk> " , to emphasize the affinity of the group to other chordates . No doubt largely because of his influence , various authors supported the term , either as such , or as " Urochordata " , but the usage is invalid because " Tunicata " has precedence and grounds for superseding the name never existed . Accordingly , the current ( formally correct ) trend is to abandon the name <unk> or Urochordata in favour of the original Tunicata , and the name Tunicata is almost invariably used in modern scientific works . It is accepted as valid by the World Register of Marine Species and by the Integrated Taxonomic Information System . 
 Various common names are used for different species . Sea tulips are tunicates with colourful bodies supported on slender stalks . Sea squirts are so named because of their habit of contracting their bodies sharply and squirting out water when disturbed . Sea liver and sea pork get their names from the resemblance of their dead colonies to pieces of meat . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Tunicates are more closely related to <unk> ( including hagfish , lampreys , and jawed vertebrates ) than to lancelets , echinoderms , hemichordates , Xenoturbella or other invertebrates . 
 The clade comprising tunicates and vertebrates is called <unk> . 
 The Tunicata contain roughly 3 @,@ 051 described species , traditionally divided into these classes : 
 Ascidiacea ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) 
 Thaliacea ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) 
 Appendicularia ( Larvacea ) 
 Members of the <unk> were included in Ascidiacea in 2011 as a result of rDNA sequencing studies . Although the traditional classification is provisionally accepted , newer evidence suggests the Ascidiacea are an artificial group of paraphyletic status . 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Undisputed fossils of tunicates are rare . The best known and earliest unequivocally identified species is <unk> <unk> from the Lower Cambrian Maotianshan Shale at <unk> village , Anning , near Kunming ( South China ) . There is also a common <unk> , ( <unk> <unk> ) , of a possible tunicate found in Upper Ordovician bryozoan skeletons of the upper midwestern United States . 
 Three enigmatic species also were found from the Ediacaran period – Ausia <unk> from the Nama Group of Namibia , the sac @-@ like <unk> <unk> , and one from a second new Ausia @-@ like genus from the Onega Peninsula of northern Russia , Burykhia <unk> . Results of a new study have shown possible affinity of these Ediacaran organisms to the ascidians . Ausia and Burykhia lived in shallow coastal waters slightly more than 555 to 548 million years ago and are believed to be the oldest evidence of the chordate lineage of metazoans . The Russian Precambrian fossil <unk> is tentatively identified as a tunicate , though , because its fossils are nowhere near as well @-@ preserved as those of Ausia and Burykhia , this identification is questioned . 
 Fossils of tunicates are rare because their bodies decay soon after death , but in some tunicate families , microscopic spicules are present which may be preserved as microfossils . These spicules have occasionally been found in Jurassic and later rocks , but as few palaeontologists are familiar with them , they may have been mistaken for sponge spicules . 
 = = = Hybridization studies = = = 
 A multi @-@ taxon molecular study in 2010 proposed that sea squirts are descended from a hybrid between a chordate and a protostome ancestor . This study was based on a quartet partitioning approach designed to reveal horizontal gene transfer events among metazoan phyla 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 = = = Body form = = = 
 Colonies of tunicates occur in a range of forms and in the degree to which individual organisms , known as zooids , integrate with one another . In the simplest systems , the individual animals are widely separated , but linked together by horizontal connections called stolons which grow across the seabed . Other species have the zooids growing closer together in a tuft or clustered together and sharing a common base . The most advanced colonies involve the integration of the zooids into a common structure surrounded by the tunic . These may have separate buccal siphons and a single central atrial siphon and may be organized into larger systems with hundreds of star @-@ shaped units . Often the zooids in a colony are tiny , but very numerous , and the colonies can form large encrusting or mat @-@ like patches . 
 = = = Body structure = = = 
 By far the largest class of tunicates is the Ascidiacea . The body of an <unk> is surrounded by a test or tunic , from which the subphylum derives its name . This varies in thickness between species but may be tough , resembling cartilage , thin and delicate , or transparent and gelatinous . The tunic is composed of proteins and complex carbohydrates , and includes <unk> , a variety of cellulose . The tunic is unique among invertebrate exoskeletons in that it can grow as the animal enlarges and does not need to be periodically shed . Inside the tunic is the body wall or mantle composed of connective tissue , muscle fibres , blood vessels , and nerves . Two openings are found in the body wall : the buccal siphon at the top through which water flows into the interior , and the atrial siphon on the ventral side through which it is expelled . A large pharynx occupies most of the interior of the body . It is a muscular tube linking the buccal opening with the rest of the gut . It has a ciliated groove known as an <unk> on its ventral surface , and this secretes a mucous net which collects food particles and is wound up on the dorsal side of the pharynx . The gullet , at the lower end of the pharynx , links it to a loop of gut which terminates near the atrial siphon . The walls of the pharynx are perforated by several bands of slits , known as stigmata , through which water escapes into the surrounding water @-@ filled cavity , the atrium . This is criss @-@ crossed by various rope @-@ like mesenteries which extend from the mantle and provide support for the pharynx , preventing it from collapsing , and also hold up the other organs . 
 The Thaliacea , the other main class of tunicates , is characterised by free @-@ swimming , pelagic individuals . They are all filter feeders using a pharyngeal mucous net to catch their prey . The <unk> are bioluminous colonial tunicates with a hollow cylindrical structure . The buccal siphons are on the outside and the atrial siphons inside . About 10 species are known , and all are found in the tropics . The 23 species of <unk> are small , mostly under 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) long . They are solitary , have the two siphons at opposite ends of their barrel @-@ shaped bodies , and swim by jet propulsion . The 40 species of salps are also small , under 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long , and found in the surface waters of both warm and cold seas . They also move by jet propulsion , and often form long chains by budding off new individuals . 
 A third class , the Larvacea ( or Appendicularia ) , is the only group of tunicates to retain their chordate characteristics in the adult state , a product of extensive neoteny . The 70 species of <unk> superficially resemble the tadpole larvae of amphibians , although the tail is at right angles to the body . The notochord is retained , and the animals , mostly under 1 cm long , are propelled by undulations of the tail . They secrete an external mucous net known as a house , which may completely surround them and is very efficient at trapping planktonic particles . 
 = = = Physiology and internal anatomy = = = 
 Like other chordates , tunicates have a notochord during their early development , but by the time they have completed their larval stages , they have lost all <unk> segmentation throughout the body . As members of the Chordata , they are true <unk> with endoderm , ectoderm , and mesoderm , but they do not develop very clear coelomic body cavities , if any at all . Whether they do or not , by the end of their larval development , all that remain are the pericardial , renal , and gonadal cavities of the adults . Except for the heart , gonads , and pharynx ( or branchial sac ) , the organs are enclosed in a membrane called an <unk> , which is surrounded by the jelly @-@ like mesenchyme . Tunicates begin life in a mobile larval stage that resembles a tadpole . A minority of species , those in the Larvacea , retain the general larval form throughout life , but most Tunicata very rapidly settle down and attach themselves to a suitable surface , later developing into a barrel @-@ like and usually sedentary adult form . The Thaliacea , however , are pelagic throughout their lives and may have complex lifecycles . 
 Tunicates have a well @-@ developed heart and circulatory system . The heart is a double U @-@ shaped tube situated just below the gut . The blood vessels are simple connective tissue tubes , and their blood has several types of corpuscle . The blood may appear pale green , but this is not due to any respiratory pigments , and oxygen is transported dissolved in the plasma . Exact details of the circulatory system are unclear , but the gut , pharynx , gills , gonads , and nervous system seem to be arranged in series rather than in parallel , as happens in most other animals . Every few minutes , the heart stops beating and then restarts , pumping fluid in the reverse direction . 
 <unk> blood has some unusual features . In some species of <unk> and <unk> , it contains high concentrations of the transitional metal vanadium and vanadium @-@ associated proteins in vacuoles in blood cells known as vanadocytes . Some tunicates can concentrate vanadium up to a level ten million times that of the surrounding seawater . It is stored in a + 3 oxidation form that requires a pH of less than 2 for stability , and this is achieved by the vacuoles also containing sulphuric acid . The vanadocytes are later deposited just below the outer surface of the tunic , where their presence is thought to deter predation , although it is unclear whether this is due to the presence of the heavy metal or low pH . Other species of tunicates concentrate lithium , iron , niobium , and tantalum , which may serve a similar function . Other tunicate species produce distasteful organic compounds as chemical defenses against predators . 
 Tunicates lack the kidney @-@ like <unk> organs typical of deuterostomes . Most have no excretory structures , but rely on the diffusion of ammonia across their tissues to rid themselves of nitrogenous waste , though some have a simple excretory system . The typical renal organ is a mass of large clear @-@ walled vesicles that occupy the rectal loop , and the structure has no duct . Each vesicle is a remnant of a part of the primitive coelom , and its cells extract nitrogenous waste matter from circulating blood . They accumulate the wastes inside the vesicles as urate crystals , and do not have any obvious means of disposing of the material during their lifetimes . 
 Adult tunicates have a hollow cerebral ganglion , equivalent to a brain , and a hollow structure known as a neural gland . Both originate from the embryonic neural tube and are located between the two siphons . Nerves arise from the two ends of the ganglion ; those from the anterior end innervate the buccal siphon and those from the posterior end supply the rest of the body , the atrial siphon , organs , gut and the musculature of the body wall . There are no sense organs but there are sensory cells on the siphons , the buccal tentacles and in the atrium . 
 Tunicates are unusual among animals in that they produce a large fraction of their tunic and some other structures in the form of cellulose . The production in animals of cellulose is so unusual that at first some researchers denied its presence outside of plants , but for some time now it has been accepted that it also occurs in the dermis of mammals . However , the tunicates are unique in their scale of application and production of cellulose , and possibly in having a functional cellulose synthesizing enzyme . When , in 1845 , Carl Schmidt first announced the presence in the test of some ascidians of a substance very similar to cellulose , he called it " <unk> " , but it is now recognized as cellulose rather than any alternative substance . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 Nearly all tunicates are suspension feeders , capturing planktonic particles by filtering sea water through their bodies . <unk> are typical in their digestive processes , but other tunicates have similar systems . Water is drawn into the body through the buccal siphon by the action of cilia lining the gill slits . To obtain enough food , an average <unk> needs to process one body @-@ volume of water per second . This is drawn through a net lining the pharynx which is being continuously secreted by the <unk> . The net is made of sticky mucus threads with holes about 0 @.@ 5 µm in diameter which can trap planktonic particles including bacteria . The net is rolled up on the dorsal side of the pharynx , and it and the trapped particles are drawn into the oesophagus . The gut is U @-@ shaped and also ciliated to move the contents along . The stomach is an enlarged region at the lowest part of the U @-@ bend . Here , digestive enzymes are secreted and a pyloric gland adds further secretions . After digestion , the food is moved on through the intestine , where absorption takes place , and the rectum , where undigested remains are formed into faecal pellets or strings . The anus opens into the dorsal or cloacal part of the <unk> cavity near the atrial siphon . Here , the faeces are caught up by the constant stream of water which carries the waste to the exterior . The animal orientates itself to the current in such a way that the buccal siphon is always upstream and does not draw in contaminated water . 
 Some ascidians that live on soft sediments are detritivores . A few deepwater species , such as <unk> <unk> , are sit @-@ and @-@ wait predators , trapping tiny crustacea , nematodes , and other small invertebrates with the muscular lobes which surround their buccal siphons . Certain tropical species in the family <unk> have symbiotic green algae or cyanobacteria in their tunics , and one of these symbionts , <unk> , is unique to tunicates . Excess photosynthetic products are assumed to be available to the host . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 <unk> are almost all hermaphrodites and each has a single ovary and testis , either near the gut or on the body wall . In some solitary species , sperm and eggs are shed into the sea and the larvae are planktonic . In others , especially colonial species , sperm is released into the water and drawn into the atria of other individuals with the incoming water current . Fertilization takes place here and the eggs are brooded through their early developmental stages . Some larval forms appear very much like primitive chordates with a notochord ( stiffening rod ) and superficially resemble small tadpoles . These swim by undulations of the tail and may have a simple eye , an ocellus , and a balancing organ , a statocyst . 
 When sufficiently developed , the larva of the sessile species finds a suitable rock and cements itself in place . The larval form is not capable of feeding , though it may have a rudimentary digestive system , and is only a dispersal mechanism . Many physical changes occur to the tunicate 's body during metamorphosis , one of the most significant being the reduction of the cerebral ganglion , which controls movement and is the equivalent of the human brain . From this comes the common saying that the sea squirt " eats its own brain " . In some classes , the adults remain pelagic ( swimming or drifting in the open sea ) , although their larvae undergo similar metamorphoses to a higher or lower degree . Colonial forms also increase the size of the colony by budding off new individuals to share the same tunic . 
 <unk> colonies grow by budding off new zooids near the posterior end of the colony . Sexual reproduction starts within a zooid with an internally fertilized egg . This develops directly into an oozooid without any intervening larval form . This buds precociously to form four blastozooids which become detached in a single unit when the oozoid disintegrates . The atrial siphon of the oozoid becomes the <unk> siphon for the new , four @-@ zooid colony . 
 <unk> have a very complex life cycle that includes various zooids with different functions . The sexually reproducing members of the colony are known as gonozooids . Each one is a hermaphrodite with the eggs being fertilised by sperm from another individual . The <unk> is viviparous , and at first , the developing embryo feeds on its yolk sac before being released into the sea as a free @-@ swimming , tadpole @-@ like larva . This undergoes metamorphosis in the water column into an oozooid . This is known as a " nurse " as it develops a tail of zooids produced by budding asexually . Some of these are known as <unk> , have a nutritional function , and are arranged in lateral rows . Others are phorozooids , have a transport function , and are arranged in a single central row . Other zooids link to the phorozooids , which then detach themselves from the nurse . These zooids develop into gonozooids , and when these are mature , they separate from the phorozooids to live independently and start the cycle over again . Meanwhile , the phorozooids have served their purpose and disintegrate . The asexual phase in the lifecycle allows the <unk> to multiply very rapidly when conditions are favourable . 
 <unk> also have a complex lifecycle with an alternation of generations . In the solitary life history phase , an oozoid reproduces asexually , producing a chain of tens or hundreds of individual zooids by budding along the length of a stolon . The chain of salps is the ' aggregate ' portion of the lifecycle . The aggregate individuals , known as blastozooids , remain attached together while swimming and feeding and growing larger . The blastozooids are sequential hermaphrodites . An egg in each is fertilized internally by a sperm from another colony . The egg develops in a brood sac inside the <unk> and has a placental connection to the circulating blood of its " nurse " . When it fills the <unk> 's body , it is released to start the independent life of an oozooid . 
 <unk> only reproduce sexually . They are protandrous hermaphrodites , except for Oikopleura dioica which is <unk> , and a larva resembles the tadpole larva of ascidians . Once the trunk is fully developed , the larva undergoes " tail shift " , in which the tail moves from a rearward position to a ventral orientation and twists through 90 ° relative to the trunk . The larva consists of a small , fixed number of cells , and grows by enlargement of these rather than cell division . Development is very rapid and only takes seven hours for a zygote to develop into a house @-@ building juvenile starting to feed . 
 During embryonic development , tunicates exhibit determinate cleavage , where the fate of the cells is set early on with reduced cell numbers and genomes that are rapidly evolving . In contrast , the amphioxus and vertebrates show cell determination relatively late in development and cell cleavage is indeterminate . The genome evolution of amphioxus and vertebrates is also relatively slow . 
 = = = Promotion of out @-@ crossing = = = 
 Ciona intestinalis ( class Ascidiacea ) is a hermaphrodite that releases sperm and eggs into the surrounding seawater almost simultaneously . It is self @-@ sterile , and thus has been used for studies on the mechanism of self @-@ incompatibility . Self / non @-@ self @-@ recognition molecules play a key role in the process of interaction between sperm and the <unk> coat of the egg . It appears that self / non @-@ self recognition in ascidians such as C. intestinalis is mechanistically similar to self @-@ incompatibility systems in flowering plants . Self @-@ incompatibility promotes out @-@ crossing , and thus provides the adaptive advantage at each generation of the masking of deleterious recessive mutations ( i.e. genetic complementation ) and the avoidance of inbreeding depression . 
 <unk> schlosseri ( class Ascidiacea ) is a colonial tunicate , a member of the only group of chordates that are able to reproduce both sexually and asexually . B. schlosseri is a sequential ( protogynous ) hermaphrodite , and in a colony , eggs are ovulated about two days before the peak of sperm emission . Thus self @-@ fertilization is avoided , and cross @-@ fertilization is favored . Although avoided , self @-@ fertilization is still possible in B. schlosseri . Self @-@ fertilized eggs develop with a substantially higher frequency of anomalies during cleavage than cross @-@ fertilized eggs ( 23 % vs. 1 @.@ 6 % ) . Also a significantly lower percentage of larvae derived from self @-@ fertilized eggs metamorphose , and the growth of the colonies derived from their metamorphosis is significantly lower . These findings suggest that self @-@ fertilization gives rise to inbreeding depression associated with developmental deficits that are likely caused by expression of deleterious recessive mutations . 
 = = = A model tunicate = = = 
 Oikopleura dioica ( class Appendicularia ) is a <unk> organism , reproducing only once in its lifetime . It employs an original reproductive strategy in which the entire female germ @-@ line is contained within an ovary that is a single giant <unk> cell termed the " <unk> " . O. dioica can be maintained in laboratory culture , and is of growing interest as a model organism because of its phylogenetic position within the closest sister group to vertebrates . 
 = = Invasive species = = 
 Over the past few decades , tunicates ( notably of the genera Didemnum and <unk> ) have been invading coastal waters in many countries . The carpet tunicate ( Didemnum vexillum ) has taken over a 6 @.@ 5 sq mi ( 17 km2 ) area of the seabed on the Georges Bank off the northeast coast of North America , covering stones , molluscs , and other stationary objects in a dense mat . D. vexillum , <unk> <unk> and Ciona <unk> have appeared and are thriving in Puget Sound and Hood Canal in the Pacific Northwest . 
 Invasive tunicates usually arrive as fouling organisms on the hulls of ships , but may also be introduced as larvae in ballast water . Another possible means of introduction is on the shells of molluscs brought in for marine cultivation . Current research indicates many tunicates previously thought to be indigenous to Europe and the Americas are , in fact , invaders . Some of these invasions may have occurred centuries or even millennia ago . In some areas , tunicates are proving to be a major threat to aquaculture operations . 
 = = Use by humans = = 
 = = = Medical uses = = = 
 Tunicates contain a host of potentially useful chemical compounds , including : 
 <unk> , effective against various types of cancer as antivirals and immunosuppressants 
 <unk> , effective against various types of cancer 
 <unk> , effective against various types of cancer 
 Tunicates are able to correct their own cellular abnormalities over a series of generations , and a similar regenerative process may be possible for humans . The mechanisms underlying the phenomenon may lead to insights about the potential of cells and tissues to be reprogrammed and to regenerate compromised human organs . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Various Ascidiacea species are consumed as food around the world . In Japan and Korea , the sea pineapple ( <unk> <unk> ) is the main species eaten . It is cultivated on dangling cords made of palm fronds . In 1994 , over 42 @,@ 000 tons were produced , but since then , mass mortality events have occurred among the farmed sea squirts ( the tunics becoming soft ) , and only 4 @,@ 500 tons were produced in 2004 . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 The use of tunicates as a source of biofuel is being researched . The cellulose body wall can be broken down and converted into ethanol , and other parts of the animal are protein @-@ rich and can be converted into fish feed . <unk> tunicates on a large scale may be possible and the economics of doing so are attractive . As tunicates have few predators , their removal from the sea may not have profound ecological impacts . Being sea @-@ based , their production does not compete with food production as does the cultivation of land @-@ based crops for biofuel projects . 
 Some tunicates are used as model organisms . Ciona intestinalis and Ciona <unk> have been used for developmental studies . Both species ' mitochondrial and nuclear genomes have been sequenced . The nuclear genome of the <unk> Oikopleura dioica appears to be one of the smallest among metazoans and this species has been used to study gene regulation and the evolution and development of chordates . 
 = Chao ( Sonic ) = 
 Chao ( / <unk> / ; Japanese : <unk> ) are fictional life forms in the Sonic the Hedgehog video game series published by Sega . They are small , childlike creatures that go through a complex life cycle and exist in several visual forms depending on how they are raised . Developer Sonic Team incorporated Chao into the games to encourage players to explore levels and support the good – evil dichotomy of Sonic Adventure 2 . 
 Chao have appeared in many games in the series , beginning with Sonic Adventure in 1998 . They usually take the form of digital pets , but have also played parts in the story and figured into other gameplay elements . Most notably , the character Cream the Rabbit has a Chao named Cheese , whom she uses to attack enemies . They have also appeared in games outside the series , the Sonic the Hedgehog comics , and the Sonic X anime , as well as being featured in promotions and merchandise . Critics have given mixed opinions on Chao and their integration into Sonic gameplay , generally praising their worth as a diversion but criticizing Chao minigames ' low interactivity . 
 = = Conception and characteristics = = 
 Sonic Team 's Takashi Iizuka stated in an interview with video game publication 1UP.com that Chao were incorporated into Sonic Adventure " so that new players would be forced to go out , explore the action sections , and find <unk> and things . " Chao were designed as a " relative neutral entity " in this game . However , to remain consistent with the good – evil dichotomy of Sonic Adventure 2 , they were designed so that the player could raise them as " Hero <unk> " or " Dark Chao " . Chao were given the ability to socialize and interact in Sonic Adventure 2 in order to make the game unique , and to more resemble " a real artificial life form . " 
 Chao are small creatures with a pudding @-@ like body and behave much like human infants , with pleasant and relaxing personalities . Professor Chao , a minor character in Sonic Adventure 2 , states that Chao are cute , and enjoy toys and being held or petted . However , they dislike being held while the player jumps , spins around , or throws them . Chao 's diets consist of tree fruit and coconuts . Chao hatch from eggs found in Chao Gardens . When the player spends enough time with a Chao in the Chao Garden , the Chao develops a cocoon ; it hatches from this as an adult . Eventually it develops another cocoon . If the Chao has been treated well , the cocoon is pink and the Chao is reincarnated as an egg ; the cycle then restarts and the Chao remembers the player . If , however , the Chao has been treated poorly , the cocoon is gray and the Chao dies , removing every trace of itself from the game . Chao can breed to produce fertile eggs . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Chao have appeared in numerous Sonic the Hedgehog video games as digital pets . They made their first appearance in the 1998 Dreamcast game Sonic Adventure . The player can raise them , enter them in races , and export them to Chao Adventure , a game for the Dreamcast 's VMU peripheral . The player can also trade Chao or post their high scores online using the Dreamcast 's Internet capabilities . The Chao raising feature was expanded in Sonic Adventure 2 ; Chao may become " Hero Chao " or " Dark Chao " depending on whether the game 's " hero " characters ( Sonic the Hedgehog , Miles " Tails " Prower , and Knuckles the Echidna ) or " dark " characters ( Shadow the Hedgehog , Doctor Eggman , and Rouge the Bat ) are nicer to them . Chao can enter karate competitions in this game , as well as racing . The Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) games Sonic Advance , Sonic Advance 2 , and Sonic Pinball Party feature a " Tiny Chao Garden " , similar to the Chao Gardens of Sonic Adventure and Sonic Adventure 2 but with minigames in place of racing and karate competitions . Chao can be transferred between Sonic Adventure 2 : Battle and Sonic Adventure DX : Director 's Cut — Nintendo GameCube ports of Sonic Adventure 2 and Sonic Adventure — and the GBA games featuring a Tiny Chao Garden . Unusually , a generic Chao is playable in the party game Sonic Shuffle . 
 Chao have also appeared in the series as minor characters and gameplay elements . Two Chao — one Normal and one Dark — who drive Chao @-@ styled <unk> are playable characters in the two @-@ player battle mode of Sonic Adventure 2 : Battle . On the Sonic the Hedgehog @-@ styled pinball board in Sonic Pinball Party , one of the player 's objectives is to hatch several Chao eggs . Each world in the 2004 GBA game Sonic Advance 3 features Chao @-@ inspired minigames to earn extra lives for the player , and a sidequest that involves finding Chao to obtain Chaos Emeralds . 2007 's PlayStation Portable installment Sonic Rivals 2 hides Chao throughout levels to be found in a free play mode . In the 2008 Nintendo DS role @-@ playing game Sonic Chronicles : The Dark Brotherhood , Chao eggs are hidden throughout the in @-@ game universe for the player to find and hatch . The resulting infant Chao can be equipped to characters . This affects the characters ' performance in battle ; for example , one kind will increase the character 's hit points . The game features a multiplayer mode in which Chao can be traded between players who each have a copy of the game . Chao take the form of an item in the " Panel Flip " party game of the 2009 Wii and DS game Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Winter Games . Each player 's object is to claim as many panels as possible in a six @-@ by @-@ six grid ; finding a Chao upon flipping a panel claims all panels in a given row or column for the player . One mission in Sonic Generations ( 2011 ) involves racing against Cream the Rabbit to collect lost Chao in a city location . 
 Cream , a prominent character in the series , has a Chao named Cheese as a partner . In a move to keep her image safe , she often uses him to attack enemies instead of doing so herself . Other notable Chao include Chaos , guardian of the Chao , who serves as an antagonist in Sonic Adventure ; Omochao , a robotic ( often described as annoying by players ) Chao who appears in several games as a means of player tutorial ; and Chocola , Cheese 's twin whom Cream , Amy Rose , and Big the Cat search for over the course of Sonic Heroes . 
 Chao have also made appearances in video games outside the Sonic the Hedgehog series . In the 2004 PlayStation 2 game Sega Superstars ; the player uses points earned during the game to please a pet Chao . Marking the introduction of the character Sonic the Hedgehog to the 2008 Wii game Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Chao and other characters from the Sonic the Hedgehog series appear as collectible trophies and stickers . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Chao were recurring characters in the Sonic X anime that ran from 2003 to 2006 . In the episode " Little Chao Lost " , Cheese becomes lost while swimming in a stream . The main characters find him at the stream 's end , in a Chao colony , where Doctor Eggman shows up to steal a supposed Chaos Emerald from them until he is defeated . Later on , in " Flood Fight " , a colony of Chao appears after a battle with Chaos ; they turn out to be Chaos ' old friends and embrace it as it leaves with Tikal the Echidna to return to the past . 
 Chao have also made occasional appearances in Archie Comics ' Sonic the Hedgehog comic book series . They debuted in an Sonic Adventure @-@ based story arc , where they work together with Tikal to defeat Chaos . At one point , Sonic , Tails , and Knuckles find a Chao garden and one Chao followed Sonic home , and after spending time around his <unk> father came to resemble Omochao . However , Eggman destroys the garden , and the Chao migrate to a lake . Much later , Cream and her mother Vanilla protect a frightened but incompetent group of Chao from Eggman 's assistant , Snively . Cream 's friend Amy Rose realizes they are the same group from the lake and , to Cream 's delight , suggests that the lake can be converted to a Chao garden . Following the comic reboot , Cheese continued to accompany Cream while Chocola was revealed to live with her mother Vanilla and Gemerl ( from Sonic Advance 3 ) . The heroes would also discover a Chao Garden hidden in an undersea cavern whose inhabitants included an ancient Chao named Aquarius and a guard dog @-@ like Chao named Crusher . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 Chao and the Chao @-@ raising system have received mixed to positive reviews . In a review of Sonic Adventure , GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow stated that " [ w ] ith the Chao @-@ breeding simulation and the minigames , Sonic offers much more beyond the completion of its story . " IGN stated that " SA more than has the extras department covered . " This enthusiasm was extended to IGN 's reviews of Sonic Adventure 2 , Sonic Advance , and Sonic Adventure DX : Director 's Cut . GameSpot 's Shane Satterfield was critical of the Chao raising feature in Sonic Adventure 2 : Battle , stating that " there 's little in the way of interactivity " and that " the [ C ] hao training aspect using the Game Boy Advance is little more than a novelty . " However , GameSpy 's Shane Bettenhausen praised the feature in the game , comparing Chao to Tamagotchi digital pets . GameSpot 's Frank Provo noted the appeal to " those people who might only enjoy pinball in passing " that Chao brought to Sonic Pinball Party . 1UP.com 's Chris Baker called the Chao feature in Sega Superstars " ultimately worthless ... but some might find it amusing . " In a review of Sonic Chronicles : The Dark Brotherhood , GameSpot 's Shiva Stella praised the level of strategy that the game 's Chao system added . Destructoid 's Jim Sterling voiced a similar opinion , although saying that Chao had been " rubbish " in previous games . 
 A Chao keychain was released as part of a Sonic X character keychain series . Between July 27 and September 8 , 2002 , Sega hosted events at Tokyo @-@ based department stores to promote upcoming Sega video games . Attendees could download " Chao Mini Garden " s and exclusive Chao to their copies of Sonic Advance . Chao clothing clips , along with accessories based on other Sega characters , were available . 
 Chao 's notability extends beyond the Sonic series and related media ; Mary Jane Irwin of IGN used " Chao program " to describe Pokémon Channel in her review of the game . 
 = Joseph Hazelwood = 
 Joseph Jeffrey Hazelwood ( born September 24 , 1946 ) is an American sailor . He was the captain of Exxon Valdez during its 1989 oil spill . He was accused of being intoxicated which contributed to the disaster , but was cleared of this charge at his 1990 trial after witnesses testified that he was sober around the time of the accident . Hazelwood was convicted of a lesser charge , negligent discharge of oil ( a misdemeanor ) , fined $ 50 @,@ 000 , and sentenced to 1 @,@ 000 hours of community service . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Hazelwood was born in Hawkinsville , Georgia , but was raised in Huntington , Long Island , New York . His father , Joseph was a United States Marine Corps torpedo bomber pilot turned airline pilot . His mother , Margaret , was born in Georgia . Hazelwood was their first @-@ born son . He was married in 1969 to Suzanne and has one daughter , Alison ( born September 7 , 1975 ) . 
 In 1964 , Hazelwood graduated from Huntington High School , where his IQ was reportedly tested at 138 . As a youth he was an avid sailor and was a member of the Sea Scouts . In May 1968 , he received a bachelor of science degree in marine transportation from the State University of New York Maritime College . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Following college , on June 10 , 1968 he was hired as a Third Mate by Humble Oil and Refining Company , which later became Exxon Shipping Company . His first ship was Esso Florence homeported in Wilmington , North Carolina . Hazelwood climbed the ranks of the merchant marine until he obtained a master 's license at age 31 . 
 By age 32 , he was the youngest captain working for Exxon when he took command of Exxon Philadelphia , a California @-@ to @-@ Alaska oil tanker , in 1978 . In 1985 he was master of Exxon Chester when the asphalt carrier ran into a storm during its New York to South Carolina trip . High winds damaged the ship 's mast including radar and radio communications antennas . Though the crew was prepared to abandon ship , Hazelwood rallied them and guided the ship to safety . In 1987 , he became the alternate master of Exxon Valdez which subsequently received Exxon Fleet safety awards for the year of 1987 and 1988 . 
 Hazelwood 's driver 's license had been suspended or revoked three times by the state of New York for alcohol violations since 1984 . At the time of the Exxon Valdez incident , his New York state driving privileges were suspended as a result of a driving under the influence arrest on September 13 , 1988 . He entered a rehabilitation program in 1985 at South Oaks Hospital in Amityville , New York . Following rehabilitation he received 90 days of leave to attend Alcoholics Anonymous , but it is not clear if he attended during that leave . 
 = = Exxon Valdez oil spill = = 
 Exxon Valdez departed the port of Valdez , Alaska at 9 : 12 p.m. March 23 , 1989 with 53 million gallons of crude oil bound for California . A harbor pilot guided the ship through the Valdez Narrows before departing the ship and returning control to Hazelwood , the ship 's master . The ship maneuvered out of the outbound traffic lane in the Traffic Separation Scheme ( TSS ) to avoid icebergs . Following the maneuver and sometime after 11 p.m. , Hazelwood departed the navigation bridge and was in his stateroom at the time of the accident . 
 He left Third Mate Gregory Cousins in charge of the navigation bridge and Able Seaman Robert Kagan at the helm with instructions from the third mate to return to the southbound traffic lane in the TSS at a prearranged point . Exxon Valdez failed to return to the shipping lanes and struck Bligh Reef at around 12 : 04 a.m. March 24 , 1989 . The accident resulted in the discharge of around 11 million gallons of oil , 20 % of the cargo , into Prince William Sound . 
 During Hazelwood 's trial following the accident , Alaska state prosecutors failed to convince the jury that Hazelwood was intoxicated at the time of the grounding . By his own admission , Hazelwood drank " two or three vodkas " between 4 : 30 and 6 : 30 that same night , his blood alcohol content was found to be <unk> . However , the defense argued that the blood samples were taken nearly ten hours after the incident and were mishandled . 
 Most states , including Alaska , do not allow samples after three hours and a preservative required to halt fermentation was not added to the sample . Fermentation could have added to the amount of alcohol in the sample , making the result invalid . As a result of the accident , in 1991 the United States Coast Guard suspended his masters ' license for a period of nine months . Hazelwood was acquitted on all felony charges , but was convicted of a misdemeanor charge of negligent discharge of oil , fined $ 50 @,@ 000 , and sentenced to 1 @,@ 000 hours of community service . 
 = = Post @-@ Exxon Valdez = = 
 Hazelwood never had his masters ' license revoked and it remains valid to this date , but he has been unable to find long @-@ term work as a captain after the spill . His alma mater , SUNY Maritime College , hired him in a show of solidarity as a teacher aboard the T / S Empire State V the year after the incident with the Valdez . In 1997 , he was working as a para @-@ legal and maritime consultant with New York City 's <unk> & Brown , the firm that represented him in his legal cases . He was residing in his native Long Island as of 1997 . 
 Though he was originally sentenced to assist with the clean @-@ up of the oil spill , due to the lengthy appeals process , his community service was conducted in the Anchorage , Alaska , area , beginning in June 1999 picking up trash from local roads , later moving to Bean 's Cafe , a local soup kitchen . His community service was conducted over five years with the Anchorage Parks Beautification Program . He paid the $ 50 @,@ 000 fine in May 2002 . 
 In 2009 , Hazelwood offered a " heartfelt apology " to the people of Alaska , but suggested he had been wrongly blamed for the disaster : " The true story is out there for anybody who wants to look at the facts , but that 's not the sexy story and that 's not the easy story , " he said . Hazelwood said he felt Alaskans always gave him a fair shake . The apology appears in an interview in the book The Spill : Personal Stories from the Exxon Valdez Disaster by Sharon Bushell . 
 = = Pop cultural references = = 
 Following the Exxon Valdez incident , Hazelwood was ridiculed by talk shows and late night television . He was the subject of a " Top Ten " list on Late Night with David Letterman , in which one of his excuses was , " I was just trying to scrape some ice off the reef for my margarita . " 
 He was featured in the syndicated comic strip The Far Side , which showed him as a clumsy person who spilled in various stages of his life ; as a baby ( his cup ) , teenager ( pen ink in his shirt pocket ) , and ultimately as an adult , driving into a water tower . 
 In the 1995 film Waterworld , Hazelwood was anointed the patron saint of the movie 's villain " The Deacon " , leader of the " Smokers " , a band of scavenging raiders . The film displayed Hazelwood 's portrait prominently aboard their flagship , also called Exxon Valdez . The ship also seemed to have a large stockpile of booze as " The Deacon " is seen holding an old Jack Daniel 's bottle . This is yet another reference to accusations that Hazelwood was intoxicated at the time of the spill . 
 = City of Salford = 
 The City of Salford ( / <unk> / ) is a city and metropolitan borough of Greater Manchester , England . It is named after its largest settlement , Salford , but covers a far larger area which includes the towns of Eccles , Swinton and Pendlebury , Walkden , and Irlam which apart from Irlam each have a population of over 35 @,@ 000 . The city has a population of 218 @,@ 000 , and is administered from the Salford Civic Centre in Swinton . 
 The current city boundaries were set as part of the provisions of the Local Government Act 1972 , and cover an amalgamation of five former local government districts . It is bounded on the south east by the River Irwell , which forms its boundary with the city of Manchester and by the Manchester Ship Canal to the south , which forms its boundary with Trafford . The metropolitan boroughs of Wigan , Bolton and Bury lie to the west , northwest and north respectively . Some parts of the city , which lies directly west of Manchester , are highly industrialised and densely populated , but around one third of the city consists of rural open space . This is because the western half of the city stretches across an ancient peat bog known as Chat Moss . 
 Salford has a history of human activity stretching back to the Neolithic age . There are over 250 listed buildings in the city , including Salford Cathedral , and three Scheduled Ancient Monuments . With the Industrial Revolution , Salford and its neighbours grew along with its textile industry . The former County Borough of Salford was granted city status in 1926 . The city and its industries experienced decline throughout much of the 20th century . Since the 1990 's , parts of Salford have undergone regeneration , especially Salford Quays , home of BBC North and Granada Television , and the area around the University of Salford . 
 Salford Red Devils are a professional rugby league club in Super League . 
 = = History = = 
 Although the metropolitan borough of the City of Salford was a 20th @-@ century creation , the area has a long history of human activity , extending back to the Stone Age . Neolithic flint arrow @-@ heads and tools , and evidence of Bronze Age activity has been discovered in Salford . The Roman road from Manchester ( Mamucium ) to Bury passes through the city ; a hoard of over 550 bronze Roman coins dating between 259 AD and 278 AD was discovered in Boothstown ; and a Romano @-@ British bog body , Worsley Man , was discovered in the Chat Moss peat bog . 
 In 1142 , a cell and priory dedicated to St. Leonard was established in Kersal . The 12th century hundred of Salford was created as Salfordshire in the historic county of Lancashire and survived until the 19th century , when it was replaced by one of the first county boroughs in the country . Salford became a free borough in about 1230 , when it was granted a charter as a free borough by the Earl Ranulph of Chester . The cell in Kersal was sold in 1540 during the Dissolution of the Monasteries . A 16th @-@ century manor house , called Kersal Cell , was built on the site of the priory . In the English Civil War between King Charles I and parliament , Salford was Royalist . Salford was also noted as Jacobite territory ; its inhabitants supported Charles Edward Stuart 's claim to the Kingdom of Great Britain and hosted him when he rode through the area during the Second Jacobite Rebellion . 
 During the Industrial Revolution , Salford grew as a result of the textile industry . Although Salford experienced an increase in population , it was overshadowed by the dominance of Manchester and did not evolve as a commercial centre in the same way . On 15 September 1830 , Eccles was site of the world 's first railway accident . During a stop in Eccles to take on water , William Huskisson , Member of Parliament for Liverpool , had his leg crushed by Stephenson 's Rocket ; at the time he was in conversation with the Duke of Wellington , who was opening the railway , and did not get out of the way of the train in time . Although Huskisson was taken to Eccles for treatment he died of his injuries . The six @-@ foot @-@ tall Oglala Sioux tribesman , " Surrounded By the Enemy " , died here from a bronchial infection at age twenty @-@ two in 1887 during a tour of Buffalo Bill 's Wild West Show and was buried at Brompton Cemetery . In 1894 , the Manchester Ship Canal was opened , running from the River Mersey to Salford Quays ; when it was complete it was the largest navigation canal in the world . Along the route of the canal , it was necessary to create an aqueduct carrying the Bridgewater Canal over the Ship Canal . The Barton Swing Aqueduct , designed by Sir Edward Leader Williams , is 100 metres ( 330 ft ) long and weighs 1 @,@ 450 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 427 long tons ; 1 @,@ 598 short tons ) . 
 At the start of the 20th century , Salford began to decline due to competition from outside the UK . A survey in 1931 concluded that parts of Salford were amongst the worst slums in the country . Salford was granted city status in 1926 . During World War II , Salford Docks were regularly bombed . 
 In the decades following the Second World War there was a significant economic and population decline in Salford . In 1961 a small part of Eccles was added to the city . On 1 April 1974 , the City and County Borough of Salford was abolished under the Local Government Act 1972 , and was replaced by the metropolitan borough of City of Salford , one of ten local government districts in the new metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . The city status of the new district was confirmed by additional letters patent issued on the same day . Since the early 1990s , the decline has slowed . 
 Prior to the metropolitan borough 's creation , the name Salford for the new local government district courted controversy . Salford was " thought second @-@ class by those in Eccles " , who preferred the new name " Irwell " for the district ( with reference to the River Irwell ) . A councillor for the then City and County Borough of Salford objected to this suggestion , stating this label was nothing but " a dirty stinking river " . The name Irwell won 8 votes to Salford 's 7 , but a private protest and deliberation favoured Salford as the name for the new city , citing that the River Irwell would pass through two other Greater Manchester districts , and that it " doesn 't touch Worsley " . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The City of Salford is bounded to the north by the boroughs of Bolton and Bury , to the south by Trafford , to the west by Wigan and to the east by Manchester . The natural mossland of Chat Moss lies in the south western corner of the city ; it covers an area of about 10 @.@ 6 square miles ( 27 @.@ 5 km2 ) , accounting for about 30 % of the city 's area , and lies 75 feet ( 23 m ) above sea level . The moss makes up the largest area of prime farmland in Greater Manchester . Kersal Moor is an area of moorland spanning 8 hectares ( 20 acres ) in Kersal ; it is a local nature reserve and a Site of Biological Importance . Greenspace accounts for 55 @.@ 7 % of the City of Salford 's total area , domestic buildings and gardens comprise 20 @.@ 0 % , and the rest is made up of roads and non @-@ domestic buildings . 
 To the south of Salford are the docks of Salford Quays , now home to the iconic Media City UK - the home of BBC . Media City UK is a large area that crosses the boundary into Trafford Park , Trafford . Although Salford Quays is in the City of Salford new M50 <unk> were distributed to the area to separate and create new boundaries in the early 2000s . Arguably the most affluent area in Salford , The Quays ( as it is locally known ) has seen regeneration and a growth in job opportunities and available housing in the 2010s . 
 The River Irwell runs south east through Kearsley , Clifton and Agecroft then meanders around Lower Broughton and Kersal , Salford Crescent and the centre of Manchester , joining the rivers Irk and Medlock . Turning west , it meets the Mersey south of Irlam , where the route of the river was altered in the late 19th century to form part of the course of the Manchester Ship Canal . The Ship Canal , opened in 1894 , forms part of Salford 's southern boundaries with Trafford . The city 's climate is generally temperate , like the rest of Greater Manchester . The nearest weather station is 10 miles ( 16 km ) away at Ringway , in Manchester ; the mean highest and lowest temperatures ( 13 @.@ 2 ° C ( 55 @.@ 8 ° F ) and 6 @.@ 4 ° C ( 43 @.@ 5 ° F ) ) are slightly above the national average , while the annual rainfall ( 806 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 76 in ) ) and average hours of sunshine ( 1394 @.@ 5 hours ) are respectively above and below the national averages . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Parliamentary constituencies = = = 
 The City of Salford is represented by Members of Parliament ( MPs ) for three constituencies , Salford and Eccles by Rebecca Long @-@ Bailey ( Labour ) , Worsley and Eccles South by Barbara Keeley ( Labour ) , and the Broughton and Kersal wards of Salford in Blackley and Broughton by Graham Stringer ( Labour ) . 
 = = = Council = = = 
 In 1974 , Salford City Council was created to administer the newly formed local government district . Until 1986 , it shared power with the Greater Manchester County Council . The council offices are in Swinton , in what was formerly Swinton and Pendlebury Town Hall . The Labour Party have been in control of the council since its formation in 1974 . The council has a constitution detailing how they should operate in performing their duties . 
 Salford City Council was assessed by the Audit Commission and judged to be " improving well " in providing services for local people . Overall the council was awarded " three star " status meaning it was " performing well " and " consistently above minimum requirements " , similar to 46 % of all local authorities . 
 The modern metropolitan borough of the City of Salford is based on the former County Borough of the City of Salford which included the city centre , Pendleton , Weaste , Claremont , Langworthy , Broughton , Kersal , Ordsall and Seedley . The city is entirely unparished and absorbed the municipal boroughs of Eccles and Swinton and Pendlebury and the urban districts of Irlam and Worsley . An urban district was a type of local government district which covered an urbanised area . 
 Since 2012 , in addition to the long @-@ existing and largely ceremonial , annually appointed civic mayor of Salford , the city has also had a directly elected Mayor . 
 = = = = Electoral wards = = = = 
 There are 60 councillors representing 20 wards . Swinton and Walkden have six councillors each . 
 = = = Central Salford and Salford West = = = 
 The district is divided into two areas ( Central Salford and Salford West ) for some purposes including planning , regeneration and housing . 
 Central Salford is the eastern part of the district and comprises seven wards : Broughton , Claremont , Irwell Riverside , Kersal , Ordsall , Langworthy and Weaste & Seedley . This is the more urban half of the district and lies partly within the Manchester Inner Ring Road . Salford Quays lies within this area . Between 2005 and 2011 , the Central Salford Urban Regeneration Company was responsible for urban regeneration in this area , securing over £ 1 billion of private sector investment . Social housing is provided by Salix Homes in this area . 
 Salford West comprises the other 13 wards , including the towns of Eccles , Swinton and Walkden . This is the more suburban and rural half of the district . Salford City Council 's aspiration is that " In 2028 , Salford West will be one of the most desirable and prosperous areas in Greater Manchester . " Social housing is provided by City West Housing Trust in this area . 
 = = = Coat of arms = = = 
 The coat of arms of Salford City Council depicts a weaving shuttle surrounded by five bees with a three masted ship above , on a shield flanked by two lions . The blue background with a gold chief is taken from the arms of the city council of the County Borough of Salford , who in turn took it from the colours of the Earl of Chester . The shuttle and five bees represent the industry of the area and five settlements who benefited from the textile industry . The ship is borrowed from the crest of Eccles Borough Council and represents the importance of waterways to the city . The ship is flanked by two <unk> – the centres of millstones – symbolising engineering . The lions are taken from the crest of the Borough of Swinton and Pendlebury ; they are wearing iron steel chain representing engineering . The shield is topped by a griffin carrying a pennon depicting three boars ' heads . The griffin is taken from the crest of Eccles and the boars are from the crest of Irlam Urban District . Beneath the shield is a scroll reading <unk> populi <unk> lex , Latin for " the welfare of the people is the highest law " . 
 = = = = Budget = = = = 
 In 2007 – 8 , Salford City Council spent a total of £ 218 million . The council spent £ 50M on children 's services ( 23 % ) ; £ <unk> on community health and social care ( 31 % ) ; £ 15M environmental service ( 7 % ) ; £ <unk> on housing and planning ( 13 % ) ; and £ 9M on customer and support services ( 4 % ) . For the 2008 – 9 financial year , the council 's income is expected to consist of £ <unk> ( 59 % ) from government grants and £ <unk> ( 41 % ) from council tax . 
 = = = = Audit = = = = 
 A Comprehensive Area Assessment by the Audit Commission in 2010 found that Salford 's key priorities are improving health , reducing crime , helping young people achieve A @-@ level qualifications , social services , including the views of minority groups , improving skills and " making Salford a cleaner and more attractive place to live " . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the City of Salford had a total population of 216 @,@ 103 . Of the 94 @,@ 238 households in Salford , 29 @.@ 3 % were married couples living together , 36 @.@ 7 % were one @-@ person households , 8 @.@ 5 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 12 @.@ 5 % were lone parents . The figures for lone parent households were above the national average of 9 @.@ 5 % , and the percentage of married couples was also below the national average of 36 @.@ 5 % ; the proportion of one person households was higher than the national average of 30 @.@ 1 % . 
 The population density was 2 @,@ 223 / km2 ( 5 @,@ 760 / sq mi ) and for every 100 females , there were 96 @.@ 6 males . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Salford , 35 @.@ 5 % had no academic qualifications , significantly higher than 28 @.@ 9 % in all of England . 5 @.@ 3 % of Salford 's residents were born outside the United Kingdom , significantly lower than the national average of 9 @.@ 2 % . The largest minority group was recorded as Asian , at 1 @.@ 4 % of the population . 
 The number of theft from a vehicle offences and theft of a vehicle per 1 @,@ 000 of the population was 21 @.@ 3 and 7 @.@ 9 compared to the English national average of 7 @.@ 6 and 2 @.@ 9 respectively . The number of sexual offences was 1 @.@ 1 compared to the average of 0 @.@ 9 . The national average of violence against another person was 16 @.@ 7 compared to the Salford average of 27 @.@ 2 . The figures for crime statistics were all recorded during the 2006 / 7 financial year . Although all were above the averages for England , Salford 's crime rate was lower than Manchester 's . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 The table below details the population change since 1801 , including the percentage change since the last available census data . Although the City of Salford has existed as a metropolitan borough since 1974 , figures have been generated by combining data from the towns , villages , and civil parishes that would later be constituent parts of the city . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , 76 @.@ 5 % of Salford 's residents were Christian , 2 @.@ 4 % Jewish , 1 @.@ 2 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 3 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist , and 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . 11 @.@ 0 % had no religion , 0 @.@ 2 % had an alternative religion and 8 @.@ 1 % did not state their religion . Salford is covered by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Salford , and the Church of England Diocese of Manchester . During the mid @-@ 19th century , there was an influx of Irish people into the Salford area , partly due to The Great Hunger in Ireland . In 1848 , Salford Roman Catholic Cathedral was consecrated , reflecting Salford 's large Irish @-@ born community at the time . 
 Of Salford 's six Grade I listed buildings , three are churches . St Augustine 's Church , in Pendlebury , was built in 1874 by George Frederick Bodley . The Church of St Mary the Virgin , in Eccles , was originally built in the 13th century but was expanded in the 15th . A church has been on the site since at least the Norman period . St Mark 's Church , in Worsley , was built in 1846 by George Gilbert Scott . The six Grade II * listed churches are the Church of St Andrew in Eccles , the Cathedral Church of St John , the Church of St Luke in Pendleton , Monton Unitarian Church in Monton , the Church of St Philip in Salford , and the United Reformed Church . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Salford Docks ( also called Manchester Docks ) were opened by Queen Victoria in 1894 , providing docks in Manchester and Salford for the Manchester Ship Canal which linked Manchester to the sea . During the 1970s , the docks fell into decline as they proved too small for new , larger ships , and when they were abandoned in 1982 over 3 @,@ 000 people lost their jobs . Salford City Council purchased the docks in 1984 and since then they underwent regeneration as a centre of tourism in Salford , which included the construction of the Lowry Centre . More than 10 @,@ 000 people are employed in the Quays in jobs such as retail , construction , and e @-@ commerce . In 2007 , it was confirmed that the BBC would be moving five of its departments to a new development on Pier 9 of Salford Quays , to be called MediaCityUK . The move , which is expected to be completed by 2011 , will create up to 15 @,@ 500 jobs and add £ 1bn to the regional economy over 5 years . 
 Finance and professional services , tourism and culture , and computer and internet based services have been identified as growth industries in Greater Manchester and are concentrated in Manchester and Salford . Average house prices in the City of Salford are sixth out of all the metropolitan boroughs in Greater Manchester , 7 @.@ 6 % lower than the average for the county . There are , however , areas of considerable affluence , within the city , such as Broughton Park , parts of Kersal , Ellesmere Park , Worsley , parts of Swinton and Pendlebury and the ultra @-@ modern Salford Quays . 
 At the 2011 UK census , Salford had 173 @,@ 117 residents aged 16 to 74 . 4 @.@ 7 % of these people were students with jobs , 4 @.@ 1 % looking after home or family , 6 @.@ 9 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 9 % economically inactive for other reasons . The City of Salford has a high rate of people who are permanently sick and disabled , 70 % higher than the national average of 4 @.@ 0 % . 
 In 2001 , of 89 @,@ 920 residents of the City of Salford in employment , the industry of employment was 18 @.@ 7 % retail and wholesale , 14 @.@ 4 % manufacturing , 12 @.@ 7 % property and business services , 11 @.@ 9 % health and social work , 7 @.@ 7 % transport and communications , 7 @.@ 6 % education , 6 @.@ 8 % construction , 5 @.@ 1 % hotels and restaurants , 4 @.@ 7 % public administration and defence , 4 @.@ 4 % finance , 0 @.@ 7 % energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 4 % agriculture , and 4 @.@ 9 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the proportion of jobs in agriculture which is less than half the national average , reflecting the city 's suburban nature and its proximity to the centre of Manchester . 
 <unk> UK has its Manchester office in the Metroplex Business Park in Salford . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Landmarks = = = 
 As of September 2003 , the City of Salford has 6 Grade I , 14 Grade II * , and 253 Grade II listed buildings . The city has the equal second highest number of Grade I listed buildings out of the districts of Greater Manchester , behind Manchester . The Grade I listed buildings are the Church of St Augustine , the Parish Church of St Mary the Virgin , St Mark 's Church , Ordsall Hall , Wardley Hall , and a bridge over the River Irwell . Salford Cathedral , built in 1845 , is the seat of the Diocese of Salford and a Grade II * listed building . Most of the Salford 's tallest buildings are mid @-@ 20th century residential tower blocks or 21st century high rise apartments . A study by Professor Christopher Collier of the University of Salford suggested that Manchester 's drizzly climate is largely due to the multitude of high @-@ rise blocks in Salford . Collier has proposed that they have a " dramatic influence on the region 's weather patterns " , and may contribute to the 8 ° C ( 14 ° F ) temperature difference between Salford and its surrounding countryside . 
 There are three Scheduled Ancient Monuments in the city . The oldest is an Iron Age promontory fort occupied from 500 BC – 200 AD . Also scheduled is Hanging Bridge on the border with Manchester , dating to the 14th century , and an underground section of the Bridgewater Canal in Swinton built in 1759 . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Salford is home to a number of past and present rugby league teams . Founded in 1873 , Salford Red Devils play in the Super League at the AJ Bell Stadium , in Barton , Salford . They are 6 times Champions and they won the Challenge Cup in 1938 , and have experienced two previous stretches in the Super League , 1997 – 2002 and 2004 – 2007 . In 2008 they won the Northern Rail Cup beating Doncaster 60 @-@ 0 in the Final at Blackpool . They previously won the same trophy in 2003 . They also won the National League 1 Grand Final in 2008 , beating Celtic Crusaders after extra time in Warrington . Construction on a new 20 @,@ 000 seat £ 35 million pound stadium was complete in 2012 . Now named the AJ Bell stadium it is home to Salford Red Devils and Sale Sharks rugby union team . 
 Swinton Lions were founded in 1866 and play in the Championship at Park Lane , Whitefield . They won the Rugby Football League Championship six times between 1927 and 1964 , before it was superseded by Super League . They have also won the Challenge Cup three times between 1900 and 1928 . 
 Broughton Rangers were founded in 1877 and won the Rugby League Challenge Cup in the 1901 – 02 and 1910 – 11 seasons . The club folded in 1955 , but were reformed as a local amateur club in 2007 with the support of Salford Red Devils . 
 At amateur level , the city is represented in rugby league by the Salford City Roosters . 
 Also in Salford are several football and cricket teams . Irlam F.C. is an amateur football team that has played in the Manchester Football League since 1989 . They were founded in 1969 as Mitchell Shackleton Football Club and changed their name in 2006 . Salford City F.C. was founded in 1940 and play in the Northern Premier League . Monton & Weaste C.C. and Clifton C.C. have played in the Central Lancashire Cricket League since 2005 and 2006 respectively . Walkden play in the Bolton Cricket League . Little Hulton play in the Bolton and District Cricket Association . Winton and Worsley play in the Manchester and District Cricket Association . City of Salford Swimming Club , and at the recent National Arena League A Final , they finished seventh best in the country - and second in the north west behind Stockport , are based and have their home pool in Broughton 
 = = Education = = 
 Overall , Salford was ranked 75th out of the all the Local Education Authorities ( LEAs ) – and seventh in Greater Manchester – in National Curriculum assessment performance in 2007 . Unauthorised absences and authorised absences from Salford secondary schools in 2006 – 07 were 2 @.@ 0 % and 7 @.@ 0 % respectively , both higher than the national average ( 1 @.@ 4 % and 6 @.@ 4 % ) . In 2007 , the Salford LEA was ranked 127th out of 149 in the country – and ninth in Greater Manchester – based on the percentage of pupils attaining at least 5 A * – C grades at General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) including maths and English ( 37 @.@ 8 % compared with the national average of 46 @.@ 7 % ) . In 2007 , Beis Yaakov High School was the most successful school in Salford at GCSE , with 90 % of the pupils gaining five or more GCSEs at A * – C grade including maths and English . Bridgewater School was the most successful at A – level . 
 The University of Salford is one of four universities in Greater Manchester and was ranked 81st by The Times . It has over 19 @,@ 000 students and a 69 @.@ 7 % level of student satisfaction . In 2007 , the university received nearly 17 @,@ 000 applications for 3 @,@ 660 places . The university is undergoing £ 150M of redevelopment through investment in new facilities , including a £ 10M law school and a £ 22M building for health and social care which were opened in 2006 . In 2007 , the drop out rate from the university was 25 % . Of the students graduating , 50 % gained first class or 2 : 1 degrees , which is below the national average of about 55 % . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The city of Salford is served by nine railway stations on four routes . Eccles and Patricroft are on the northern route of the Liverpool to Manchester Line , while Irlam , in the southwest of the borough , is on the southern route . Clifton is on the line to Bolton and Preston ; Swinton , Moorside and Walkden are on the Manchester to Southport Line via Wigan ; and Salford Central and Salford Crescent are served by both routes . A station at Pendleton was closed in 1998 after suffering fire damage and a loss of patronage in favour of nearby Salford Crescent , opened a few years earlier . All train services are provided by Northern Rail , 
 The Eccles line of the Manchester Metrolink runs through the City of Salford , with stations at Exchange Quay , Salford Quays , Anchorage , Harbour City , Broadway , Langworthy , Weaste , <unk> and Eccles . The line was opened in two stages , in 1999 and 2000 , as Phase 2 of the system 's development . 
 There are bus stations at Pendleton and Eccles . Buses run to destinations throughout the city , across Greater Manchester and further afield : Pendleton is served by a route to Preston , Eccles Interchange is next to the Metrolink stop . 
 The council is responsible for the administration and maintenance of public roads and footpaths in the city . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 The City of Salford has formal twinning arrangements with four European places . Each was originally twinned with a place within the city prior to its creation in 1974 . 
 Clermont @-@ Ferrand , France ( originally twinned with County Borough of Salford in 1966 ) 
 Saint @-@ Ouen , France ( Worsley Urban District , 1961 ) 
 Narbonne , France ( Municipal Borough of Eccles , 1957 ) 
 <unk> , Germany ( Municipal Borough of Swinton and Pendlebury , 1966 ) 
 = LeRoy Prinz = 
 LeRoy Jerome Prinz ( July 14 , 1895 – September 15 , 1983 ) was an American choreographer , director and producer , who was involved in the production of dozens of motion pictures , mainly for Paramount Pictures and Warner Brothers , from 1929 through 1958 , and also choreographed Broadway musicals . He was nominated three times for the Academy Award for Best Dance Direction in the 1930s , and won the Golden Globe in 1958 . 
 Among the films whose dances he choreographed were Show Boat ( 1936 ) , Yankee Doodle Dandy ( 1942 ) , Rhapsody in Blue ( 1945 ) , and South Pacific ( 1958 ) . 
 = = Early life and military service = = 
 LeRoy Jerome Prinz was born in St. Joseph , Missouri . His grandfather was a dancing master , and his father taught ballroom dancing etiquette to young men and women at Prinz 's Academy in St. Joseph . According to one account , he was sent to reform school after chasing his stepmother with a carving knife . 
 In newspaper profiles , he claimed that after running away from boarding school at the age of 15 , he " hopped a freight " and came to New York City , where , in 1911 , he began a song and dance act , " Prinz and Buck , " with a young black man he met along the way . Later that year , he told interviewers , he went on a ship to Europe as a cabin boy , jumped ship , and traveled around Europe " introducing the American strut step " in return for meals and lodging . In Marseilles he joined the French Foreign Legion , serving as a bugler in Algiers . He also represented a rubber company in St. Louis and Kansas City . 
 After the outbreak of World War I , he returned to France , was trained as a pilot , and served in the French aviation corps and Captain Eddie Rickenbacker 's 94th Aero Squadron . He was with the 94th from November 1917 to June 1918 , when he switched to the 27th Aero Squadron , where he stayed until November 1918 . At the 27th his duties included working at the Aircraft Acceptance Park test facility at Orly . Prinz subsequently told journalists that he crashed 14 to 18 airplanes , was nicknamed " America 's German Ace " as a result , ( he was also called " Crash Ace Prinz ) and that he was wounded in the war and carried a silver plate in his head from his last plane crash . In an October 1918 article , war correspondent George Seldes described how Prinz was separated from his flight on his first venture into German territory , and returned home with minor injuries after a perilous journey . 
 = = Career = = 
 According to his obituary in the Los Angeles Times , Prinz returned to the U.S. in 1919 and studied theater at Northwestern University . After graduation from Northwestern , the newspaper reported , Prinz returned to France and worked as a choreographer for the Folies Bergère in Paris . 
 A November 1919 St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch report states that Prinz was employed in the aeronautical portion of an American Legion show , also featuring actor William S. Hart , that was touring the area . The newspaper gives Prinz 's rank as captain and states that he was a flight partner of Quentin Roosevelt . A Wisconsin newspaper reported in 1921 that Prinz , which it said had " danced with Al Jolson , " was teaching dance at a vacation camp for wounded veterans . The newspaper said that Prinz himself had " fallen 3000 feet " but had recovered . 
 In various newspaper profiles , Prinz claimed that he worked as a dancer at a bordello in Omaha , as an aviation instructor for the Mexican government , and that he ferried ammunition for the Nicaraguan rebel leader , Augusto César Sandino . He told interviewers that he worked for gangster Jim Colosimo 's restaurant in Chicago , and that he produced stage shows for Al Capone . He claimed in a 1945 New York Times profile that Capone hired him to book entertainment and stage floor shows at eighteen Chicago nightclubs . Prinz left Chicago and worked as a dance director in New York , Florida , Mexico and Cuba . His employers included Earl Carroll , Broadway 's Shubert family , Tex Guinan and Philadelphia bootlegger Boo Hoo Hoff . He choreographed Earl Carroll 's Vanities of 1930 and other Broadway shows between 1929 and 1933 . 
 His first employment in films was in 1931 by director Cecil B. DeMille , who employed him as dance director . While filming Cleopatra ( 1934 ) , Prinz clashed with DeMille 's niece Agnes de Mille , who was brought in to choreograph dance sequences . According to Agnes deMille 's biographer , her uncle always deferred to the " reliable but pedestrian " Prinz , even after agreeing to his niece 's flamboyant dances in advance . Agnes deMille left the film . 
 He directed dance sequences for dozens of Paramount Pictures movies between 1933 and 1941 , when he became dance director of Warner Brothers , where he staged all of Warner 's musical sequences for the next sixteen years . He worked in over 150 films , mainly as a choreographer , among them The Desert Song ( 1929 ) , Tea for Two ( 1950 ) , and The Jazz Singer ( 1952 ) , a remake of the first sound movie . 
 In the 1940s he worked on the first Bing Crosby and Bob Hope " Road " movie , Road to Singapore ( 1940 ) , at Paramount . His first major assignment at Warner Brothers was the 1942 George M. Cohan biographical movie Yankee Doodle Dandy , starring James Cagney in the title role . In 1944 he choreographed a " ballet in jive " sequence in the service musical Hollywood Canteen , featuring Broadway dancer Joan McCracken . Prinz played himself directing the sequence in a brief cameo appearance . 
 McCracken , who came to Hollywood after winning acclaim in the 1943 production of Oklahoma ! , was deeply discouraged by her experiences filming the Hollywood Canteen number and did not like working with Prinz . As a choreographer he made no effort to integrate his dances into specific story lines , or to choreograph specific dance steps . This resulted deep disillusionment for McCracken , whose Oklahoma ! dances were choreographed by Agnes de Mille , since Prinz was not able to support or advance McCracken 's artistic development . However , he gave her latitude to incorporate ballet in her dance routine , and Prinz did not object to her ideas . 
 Prinz worked again with James Cagney , eight years after Yankee Doodle Dandy , on West Point Story , also starring Virginia Mayo and Doris Day . He ceased working in films after choreographing the Boar 's Tooth Ceremonial dance sequence in the 1958 film adaptation of South Pacific . 
 Later in life he was owner of his own production company , vice president of an advertising agency , and a producer of benefit programs in Hollywood . He counted among his friends Ronald Reagan , whom he knew from their days working together at Warner Brothers , and he choreographed entertainment at the 1976 Republican National Convention and at several presidential inaugurations . Reagan called him from the White House when Prinz was in the hospital shortly before he died . At the 1976 convention , he came up with the idea of playing " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " when convention organizers wanted to silence unruly delegates . 
 Prinz was a " notorious self @-@ promoter " , and told stories about himself that were sometimes dubious . Columnist Michael Coakley recounted in a late @-@ life profile of Prinz that editors of The Saturday Evening Post once were able to verify 90 percent of what they were told by Prinz , who sent them a telegraph saying " That 's great . Don 't believe 50 percent of it myself . " In a Los Angeles Times profile late in life , Prinz ' claimed " at least partial credit " in popularizing the Charleston and rumba , which became popular after appearing in his movies . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Prinz was nominated in the long @-@ defunct category of Best Dance Direction during the 1937 Academy Awards , for a Bing Crosby film he choreographed at Paramount , Waikiki Wedding , and was twice nominated in that category for the 1935 films All the King 's Horses and The Big Broadcast of 1936 . He was awarded the Golden Globe for best film choreography in 1958 . 
 Though known mainly for his work as a dance director on big @-@ budget musicals , he directed a number of mainly short films , one of which , A Boy and His Dog ( 1946 ) , won the Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film . 
 = = <unk> style and legacy = = 
 A New York Times profile said that " his life story reads more like the script of an Errol Flynn adventure " , though the stories he told about himself were often dubious . He was once described as " a feisty little man who always had a cigarette dangling from his lips and looked more like a bartender than a choreographer . " 
 Prinz was an " idea man " rather than as a choreographer , creating lavish production numbers and using simple steps and dance routines . Jazz dance choreographer Jack Cole has said that Prinz " didn 't know a bloody thing about dancing . " In a 1952 profile , Associated Press Hollywood columnist James Bacon said that Prinz differed from what he described as " sissified " choreographers , that he was " a rough , tough guy , as some little giants of 5 foot 5 are . His language is colorful . " He claimed to have never taken a lesson in his life and , in a reference to his family 's dancing school , that he was a " victim of heredity . " 
 As a choreographer at Warner Brothers , Prinz had a different approach than Busby Berkeley , whose choreography for early 1930s movies included elaborate production numbers that were photographed using imaginative camera angles , often from above . Berkeley 's numbers " broke the boundaries of the stage , " while Prinz took a completely opposite approach , with the audience never able to forget that it was watching a stage performance . Prinz 's style is evident in the Little Johnny Jones number in Yankee Doodle Dandy , which featured a stationary camera and included features of the stage , such as the orchestra pit , in the dance number . The camera , in effect , became a member of the audience . 
 In his 1983 study of wartime Hollywood musicals , Allen L. Woll says that with the camera angles not being employed effectively , as they were by Berkeley , " the pedestrian quality of Prinz 's dance numbers is painfully revealed . No matter the picture , no matter the director , Prinz 's dances are invariably the same , static and stage @-@ bound . " 
 His treatment of dancers was sometimes caustic . Choreographer Hermes Pan recalled in 1972 interview that Prinz " would make some girls hysterical . He loved to have them in tears . And that seemed to be the thing , to swear at the girls and be nasty . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Prinz was married three times and had a son , LeRoy Prinz , Jr . 
 = = Selected credits = = 
 Bolero ( 1934 ) 
 Cleopatra ( 1934 ) 
 The Big Broadcast of 1936 ( 1935 ) 
 Anything Goes ( 1936 ) 
 Show Boat ( 1936 ) 
 The Big Broadcast of 1937 ( 1936 ) 
 Artists & Models ( 1937 ) 
 St. Louis Blues ( 1939 ) 
 Road to Singapore ( 1940 ) 
 Buck Benny Rides Again ( 1940 ) 
 Too Many Girls ( 1940 ) 
 Fiesta ( 1941 film ) 
 Yankee Doodle Dandy ( 1942 ) 
 Mission to Moscow ( 1943 ) 
 This is the Army ( 1943 ) 
 Thank Your Lucky Stars ( 1943 ) 
 Hollywood Canteen ( 1944 ) 
 Rhapsody in Blue ( 1945 ) 
 Night and Day ( 1946 ) 
 Escape Me Never ( 1947 ) 
 The West Point Story ( 1950 ) 
 The Ten Commandments ( 1956 ) 
 Sayonara ( 1957 ) 
 South Pacific ( 1958 ) 
 = Charles B. Gatewood = 
 First Lieutenant Charles Bare Gatewood ( April 5 , 1853 – May 20 , 1896 ) was an American soldier born in Woodstock , Virginia . He served in the United States Army in the 6th Cavalry after graduating from West Point . Upon assignment to the American Southwest , Gatewood led platoons of Apache and Navajo scouts against renegades during the Apache Wars . In 1886 he played a key role in ending the Geronimo Campaign by persuading Geronimo to surrender to the army . Beset with health problems due to exposure in the Southwest and Dakotas , Gatewood was critically injured in the Johnson County War and retired from the Army in 1895 , dying a year later from stomach cancer . Before his retirement he was nominated for the Medal of Honor , but was denied the award . He was portrayed by Jason Patric in the 1993 film Geronimo : An American Legend . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gatewood was born into a military family in Woodstock , Virginia , on April 5 , 1853 . He became a Cadet at the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1873 where he earned the nickname Scipio Africanus because of his resemblance to the Roman general of the same name . He graduated in 1877 with a commission as Second Lieutenant and received orders to the 6th Cavalry in the Southwest at Fort Wingate , New Mexico . 
 = = Apache Wars = = 
 Gatewood led companies of Apache and Navajo Scouts in Apache territory throughout the Southwestern United States . He was respected among the Apaches and earned the nickname <unk> <unk> @-@ che , meaning " Big @-@ nosed Captain " . After one year of service at Fort Wingate , Gatewood was made the commander of Apache scouts from the White Mountain Apache Reservation , and later an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Nelson Miles . One of his sergeants was a scout who was a former White Mountain Chief named <unk> . 
 = = = Victorio 's War = = = 
 In 1879 Gatewood and his Apache scouts were brought from Arizona to the Black Range Mountains of New Mexico to capture the Apache Chief Victorio in the Victorio Campaign . He and his scouts were placed under the command of Major Albert P. Morrow of the Ninth Cavalry at Fort Bayard , New Mexico . Gatewood 's scouts skirmished with Victorio 's band , but ultimately failed to capture him . 
 In May 1881 he returned to Virginia on sick leave because he had developed rheumatism from exposure to the elements in his two years working with the Apache scouts in the harsh Southwest . He married Georgia McCulloh , the daughter of Thomas G. McCulloh and niece of Richard Sears McCulloh on June 23 , 1881 in Cumberland , Maryland . His sick leave expired in July and having not returned to his post , he was declared Absent without leave ( AWOL ) . Gatewood returned to the Southwest on September 17 , 1881 under the command of Colonel Eugene Asa Carr in his campaign against the <unk> and White Mountain Apaches . 
 = = = Geronimo 's War = = = 
 In 1882 , the US Army sent Brigadier General George Crook to take command of Indian operations in Arizona Territory . Crook was an experienced Indian fighter who had long since learned that regular soldiers were almost useless against the Apaches and had based his entire strategy on employing " Indians to fight other Indians " . The Apache , as a mark of respect , nicknamed Crook <unk> <unk> , which means " Grey Wolf " . Despite having subjugated all the major tribes of Apaches in the Territory ; the Apaches had once again taken up arms , this time under the leadership of Geronimo . Crook repeatedly saw Geronimo and his small band of warriors escape every time . 
 Knowing Gatewood 's reputation as one of the army 's " Best Apache Men " , Crook made him Commandant of the White Mountain Indian Reservation at Fort Apache under Emmet Crawford . Gatewood and Crook disagreed on handling of the reservation and treatment of the Apaches . After a clash with local politicians over grazing rights on reservation land , Crook had Gatewood transferred in 1885 to command Navajo Scouts . That same year Crook resigned from the Army and Philip Sheridan had him replaced by General Nelson Miles in the Geronimo Campaign . 
 Although Crook and Gatewood had a falling @-@ out , Gatewood was regarded by Miles as a " Crook Man " ; despite this and Gatewood 's failing health , Miles knew that Gatewood was well known to Geronimo , spoke some Apache , and was familiar with their traditions and values ; having spent nearly 10 years in the field with them and against them . 
 Gatewood was dispatched by General Miles to seek out Geronimo for a parley . On July 21 , when he reached <unk> , Chihuahua , Gatewood encountered another Army officer , Lieutenant James Parker of the 4th Cavalry , who had orders to follow Geronimo 's trail . Parker told Gatewood , " The trail is all a myth — I haven 't seen any trail since three weeks ago when it was washed out by the rains . " 
 Despite his rapidly deteriorating health , Gatewood refused to quit and Parker guided him to Captain Henry Lawton , who was leading a mission to find and kill Geronimo with the Fourth Cavalry . It took two weeks through 150 miles of <unk> ranges to locate Lawton on the banks of the Aros River on August 3 , 1886 . Lawton reluctantly allowed Gatewood and his scouts to join his command . Gatewood 's health continued to deteriorate . On August 8 he asked <unk> 's Surgeon , Leonard Wood , to medically discharge him , but Wood refused . On August 23 , 1886 , Gatewood led 25 men and two Apache scouts into the Sierra Madre and found Geronimo 's camp : his band reduced to 20 men and 14 women and children . On August 24 Gatewood approached Geronimo 's camp with only 2 soldiers : George Medhurst Wratten , who was fluent in all Apache dialects and one other ; 2 interpreters : Tom Horn and Jesús María <unk> ; and two Chiricahua scouts : Kayitah , a <unk> , and Martine , a <unk> , so as not to alarm the Apaches . Kayitah and Martine made the initial contact , being invited into the camp by the <unk> River . Kayitah remained in the camp as a hostage while Martine left and returned with Gatewood and 15 pounds of tobacco . After Gatewood made gifts of tobacco , Geronimo teased Gatewood about his thinness and sickly look , Gatewood was then told by Geronimo , " you are always welcome in my camp , and it was always safe for you to come " . Gatewood encouraged Geronimo to abandon his fight against the US Army . When asked by Geronimo what Gatewood would do in his situation and to " think like an Apache " , Gatewood advised him to " put your trust in Miles " . 
 Agreeing to meet with General Miles , Geronimo 's band rode with Gatewood to Lawton 's camp in Guadalupe Canyon , the entrance to the United States . Lawton received Geronimo and agreed to allow the Apaches to retain their weapons for defense against nearby Mexican troops . Lawton left for a heliograph station to send word to Miles , leaving Lieutenant <unk> Smith in command . Smith and Wood wanted to disarm the Apaches because they were prisoners @-@ of @-@ war . Smith told Gatewood that he wanted a meeting with Geronimo 's men , but Gatewood refused because he knew Smith wanted to murder Geronimo , rather than bring him to Miles . Smith persisted and Gatewood threatened to " blow the head off the first soldier in line " , who was Leonard Wood , Wood left to write a dispatch and Gatewood turned to the next man , Smith , who finally relented . 
 The troops and the Apaches arrived at Skeleton Canyon , Arizona , in the <unk> Mountains without incident on September 2 , 1886 . Miles arrived on September 3 , 1886 , and Geronimo formally surrendered for the fourth and final time on September 4 . At the conclusion of the surrender , Geronimo turned to Gatewood and said to him , in Apache , " Good . You told the truth " . The following day <unk> surrendered , he had been in a nearby canyon mourning his brother , who had been killed by Mexican soldiers , bringing the Apache wars to an official end in the Southwest . 
 Despite his success , Miles chastised Gatewood for " disobeying orders " as Gatewood made the final approach to Geronimo with only a party of 6 instead of 25 . Gatewood reasoned that a larger party would have scared the Apache and made them flee . The city of Tucson , Arizona , held a Gala event to celebrate Geronimo 's surrender and invited Gatewood to be the guest of honor , but Miles refused to let him attend . Miles appointed Gatewood as his " Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp " , to keep the lieutenant under scrutiny , Miles downplayed Gatewood 's role in Geronimo 's surrender mostly because it would have given legitimacy to Crook 's strategy . 
 = = Ghost Dance War = = 
 In December 1890 , Gatewood was reassigned to the Sixth Cavalry , H Troop . His regiment was ordered to South Dakota 's Pine Ridge Agency in an operation against hostile Sioux Indians but was not engaged in the final campaign that culminated in the tragedy at Wounded Knee in December . Gatewood developed rheumatism in both shoulders and was unable to move his arms , again due to the cold weather , in January and had medical orders to leave in February 1891 for Hot Springs , South Dakota . 
 = = Johnson County War = = 
 By September 1891 Gatewood had recovered and he rejoined the Sixth Cavalry , then stationed at Fort McKinney , Wyoming . Wyoming was undergoing a range war between ranchers and farmers that would be known as the Johnson County War and the Sixth Cavalry was dispatched at the request of Acting Governor Amos W. Barber . On May 18 , 1892 cowboys from the Red Sash Ranch set fire to the Post exchange and planted a bomb in the form of gunpowder in a barracks stove . Gatewood was responding to the fire and was injured by a bomb blast in a barracks ; his left arm was shattered , rendering him too disabled to serve in the Cavalry . 
 Soon after , The Ninth Cavalry of " Buffalo Soldiers " was ordered to Fort McKinney to replace the Sixth Cavalry . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On November 19 , 1892 , Gatewood received orders for Denver , Colorado to await his muster out of the Army . On June 4 , 1894 , he sought a position as the military advisor of El Paso County , Colorado , to aid in the Cripple Creek miners ' strike of 1894 in Cripple Creek , Colorado , but was denied . In 1894 he took a leave of absence from the Army and moved to Fort Myer , Virginia . In 1895 he was recommended for the Medal of Honor by General Nelson A. Miles , " for gallantry in going alone at the risk of his life into the hostile Apache camp of Geronimo in Sonora , August 24 , 1886 , " but was denied by the acting Secretary of War because Gatewood never distinguished himself in hostile action . In 1896 he suffered excruciating stomach pains and went to a Veteran 's Hospital in Fort Monroe , Virginia , for treatment . Gatewood died on May 20 , 1896 , of stomach cancer and his body was buried at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors . 
 On May 23 , 1896 , Colonel D. S. Gordon , commander of the 6th Cavalry , issued General Order 19 , which stated : 
 It is with extreme sorrow and regret that the Colonel commanding the regiment announced the death of First Lieutenant Charles B. Gatewood at Fort Monroe May 20 . Too much cannot be said in honor of this brave officer and it is lamentable that he should have died with only the rank of a Lieutenant , after his brilliant services to the Government . That no material advantages reverted to him is regretted by every officer of his regiment , who extend to his bereaved family their most profound , earnest and sincere sympathy . As a mark of respect to his memory , the officers of the regiment will wear the usual badge of mourning for the period of 30 days . 
 His son , Charles B. Gatewood , Jr . ( January 4 , 1883 – November 13 , 1953 ) , joined the Army and rose to the rank of colonel . He campaigned for recognition of his father 's name and later compiled and published his father 's memoirs . 
 The role of Gatewood was portrayed in 1954 by Brett King in the syndicated television series , Stories of the Century , starring and narrated by Jim Davis . 
 Gatewood was later portrayed by Jason Patric in the 1993 film Geronimo : An American Legend . 
 Robert Cummings played First Lieutenant Gatewood in the episode " The Last Bugle " ( 24 Nov. 1960 ) on Dick Powell 's Zane Grey Theater . 
 = USS Balch ( DD @-@ 50 ) = 
 USS Balch ( Destroyer No. 50 / DD @-@ 50 ) was an Aylwin @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of George Beale Balch , a US Navy officer who served in the Mexican @-@ American War and the American Civil War , and as Superintendent of the United States Naval Academy . 
 Balch was laid down by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in May 1912 and launched in December . The ship was a little more than 305 ft ( 93 m ) in length , just over 31 ft ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) . She was armed with four 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns and had eight 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes . Balch was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 mph ; 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 After her March 1914 commissioning , she participated in a Presidential Fleet Review at New York City in May . After a period in reserve , Balch served on Neutrality Patrol duty . As a part of that duty in October 1916 , she was one of several US destroyers sent to rescue survivors from five victims of German submarine U @-@ 53 off the Lightship Nantucket . She picked up passengers and crew from a British ocean liner before the U @-@ boat sank it . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Balch was sent overseas to patrol the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland . Balch made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats . In October 1918 , US destroyer Paulding collided with Balch , sending her into Queenstown for two weeks of repairs . 
 Upon returning to the United States after the war in January 1919 , Balch was placed in reduced commission . After alternating periods of activity and time in reserve , Balch was decommissioned at Philadelphia in June 1922 . In November 1933 she dropped her name , becoming known only as DD @-@ 50 . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in March 1935 and ordered scrapped in April . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Balch was authorized in March 1911 as the last of four ships of the Aylwin class , which was almost identical to the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized at the same time . Construction of the vessel — like her three sister ships — was awarded to William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia which laid down her keel on 7 May 1912 . On 21 December , Balch was launched by sponsor Miss Grace Balch , daughter of the ship 's namesake , George Beale Balch . The ship was the first U.S. Navy ship named for Balch , a US Navy officer who served in the Mexican @-@ American War and the American Civil War and , as a rear admiral , served as Superintendent of United States Naval Academy from 1879 – 81 . 
 As built , the destroyer was 305 ft 3 in ( 93 @.@ 04 m ) in length , 31 feet 2 inches ( 9 @.@ 50 m ) abeam , and drew 10 ft 6 in ( 3 @.@ 20 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 235 long tons ( 1 @,@ 255 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Balch had two steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional pair triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each connected to one of the propeller shafts , for cruising purposes . Four oil @-@ burning boilers powered the engines , which could generate 16 @,@ 000 shp ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) , moving the ship at up to 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 Balch 's main battery consisted of four 4 in ( 100 mm ) / 50 caliber Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 lb ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 lb ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yd ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . Balch was also equipped with four twin 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 = = Pre @-@ World War I = = 
 Balch was commissioned into the United States Navy on 26 March 1914 under the command of Lieutenant Commander David C. Hanrahan . Balch served briefly with the Torpedo Flotilla , Atlantic Fleet , carrying out torpedo firing practice off the Virginia Capes before participating in a Presidential Fleet Review for President Woodrow Wilson at New York City on 7 May . Following fleet maneuvers with the Submarine Flotilla out of New London , Connecticut , the Torpedo Flotilla joined the battleship squadrons in Narragansett Bay for maneuvers organized by the Naval War College . Returning to the New York Navy Yard that summer , Balch was placed in reserve commission on 24 July 1914 . 
 The destroyer was placed in full commission again on 17 December 1914 and rejoined the Atlantic Fleet . In June 1915 , one of Balch 's 21 ft ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) , 1 @,@ 350 lb ( 610 kg ) torpedoes was unloaded at the Brooklyn Navy Yard , loaded on a horse @-@ drawn truck , and hauled across the Brooklyn Bridge to the Astor Hotel in Manhattan . There , the weapon was on display — along with a shell from a 14 in ( 360 mm ) naval gun — for two days at the " Peace and Preparation " conference of the National Security League . A year later , Balch served as the US Navy 's observation platform during the inter @-@ club cruise after the <unk> @-@ Corinthian Yacht Club 's annual June regatta . Balch was sent to examine which of the powerboats entered into the cruise — reported by The New York Times as about half of the 200 entries — might be suitable for use as naval auxiliaries . 
 Prior to the entrance of the United States into World War I , she served on Neutrality Patrol duty , trying to protect American and neutral @-@ flagged merchant ships from interference by British or German warships and U @-@ boats . In the course of performing those duties , Balch was at Newport , Rhode Island , in early October 1916 . At 0530 on 8 October , wireless reports came in of a German submarine stopping ships near the Lightship Nantucket , off the eastern end of Long Island . After an SOS from the British steamer West Point was received at about 1230 , Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves ordered Balch and other destroyers at Newport to attend to survivors . The American destroyers arrived on the scene about 1700 when the U @-@ boat , U @-@ 53 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Hans Rose , was in the process of stopping the Holland @-@ America Line cargo ship Blommersdijk . Shortly after , U @-@ 53 stopped the British passenger ship Stephano . As Rose had done with three other ships U @-@ 53 had sunk earlier in the day , he gave passengers and crew aboard Blommersdijk and Stephano adequate time to abandon the ships before sinking the pair . At one point , Rose signaled Balch requesting that she move out of the way to allow Stephano to be torpedoed , much to the later chagrin of Lord Beresford , who denounced Balch 's compliance as " aiding and abetting " the Germans in a speech in the House of Lords . In total , 226 survivors from U @-@ 53 's five victims were rescued by the destroyer flotilla . Balch picked up the crew of Stephano and a number of passengers , later transferring them to destroyer Jenkins for return to Newport . 
 = = World War I = = 
 When the United States entered World War I on 6 April 1917 , Balch fitted out — installing depth charge racks and other wartime gear — in preparation for foreign service . Sailing for European waters on 25 October , Balch arrived at Queenstown , Ireland on 17 November and reported for duty with the Queenstown Force Commander . The destroyer began convoy escort duties on 24 November , which generally meant shepherding merchant ships through the " submarine danger zone " in the western approaches to the United Kingdom and France . 
 While this duty was relatively uneventful , Balch did twice encounter German submarines . On 29 January 1918 , while steaming off Liverpool , she dropped two depth charges over a diving U @-@ boat , without effect . Then , on 12 May , the destroyer joined other escorts in depth @-@ charging a U @-@ boat spotted near convoy HS 60 , with Balch dropping 12 depth charges that helped drive off the submarine . 
 There were other perils at sea , however , most notably on 20 October 1918 when Paulding collided with Balch during convoy escort operations . The collision knocked Balch 's port depth charge overboard , but Boatswain 's Mate Second Class Albert <unk> , Coxswain Frank <unk> , and Gunner 's Mate Second Class Frank H. Sumner — all of whom received letters of commendation from the US Navy — recognized that a collision was imminent and set the depth charges to " safe " . Balch did suffer steering gear damage which required two weeks of repair at Queenstown . Then , on 5 November , while escorting a convoy in the English Channel , the Balch helped American destroyer Sterett rescue 29 survivors of the foundering merchant ship <unk> , returning the survivors to Queenstown . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 Following the signing of the Armistice on 11 November which ended all fighting , Balch received orders to sail for home and she departed Ireland on 16 November . She arrived at Norfolk , Virginia , via Ponta Delgada , Azores , on 1 January 1919 and was placed in ordinary . Returned to commission in early April , the destroyer sailed to the West Indies for three weeks of maneuvers out of Guantanamo Bay , Cuba . Balch then returned to Norfolk on 28 April for an overhaul . In July 1920 , she was assigned the hull code of DD @-@ 50 under the US Navy 's alphanumeric classification system . Postwar funding shortages kept the destroyer in port until late 1921 , when Balch briefly cruised with the Torpedo Flotilla , Atlantic Fleet , before financial considerations led to her inactivation . 
 Balch was decommissioned at Philadelphia on 20 June 1922 . On 1 November 1933 , she dropped the name Balch to free it for a new destroyer of the same name , becoming known only as DD @-@ 50 . The ship was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 8 March 1935 , and , on 23 April , was ordered scrapped at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . 
 = The Power of Four = 
 " The Power of Four " is a joint anthem composed for the British and Irish Lions rugby union team . It was written by Neil Myers in 2005 . It was commissioned by the Lions head coach , Sir Clive Woodward for the 2005 British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand as the official song . It was intended to be a universal anthem for the British and Irish Lions to be sung before every game . However it was criticised as being uninspiring as members of the Lions squad did not engage with it and it was also noted that the fans did not like it . It was dropped as the Lions anthem after the 2005 tour and led to changes in the way music would be chosen in future Lions tours . 
 = = Background = = 
 Historically , the British and Irish Lions were intended as a representative team of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland however , when the Irish Free State broke away from the United Kingdom it was deemed inappropriate for the British and Irish Lions to use the British national anthem , God Save the Queen . As a result of this , the British and Irish Lions did not have an anthem to represent them before any of their matches until 2005 . 
 = = 2005 Lions Tour = = 
 The Power of Four was commissioned by Sir Clive Woodward for the 2005 British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand and was written by Neil Myers . It was recorded by the Melody Music Lions Choir . The song is a classical composition played in a high key . It was first performed live by Welsh opera singer Katherine Jenkins before the British and Irish Lions rugby union match against Argentina at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , Wales in 2005 @.@ it was performed despite suggestions of either God Save the Queen , the Welsh national anthem Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau or a combination of the anthems of the Home Nations of England , Wales , Scotland and Ireland being played instead of The Power of Four . It is always sung in English . 
 Before the British and Irish Lions squad was selected , Woodward sent out bracelets with " The Power of Four " printed on them to potential British and Irish Lions players to try and create a sense of unity and to make them think about the upcoming tour to New Zealand . This was criticised as being " crazy " . The Power of Four was also used as a motivational slogan in some of the Lions ' team building activities . 
 The lyrics of The Power of Four were circulated to all of the members of the British and Irish Lions tour squad and the song was pre @-@ added to the playlists on their tour iPods . The song was not released as a single however it was permitted to be broadcast by radio stations and it was made available to download on the Internet . The British and Irish Lions players were shown the words of The Power of Four on the Saturday before their first game and it was expected that they would know the words by the time they had arrived in New Zealand . However it was mentioned by a British and Irish Lions spokesman that the players were under no obligation to sing it . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The BBC opined during the British and Irish Lions ' warm @-@ up game against Otago that it was not inspiring for the Lions supporters to sing . Austin Healey observed that the players did not appear to like The Power of Four when it was performed . 
 Before the first Test match , it was noticed that despite British and Irish Lions fans being filmed singing The Power of Four , none of the players did sing it when it was played as the Lions anthem before God Defend New Zealand . It was also noted that Lions fans felt that The Power of Four was not catching on and some even suggested that Axel F would be better than The Power of Four . It was also suggested that due to a perceived selection bias towards English members of the Lions , that Land of Hope and Glory should be used instead of The Power of Four . The acting British and Irish Lions captain Martin Corry said that he did not attempt to sing The Power of Four because he felt that he would not be able to reach the correct notes . In 2009 , British and Irish Lions player Alun Wyn Jones said that " I 'd rather sing The Power of Love " when asked if he would want to sing The Power of Four . 
 The song experienced a mixed response in the media . In July 2005 , following the Lions tour , a journalist on the BBC Sport website , James Standley , commented that The Power of Four is " hollow and disliked by fans . " However , Lions coach Sir Clive Woodward said he hoped it would " stir the passions " . It was also described in The Independent as an " excruciating mix of politburo and classical pop " . However Danny Stevens in The New Zealand Herald said that " The Power of Four was not a bad song but unfortunately nobody actually knew the tune or the words . " The words of The Power of Four were also compared to be similar to the New Zealand Māori rugby union team 's " <unk> " haka in The Telegraph . 
 The anthem did not return for the 2009 British and Irish Lions tour to South Africa , which received a positive reaction from Sky Sports reporters . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The negative reception of The Power of Four was listed as one of the issues used to criticise Woodward for the failures of the tour . It was also pointed out that Woodward and team manager , Bill Beaumont used The Power of Four whenever they entered into a press conference which led to the press conferences being referred to as possibly being " mistaken for a revivalist meeting " . 
 The Power of Four was so negatively received , that it was announced that future British and Irish Lions tours would have songs and themes chosen by a musical committee set up in the wake of the 2005 tour instead of by the team coach . After 2005 , The Power of Four became largely forgotten . During the 2013 British and Irish Lions tour to Australia , ESPN jokingly suggested that The Power of Four would be remixed into a hip hop song for the third test by Pharrell Williams and would be performed by Snoop Dogg . 
 = Give It 2 Me ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Give It 2 Me " is a song by American singer and songwriter Madonna , featured on her 11th studio album Hard Candy . It was released on June 24 , 2008 by Warner Bros. Records as the second single from the album . The song was written by Madonna as an anthemic , self @-@ manifesto song which , although it appears to be about dance and sex , is a reference to Madonna 's career spanning three decades in the music industry . Musically , " Give It 2 Me " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song , featuring instrumentation from West African percussion and cowbells . Backing vocals are provided by Pharrell Williams . 
 " Give It 2 Me " received positive reviews from contemporary critics . The song became Madonna 's 39th number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart . It charted on the Billboard Hot 100 for one week , and reached a peak of 57 only , due to limited radio play . The song topped the music charts in Hungary , the Netherlands and Spain , while it peaked within the top ten of the charts in many other nations , including Canada , Denmark and the United Kingdom . 
 The music video featured Madonna recreating her look from the Elle magazine May covergirl photo shoot , and was directed by photographer Tom Munro . Williams had a guest appearance in the video . It received positive response for her retro @-@ inspired look . Madonna performed " Give It 2 Me " on both the promotional tour for Hard Candy , and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . The song was additionally performed at a special concert for The MDNA Tour at Madison Square Garden in 2012 . " Give It 2 Me " received a Grammy nomination in 2009 in the Best Dance Recording category . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Give It 2 Me " was written by Madonna and Pharrell Williams as a self @-@ empowerment song . Ingrid Sischy from Interview magazine asked Madonna whether the song had the ability to become a party anthem in Ibiza . Madonna responded that she liked the idea of everybody dancing to " Give It 2 Me " , treating it as a party anthem . When asked about the inspiration behind the song , Madonna said , 
 " It 's [ ' Give It 2 Me ' ] very anthemic . I basically wrote it so I could have a great time doing it in a stadium . The words are very autobiographical . ' Got no boundaries , got no limits . [ ... ] Don 't stop me now . [ ... ] If it 's against the law , arrest me . ' [ ... ] Yes , that 's me . It 's the provocative me . The boring , predictable me . " 
 In an interview with MTV Australia , Madonna explained that a prominent theme of the Hard Candy album was about incorporating the image of a boxer , an idea which has been repeated within the song . According to her , " [ ' Give It 2 Me ' ] is basically [ opposite in meaning ] . I 'm not [ ... ] , ' give me all you got ' [ kind of person ] , so it 's quite a sort of tough stance . " Initially , Madonna had decided that the title of the song was to be used for her then @-@ unnamed album . This was changed following the release of a similarly named song by Timbaland . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Give It 2 Me " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song , which , according to newspaper The Sun , features a " bouncy beat " and Williams ' characteristic funky sound . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone said that the song has a club @-@ like synth arrangement with a hip hop " feel to it " . Chris Williams of Entertainment Weekly felt that the hip hop feel is brought about by the use of snare drums . According to the sheet music published by Alfred Publishing , the song is set in common time , with a medium dance tempo of 132 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of G ♯ minor , with Madonna 's vocal range spanning from G3 to C5 . The song has a basic sequence of D ♯ m – G ♯ m – E – F ♯ – A ♯ m – D ♯ m as its chord progression . 
 " Give It 2 Me " starts with an offbeat rhythm and is accompanied by the sound of West African percussion . The song builds into a crescendo as Madonna sings the line , " If it 's against the law , arrest me , if you can handle it , undress me " . This is followed by synthesized musical arrangement , as Madonna starts singing the line , " When the lights go down and there 's no one left , I can go on and on and on . " An interlude , where Madonna continuously chants the words " Get Stupid " , is also present . According to Miles Marshall Lewis of The Village Voice , the song contains elements of the work of Nile Rodgers . 
 " Give It 2 Me " is written as a self @-@ manifesto song . Lyrically , though the song appears to be about dancing and sex , in reality Madonna uses sarcasm to emphasize the longevity of her career . The lyrics explain that she does not want to retire from her career at that moment and possesses the ability to continue , as noted in the lines " Don 't stop me now , no need to catch my breath , I can go on and on and on . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Give It 2 Me " received critical acclaim from music critics . Elysa Gardner from USA Today called the song " thumping " and " breathless " , naming it one of the standout tracks of the album . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone described " Give It 2 Me " as a " thumpy self @-@ empowerment anthem " . Mark Beech from Bloomberg Television complimented the track 's " insidious beats " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called it " a little careerism on the dance floor " , for the line " Give me a record and I 'll break it " . However , she criticised the " Get stupid " interlude , calling it " plain stupid " . Jon Pareles from The New York Times , and Alexis Petridis of The Guardian , compared the song with Rick James ' " Super Freak " ( 1981 ) . Mark Savage from BBC described the song as " one of the [ Hard Candy ] record 's few out @-@ and @-@ out pop moments , featuring a cute , bouncy beat , and a sense of humour that has been missing from Madonna 's music since her Dick Tracy days . " Tom Ewing of Pitchfork named the song as one of Hard Candy 's better tracks , possessing the album 's " most urgent tune " , stating that Madonna sings the lyrics " Show me a record and I 'll break it / I can go on and on " over " hard @-@ pushing electro @-@ ska whose keyboards break up trying to keep pace . " 
 While reviewing Hard Candy , Chris Williams from Entertainment Weekly complemented the song , saying that with " tunes like ' Give It 2 Me ' [ Madonna 's ] unabashedly reviving the <unk> spirit of early singles like ' Lucky Star ' and ' Holiday ' filtering it through hip @-@ hop 's sonic boom . " He also called it the most exciting club banger . Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe said that the song " thumps relentlessly , euphorically , to the rhythm of a clanking virtual cowbell and freaky bass . " Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle complimented the " furious house grooves and thundering beats " of the song . " Give It 2 Me " was compared by Miles Marshall Lewis of The Village Voice , to the earlier Madonna song " Material Girl " , and the music of producer Nile Rodgers . Pete Paphides of The Times noted how different Madonna sounded in songs like " Give It 2 Me " , " Dance <unk> " and " She 's Not Me " from the Hard Candy album . The song received negative feedback from Thomas Hauner of PopMatters , who said that " [ the ] West @-@ African inspired percussion bridge — airdropped onto the album and randomly landing at this point — completely disrupts the song ’ s full potential . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , before its official release as a single , " Give It 2 Me " became the highest debut of the week on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 57 , but dropped off the chart the following week . The song charted based solely on digital sales , and it debuted on the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 21 , and at 41 on the Pop 100 chart . The track failed to gain airplay upon its release to radio . It topped the Billboard Hot Dance Airplay as well as the Hot Dance Club Play charts ; it became Madonna 's 39th number @-@ one single on the latter chart . As of April 2010 , the song has sold 316 @,@ 000 digital units . Before it was officially released in Canada , the single debuted and peaked at number eight on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , becoming the week 's highest debut . The single fluctuated on the chart for the next few weeks , but did not top its debut peak of eight . It was present for a total of 20 weeks on the chart . 
 " Give It 2 Me " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 73 the chart week of May 4 , 2008 , but fell off the chart the following week . It re @-@ entered at number 25 the chart week of July 5 , 2008 , ultimately peaking at number seven . The song remained on the chart for a total of 19 weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , " Give It 2 Me " has sold 170 @,@ 000 copies there . On the 2008 UK year @-@ end singles chart , the song came in at number 73 . In Australia , the song debuted at number 23 , before descending off the chart . 
 In the Netherlands , the single debuted on the Dutch Top 40 chart at number 19 . In its fourth week , the song rose to number one , and spent six weeks at the top . " Give It 2 Me " debuted at number one on Spanish Singles Chart and spent four weeks atop the chart . It also peaked within the top ten of the official charts of Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , Italy , Slovakia and Switzerland . " Give It 2 Me " received a platinum certification in Brazil and a gold certification in Denmark , by the Associação Brasileira dos Produtores de Discos ( ABPD ) and IFPI Denmark , for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 500 copies respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was filmed on April 3 , 2008 , at the Sunbeam Studios in London , co @-@ directed by fashion photographer Tom Munro and Nathan Rissman . The video was shot during Madonna 's photo shoot with Elle magazine , for its May cover girl issue . Madonna 's retro @-@ chic look in the video was inspired by the photoshoot . The video featured a guest appearance from rapper Pharrell Williams ; he was portrayed alongside Madonna , singing to the camera in front of various backdrops . Madonna wore thigh @-@ high PVC boots , visible underwear and sheer tops in the video . The dresses were designed by several fashion brands , including Chanel and Roberto Cavalli . 
 The video begins with Madonna stretching in front of a wall @-@ mirror , while traffic noise is heard . During the first verse , Madonna is shown in a chic Chanel black dress with retro makeup . As the bridge of the song builds up , she is shown dancing in front of a white screen , wearing a French cap , and standing on a sofa . When the chorus of the song plays , she dances while holding an <unk> , and fondles with long black fur . The second verse shows Madonna and Williams trading shots , with Williams wearing sunglasses in some scenes . At the " Get stupid " interlude , Williams is shown dragging a bag along the floor behind Madonna . The video concludes with an exhausted Madonna , falling asleep on the studio floor . 
 The Daily Mail called the video " kinky " and wrote that " [ Madonna ] has no plans to tone down her racy image . " MTV said that the essence of the video was Madonna 's 1990 compilation album The Immaculate Collection , whose inline pictures featured her in bejewelled costumes . The black @-@ and @-@ white footage and the mod @-@ burlesque feel was compared to " Vogue " ( 1990 ) . According to MTV , elements from Madonna 's 2006 Confessions Tour were included in the dance choreography . They added that " she ’ s thrown in some new [ choreography ] , an extended cameo by Pharrell and enough jewelry to give Mr. T an inferiority complex . " Bill Lamb of About.com complimented Madonna 's " stunning " body in the video , although she had turned 50 in the summer of 2008 . He added that the video emphasized Madonna 's " amazing staying power as one of the world 's top pop stars for 25 years . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was performed during the promotional tour for the Hard Candy album , and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour ; both performances were similar . In the promotional tour , " Give It 2 Me " was performed as the fifth song of the setlist . Madonna wore a shiny black dress with black tails , Adidas track pants and high @-@ heeled , lace @-@ up boots . Every time the chorus played , Madonna and her back @-@ up dancers jumped up and down , while waving their hands up in the air . The performance was backed by laser lights in the background and two movable screens , which displayed Williams , performing his lines . 
 In the Sticky & Sweet Tour , " Give It 2 Me " was performed as the closing song of the " Futuristic rave with Japanese influence " section . During the last segment of the show , Madonna wore a futuristic robotic dress with plates on her shoulder and a wig with long curled hair . She opened the breastplate from the previous performance , and started singing " Give It 2 Me " . Parts of the lyrics of the song flashed on the screens in the style of a shooter video game , featuring 1980s games like Space Invaders and Asteroids . Gradually , more and more dancers joined Madonna , and together they started jumping on stage . Williams appeared on the screens to sing his lines . He made a special guest appearance , for the performances of " Give It 2 Me " , at the Madison Square Garden stop of the tour . Near the end of the performance , Madonna asked the crowd to sing along with her while she shouted , " No one is ever going to stop me " . The performance ended with video backdrops showing Madonna 's sweaty , unsmiling , exhausted face , as she disappeared behind the reformed cubicle @-@ shaped screens , which showed the words , ' Game Over ' , and " Holiday " started playing in the background . 
 Elements of the song were used in the opening number , " Girl Gone Wild " , during The MDNA Tour in 2012 . On November 13 , 2012 , during The MDNA Tour 's second performance at Madison Square Garden in New York City , Madonna was joined onstage by Korean entertainer Psy . Together they performed a mashup of the song and " Gangnam Style " . When introducing Psy , Madonna told the crowd that he " flew in all the way from Frankfurt , Germany this morning just to cheer your asses up ! " During the performance Madonna and Psy ( who was wearing a bright red suit and his signature sunglasses ) executed " Gangnam Style " ' s characteristic horse dance , and at one point Madonna pretended to be galloping along Psy 's back . Joyce Chen of New York Daily News described the performance as a " spectacle , " stating that the crowd " went wild . " 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , co @-@ producer , vocals 
 Pharrell Williams – writer , additional vocals 
 The Neptunes – producer 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Andrew Coleman – mixing consoles 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Christina Milian = 
 Christine Flores ( born September 26 , 1981 ) , better known as Christina Milian ( / <unk> / ) , is an American singer , songwriter and actress . At the age of 19 , Milian signed a contract with Def Jam . In 2001 , Milian released her self @-@ titled debut album , which featured the singles " AM to PM " and " When You Look at Me " ; " AM to PM " charted within the Top 40 of the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and both peaked in the top three on the UK Singles Chart . In 2004 , Milian released her second studio album It 's About Time , which provided her first major U.S. hit , " Dip It Low " , which reached number five on the U.S. Billboard chart . " Whatever U Want " was released as the album 's second single . Both singles charted within the Top 10 of the UK chart . 
 In 2006 , Milian released her third studio album So Amazin ' . The album produced one single , " Say I " , which peaked in the Top 30 of the US Billboard chart . A month after the release of So Amazin ' , Milian 's representative confirmed that she had left Island Records due to creative differences . Milian signed with Interscope Records in 2009 . A single , ballad " Us Against the World " , was released in October 2008 . In 2012 , Milian signed to Young Money Entertainment , which will release her fourth studio album . 
 Although Milian is best known for her singing career , she originally wanted to be an actress . Her first lead role was in the 2003 film Love Don 't Cost a Thing , and she subsequently had main roles in Be Cool and the 2006 horror film Pulse . Milian had a minor role in Ghosts of Girlfriends Past , and starred as the lead role in the straight @-@ to @-@ DVD film Bring It On : Fight to the Finish , training with former Cleveland Cavaliers dancer Kelly Wilson . Milian has since been cast in the 2010 ABC Family Original Movie Christmas Cupid , alongside Ashley Benson and Chad Michael Murray . 
 On September 4 , 2009 , Milian and R & B singer / songwriter The @-@ Dream eloped in Las Vegas , and she gave birth to their daughter , Violet , on February 26 , 2010 . Milian and The @-@ Dream announced their separation on July 12 , 2010 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Milian was born in Jersey City , New Jersey , and is Cuban American . She was born to parents Don Flores and Carmen Milian , and raised in Waldorf , Maryland . , Flores changed her name and adopted her mother 's maiden name ( Milian ) in the hopes of landing a wider range of acting roles . The oldest of three sisters , including Danielle and Elizabeth , she moved with her family to Waldorf , Maryland , soon after her birth . Milian was four years old when she showed an interest in show business , and when her family realized that she was a talented actress , she became determined to pursue an entertainment career . As a child , Milian was " very imaginative and very creative " , and watching television and listening to the radio became her life . They inspired her to have fun , and she convinced her parents that she " did not want to be inside the TV " , although it took some time to convince them . By the time she was nine years old , Milian had begun auditioning with local talent agencies , shot commercials for Wendy 's and Honeycomb , and played the lead role in the musical Annie . Milian 's mother noticed her daughter 's potential and left her husband and moved to Los Angeles with her three daughters when Milian was 13 years old . Her father had to stay in Maryland and divorced her mother soon after the move . 
 When Milian moved to Los Angeles , her only desire was to be an actress . She always wanted to be in the record business , but did not know how to obtain a recording contract . During this time , she was also a host for the Disney Channel . After living in Los Angeles for six months , Milian moved into the same apartment complex as songwriter and producer Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins . Jerkins heard about Milian from a boy band he was working with and once he heard her sing , they began working together . For a year and a half , Milian went into a studio every day and worked with Jerkins , which is where she started meeting people in the record business . She began writing songs at the age of 17 because she needed a demo to help her obtain a recording contract . According to Milian , every time she recorded a song , the producer would refuse to give her the demo , or would write lyrics that she did not agree with . She felt that she had to write a song , record a demo , and send it out on her own . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2001 – 02 : Christina Milian , record deal and minor acting = = = 
 Milian made her first professional musical appearance on rapper Ja Rule 's second studio album Rule 3 : 36 ( 2000 ) , performing vocals on the song " Between Me and You " . The song was released as the album 's lead single in 2000 , peaking at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and in the top 30 of the UK Singles Chart . Milian co @-@ wrote and performed backing vocals for the track " Play " for Jennifer Lopez 's album J. Lo ( 2001 ) , and co @-@ wrote " Same Ol ' Same Ol ' " , the second single from girl group PYT 's debut album PYT ( Down with Me ) ( 2001 ) . Milian 's collaboration with Ja Rule led to a record deal with Def Soul Records , prompted by his affiliation with Murder Inc . Records , an imprint of The . Inc Records that was distributed through Def Jam , the parent label of Def Soul Records . She travelled to Sweden and recorded her self @-@ titled debut album . The album was released on October 9 , 2001 in the UK , peaking at number 23 and selling a total of 101 @,@ 986 copies . Internationally , the album peaked at number 36 in the Netherlands , and number 98 in Sweden . The album 's domestic release was postponed because of the September 11 attacks , which occurred just two weeks before its release date . Her label opted to release it later that year , in the fourth quarter , but as Milian explained , new artists generally do not release their albums during that time . As a result , the album was again delayed until the first quarter of 2002 ; however , Milian eventually opted not to release it . Two singles were taken from the album , " AM to PM " and " When You Look at Me " , both of which charted worldwide . A music video for the track " Get Away " was filmed in Paris , although it was not officially released as a single . 
 The critical response to the album was mixed to generally positive . Imran Ahmed of the New Musical Express predicted that based on the record , " genius can 't be more than a few albums away " . Contrastingly , entertainment.ie writer Andrew Lynch suggested that Milian needed original ideas . Milian believed that the public expected " a certain thing " from her when she first appeared with Ja Rule , however she wanted to record the type of music she was signed to do . She said that " AM to PM " was a " cool record , " but it was not what the public expected . Milian approached the executives at her record company , Island Def Jam , and " <unk> them all out " , telling them that they were not listening to her . She felt that she had gained their respect by explaining that she was serious about her musical career . In the following years , she was featured on the track " It 's All Gravy " , a duet with British rapper Romeo , which was a UK top ten hit ; provided the theme song for the hit Disney Channel animated series Kim Possible , " Call Me , Beep Me ! " ; and collaborated with Hilary Duff on Duff 's Christmas album Santa Claus Lane ( 2002 ) , on the song " I Heard Santa on the Radio " . 
 Although Milian is best known for her singing career , she originally wanted to be an actress . When asked whether she prefers singing or acting , Milian said that " they 're both my passion . But , honestly , if I had to choose , it would probably be my music . I love writing . I love listening . I love the challenge of it . " Milian has also stated that she loves " performing live on the stage ... above all else . It 's my favorite . " 
 Milian 's first major acting role was offered by the Disney Channel to join The Mickey Mouse Club ; however , she did not accept and opted to star as a reporter on Movie Surfers . During this time , she had minor roles in film and television , including Sister , Sister , Smart Guy , The Steve Harvey Show , Get Real , The Wood and American Pie . In 2002 , Milian was appointed the host of the live competitive music series Becoming Presents : Wannabe on MTV , where she met director Joseph Kahn . Kahn suggested she audition for a lead role in the film Torque . Her audition was successful and she played a minor role in the film . She was subsequently cast in her first lead role in Love Don 't Cost a Thing . Milian has been described as a role model to young girls ; she has said that there are a lot of people who young girls look up to , but " at the end of the day you have to be your own person and love yourself . " Milian worked with the Children Uniting Nations charity , in which she was a big sister to foster children , and says her favorite charity is the Penny Lane Foundation . Milian was awarded with a humanitarian award at The Reign fundraiser from the Elton John AIDS Foundation for being a role model for young children . Milian said , " I 've never been rewarded that way and never been acknowledged like that . That was really nice of them , and I was happy I was able to show up for the kids . " 
 = = = 2003 – 04 : It 's About Time and acting debut = = = 
 Milian felt that Island Def Jam was confused as to how they wanted her image to be portrayed ; one second she was young and singing " AM to PM " , and next she was a grown woman singing " Get Away " . She realized that the change confused the audience , and that " nobody was buying it " . In 2003 , Milian 's label Def Soul was shut down and absorbed by its parent Def Jam , although Milian was instead moved over to Island Records . After the international release of her debut album , Milian went back into the recording studio . The singer felt that music trends had changed into rock music , hardcore hip hop and tribute songs , and her music did not fall into those categories . Milian decided to stop recording and toured overseas for a year and a half . When she returned to the US , she decided not to release her previous album domestically , and started working on a new album . Milian traveled the world , working with the popular producers Bloodshy & Avant , " Darkchild " , Cory Rooney , Warryn Campbell , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox and <unk> Paul . 
 Milian 's second studio album , It 's About Time , was released in the US on July 13 , 2004 . The critical response to the album was mixed ; the club tracks , most notably lead single " Dip It Low " , were praised while the ballads were said to be disappointing . The style and sound of the album was compared to that of Beyoncé and Jennifer Lopez by several critics . Milian later admitted that her new sexy image for " Dip It Low " and the whole album was mainly for shock value . She had to make her way back into the US market , and by choosing a sexier image , she made a name for herself . " Dip It Low " was also meant to show that she was not the same 18 @-@ year @-@ old girl in the " AM to PM " video . To create her new image , Milian also decided to change her appearance and lightened her hair . Taking inspiration from Janet Jackson who constantly changed her image , Milian thought to herself , " ' When did I like Janet Jackson the most ? ' It was when she had her lightened hair . " 
 Milian believed that the album was more R & B when compared to her " bubble @-@ gum " pop debut album . The change was reflected in the album 's lead single , " Dip It Low " , which was more of a club and R & B track than her previous pop release " AM to PM " . Milian performed as an opening act on the Usher and Kanye West tour to promote her album . The album debuted and peaked at number 14 on the Billboard 200 album chart and number 21 in the UK , selling a total of 382 @,@ 000 and 63 @,@ 708 copies respectively , and received a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Contemporary R & B Album " in 2005 . The album 's first single , " Dip It Low " , became Milian 's biggest hit to date , reaching number two in the UK and number five in the US . The single was certified Gold by the RIAA for digital sales , and earned a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Rap / Sung Collaboration " . The album 's second and final single , " Whatever U Want " , featuring Joe Budden , failed to reprise the success of the lead single but reached the top ten in the UK . 
 Milian starred in Be Cool , the sequel to Get Shorty , with John Travolta and Uma Thurman , and recorded two songs for its soundtrack . She was then cast in a lead role in the horror film Pulse , starring alongside Kristen Bell and Ian Somerhalder . The film was a remake of the Japanese film Kairo ( 2001 ) , and was adapted by Wes Craven and Ray Wright . Filming took place in Romania , a traumatic time for Milian , where she endured racial abuse and discovered that boyfriend Nick Cannon was cheating on her . Milian has also appeared in two video games : Def Jam Vendetta ( 2003 ) , where she plays Angel , a mob boss ' girlfriend , and as one of the female leads , Carmen Mendez , in the video game Need for Speed : Undercover ( 2008 ) . 
 = = = 2005 – 06 : So Amazin ' and record departure = = = 
 Whereas Milian 's previous albums had pop and R & B stylings , she was encouraged by Island Def Jam to target a new audience and release an urban record . Explaining the change , Milian said that one of her main problems was that previous releases would often find mainstream success , but would be relatively unsuccessful on urban radio . As an R & B artist , she wanted to build her core audience – a true fan base that would support her through time – to increase her career 's longevity . The main purpose of her genre change was to go back to the streets and add to her core audience . To create a more urban record , Milian had a list of producers that she wanted to work with . L.A. Reid suggested to Milian that she should work with Cool & Dre , with whom she ended up working with as the first people to start off the album . Although Milian was originally supposed to work with several different music producers , she felt that the chemistry they had in the first week was so " instant and real " that she felt she could not get a better " vibe " with anybody else other than them . Milian ended up working with Cool & Dre on the majority of the production of the album , producing ten of the album 's eleven tracks together . The album completed within a three @-@ month period , whereas Milian 's previous albums would take six months to a year . 
 Milian 's third studio album , So Amazin ' , was released on May 16 , 2006 . The album 's lead single , " Say I " , featured rapper Young Jeezy . The single saw peak positions of number four in the UK , and number twenty @-@ one in the US . So Amazin ' debuted and peaked at number eleven on the Billboard 200 albums chart , selling 54 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and 163 @,@ 000 copies in total . Internationally , the album peaked at number 55 on the Swiss Albums Chart , 67 on the UK Albums Chart , and 139 on the France Albums Chart . Reviews of So Amazin ' were mixed ; critics felt that while Milian claimed that she was displaying the various sides of her personality , the album could " only [ scratch ] the surface of who she really is . " " Say I " was praised by several critics , and was described as " instantly rousing " and " intoxicating " . In June 2006 , Milian 's representative confirmed that she had been dropped by Island Def Jam . In an interview with Rap @-@ Up , Milian revealed she was dropped a week after her album was released . The singer believed it was a " budget cut " , and that Island Def Jam Music Group wanted to spend more money on label mate Rihanna . She said , " it was embarrassing . It was a week after my album got put out . I would be in my room a lot of the time crying by myself . " After leaving Def Jam , Milian released her first compilation album , The Best of Christina Milian ( 2006 ) . 
 After the production of So Amazin ' in 2006 , Milian began dating Andre Lyon from the production group Cool & Dre . The pair dated until February 2009 , when they decided to go on a break . Milian said that they were still really close , and decided to break up because it was " hard to grow together when you live on two different coasts " . The singer wanted to take more opportunities and learn more about herself , which she often let go when in a relationship , but felt that she was in a now @-@ or @-@ never situation . Milian described Lyon as an amazing guy , and said that although there was a chance for the couple in the future , she needed to focus on herself . 
 = = = 2007 – 10 : Elope and hiatus = = = 
 Following her departure from Island Def Jam Music Group , Milian signed with MySpace Records in 2008 . She began writing songs and recording in the studio with numerous different producers , including Cool & Dre , J. R. Rotem , The Runners , Danja , Madd Scientist , T @-@ Pain , Jim Jonsin and Toby Gad . Milian was featured on the cover of Rap @-@ Up 's 2008 Winter issue , in which she announced that the album 's title was Dream in Color ( later retitled as Elope ) . A single was released in October 2008 , ballad " Us Against the World " . It was written by Milian and produced by Madd Scientist . The single , described by Milian as a " cinematic power ballad " , premiered via MySpace on October 6 , 2008 , and was made available by digital download the next day . Milian felt that Madd Scientist " brought the best out of me " while producing " Us Against the World " , and " was really able to do some amazing things with my vocals " . 
 After recording songs with the aforementioned producers , Milian took a break from music and started filming Bring It On : Fight to the Finish . When Milian returned to music , she concentrated on promoting her single " Us Against the World " , and shot its music video . Since then , Milian said that she became " a little bit more meticulous with what I feel deserved to be on the album " , and resumed recording . Songs recorded for the album included the 1990s Madonna @-@ styled ballad " Stay " , Euro @-@ club record " Tug of War " and the feel @-@ good song " Diamonds " , which featured Kanye West . Other features included Rick Ross on the Cool & Dre produced track " <unk> " , and Pitbull . 
 In early 2009 , Milian began working with The @-@ Dream , Tricky Stewart , and <unk> Da Maestro , which led to her signing a deal with Radio Killa Records . Milian revealed that aside from " Us Against the World " , The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart would be producing all the songs on her album . In March 2009 , Milian changed the album 's title to Elope . Regarding the album 's title change , Milian explained , " the definition of elope is to run away secretly with one 's beloved . This next album is about taking responsibility for yourself and making your own decisions . " In June 2009 , The @-@ Dream said that the album was finished . Upon completion of the album , Milian said it represented " independence , not having to answer to any type of ' authority ' , being a woman at her best and feeling very confident " . She said that fans could expect an " edgy sound with lots of strong powerful anthems . Big up tempos , R & B and Pop at it 's [ sic ] best and two big ballads " . 
 In August 2009 , Milian confirmed that she had signed a deal to release Elope through Interscope Records , with a 2010 release date . Originally scheduled to be released in 2009 , Tricky Stewart explained the delay , saying " we just got our label deals done , so the reason why some of these projects got delayed had to do with technicalities and things of that nature " . The album has been furthered delayed because of Milian 's marriage to The @-@ Dream and her pregnancy . In January 2010 , Milian said that she was going back into the studio in the summer to record more material . Although the album had already been finished when Milian took a break for her pregnancy , she wanted to " go back and re @-@ do some of the music and make some new songs and find my new inspiration " . In October 2009 , Tricky Stewart said that another single had yet to be chosen , and that it would be the first single off Elope . Reported choices for the first single include " Zipper " , " I 'm a Cheat " , and " Supersonic " . 
 Milian starred as the main character in the Christmas television movie for the ABC Family channel entitled <unk> , alongside Lorraine Bracco . She was to be a leading character in The CW 's new show Eight Days a Week as Olivia , alongside Mario Lopez , but The CW decided not to pick up the series due to the Writers Guild of America strike . Milian had a minor role in Ghosts of Girlfriends Past alongside Matthew McConaughey , and starred as the lead role in the straight @-@ to @-@ DVD film Bring It On : Fight to the <unk> and as one of the female leads , Carmen Mendez , in the video game Need for Speed : Undercover ( 2008 ) . 
 = = = 2010 – 2014 : Return to music , The Voice and Dancing with the Stars = = = 
 Milian was scheduled to resume recording in July 2010 to complete the album ; however , Milian opted to focus on her acting career . Despite the separation , Milian and The @-@ Dream continued to " work together and write together " . At the 2010 Los Angeles Fashion Week , Milian performed " Zipper " and " Dip It Low " . Milian has worked on a fourth studio album since 2008 , but its release has frequently been delayed . At the 2010 American Music Awards , she said it would be ready in 2011 . In June 2011 , her collaboration with The Jackie Boyz titled Memory was released in Japan . It is set to appear on their album Songs In My Blackberry . 
 NBC announced on October 27 that Milian would serve as the official Social Media Correspondent for The Voice . The role , previously held by Alison Haislip , saw Milian make regular appearances during the live broadcasts . She will also interact with fans through Facebook , Twitter , NBC.com and NBC Live . She has since left the show . 
 On February 12 , 2012 , Lil ' Wayne said that Christina Milian had joined Young Money , and will release her fourth album through Young Money Entertainment . The next day , a song titled " Mr. Valentine " leaked onto the internet . Milian told Carson Daly on 97 @.@ 1 AMP Radio . " Yeah , I 've signed with Young Money . It was pretty awesome . This weekend we had a big party , a big <unk> party , and Drake was performing and we were all up on the stage and Wayne got up there and he announced it himself . And so I was kind of surprised and I was like , ' Oh my gosh , this is awesome ! ' " Milian is currently recording her fourth album . " We 're just getting started on it , " she said . " I 've already halfway gotten there and when my mom and I went to Wayne and we played him some of the music , off the second song , he was like , ' I love it . Let 's do this deal . ' I have some music that 's already going to be on it and the second half I 'm working with them now . [ ... ] When they did a little background check , they saw even the songwriting , all that kind of stuff adds on top of , alright , she 's an actress , she 's a pretty face , she can actually sing , but not to mention she 's a songwriter . I thought that was cool that they even saw that . [ ... ] They all get on each other 's records , so all I have to do is be home with everybody and we 'll just do lots of features . " 
 In October 2012 during an interview , Milian spoke of her Young Money debut : " Wayne just gets his artists , which is great , I have a very one @-@ on @-@ one business relationship with everybody from Mack Maine to Wayne . They 're just very involved in the project as far as bringing the music , playing songs , just giving their input . [ ... ] I really want to pick the perfect single though . It 's been a second since I 've been out musically , so I do not want to fail and I don 't believe in failure , so I just try new things and figure out the pieces . That 's one thing that 's great about Wayne . He 's like , ' Work with different producers , take your time , but at the same time , try new things . Don 't be stuck on one thing . ' " In July 2013 , it was discovered that her contract with The Voice would be ended . 
 In the summer , she collaborated with the Stafford Brothers and Lil ' Wayne on the single " Hello " which reached the <unk> on the Billboard Dance charts . 
 In September 2013 , Milian became a contestant on Dancing with the Stars ( season 17 ) . She was partnered with professional dancer Mark Ballas . She was eliminated in week five despite receiving the highest score of the night . This was because the elimination was based on the previous week 's score ( 24 ) and viewer votes . 
 In July 2014 , she announced she 'd started work on a mixtape titled # <unk> . 
 In November 2014 , she collaborated with Lil ' Wayne on his single " Start a Fire " which they performed on the American Music Awards . 
 = = = 2015 @-@ present : " # <unk> , new ventures , and a music refocus = = = 
 On January 18 , 2015 , Milian debuted her reality show Christina Milian Turned Up . The series follows the day @-@ to @-@ day lives of Christina , her mother Carmen and her two sisters , Danielle and Liz Milian . It was renewed for a second season in April , which premiered in November 2015 . 
 In March , she released a pair of singles ( which were previewed in her reality series ) , with " Rebel " and " We Ain 't Worried " , of which the latter was used to promote her " We Are Pop Culture " clothing line . In July , she announced she was going to release a 5 @-@ track EP and video set , and was working with director Mike Ho . Also that month , she performed the National Anthem at the 2015 <unk> and premiered a new single " Like Me " featuring Snoop Dogg . 
 A few months later , she released another single " Do It " with Lil ' Wayne and changed the EP 's title to Like Me . 
 Her EP " 4U " was released on December 4 , 2015 which includes four tracks and music videos packaged in one . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Milian met actor Nick Cannon on the set of their film , Love Don 't Cost a Thing , in 2003 , and they began dating . After being together for two and a half years , Milian ended her relationship with Cannon in 2005 because of his cheating . Cannon revealed that he refused to stay faithful to Milian because their relationship was becoming too much like a " Christian romance " . When Cannon married Mariah Carey on April 30 , 2008 , Milian said , " regardless of what I felt in the past at the time , I actually forgive him and I 'm very much over that . " 
 In February 2009 , reports emerged that Milian was dating musician The @-@ Dream . Music producer Dre of Cool & Dre said that he supported Milian 's relationship with The @-@ Dream , " I think it 's gonna be a good fit for her " . He stated that he had " nothing but love for her and her family " , and that he " wish [ ed ] her the best and we 're definitely looking forward to what she 's got going on " . In late May 2009 , it was reported that Milian and The @-@ Dream were getting married , and the couple celebrated their engagement party in Las Vegas in June . On September 4 , 2009 , Milian and The @-@ Dream eloped at the Little White Chapel in Las Vegas , Nevada . MTV reported that Milian and The @-@ Dream would get married again in Rome , Italy , and then renew their vows in the US in front of family and friends . On September 11 , 2009 , it was announced that Milian and The @-@ Dream were expecting their first child together . The Daily Mail reported that " the pregnancy was a surprise , but they were getting married regardless " . On February 26 , 2010 , Milian gave birth to their daughter Violet Madison Nash , who had " a full head of hair . " Violet was Milian 's first child , and the fourth for The @-@ Dream , who had three children with ex @-@ wife Nivea . In July 2010 , The @-@ Dream announced that he and Milian had separated in late 2009 , only three months after their wedding in September of that year . Their divorce was finalized on October 23 , 2011 . 
 In September 2010 , Christina began dating Jas Prince , son of Rap @-@ A @-@ lot Records CEO , James Prince . On September 2 , 2013 , It was confirmed that Christina and Jas have been engaged since before April . Christina moved out of the couple 's home on June 19 , 2014 , and the couple announced the following day that their engagement had been called off . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 Milian is a light @-@ lyric soprano who has not displayed her voice all the way in terms of upper register . She has only showcased a full voice vocal range from Eb3 to F5 . The tessitura and tone of her voice are naturally light in their quality but she has shown in her belts that she can create strong tones . Her vocal style has been compared to Paula Abdul . David Peisner of Maxim commented on her talent and described her voice as being " silky and sassy . " Earlier in her career , Milian was mainly an urban pop and teen pop singer but as she matured and grew her sound later grew to branch out into a more hip @-@ hop soul and straight forward R & B sound on her later two releases It 's About Time and So Amazin ' . 
 Milian described the sound of the album as " hip hop under @-@ toned with nice , pop melodies " , and later said the genre of the album was " bubble @-@ gum pop " . She described lead single " AM to PM " as a " very pop " and " fun , party / club song " . The genre of the album was described by one critic as " light @-@ hearted , energetic R & B pop tunes " . Critics compared Milian to Aaliyah . Sonically , the album was said to stick " rigidly to the <unk> @-@ snorting pop formula of Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera " . One reviewer compared Milian to other singers of her generation , and found that " while Spears has gone raunchy with ' I Love Rock ' n ' Roll ' , Christina Aguilera down and dirty on Stripped , and even clean @-@ cut Mandy Moore has brashly cut her hair Felicity @-@ style , Milian still seems young and real . " The critic also compared Milian to Beyoncé , " while Beyonce is shaking her bootylicious body like crazy on ' Crazy In Love ' , Milian is simply enjoying becoming a young star . " " It 's About Time " Compared to her " bubble @-@ gum pop " debut album , Milian described the genre of It 's About Time as more R & B. Discussing the change of genre between her lead singles , Milian said that the " first single off my last album , ' AM to PM ' , was more of a kiddie kind of thing , very pop . [ Dip It Low ] is more R & B , kind of a club / party kind of vibe . " An issue Milian had with the album was that it did not flow . The various pop and urban influences in that album , she found , confused the audience . For her next studio album , Milian said that she wanted a more consistent feel . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 In February 2010 , it was announced that Milian had signed an Australian music duo , Kasey Osborne and Kelsey @-@ Maree Eckstein , as their manager . Milian said , " the girls have everything it takes to be the biggest international pop duo out there . The world is definitely ready for these beautiful girls to hit the stage and kill it on screen . " She said that the duo were the " most exciting project " she had worked on , and were writing and recording an album to be released in 2010 . In September 2010 , Osborne stated that she was working on a solo album with Milian , was scheduled to release in 2011 , but never did . The album project was pushed back to an unknown release date . Eckstein remained acting and working on her solo music , which was released late 2011 . In early 2012 , Eckstein released her Official Music Video to " The Revolution " , which was written by The Movement and Jesse McCartney and produced by The Movement . In September 2012 , Eckstein signed with Brillstein Entertainment Partners as her acting management . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Christina Milian ( 2001 ) 
 It 's About Time ( 2004 ) 
 So Amazin ' ( 2006 ) 
 EPs 
 4U ( 2015 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Russulaceae = 
 The Russulaceae are a diverse family of fungi in the order Russulales , with roughly 1 @,@ 900 known species and a worldwide distribution . They comprise the brittlegills and the milk @-@ caps , well @-@ known mushroom @-@ forming fungi that include some edible species . These gilled mushrooms are characterised by the brittle flesh of their fruitbodies . 
 In addition to these typical agaricoid forms , the family contains species with fruitbodies that are laterally stiped ( pleurotoid ) , closed ( secotioid or gasteroid ) , or crust @-@ like ( corticioid ) . Molecular phylogenetics has demonstrated close affinities between species with very different fruitbody types and has discovered new , distinct lineages . 
 An important group of root @-@ symbiotic ectomycorrhizal fungi in forests and shrublands around the world includes Lactifluus , Multifurca , Russula , and Lactarius . The crust @-@ forming genera Boidinia , Gloeopeniophorella , and Pseudoxenasma , all wood @-@ decay fungi , have basal positions in the family . 
 = = Systematics and taxonomy = = 
 The family Russulaceae was first validly named in 1907 by Dutch botanist Johannes Paulus <unk> , who included three genera : Russula , Lactarius , and <unk> ( now considered a synonym of Russula ) . He emphasised features such as the granular flesh , thick gills , spiny spores , and milky hyphae and rounded cells ( sphaerocytes ) . A prior usage of " <unk> " by French mycologist Ernst Roze in 1876 is not considered a valid publication , since the proper Latin termination for the family rank specified in article 18 @.@ 4 of the nomenclature code was not used . 
 Synonyms of Russulaceae include : Ernst Albert <unk> 's <unk> ( 1926 ) , Fernand Moreau 's <unk> ( 1953 ) , and David Pegler and Thomas Young 's <unk> ( 1979 ) . The latter family was proposed to contain species with <unk> ( non @-@ forcibly discharged ) and symmetric spores , including the gasteroid genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Zelleromyces . Calonge and Martín reduced the <unk> to synonymy with the Russulaceae when molecular analysis confirmed the close genetic relationship between the gasteroid and agaricoid genera . 
 = = = Placement of the family = = = 
 Historically , the gilled mushrooms of the family Russulaceae were classified with other gilled species in the order Agaricales , but microscopical studies of spore and fruitbody flesh features raised the possibility that they were more closely related with certain " lower fungi " presenting <unk> , crust @-@ like fruitbodies . The use of molecular phylogenetics confirmed that these morphologically diverse fungi form a distinct lineage , first termed the " <unk> clade " and today classified as order Russulales in the class Agaricomycetes . The family 's sister group within the order appears to be the crust @-@ like <unk> . 
 = = = Internal systematics = = = 
 A 2008 molecular phylogenetic study clarified the relationships among the mushroom @-@ forming species of the family . The authors demonstrated the existence of four distinct lineages of gilled mushrooms , which led to the description of Multifurca as a new genus separated from Russula and the segregation of Lactifluus from Lactarius . 
 Genera with closed fruitbodies within the family are form taxa instead of natural groups : <unk> , <unk> , and Zelleromyces are phylogenetically part of Lactarius , while <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> belong to Russula . Nevertheless , some of these genus names are still in use , as many of the concerned species have not yet formally been synonymised with Lactarius or Russula . 
 The crust @-@ like genera Boidinia , Gloeopeniophorella , and Pseudoxenasma , formerly placed in the <unk> or <unk> , are now classified in the Russulaceae and basal to the clade of mushroom @-@ forming species described above . Studies have so far failed to clearly circumscribe and place these genera within the family . Boidinia in its current extent is polyphyletic , with some species not falling into the Russulaceae . 
 = = = Species diversity = = = 
 Altogether , the Russulaceae comprise around 1 @,@ 900 accepted species . Russula is by far the largest genus with ca . 1100 species , Lactarius has ca . 550 , Lactifluus ca . 120 , Boidinia 13 , Multifurca 6 , Gloeopeniophorella 6 , and Pseudoxenasma 1 species . Closed @-@ fruitbody species not yet synonymised with Lactarius or Russula ( see above ) account for some 150 species . 
 New species in the Russulaceae continue to be described from various regions , such as the US , Guyana , Brazil , Patagonia , Togo , Sri Lanka , or Thailand . It has been estimated that the real number of Russula species in North America alone ( currently around 400 described ) might be as high as 2000 . Cryptic species may increase true diversity : some morphologically well @-@ defined species , especially in Lactifluus , have been shown to actually encompass several phylogenetic species . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Macroscopic characteristics = = = 
 Three major types of fruitbodies occur in the Russulaceae : agaricoid and pleurotoid forms with a cap , gills , and a stipe ; forms with closed ( gasteroid ) or partially closed ( secotioid ) fruitbodies , and corticioid , crust @-@ like forms . 
 The agaricoid species in Lactarius , Lactifluus , Multifurca , and Russula are readily distinguished from other gilled mushrooms by the consistency of their flesh , which is granular , brittle and breaks easily , somewhat like a piece of chalk . Russulaceae never have a volva , but a partial veil can be found in some tropical species . Gills are adnate to decurrent , and the colour of the spore print ranges from white to ochre or orange ( with the brown @-@ spored Lactarius <unk> as an exception ) . 
 Caps can be dull to very colourful , the latter especially in Russula ; their size ranges from 17 mm diameter or less in Russula <unk> to 30 cm ( 12 in ) in Lactifluus vellereus . <unk> ringed ( zonate ) caps occur in all Multifurca and several Lactarius species . Laterally stiped ( pleurotoid ) fruitbodies exist in some , mainly tropical Lactifluus and Russula species . Taste is a distinguishing characteristic in many species , from mild to very acrid . A conspicuous feature of the " milk @-@ caps " in Lactarius , Lactifluus , and Multifurca furcata is the latex or " milk " their fruitbodies exude when bruised . 
 The secotioid and gasteroid species in Lactarius and Russula are derived from agaricoid forms . <unk> species still have a stipe but the cap does not open fully , while in gasteroid species , fruitbodies are completely closed and the stipe is reduced ; in both cases , the spore @-@ bearing structure is made up of convoluted gills that are more or less crowded and anastomosed . These closed @-@ fruitbody species represent a continuum of secotioid to gasteroid , above @-@ ground to below @-@ ground fruitbodies , with spores forcibly discharged or not . <unk> or gasteroid Lactarius exude latex just like their agaricoid relatives . 
 The corticioid species of Boidinia , Gloeopeniophorella , and Pseudoxenasma develop crust @-@ like fruitbodies with a smooth , porous , or flaky surface and grow on tree logs or dead branches . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 All Russulaceae , including the corticioid species , are characterised by spherical to elliptic basidiospores with a faint to very distinct ( e.g. warty , spiny , or crested ) ornamentation that stains bluish @-@ black with Melzer 's reagent ( an amyloid stain reaction ) . Basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are usually club @-@ shaped and four @-@ spored . Russulaceae species do not have clamp connections . 
 Characteristic cells with an oily content ( gloeocystidia ) are found in the hymenium . In Russulaceae , these show a positive colour reaction when treated with <unk> ( <unk> is mostly used ) . They are also present in the hyphal sheath of ectomycorrhizal roots colonised by Russulaceae . 
 The feature responsible for the brittle fruitbody structure in the mushroom @-@ forming species are globular cells , called sphaerocytes or sphaerocysts , that compose the flesh ( trama ) alongside the usual hyphae . Sometimes , these cells are clustered , and the position and arrangement of these clusters differs among genera . 
 Another particular trama cell type are lactiferous hyphae ( also lactifers ) . These are hyphae carrying the " milk " or " latex " exuded by the milk @-@ caps ; they react positively with <unk> , form an abundantly branched system in the trama and end as pseudocystidia in the hymenium . In general , only Lactarius , Lactifluus and Multifurca furcata possess lactifers . In Russula , similar hyphae can sometimes be observed in the trama , but these are not as abundantly branched as real lactifers and do not extend into the hymenium as pseudocystidia . This traditional distinction line between the " milk @-@ caps " and Russula is however less evident in some tropical species presenting intermediate states . 
 = = = Genera distinction = = = 
 Some characteristics of the mushroom @-@ forming genera ( marked with * below ) can be less obvious or absent in tropical species . Distinguishing between Lactarius and Lactifluus based on morphology alone is quite difficult , as clear synapomorphies for both genera have yet to be identified . Most field guides treat the two genera together , often because Lactifluus is not yet recognised as a separate genus . 
 Boidinia : corticioid ; loose texture ; surface smooth , with pores , or flaky ; spores spherical with spiny to warty ornamentation . Note that the genus is polyphyletic and needs to be redefined . 
 Gloeopeniophorella : corticioid ; surface almost smooth ; hyphae without clamp connections ; thick @-@ walled cystidia ( metuloids ) and gloeocystidia present ; spores with wrinkled ( rugose ) ornamentation . 
 Lactarius : agaricoid or gasteroid ; exuding latex * ; caps sometimes zonate , viscose or <unk> , but never <unk> ; rarely thick @-@ walled cells in cuticles of the cap ( pileipellis ) and the stipe ( stipitipellis ) and sphaerocytes in the gills . 
 Lactifluus : agaricoid or pleurotoid ; exuding latex * ; caps never zonate , viscose or <unk> , but sometimes <unk> ; thick @-@ walled cells in cap and stipe cuticles ; often sphaerocytes in the gill trama . 
 Multifurca : agaricoid ; caps zonate ( also visible in cut through trama ) ; gills regularly forked ; only M. furcata exuding latex ; spore print orange ; spores very small ; microscopical trama and hymenium features very variable . 
 Pseudoxenasma : corticioid ; wax @-@ like texture ; gloeocystidia with spherical apical appendices ; basidia developing laterally on hyphae ( <unk> ) ; spores broadly ellipsoid to roughly spherical , with warty ornamentation . 
 Russula : agaricoid , gasteroid or pleurotoid ; never exuding latex ; caps often brightly coloured with stipe and gills much paler ; caps not zonate * ; spore print white , cream , ochre , or orange ; no true lactiferous hyphae * ; sphaerocytes abundant in gill , cap , and stipe trama . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The Russulaceae as a whole have a worldwide distribution , but patterns differ among genera . Russula is the most widespread , found in North , Central and South America , Europe , temperate and tropical Asia , Africa , and Australasia . It is the only Russulaceae genus that occurs in the Nothofagus zone of temperate South America . 
 Lactarius is mainly known from the north temperate zone , but some species also occur in tropical Asia and Africa . Lactifluus has a more tropical distribution than Lactarius , with most species known from tropical Africa , Asia , South America , and Australasia , but some also occurring in the north temperate zone . Multifurca is the rarest among the four mushroom genera , known only from some punctual records in North and Central America , Asia , and Australasia . 
 Species of Lactarius , Lactifluus , and Russula have repeatedly been introduced with trees outside their native range : An overview article lists introductions in Chile , Argentina , Uruguay , Brazil , the USA , Great Britain , the Faroe Islands , South Africa , China , Thailand , and New Zealand . 
 Among the corticioid genera , Pseudoxenasma is only known from Europe . In contrast , Boidinia species have been found in Europe , Taiwan , and Japan , and Gloeopeniophorella species in North America , South America , Europe , West Africa , Taiwan , Australia , and New Zealand . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Ectomycorrhizal symbiosis = = = 
 The genera Lactarius , Lactifluus , Multifurca and Russula form a mutualistic ectomycorrhizal root symbiosis with trees and shrubs , exchanging mineral nutrients for photosynthetic sugar . They are one of several fungal lineages that have evolved such a lifestyle and are sometimes referred to as the " / russula @-@ lactarius " clade in the scientific literature . Worldwide , they are one of the most frequently encountered lineages on ectomycorrhizal roots . While some tropical species were initially believed to be parasitic , the observation that species fruiting on tree trunks do form ectomycorrhiza in tropical Guyana supports the view of an exclusively symbiotic lineage . 
 Associations are known with several plant families . In the Northern Hemisphere , these are essentially the well @-@ known ectomycorrhizal trees and shrubs in the Betulaceae , Fagaceae , Pinaceae and <unk> , but in arctic and alpine habitats , Russulaceae also associate with <unk> vivipara ( Polygonaceae ) , Kobresia ( Cyperaceae ) , and Dryas <unk> ( <unk> ) , ectomycorrhizal plants <unk> in their respective families . In the tropics , known plant partners include Dipterocarpaceae , Fabaceae , <unk> , <unk> , Polygonaceae ( <unk> ) , <unk> , and the gymnosperm Gnetum <unk> , and in the Southern Hemisphere , <unk> , Myrtaceae ( Eucalyptus and Leptospermum ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) . Some Russulaceae are quite specialised in their ectomycorrhizal symbiosis , such as Lactarius and Russula species that only grow with Cistus shrubs in the Mediterranean basin . 
 The different plant partners are reflected in the wide variety of habitats worldwide . Ectomycorrhizal Russulaceae have been observed in arctic and alpine tundra , boreal and alpine forest , north temperate forest , mires , mediterranean forests and scrub ( maquis ) , miombo woodland , tropical lowland rainforest , tropical cloud forest , tropical dry forest , Australian eucalypt woodlands , and south temperate forests . Where they are introduced , they typically grow in plantations of their native host species , e.g. with pine in South Africa , Eucalyptus in Thailand , or birch in New Zealand . 
 = = = Other types of mycorrhiza = = = 
 Some of the ectomycorrhizal Russulaceae are also involved in other types of root symbioses with plants . 
 A mutualistic association similar to ectomycorrhiza but with some hyphae penetrating into the plant root cells , termed <unk> mycorrhiza , is formed by Russulaceae with shrubs of the genera Arbutus and Arctostaphylos , both in subfamily <unk> of the Ericaceae . 
 Some Russulaceae are associated with myco @-@ heterotrophic plants of the Ericaceae subfamily <unk> , forming <unk> mycorrhiza . This is an <unk> relationship , where the heterotrophic plant ultimately derives its carbon from the primary , ectomycorrhizal plant partner of the fungus . The association is often very specific , with the heterotrophic plants only associating with selected fungus partners , including Russulaceae . 
 Russulaceae are also an important group of orchid mycorrhizal fungi . This symbiosis is mutualistic in the case of green orchids , but a partly or fully <unk> relationship in the case of myco @-@ heterotrophic and <unk> orchids , respectively . In some cases , the association with Russulaceae is , as in <unk> mycorrhiza , very specific : the Mediterranean orchid <unk> abortivum predominantly associates with Russula delica and closely related species ; in <unk> maculata , different genotypes of the same species have distinct Russula partners . 
 = = = Wood decay species = = = 
 The corticioid species in Boidinia , Gloeopeniophorella , and Pseudoxenasma are saprotrophic , wood @-@ degrading fungi that develop on dead wood . Their early @-@ branching positions in the phylogeny suggests this has been the ancestral trophic mode of the Russulaceae , and that the mycorrhizal lifestyle ( see above ) evolved later . The saprotrophic nature of these species has been questioned , based on the observation that other inconspicuous , crust @-@ forming fungi are ectomycorrhizal ; a subsequent author reaffirms nevertheless that " [ n ] one of the corticioid species in the family shows any sign of mycorrhizal activity . " 
 = = = <unk> fruiting = = = 
 <unk> fruitbodies , or fruitbodies developing below ground , occur in Lactarius and Russula and have previously been considered as distinct genera ( see Systematics and taxonomy : Internal systematics ) . As such species are especially diverse in some warm and dry regions , e.g. in Spain , California , or Australia , below @-@ ground fruiting has been interpreted as an adaptation to drought . However , hypogeous Russulaceae are also known from cold temperate regions and tropical rainforest . The fact that hypogeous species in the Russulaceae do not form their own lineages but are scattered in Russula or Lactarius shows that this type of fruiting evolved several times . It is believed that these changes are evolutionarily quite recent . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 Russulaceae fruitbodies are subject to <unk> by other fungi . The genus Asterophora develops on old fruitbodies of the mushroom species in the family , as does Dendrocollybia racemosa on at least Russula crassotunicata . Fruitbodies of Lactifluus or Russula species otherwise hot @-@ tasting and unpalatable are regarded as choice edibles in North America when infected by the " lobster mushroom " Hypomyces lactifluorum . <unk> plants , including orchids or <unk> , also parasitise ectomycorrhizal Russulaceae and their plant partners – see above , Other types of mycorrhiza . 
 = = = Threats and conservation = = = 
 As with most fungi , little information is available on the threat of extinction for Russulaceae species , and they have not been assessed in the International Union for the Conservation of Nature 's Red List . However , national lists contain some species of Lactarius , Lactifluus and Russula , indicating that they have small populations and are endangered , e.g. in Great Britain , Switzerland , the Czech Republic , and New Zealand . 
 Although data on Russulaceae themselves are scarce , more is known about the habitats they occur in , especially for the ectomycorrhizal species which depend on their host plants : Several of these habitats are affected by loss or degradation , such as peatlands , Mediterranean forests and scrub or tropical African dry woodland . Similarly , dead wood , the habitat of the corticioid Russulaceae , is rare in many exploited forests and needs special management . 
 Recent studies have found some traditional Russulaceae species to comprise several cryptic species ( see Systematics and taxonomy : Species diversity ) . This may imply that distribution range and population size for each of such distinct species are smaller than previously thought . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Several species of Lactarius , Lactifluus and Russula are valued as excellent edible mushrooms . This is the case for example for the north temperate species Lactarius deliciosus , Lactifluus volemus , or Russula <unk> , and other species are popular in other parts of the world , e.g. Lactarius indigo in Mexico , or Lactifluus edulis in tropical Africa . Some species , like Russula <unk> , can even be eaten raw . The brittle texture of Russula fruitbodies makes them different from other mushrooms and is not appreciated by some . 
 Several species have a hot to very acrid taste and can cause gastrointestinal symptoms . Despite this , such species are eaten in some regions , e.g. Lactarius torminosus in Finland or Russia . Often , they are parboiled or pickled to make them palatable , and sometimes , they are used as spice , for example Russula emetica in Eastern Europe . Some species are however truly poisonous : the East Asian and North American Russula <unk> causes rhabdomyolysis and is potentially lethal , and Lactarius turpis from Eurasia contains a mutagenic substance . 
 Cultivation of edible Russulaceae , as in other ectomycorrhizal fungi , is challenging , since the presence of host trees is required . In spite of this difficulty , the European Lactarius deliciosus has been successfully grown in " mushroom orchards " in New Zealand . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Fruitbodies of Russulaceae have been the subject of natural product research , and different classes of organic compounds have been isolated from them . 
 Aroma compounds are responsible for the particular odour or taste in some species , e.g. sotolon in the fenugreek @-@ smelling Lactarius <unk> , or the similar <unk> III in Lactarius rubidus which causes a maple syrup @-@ like odour in dried specimens . Pigments have been isolated from brightly coloured species , e.g. ( 7 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ yl ) methyl stearate from the blue Lactarius indigo or <unk> and a derivative from the yellow Russula flavida . Some Russula species contain pigmented <unk> derivatives called <unk> that are not found in the milk @-@ caps . Sesquiterpenes are characteristic secondary metabolites of many Russulaceae , especially milk @-@ caps which have been quite intensively studied . They are thought to be responsible for the hot taste in many species and may have deterrent , <unk> functions in nature . 
 Other metabolites isolated from different species include <unk> alkaloids , <unk> phenols , <unk> , <unk> , natural rubber ( polyisoprene ) , sterols , and the sugar alcohol volemitol . Among toxic substances , Lactarius turpis contains the mutagenic alkaloid <unk> , and the small compound <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ ene carboxylic acid has been identified as the toxic agent in Russula <unk> . Some secondary metabolites showed antibiotic properties in laboratory tests . An <unk> extract of Russula delica was antibacterial , and a lectin from Russula rosea showed antitumor activity . 
 = Michel Aflaq = 
 Michel Aflaq ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> , 1910 – 23 June 1989 ) was a Syrian philosopher , sociologist and Arab nationalist . His ideas played a significant role in the development of Ba 'athism and its political movement ; he is considered by several Ba 'athists to be the principal founder of Ba 'athist thought . He published various books during his lifetime , the most notable being The Battle for One Destiny ( 1958 ) and The Struggle Against Distorting the Movement of Arab Revolution ( 1975 ) . 
 Born into a middle @-@ class family in Damascus , Syria , Aflaq studied at the Sorbonne , where he met his future political companion Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar . He returned to Syria in 1932 , and began his political career in communist politics . Aflaq became a communist activist , but broke his ties with the communist movement when the Syrian – Lebanese Communist Party supported France 's colonial policies . Later in 1940 Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar established the Arab Ihya Movement ( later renaming itself the Arab Ba 'ath Movement , taking the name from Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi 's group by the same name ) . The movement proved successful , and in 1947 the Arab Ba 'ath Movement merged with al @-@ Arsuzi 's Arab Ba 'ath organisation to establish the Arab Ba 'ath Party . Aflaq was elected to the party 's executive committee and was elected " ' Amid " ( meaning the party 's leader ) . 
 The Arab Ba 'ath Party merged with Akram al @-@ Hawrani 's Arab Socialist Party to establish the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party in 1952 ; Aflaq was elected the party 's leader in 1954 . During the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1950s the party began developing relations with Gamal Abdel Nasser , the President of Egypt , which eventually led to the establishment of the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) . Nasser forced Aflaq to dissolve the party , which he did , but without consulting with party members . Shortly after the UAR 's dissolution , Aflaq was reelected as Secretary General of the National Command of the Ba 'ath Party . Following the 8th of March Revolution , Aflaq 's position within the party was weakened to such an extent that he was forced to resign as the party 's leader in 1965 . Aflaq was ousted during the 1966 Syrian coup d 'état , which led to a schism within the Ba 'ath Party . He escaped to Lebanon , but later went to Iraq . In 1968 Aflaq was elected Secretary General of the Iraqi @-@ led Ba 'ath Party ; during his tenure he held no de facto power . He held the post until his death on 23 June 1989 . 
 Aflaq 's theories about society , economics and politics , which are collectively known as Ba 'athism , hold that the Arab world needs to be unified into one Arab Nation in order to achieve an advanced state of development . He was critical of both capitalism and communism , and critical of Karl Marx 's view of dialectical materialism as the only truth . Ba 'athist thought placed much emphasis on liberty and Arab socialism – a socialism with Arab characteristics , which was not part of the international socialist movement as defined by the West . Aflaq believed in the separation of state and religion , and was a strong believer in secularisation , but was against atheism . Although a Christian , he believed Islam to be proof of " Arab genius " . In the aftermath of the 1966 Ba 'ath Party split , the Syrian @-@ led Ba 'ath Party accused Aflaq of stealing al @-@ Arsuzi 's ideas , and called him a " thief " . The Iraqi @-@ led Ba 'ath Party rejects this , and does not believe that al @-@ Arsuzi contributed to Ba 'athist thought . 
 = = Early life : 1910 – 1939 = = 
 Born in Damascus to a middle class Greek Orthodox Christian family , his father , Joseph , working as a grain merchant . Aflaq was first educated in the westernized schools of the French Mandate of Syria . In 1929 , he left Syria to study philosophy abroad at the Sorbonne in Paris . During his stay Aflaq was influenced by the works of Henri Bergson , and met his longtime collaborator Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar , a fellow Syrian nationalist . Aflaq founded an Arab Student Union at the Sorbonne , and discovered the writings of Karl Marx . He returned to Syria in 1932 , and became active in communist politics , but left the movement when the government of Léon Blum , supported by the French Communist Party ( FCP ) , continued France 's old politics towards its colonies . Aflaq , and others , had believed that the FCP followed pro @-@ independence policies towards the French colonies . It had not helped that the Syrian – Lebanese Communist Party ( <unk> ) supported the FCP 's decision . From then on Aflaq saw the communist movement as a tool of the Soviet Union . He was impressed by the organisation and ideology of Antun Saadeh 's Syrian Social Nationalist Party . 
 = = = Arab Ba 'ath Movement : 1940 – 1947 = = = 
 Upon their return to Syria , Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar became teachers at <unk> all ' <unk> , " the most prestigious secondary school in Syria " . Aflaq taught history , while al @-@ Bitar taught maths and physics . By 1940 , Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar had managed to set up a student circle , which usually met on Fridays . That year , the Arab Ihya Movement , a political party , was established by Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar . They used most of their spare time in 1941 to agitate for the party . It was in 1942 that Aflaq showed his skills as " a compelling speaker " who was able to utilize the " theatrical pause " to great effect . The party changed its name to Arab Ba 'ath Movement to signify the radical changes which were sweeping the Middle East ; Rashid Ali al @-@ Gaylani , the Prime Minister of Iraq , had challenged Britain 's domination over Iraq . The replacement of the word " Revival " with " Ba 'ath " ( Arabic : <unk> , literally means resurrection / rebirth ) signified that Arab revival had been replaced ideologically by the need for an Arab rebirth . The change of name led to Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi , leader of the Arab Ba 'ath Party , to accuse Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar of stealing his party 's name from him . Though both men were promoting a party platform based on an Arab nationalist stance , Aflaq and al @-@ Arsuzi became bitter rivals . 
 On 24 October 1942 , both Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar resigned from their teaching positions , now determined to devote themselves fully to the political struggle . In 1941 the Syrian Committee to Help Iraq was established to support the Iraqi Government led by Rashid Ali al @-@ Gaylani against the British invasion during the Anglo – Iraqi War . Al @-@ Arsuzi , the leader of the other Arab Ba 'ath movement , was skeptical of the new committee , and opposed helping the Iraqis on the ground that they would lose anyway . In 1941 the movement began publishing documents under the name the " Arab Ihya Movement " . Later , in 1945 , Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar asked the French Mandate authorities to grant the movement a party license . The Arab Ba 'ath movement did not become an official party until 1947 , when it merged with al @-@ Arsuzi 's Arab Ba 'ath Movement to found the Arab Ba 'ath Party . The Arab Ba 'ath Movement , led by Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar , drew supporters from al @-@ Arsuzi 's Ba 'ath Movement ; during the 1940s , al @-@ Arsuzi started to <unk> himself from the public eye , he developed a deep distrust of others and became , according to some of his associates , paranoid . When the two Ba 'ath movements merged and established the Arab Ba 'ath Party in 1947 , the only subject discussed was how much socialism to include ; <unk> al @-@ Ghanim and Jalal al @-@ Sayyid from the al @-@ Arsuzi led Ba 'ath movement wanted Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar to adopt more radical socialist policies . 
 = = Early political career and the UAR : 1947 – 1963 = = 
 = = = Founding and early years = = = 
 The Arab Ba 'ath Party 's first congress was held in Damascus in 1947 . Aflaq took the pre @-@ eminent position of Amid , sometimes translated as ' doyen ' or as ' leader ' ; and was elected to a four @-@ member executive committee . Under the constitution adopted at the congress , this made him effective leader of the party , with sweeping powers within the organisation ; al @-@ Bitar was elected Secretary General of the National Command . Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi , the leader of the Arab Ba 'ath , was not given any position , or membership in the party . Aflaq as Amid was responsible for ideological affairs and became the party 's mentor , while al @-@ Bitar controlled the party 's day @-@ to @-@ day management . The merger would prove problematic , several members of the al @-@ Arsuzi @-@ led Ba 'ath Party were more left @-@ leaning , and would become , later in Aflaq 's tenure as leader , highly critical of his leadership . 
 In the late 1940s , Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar gave free lessons on Ba 'athist thought , and in 1948 they established the newspaper al @-@ Ba 'ath ( English : rebirth / resurrection ) . Aflaq tested the Ba 'ath Party 's strength during the 1948 Arab – Israeli War after early Syrian defeats – he led several demonstrations against the government led by President Shukri al @-@ Quwatli . He personally led demonstrations , and claimed that al @-@ Quwatli , a landowner , was a corrupt and capitalistic politician , who was to blame for the Syrians army 's defeat . Aflaq called for al @-@ Quwatli 's resignation , and wrote several al @-@ Ba 'ath articles criticising his presidency and his prime minister , Jamil Mardam Bey . Aflaq was later arrested on the orders of al @-@ Quwatli 's prime minister Bey . Al @-@ <unk> 's government was brought down in a coup d 'état led by military officer Husni al @-@ Za 'im . Al @-@ Za 'im banned all parties , claiming that Syria was not ready to establish a liberal democracy yet . Aflaq , who had been set free , was rearrested during al @-@ Zai <unk> presidency and sent to the notorious Mezzeh Prison . Al @-@ Za 'im 's rule did not last for long , and in August 1949 , he was toppled , and Hashim al @-@ Atassi , who was democratically @-@ elected , took his place . Al @-@ Atassi established a national unity government , and Aflaq was appointed to the post of Minister of Education , the only government post he would ever hold ; he held it from August to December 1949 . Al @-@ <unk> 's presidency did not last for very long either , and in 1951 Adib Shishakli took power in a military coup . 
 Aflaq at first extended his support to the new government , believing that he and the Ba 'ath Party could collaborate with Shishakli because they shared the same Arab nationalist sentiments . His analysis of Shishakli proved to be wrong , and one of Shishakli 's first decisions as ruler was to ban all political parties , including the Ba 'ath Party . The Ba 'ath Party leadership , and several leading members , escaped to Lebanon in the wake of increased government repression . In Lebanon Aflaq and al @-@ Bitar agreed to a merger of the Arab Ba 'ath Party and the Arab Socialist Party ( ASP ) , led by Akram al @-@ Hawrani , to establish the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party in 1952 . The newly formed party worked as a base of operation against <unk> 's rule – Aflaq and the rest cooperated with non @-@ Ba 'athist opposition forces too . Shishakli was toppled in February 1954 . 
 = = = Power politics : 1954 – 1963 = = = 
 Following the overthrow of al @-@ Shishakli , Syria held its first democratic elections in five years . The Ba 'ath Party , led by Aflaq , al @-@ Bitar and al @-@ Hawrani , had 22 members elected to parliament . This increase in influence can largely be attributed to al @-@ Hawrani – several old ASP strongholds voted for the Ba 'ath Party because of al @-@ Hawrani 's presence . By this time Aflaq was losing much of his power to al @-@ Hawrani and his supporters , who were in a majority in the party . A proof of this was the decision of the Ba 'ath Party to collaborate openly with the Syrian Communist Party ( SCP ) , a move Aflaq opposed . Aflaq was elected the party 's Secretary General of the newly established National Command , a title equivalent to ' party leader ' , by the party 's Second National Congress . 
 When , under the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) , Aflaq was forced by Nasser to dissolve the party , he disbanded the party by himself , instead of convening a congress on the matter . The UAR proved to be disastrous for the Ba 'ath Party – the party was sidelined to a great extent by Nasser 's government . The Ba 'ath movement , which was on the verge in 1958 of becoming the dominant Arab nationalist movement , found itself in disarray after three years of Nasserist rule . Only a handful of Ba 'athists were given public office in the UAR 's government , al @-@ Hawrani became Vice President and al @-@ Bitar became Minister of Culture and Guidance . Several members , mostly young , blamed Aflaq for this situation ; it was he who dissolved the party in 1958 without consulting the National Congress . Hafez al @-@ Assad and Salah Jadid amongst others , eventually established the Military Committee to save the Syrian Ba 'ath movement from annihilation . The party 's Third National Congress in 1959 supported Aflaq 's decision to dissolve the party , but a 1960 National Congress , in which Jadid was a delegate representing the then @-@ unknown Military Committee , reversed the decision and called for the Ba 'ath Party 's reestablishment . The Congress also decided to improve relations with Nasser by <unk> the UAR from within . A faction within the party , led by al @-@ Hawrani , called for Syria 's secession . When the UAR broke up in 1961 , some members applauded the dissolution , among them was al @-@ Bitar . 
 The Ba 'ath Party captured 20 seats , down from 22 , in the 1961 election . In 1962 , after four years , Aflaq convened the Fifth Congress in Homs . Al @-@ Hawrani was not invited ; cells that had stayed active and defied Aflaq 's orders , and Ba 'athists who become Nasserists during the period of the UAR , were not invited to the congress . Aflaq was reelected the National Command 's Secretary General , and ordered the reestablishment of the Syrian @-@ regional Ba 'ath organisation . During the congress , Aflaq and the Military Committee , through Muhammad Umran , made contact for the first time ; the committee asked for permission to initiate a coup d 'état ; Aflaq supported the conspiracy . Following the success of the February 1963 Iraqi coup d 'état , led by the Ba 'ath Party 's Iraqi Regional Branch , the Military Committee hastily convened to hatch a coup against Nazim al @-@ Kudsi 's presidency . The 8th of March Revolution , a military coup launched in 1963 , proved successful , and a Ba 'athist government in Syria was established . The plotters first order was to establish the National Council of the Revolutionary Command ( NCRC ) , consisting entirely of Ba 'athists and Nasserists , and controlled by military personnel rather than civilians from the very beginning . 
 = = The struggle : 1963 – 1968 = = 
 = = = The beginning : 1963 – 1964 = = = 
 The relationship between the Ba 'athists and the Nasserists were at best , uncomfortable . The Ba 'ath Party 's rise to power in Iraq and Syria put Nasser , as he put it , " between the hammer and the anvil " . The establishment of a union between Iraq and Syria would weaken his credentials as a pan @-@ Arab leader . Nasser started launching bitter propaganda attacks against the party ; Aflaq was dismissed as an ineffectual theorist who was mocked as a puppet " Roman emperor " and accused of being a " Cypriot Christian " . In several Ba 'ath Party meetings Aflaq responded with pure anger , and became an anti @-@ Nasserist . Because of the position he took , Aflaq had a falling out with al @-@ Bitar who still believed there was a chance to reestablish good ties with Nasser . 
 The break with Nasser weakened the original leaders of the Ba 'ath Party , which in turn gave the Military Committee room to expand . After taking power , the Military Committee looked for theoretical guidance , but instead of going to Aflaq to solve problems ( which was usual before ) , they contacted the party 's Marxist faction led by <unk> al @-@ <unk> . At the Syrian Ba 'athist Regional Congress , the Military Committee " proved " that it was rebelling equally against Aflaq and the traditional leadership , as against their moderate social and economic policies . The Military Committee was bent on removing Aflaq from a position of power , believing that he had become old and frail . At the Sixth National Congress held in October 1963 , Aflaq was barely able to hold on to his post as Secretary General – the Marxist factions led by al @-@ <unk> and Ali Salih al @-@ Sadi , in Syria and Iraq respectively , were the majority group . Another problem facing Aflaq was that several of his colleagues were not elected to party office , for instance al @-@ Bitar was not reelected to a seat in the National Command . Instead of the traditional civilian leadership , a new leadership consisting of military officers was gradually growing ; Jadid and Amin al @-@ Hafiz from Syria and Ahmed Hassan al @-@ Bakr and Salih Mahdi <unk> from Iraq were elected to the National Command . While the Military Committee was in fact taking control over the Ba 'ath Party from the civilian leadership , they were sensitive to such criticism , and stated , in an ideological pamphlet , that civilian @-@ military symbiosis was of major importance , if socialist reconstruction was to be achieved . To the outside world Aflaq seemed to be in charge . As the Tunisian newspaper L 'Action <unk> put it ; " The philosopher who made two coups [ Iraqi and Syrian coups ] in a month " . 
 The Ba 'ath movement was not running as smoothly as the rest of the world believed ; the Iraqi Regional Branch was already starting to lose membership . The Iraqi military and the party 's militant arm , the National Guard , detested each other . Al @-@ Sadi , the Regional Secretary of the Iraqi Regional Branch , was eventually exiled to Madrid , Spain on 11 November by several military officers and moderate Ba 'athists . An anxious Aflaq hastily traveled from Syria and dissolved the Regional Command of the Iraqi Regional Branch , exclaiming that the National Command would rule Iraq in its place until a new Regional Command was elected . This was not greeted warmly by the majority of Iraqi military officers and Ba 'athists – the idea that a Christian was to rule over a Muslim country was considered " insensitive " . 
 The situation in Iraq did not improve , Abdul Salam Arif , the President of Iraq and a Nasserist , plotted a coup against the Ba 'ath Party on 18 November , which succeeded . The dream of cornering Nasser 's pan @-@ Arab project was over ; instead , it was Nasser and the Nasserists who were cornering the Ba 'ath movement . On hearing the news , Aflaq and several Ba 'athists fled Iraq for Syria . 
 = = = The schism : 1964 – 1965 = = = 
 After a falling out with the Military Committee , of which he was a member , Muhammad Umran told Aflaq about the Committee 's secret plans to oust the civilian leadership , led by Aflaq , and take over the Ba 'ath Party . Shortly after , Umran was sent into exile as Ambassador to Spain for supporting the Aflaq faction . Aflaq responded to the threat posed to his leadership by invoking his office as Secretary General , and calling for the National Command to dissolve the Regional Command . He was forced to withdraw his request , when the majority of Ba 'ath Party members proved to oppose such a move . A contest for power , between Aflaq and the Military Committee , ensued in the open ; but it was a struggle Aflaq was losing . It was plain from the very beginning that the initiative lay with the anti @-@ Aflaq forces . To counter the military threat , Aflaq invoked party rules and regulations against them . To counter this , the Military Committee befriended a staunchly anti @-@ Aflaq civilian faction calling themselves the " Regionalists " – this group had not dissolved their party organisations as ordered by Aflaq in the 1950s . 
 The Regional Congress of the Syrian Regional Branch , in March 1965 , devolved power from the center , the National Command , to the Regional Command . From then on , the Regional Secretary of the Regional Command was considered Syria 's ex officio 's head of state . The Regional Secretary had the power to appoint the Prime Minister , the cabinet , the chief of staff and top military commanders . Aflaq was unsettled by the way things were moving , and in May he convened the Eighth National Congress to get a showdown between his followers and those of the Military Committee . However , this never came to fruition . Several civilian members of the National Command , such as the Lebanese <unk> Majdalani and the Saudi Ali Ghannam , advised caution , believing that if he pressed the Military Committee too hard the military would take over the Syrian Regional Branch , and then the Ba 'ath Party — as had happened in Iraq following the ousting of the Iraqi Regional Branch . Because of their concerns , Aflaq kept quiet . But to his astonishment , keeping quiet caused him to lose his post as Secretary General – Aflaq was succeeded as Secretary General of the National Command by Munif al @-@ Razzaz , a Jordanian of Syrian origin . However , the power between the two camps was unexpectedly reshuffled when Amin al @-@ Hafiz defected to Aflaq 's camp . In contrast to other military officers al @-@ Hafiz had very little influence within or outside the party . Al @-@ Hafiz 's defection led to a resurgence of activity within Aflaq 's faction , al @-@ Bitar and Umran were brought back from Spain to form a new government . 
 = = = Downfall : 1966 – 1968 = = = 
 Al @-@ Razzaz , Aflaq 's successor as Secretary General , came from the pro @-@ Aflaq faction . With the defection of al @-@ Hafez , he ordered that the National Command was the de jure ruling body of the Ba 'ath Party . He appointed al @-@ Bitar Prime Minister , Umran defence minister , Mansur al @-@ Atrash as Chairman of the National Council of the Revolutionary Command and al @-@ Hafiz retained his post as President of Syria . Salah Jadid , the Military Committee 's strongman , responded by arresting several Umran supporters . Umran responded by dismissing a handful of pro @-@ Jadid officials . The most important of these dismissals was the removal of Ahmad Suwaydani from the post of head of the country 's military intelligence to head of the Officer Administration . On 23 February a coup d 'état led by Jadid and Hafez al @-@ Assad overthrew the Syrian Government and the Ba 'ath Party leadership . Aflaq was exiled from Syria , and ordered never to return his homeland . Members of the party 's other factions fled ; Aflaq was captured and detained , along with other pro @-@ Aflaq supporters , in a government guest house . When the new rulers launched a purge in August that year , Aflaq managed to make his escape , with the help of Nasim Al <unk> and Malek <unk> , both closely trusted friends and colleagues , and hence was able to flee to Beirut , Lebanon , and later to Brazil . 
 Aflaq 's downfall caused a split within the Ba 'ath Party ; the party was de facto dissolved and two Ba 'ath Parties were established , one Iraqi @-@ led Ba 'ath Party and one Syrian @-@ led Ba 'ath Party . The Syrian @-@ led party was led by Jadid and his supporters and hailed Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi , the founder of the Arab Ba 'ath in 1940 , as the father of Ba 'athist thought , while the Iraqi @-@ led party led by Ahmed Hassan al @-@ Bakr and Saddam Hussein , still proclaimed Aflaq to be the founder of Ba 'athist thought . In February 1966 at the Ninth National Congress , held after the coup which ousted the pro @-@ Aflaq faction , the Iraqi delegation split with the Syrian Ba 'athists . The Iraqi 's held the true Ninth National Congress in February 1968 in Beirut , and elected Aflaq as Secretary General of the National Command . Aflaq 's election to the Secretary Generalship also proved to be his final break with al @-@ Bitar ; before the congress convened al @-@ Bitar announced that he had left the Ba 'ath Party and given up on the Ba 'athist movement as a whole . 
 = = Iraqi @-@ led Ba 'ath Party : 1968 – 1989 = = 
 Aflaq moved to Baghdad following his reelection to the Secretary Generalship in February 1968 . He stayed there until 1970 , when the Jordan – Palestine War broke out , he criticised the Ba 'ath leadership of doing too little to help Palestine during the conflict . During the conflict , Aflaq lobbied extensively for Yasser Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organisation . Aflaq wanted Iraqi intervention ; al @-@ Bakr , however , refused to get Iraq involved in such a conflict . Because of this , Aflaq returned to Lebanon in self @-@ imposed exile . The government of Hafez al @-@ Assad , the President of Syria , condemned Aflaq to death in absentia in 1971 . 
 = = = Until his death = = = 
 After four years of self @-@ imposed exile Aflaq returned to Iraq In 1974 , a year before the Lebanese Civil War broke out . He refrained from taking part in Iraqi politics . He published several works during this period , the most notable being The Struggle Against Distorting the Movement of Arab Revolution in 1975 . Aflaq regained some of his influence when he befriended Saddam Hussein , President of Iraq from 1979 until 2003 . During the Iran – Iraq War the Iranian leadership accused Hussein of being under the control of a Christian , and Aflaq himself was labelled " a Christian infidel " . Effectively , throughout his tenure as Secretary General in Iraq , Aflaq was given all due honour as the founder of the Ba 'ath movement , but on policy @-@ making , he was ignored . 
 Aflaq died on 23 June 1989 in Paris , after undergoing heart surgery there . 
 = = = Disputed conversion to Islam = = = 
 Saddam Hussein claimed that Aflaq had converted to Islam prior to his death – according to nameless Western diplomats . This claim was later disputed by nameless members of Aflaq 's own family - although Aflaq 's son Iyad confirmed that his father thought about conversion already in 1980 . Upon his disputed conversion he had taken the first name of Ahmad . According to the German orientalists Martin <unk> and Gerhard <unk> the conversion happened before 1988 . Even so , Aflaq was given an Islamic funeral . For the Berkley Center , Aflaq 's disputed conversion is considered by anonymous members of his family as a tool used by Saddam Hussein to disassociate Ba 'athism from Christianity . The tomb constructed on the orders of Hussein was later used by American soldiers after the 2003 American invasion of Iraq as a military barracks for troops stationed within the Green Zone . According to Aflaq 's family , the tomb was badly damaged during the invasion . 
 = = Memory and Legacy = = 
 Upon his death in 1989 he was given a state funeral . A large tomb and mausoleum were erected to form a shrine for him . The tomb , widely regarded as a work of great artistic merit , designed by Iraqi architect <unk> , was located on the western grounds of the Ba 'ath Party Pan @-@ Arab Headquarters , at the intersection of Al @-@ Kindi street and the <unk> Expressway overpass . Currently it is a part of a US Army base . Although there were rumors and accusations that his tomb was destroyed during the 2003 Iraq War , the burial chamber and building above it were left untouched . Its blue @-@ tiled dome can be seen above the concrete T @-@ walls surrounding the Camp 's perimeter . 
 = = Thought = = 
 = = = " Unity , liberty , socialism " = = = 
 The Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party slogan " Unity , liberty , socialism " is the key tenet of Aflaq 's and Ba 'athist thought . Unity meant the unification of the Arab people into one nation , the Arab Nation . The creation of an Arab Nation would have direct implications on Arab development . The establishment of this new state would lead to an Arab Ba 'ath ( literally meaning " Renaissance " ) . The Arab nations of his time could only progressively " decline " if not unified ; these nations had various ailments – " feudalism , sectarianism , regionalism , intellectual <unk> " . The only way to " cure " the Arab nations was , according to Aflaq , through a revolutionary movement . Aflaq was influenced by Marxism in that he saw the need for a vanguard party to rule the Arab Nation for an indefinite period of time ( the period would be a transition from the old to the new ) . 
 The need for liberty was one of the defining features of Ba 'athism , however , liberty not in the sense used by liberal democracies . Aflaq was a strong believer in pluralism of thought , but paradoxically , against pluralism in the form of votes . In theory , the Ba 'ath Party would rule , and guide the people , in a transitional period of time without consulting the people because the party knew what was right . 
 The last tenet , ' socialism ' , did not mean socialism as it is defined in the West , but rather a unique form of Arab socialism . Aflaq coined the word Arab socialism for his variant of socialism . Socialism , in its original form in the Arab world had , according to Aflaq , first come into being under the rule of Muhammad . The point of Arab socialism was not to answer questions such as : how much state control was necessary , or economic equality ; but instead Arab socialism was a system that freed the Arab people from oppression and enslavement , which in turn created independent individuals . 
 Aflaq opposed Marx 's view that dialectical materialism was the only truth , but believed that the " importance of material economic conditions in life " was one of the greatest discoveries in modern history . Even so , Aflaq was critical of both capitalism and communism , and did not want either of the two power blocs to collapse during the Cold War – believing that the Cold War was a sort of check and balance on their power . 
 = = = Role of Islam = = = 
 What Aflaq saw in Islam was a revolutionary movement . In contrast to other nationalities , the Arab awakening and expansion was attributed to a religious message . Because of this , Aflaq believed that the Arab 's spirituality was directly linked to Islam , therefore , one could never take Islam out of the equation of what is essentially , and essentially is not , Arab . Arab nationalism , just as Islam had been during the lifetime of Muhammad , was a spiritual revolutionary movement , leading the Arabs towards a new renaissance : Arab nationalism was the second revolution to appear in the Arab world . All Arab religious communities should , according to Aflaq , respect and worship the spirituality of Islam , even if they did not worship Islam in a religious sense – Aflaq was a Christian who worshipped Islam . Aflaq did not believe it was necessary to worship Muhammad , but believed that all Arabs should strive to emulate Muhammad . In the words of Aflaq himself , Arabs " belong to the nation that gave birth to a Muhammad ; or rather , because this Arab individual is a member of the community which Muhammad put all his efforts into creating [ … ] Muhammad was all the Arabs ; let us today make all the Arabs Muhammad . " The Muslim of Muhammad 's days were , according to Aflaq , synonymous with Arabs – the Arabs were the only ones to preach the message of Islam during Muhammad 's lifetime . In contrast to Jesus , who was a religious leader , but not a political leader , Muhammad was both – the first leader of Islam and of the Arab world . Therefore , secularisation could not take the same shape in the Arab world as it did in the West . 
 Aflaq called on all Arabs , both Muslim and non @-@ Muslim alike , to admire the role Islam had played in creating the Arab character . But his view on Islam was purely spiritual , and Aflaq emphasised that Islam " should not be imposed " on state and society . Time and again Aflaq emphasised that the Ba 'ath party was against atheism , but also equally against fundamentalism . For him , any fundamentalism represented a " shallow , false faith . " According to Ba 'athist ideology , all religions were equal . Despite his anti @-@ atheist stance , Aflaq was a strong supporter of secular government , and stated that a Ba 'athist state would replace religion with a state " based on a foundation – Arab nationalism , and a moral – freedom . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Fouad Ajami criticised Aflaq for a lack of real substance , stating , " Nearly three hundred pages of text yield no insight , on his part , into what went wrong and what needed to be done ; there is only the visible infatuation with words " and " Aflaq summons the party to renounce power and go back to its ' pure essence ' " . There is some truth in this critique . Aflaq spent much time and energy writing optimistically about the future , and the past , of the Arab Nation , and of how the Arab World could be unified . As Kanan Makiya , the author of Republic of Fear : The Politics of Modern Iraq , notes : for " Aflaq , reality is confined to the inner world of the party . " In contrast to other philosophers , such as Karl Marx or John Locke , Aflaq 's ideological view of the world makes no clear stand on the materialistic or socioeconomic behavior of humanity . While other philosophers make distinctions between what is real and what is not real , that is between prescriptive and descriptive analysis , Aflaq did not as a rule define what is and what ought to be . In his thought both are molded into the same category : that which is attainable . 
 In contrast to his longtime friend and colleague Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar , who was more practical when it came to politics , Aflaq was a " visionary , the dreamer rather unfitted for political life " . Aflaq was described by his associates as an " ascetic , shy and intense figure living a simple and <unk> life . " He has been accused of seeking help from other people instead of fulfilling his goal by himself or with others he led ; Aflaq collaborated with Gamal Abdel Nasser , Abd al @-@ Karim Qasim and Abdul Rahman Arif in 1958 , to Ahmed Hassan al @-@ Bakr and Ali Salih al @-@ Sadi in 1963 and finally in the 1970s to Saddam Hussein . There are several Ba 'athists , mostly from the Syrian @-@ led Ba 'ath Party , who believe Aflaq stole Ba 'athist ideology from its original founder , Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi . These individuals have denounced , and labelled , Aflaq as a " thief " . 
 In his writings Aflaq had been stridently in favor of free speech and other human rights and aid for the lower classes . During the Military Committee 's gradual take over of power in Syria , Aflaq rallied against what he saw as the establishment of a military dictatorship , instead of the democracy for which Aflaq had planned . These ideals were never realized by the governments that used his ideology . Most scholars see the Assad government in Syria and Saddam Hussein 's government in Iraq to have only employed Aflaq 's ideology as a pretense for dictatorship . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 في <unk> <unk> ( English : On the Way of Resurrection , published 1947 ) 
 <unk> <unk> wa Misr ( English : Unity Between Syria and Egypt , published 1958 ) 
 Ma <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Wahid ( English : The Battle for One Destiny , published 1958 ) 
 <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( English : The Starting Point , published 1971 ) 
 Al @-@ Ba 'ath wa al @-@ <unk> ( English : The Ba 'ath and Arab Unity , published 1972 ) 
 Al @-@ Ba 'ath wa al @-@ <unk> ( English : The Ba 'ath and Socialism , published 1973 ) 
 Al @-@ Nidal did <unk> Harakat al @-@ Thawra al @-@ <unk> ( English : The Struggle Against Distorting the Movement of Arab Revolution , published 1975 ) 
 = Death of Kaja Ballo = 
 Kaja <unk> Ballo ( 1988 – March 28 , 2008 ) was a university student in the French town of Nice ; her father was Olav Gunnar Ballo , a member of the Norwegian Parliament . On March 28 , 2008 Kaja Ballo took the personality test run by the Church of Scientology , and committed suicide later the same day . Family and friends stated that Ballo was happy prior to taking the test , and that her mood dramatically shifted after receiving the results . She committed suicide hours after getting the results of the test back ; Ballo jumped from the fourth floor of her dorm room . In addition to a note , her family found the Scientology personality test among her belongings . French police investigated connections between Scientology and Ballo 's death , and interviewed two leaders of the organization in France . Prosecutors stated in December 2008 that they were unable to establish a causative link between the Scientology test and Ballo 's death . 
 A Scientology representative in France asserted that the Scientology personality test was not created by the Church of Scientology , and that it was not related to Ballo 's death . The Church of Scientology 's information chief in Norway , Matthias Fosse stated that the test was not dangerous and that the organization did not bear any responsibility for Ballo 's death . Ballo 's father retained a lawyer to investigate his daughter 's death , and the family considered filing a lawsuit against Scientology . 500 people attended Ballo 's funeral on April 11 , 2008 at Grefsen Church in Oslo , Norway . 
 The incident received significant media coverage in Norway , and Verdens Gang and Dagbladet devoted multiple cover stories to investigating the controversy . The media faced criticism for its extensive coverage of Ballo 's death . Norway parliament member Inga Marte Thorkildsen commented that she thought indications were that Scientology had a role in Ballo 's suicide . Psychologist Rudy Myrvang told Aftenposten that the Scientology personality test was designed to break down an individual ; he characterized the test as a form of recruitment tool for the organization . Scientology critic Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund stated parents of those involved in Scientology contacted him with similar concerns . The Norwegian Psychological Association warned individuals against taking such types of personality tests . 
 Ballo 's father wrote a book about his daughter 's death , and refrained from interviews with the press until the book was published in 2009 . Titled Kaja : 1988 – 2008 , the book became a bestseller in Norway . It reached second place on the bestseller list of the Bestseller Association in Norway for general literature , in May 2009 . The author stated he wrote the book as an expository method to both process his grief , inform his family about the controversy , and educate the public about suicide . 
 = = Family = = 
 Kaja <unk> Ballo was the daughter of Olav Gunnar Ballo , a member of the Norwegian Parliament . Her stepmother was Heidi Sørensen , a former member of the Norwegian Parliament , and State Secretary in the Ministry of the Environment . 
 = = Scientology personality test = = 
 Kaja Ballo took a personality test given by the Church of Scientology in Nice , France on March 28 , 2008 . The test is known either as the Scientology personality test , or as Oxford Capacity Analysis . The testing location was situated close to her residential area in student housing , in a nearby storefront shopping facility . It was located only a few meters from her dormitory . According to representatives for Scientology , Ballo spent a total of one hour at the facility . She received a negative result from the test . It indicated that some of her responses were situated on what is referred to in Scientology as " an unacceptable level " . The test consists of 200 questions . Ballo missed 100 points on the test , and this was seen as " unstable " . The Scientology test stated she had a " very limited " IQ . 
 Ballo 's friends and family members said that her mood " changed " after receiving the results . Family said she had not indicated any problems prior to taking the test . Ballo 's uncle Heljar Ballo stated on a program on public broadcaster NRK that the results of the Scientology personality test were " devastating " to her . He served as a spokesperson for the family during an intense period of their grief . He described her as " happy and bubbly " , prior to taking the Scientology test . Heljar Ballo stated , " We can only relate the facts , that she was doing well in France , was happy and had many good friends , and that she took this test . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Ballo committed suicide , hours after hearing the results of the personality test conducted by Scientology . She jumped from the fourth floor of her dorm room in Nice , France , two hours after getting the results of the test . She left behind a note , along with the results of the Scientology personality test . The results of the personality test were found among her belongings by her family . In April 2008 , Aftenposten noted that the French police were investigating connections between Scientology and Ballo 's death . The investigation was being headed by a judge in France . In April 2008 the French police interviewed two leaders of Scientology in France . Prosecutor Eric de Montgolfier opened an investigation into the incident in France , in April 2008 . A French investigating prosecutor told Dagbladet , " We are almost convinced that it is a suicide . But the question is whether something encouraged her to this . " Prosecutors stated in December 2008 that they could not determine a direct link between the Scientology personality test and Ballo 's death . 
