 Agnes Bron , a Scientology representative in France , denied that the test was related to Ballo 's death , and asserted that the Scientology personality test was not created by the Church of Scientology . Scientologists pay royalties to the Hubbard Foundation for use of the test . She said that Ballo never actually received the results of her personality test . A spokesperson for Scientology asserted to Verdens Gang that the results of the personality test are seen as neither positive nor negative , but rather allow the individual to gain insight into their own personality . A representative of Scientology in Norway described the concerns leveled against the organization as " deeply unfair " . The Scientology official noted Ballo had a psychological history as a teenager , and said she had an eating disorder . The Church of Scientology 's Information Chief in Norway , Matthias Fosse , asserted that the Scientology personality test was not " dangerous " , and stated that " millions " of individuals had partaken in the examination . He asserted that approximately 10 @,@ 000 residents of Norway had taken the test . " I have never , never , never heard of someone who has killed on the basis of the OCA test , " said Fosse . Fosse said that Ballo had entered the Scientology premises in Nice of her own volition . Fosse maintained that the negative views of the organization were based on ignorance and intolerance . " I feel deeply for the Ballo family , but it is a rude insinuation that the Church of Scientology has any responsibility for this incident , " said Fosse . 
 Ballo 's father was critical of the statements made by Fosse about his daughter 's history . He commented to Verdens Gang that the Church of Scientology was negatively impacting the reputation of his daughter and not respecting the privacy of her health history . He did not wish to comment regarding the nature of the investigation in France . Ballo 's uncle Heljar Ballo explained that Kaja Ballo 's family decided to come forward with information to the media about her suicide , due to a motivation to publicize information relating to the circumstances of her death . Heljar Ballo told Aftenposten that the family " had confidence " in the investigation by local law enforcement in France . He thought there was a connection between her death and Scientology . Kaja Ballo 's father retained an attorney to investigate his daughter 's death . In April 2008 , Ballo 's family was considering taking legal action against Scientology . Kaja Ballo was interred on April 11 , 2008 at Grefsen Church in Oslo , and approximately 500 people were present at the funeral ceremony . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 In reporting on Ballo 's death , United Press International noted , " Critics say the break @-@ you @-@ down @-@ build @-@ you @-@ up recruitment tool of Scientologists is controversial . " The issue received a significant amount of coverage in Norway news publications ; and media attention focused criticism on the Church of Scientology . Both Verdens Gang and Dagbladet devoted several cover stories investigating the matter . News media received criticism regarding the amount of coverage given to the incident . A representative of the National Association for Suicide Survivors in Norway regarded it as excessive . News editor of Dagbladet , Peter <unk> , defended the amount of news coverage given to the incident : " We write about this because the survivor has made criticism of the Scientology test that Kaja took just before she took her life . The family wanted a debate about this . What makes this so important is this test . What kind of test is this ? Is it so reprehensible , and significant to what happened ? If it is , I mean it 's something that 's extremely important to focus on . " Ballo 's family agreed to discuss the incident with the media . In an interview Ballo 's father said he did not have issues with the case being front @-@ page news in newspapers . 
 Norway parliament member Inga Marte Thorkildsen weighed in on the situation , and stated to the Oslo , Norway newspaper Dagbladet , " All indications are that the Scientologist sect has played a direct role in Kaja 's choice to take her own life . " Ballo 's friend and study partner Henry Møinichen told Dagbladet , " I think Kaja would be alive today if she had not gone to the Scientologists . " Psychologist Rudy Myrvang told Aftenposten that testing procedures such as the personality test conducted by Scientology could have negative consequences ; he said the goal was focused on " breaking you down , and then they 'll offer to build you up again " . Myrvang characterized the Scientology personality test as a recruitment tactic for the organization . Dagbladet consulted an expert on the subject of assessment tests , Ole I. Iversen , who characterized the Scientology personality test as " unethical and junk " . 
 Scientology critic Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund stated that the Church of Scientology views candidates for the test as " raw meat from the street " . " You 're told you 're worth nothing , " he said . Heldal @-@ Lund stated that , " thousands of desperate parents contact me because they have children who have had major mental problems , or taken their own life after similar circumstances to Kaja Ballo " . Scientology @-@ associated celebrity , Hank Von <unk> , commented to the press that he thought psychiatry , not Scientology , was the cause of Ballo 's suicide . TV 2 reported that psychologists advised that subsequent to the personality test , there should be proper follow @-@ up attention with the subject . In an analysis of personality tests available online on social networking sites , Norwegian Psychological Association department advisor Andreas <unk> cited Kaja Ballo as " an example of how wrong things can go " . The Norwegian Psychological Association warned individuals against taking such types of personality tests . 
 = = Kaja : 1988 – 2008 = = 
 Ballo 's father subsequently wrote a book about his daughter 's suicide . He decided not to give interviews to the press about his ordeal until the book was published . He wanted to be able to tell the story and impact of his daughter 's death , on his own terms . Titled , Kaja : 1988 – 2008 , the book explores the sequence of events that led to his daughter 's death , from her time studying French in Nice . Her early history of psychiatric treatment is discussed in the book . He recounts the difficulties in getting information about his daughter 's death from government authorities . According to the author , there was a slow response in receiving help from the Foreign Ministry of Norway . In an interview with Politiken , he explained the motivation for writing the book : " After the funeral I felt I had to do something relating to grief . This was my way to process the grief . The second issue was that I needed to transcribe the account to later tell my little daughter Oda . " He also said , " I wanted to contribute to greater openness about suicide . " He acknowledged , " Losing a child means that life is turned upside down . I believe that grief becomes heavier if you do not share it with anyone . " The book was written with input from other family members . 
 Kaja : 1988 – 2008 became a bestseller in Norway . The book reached second place on the bestseller list of the Bestseller Association in Norway for general literature , in May 2009 . Kaja : 1988 – 2008 sparked renewed controversy over perceptions of Scientology activities in Norway . In a review of the book , Dagbladet noted that because the author was writing both as a private individual and as a physician , " he is trained to look at the familiar and intimate with professionalism and distance . " Upon the book 's publication , representative Matthias Fosse of the Church of Scientology stated , " Church of Scientology had absolutely nothing to do with this young woman 's decision to take her own life . We are sorry for the loss the family has suffered , but this young woman was never a member of the Church of Scientology and never participated in any of the church activities . " 
 = Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line = 
 " Illawarra railway line , Sydney " redirects to here ( Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line while Illawarra railway line redirects to South Coast railway line , New South Wales 
 The Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line ( numbered T4 , coloured azure blue ) is a commuter railway line in the eastern and southern suburbs of Sydney , Australia and is a part of the Sydney Trains network . The line was constructed in the 1880s to Wollongong to take advantage of agricultural and mining potentials in the Illawarra area . In March 1926 it became the first railway in New South Wales to run electric train services . 
 Today the railway consists of three connected lines : 
 the original Illawarra line from the Sydney CBD to Waterfall 
 the Cronulla line from Sutherland to Cronulla which opened in 1939 replacing an earlier tram service 
 the Eastern Suburbs line from the Sydney CBD to Bondi Junction which opened in 1979 
 Operationally and historically , the entire line from the Illawarra Junction at Redfern to its terminus in <unk> on the South Coast was known as the Illawarra Line . However , since 1989 CityRail has marketed the suburban services to Waterfall and Cronulla as the Illawarra line and interurban services south to Wollongong and <unk> as the South Coast Line . The line is coloured an azure blue on Sydney Trains timetables and other promotional materials . 
 = = Alignment = = 
 = = = Eastern Suburbs Line = = = 
 The Suburbs Line runs between Bondi Junction in Sydney 's east and Eveleigh , just south of the Sydney central business district . It is mostly underground , and consists of 7 kilometres of bored tunnels and 1 @.@ 5 kilometres of cut and cover tunnels , with only 2 kilometres above ground . In the Eastern Suburbs , three tunnels proceed in a westerly direction from Bondi Junction via Edgecliff and Kings Cross ; in each of these tunnels there are stations . Between Bondi Junction and Edgecliff there is a short open @-@ air cutting in Woollahra , and between Edgecliff and Kings Cross there is a short viaduct over Rushcutters Bay . 
 From Kings Cross , the line proceeds west towards the Sydney Central Business District on a viaduct that passes over the suburb of Woolloomooloo and the Eastern Distributor . The line then passes into a tunnel underneath the Art Gallery of New South Wales to a station underneath Martin Place . Turning south , the line proceeds through Town Hall , Central and Redfern stations , before emerging behind the Eveleigh Railway Workshops . The line is double track throughout , with turnback sidings at Martin Place and Bondi Junction for <unk> trains , and at Central for trains from Bondi Junction . 
 = = = Illawarra & Cronulla Lines = = = 
 The Illawarra Line commences at Illawarra Junction at Redfern and travel on the ' Illawarra ' ( eastern pair ) tracks . A dive tunnel allows Intercity services from the South Coast Line to cross underneath the main suburban lines to access Central station . The Illawarra lines are also connected at this point to the Illawarra Relief Lines which emerge from underground and lead to the Eastern Suburbs Line . 
 From Illawarra Junction , four tracks head south through Erskineville and St Peters to Sydenham station . The ' main ' pair of tracks are used by Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line and South Coast Line trains and the ' local ' pair by Bankstown Line and peak hour Airport , Inner West & South Line trains . At Sydenham , the Bankstown railway line branches off , but trains from the Airport , Inner West & South Line continue along the Illawarra line until Wolli Creek , where a junction to the East Hills line exists . South of Wolli Creek station , a crossover allows trains from the ' main ' pair of tracks to switch to the ' local ' pair . This is used by peak hour all @-@ stations Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line trains . The four track section ends at Hurstville . The line then continues as two tracks south towards Sutherland , crossing the Georges River via the Como railway bridge between Oatley and Como . At Sutherland the Cronulla line branches in an easterly direction . 
 The main line then heads in a southerly direction , parallel to the Princes Highway to the west and bordering the Royal National Park on its eastern side until Waterfall , the last suburb in the Sydney metropolitan area . The track continues south from here as the South Coast Line through the Royal National Park towards the Illawarra region . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Main line construction = = = 
 The Illawarra line route was approved by the New South Wales Government in 1880 . This route originated near the inner @-@ city locality of Macdonaldtown and ran to Kiama via the locality of " Bottle Forest " , a distance of 109 kilometres ( 68 mi ) . The route selected comprises the present @-@ day route of the Macdonaldtown to Waterfall section of the Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line . On 6 April 1881 , Governor Augustus Loftus assented to Act 44 Vic . No. 28 , which provided £ 1 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 for the construction of this railway , and proposed that the first section of 37 kilometres ( 23 mi ) , constituting approximately the present suburban route , be completed by 30 September 1884 . Almost immediately , concerns were raised about the new route 's viability , most specifically over the cost of tunnelling between Waterfall and Otford to reach Wollongong . Work was suspended past the 24 kilometre point at Como , and Government surveyors were instructed to re @-@ survey a route via the Port Hacking River that had originally been surveyed in 1873 . Their work allayed concerns about the new route : although the new route had more tunnelling , excavation and sharp curves , the total cost of the " Bottle Forest " route was estimated at £ 130 @,@ 175 less than the original Port Hacking route . The Minister for Works eventually agreed on this new route , although construction was again briefly halted when the contractors refused to recommence work on the disputed section . With new contractors hired , the line was complete to Hurstville by 15 October 1884 , Waterfall by 9 March 1886 , and the whole line to Kiama was opened officially in Wollongong on 22 June 1887 . 
 According to the official papers on the line 's construction , when the line first opened for trains between Sydney and Sutherland construction was not quite complete , so excursion services initially ran on weekends only until the entire line was handed over . The first official train ran within the modern @-@ day suburban area on 9 December 1885 , although the line was closed once again between December 1885 and January 1886 to permit testing on the new bridge over the Georges River . 
 = = = Amplification and electrification = = = 
 The line was originally constructed as double track between Illawarra Junction and Hurstville with single track thereafter ; however , its rising use meant that the line required duplication soon afterwards . The line was duplicated between Hurstville and Loftus Station ( with the exception of the Como bridge over the Georges River ) in April 1890 , then southward to Waterfall by 12 December 1890 . The section of track between Illawarra Junction and Hurstville was <unk> between 1913 and 1925 . 
 After duplication in 1890 , the original lattice @-@ girder Como Bridge across the Georges River was laid as gauntlet track . This arrangement remained in place for many decades , causing a notorious bottleneck on the line , until the New South Wales Government commissioned John Holland & Co to build a new bridge in 1969 . Construction of the new bridge , made of prestressed concrete box girders , commenced in 1969 and was first used by the 18 : 17 service from Como on 19 November 1972 . The old bridge , as well as a former alignment of the line between Mortdale and Oatley replaced in 1905 , is now used as a rail trail for pedestrians and cyclists . 
 The Illawarra Line was the first railway electrified in New South Wales , and was built in conjunction with the construction of the City Railway between Central and St James , opening on 1 March 1926 , a few months before the line was connected to the new underground railway . By November 1926 the electric overhead had passed Sutherland and continued to the branch line constructed to the Royal National Park . The line between Loftus and Waterfall remained unelectrified until 1980 and was serviced by steam and then diesel railcars . 
 = = = Cronulla branch line = = = 
 A single track tramway line , with four stations and a goods siding , was opened on 12 June 1911 at a cost of £ 37 @,@ 505 . The route commenced at the southern end of Sutherland station , proceeded north @-@ east to the Princes Highway , east along the Kingsway , then south past the site of the present rail terminus to Shelly Park in the centre of Cronulla . 
 By 1932 the Cronulla tramway had closed . Competing bus services had begun to run with unrestricted competition , and the tram line by this time was so full with services that trams often ran late due to holdups at the crossing loops and passengers missed their connections at Sutherland . The line suffered large losses in its later years , and the effect of the Great Depression at the time forced it to cease its services , the last passenger service operating on 3 August 1931 . The goods service continued until 12 January of the next year . 
 Although the closure of the tramway allowed planning to go ahead for a railway , the planning for the replacement railway line suffered various delays in the 1930s due to funding issues : the line 's construction competed with a proposal to electrify the Illawarra Line to Waterfall , and there were disputes over the point at which the line would connect to the main line . Two early proposals to join the line at Como and north of Sutherland Station were rejected . Despite the delays , Parliament finally gave approval to the line on 2 March 1936 , and a route with five new stations was surveyed that would connect with the main line at the southern side of Sutherland station . The new line was opened on 16 December 1939 . 
 Although a crossing loop was installed at Caringbah Station and Gymea Station when the line was opened , the single track line prevented the expansion of services to the Cronulla peninsula , and so in the 1980s it was decided to duplicate a 3 @.@ 5 kilometre section of the line between Gymea and Caringbah , with Gymea . Miranda and Caringbah all receiving island platforms . The new section was opened on 15 July 1985 . In the 2000s , the remaining single track sections were duplicated . These opened on 19 April 2010 . 
 = = = Eastern Suburbs Railway = = = 
 In 1916 , a plan for the city railways , and an Eastern Suburbs extension was drawn up by the Chief Engineer of the Melbourne Railway Construction , John Bradfield . It was given subsequent approval by Parliament . Bradfield 's plan entailed building a City Circle loop , with an extension through to the Eastern Suburbs by means of a viaduct over Woolloomooloo . The line was to extend to Rosebery and Waterloo , with ten stations , linking with the Illawarra Line near Erskineville station . 
 Upon the passing of the City and Suburban Electric Railways ( Amendment ) Act in 1947 , construction finally commenced on a variation of the Bradfield 's proposal . Two lines would be built : one proceeding on a viaduct out to Kings Cross , then eventually to Bondi Beach . Another line would head from St James via Taylor Square and the Sydney Cricket Ground , extending to Kingsford , with a proposal to extend from Taylor Square to Coogee . Construction commenced on sites around Central station but ceased in 1952 due to a recession . Work remained abandoned for over a decade . 
 In 1967 construction again commenced on yet another variation on Bradfield 's design . This involved the earlier route used towards Bondi Junction through Woolloomooloo , then an extension towards Kingsford with five extra stations at Charing Cross , <unk> Road , Randwick , University and Kingsford . The New South Wales Government awarded the contract for the civil and structural design to the successful Snowy Mountains Hydro @-@ Electric Authority . An official Legislative Assembly inquiry in 1976 , however , recommended that costs on the project be cut , and the extension to Kingsford , a proposed station at Woollahra , and the expansion of concourse areas at Bondi Junction and Martin Place stations did not proceed . Nonetheless , it was resolved to fully integrate the railway with the Illawarra line . The Eastern Suburbs Railway opened between Central station and Bondi Junction on 23 June 1979 . Initially trains ran as shuttle services between Central and Bondi Junction ; it was not until a year later that work was finished to integrate the lines . A double @-@ track junction with the Illawarra Line at Erskineville south of Illawarra Junction , twin single track tunnels connecting to the Eastern Suburbs Railway platforms at Central , a set of underground platforms at Redfern and a turnback tunnel at Martin Place opened to complete the project on 20 July 1980 . 
 Bondi Junction had originally been intended only as an intermediate turnback station before the extension to Kingsford was abandoned . As part of the Rail <unk> Program , the $ 77 million Bondi Junction Turnback project saw a new rail crossover was built between the single @-@ track tunnels , enabling 20 trains an hour , up from 14 , to use the station . The work was completed in time for the introduction of a new timetable on 28 May 2006 . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 In addition to Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line trains , the Illawarra railway line carries interurban and freight traffic . The Cronulla branch line and the Eastern Suburbs Railway are exclusively used by passenger trains . 
 Historically , passenger services were provided to the Sydney Central by steam locomotives . The first services to Hurstville were run by steam locomotives of the <unk> and <unk> classes . When the City Underground opened to St James in 1926 , a new electric service was provided to run there . From the time when the line to the Royal National Park was electrified , passengers received a steam train service at first , then when this became expensive , it was replaced by a rail motor service . This arrangement continued until the line was electrified to Waterfall , and the Eastern Suburbs Line was opened . In 1979 the Eastern Suburbs Line being the first line to only use S set double @-@ decker rolling stock . The current running operations for passenger services have remained generally unchanged since 1981 with the integration of the Illawarra line and the Eastern Suburbs Railway . Suburban services utilise Erskineville Junction and proceed to Central and Bondi Junction . 
 The last S sets were withdrawn from Mortdale Maintenance Depot in March 2013 with all services now provided by <unk> and OSCAR sets . Trains typically operate with 12 services per hour in peak , six services per hour in off @-@ peak , and four to six services per hour on weekends and public holidays . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 The line currently has 33 operating stations . Only three stations or platforms have closed , the two stations on the Royal National Park Branch ( the main station , which closed in 1991 , and the platform for the Scout 's Camp , which closed in 1947 ) , and the station on the Woronora Cemetery branch , which also closed in 1947 . 
 = = = Stopping patterns = = = 
 The stopping patterns on the Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra Line have generally been determined by several different termini . The steam era saw these termini change quite frequently as more terminating facilities were constructed : the first trains on the line after the Waterfall extension in 1887 either ran to Hurstville ( 16 per day ) , Sutherland ( two per day ) and Waterfall ( two per day ) , with all trains stopping at every intermediate station . By 1907 , however , Como and Oatley had been added to the list of termini , with nine and seven trains per day respectively . Seven trains per day at this time also ran to Sutherland , and one to Waterfall . Most trains terminated at Hurstville . 
 Since electrification , the terminus stations for suburban trains have remained consistent . From 1926 trains terminated at either Hurstville , Sutherland and The National Park . With the opening of the Cronulla branch in 1939 , Cronulla become the fourth major terminus . In 1980 Waterfall was electrified and replaced The Royal National Park as a terminus , having been served by a diesel @-@ operated shuttle service until then . 
 Today , the Eastern Suburbs & Illawarra line generally operates with five termini , at Hurstville , Mortdale , Sutherland , Cronulla and Waterfall . The vast majority of trains operate to Bondi Junction , mostly using the following patterns : 
 Stopping Patterns ( as of October 2013 ) 
 Weekdays ( Off @-@ Peak ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Tempe , all stations to Mortdale , Sutherland and then all stations to Waterfall ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Wolli Creek , Rockdale , Kogarah , Hurstville , Oatley , Jannali , Sutherland and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Wolli Creek , Rockdale and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Weekday Peak 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Tempe and then all stations to Hurstville ( every 10 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Wolli Creek , Hurstville , Oatley and then all stations to Waterfall ( every 20 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Wolli Creek , Hurstville , Penshurst , Mortdale , Jannali , Sutherland and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 20 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Wolli Creek , Hurstville , Penshurst , Mortdale , Oatley , Jannali , Sutherland and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 20 minutes ) 
 Weekends 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Tempe , all stations to Mortdale , Jannali , Sutherland and then all stations to Waterfall ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Wolli Creek , Rockdale , Kogarah , Hurstville and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Bondi Junction , all stations to Central , Redfern , Sydenham , Wolli Creek , Rockdale , Kogarah , Hurstville , Mortdale , Sutherland and then all stations to Cronulla ( every 30 minutes ) 
 Since the opening of the Bondi Junction Turnback project in 2006 , all trains have stopped at all stations on the Eastern Suburbs Line . 
 In the event that trackwork shuts down the Eastern Suburbs section of the line ( i.e. from Central to Bondi Junction ) , trains from the Illawarra line will either divert through to the City Circle or towards North Sydney on the North Shore Line . 
 = = Performance = = 
 In 2009 – 2010 , 97 @.@ 65 % of all Eastern suburbs and Illawarra services ran on @-@ time , ranking it the most reliable line on the CityRail network . 
 Planning experts recognised a need to expand capacity on the Eastern Suburbs Line . In 2002 , former CityRail chairman Ron Christie released a report , the " Long @-@ term strategic plan for rail " , which outlined the critical infrastructure that would need to be built between then and 2050 to ensure the long @-@ term survival and operation of the CityRail network . The report highlighted the problems facing the network at that time and noted that capacity on Illawarra Line trains was often at 120 % , and that 180 % was not unexpected . Christie said that by 2011 there would be no capacity on the Eastern Suburbs Line for trains coming from the Illawarra Line . To address this , the NSW Government constructed the Bondi Junction Turnback , which enables an additional six trains per hour to terminate at the station . To take advantage of the new infrastructure , a new timetable was introduced in May 2006 which reduced the overcrowding . 
 A second project , the full duplication of the Cronulla branch line , was completed in 2010 . This increases the capacity of the branch line from four to eight trains per hour . The line between Oatley , Sutherland and Cronulla also received signalling upgrades to allow more services to run at shorter intervals . A new timetable with extra services was introduced on 10 October 2010 . 
 It is proposed in the 2007 NSW State Plan that by 2017 , the line capacity between Hurstville and Sutherland will be amplified to allow extra services to and from Cronulla , as well as for services accessing the Mortdale Maintenance Centre . The 2010 Metropolitan Transport Plan made no mention of the project . 
 = = Metro proposal = = 
 Ron Christie 's " Long @-@ term strategic plan for rail " report from 2001 suggested that several " metro " lines be built to service new areas and to relieve capacity on existing lines . These included a metro line to supplement the Illawarra Line . The route would go from Cronulla to Miranda along the existing tracks , then along a reserved corridor for the F6 Southern Freeway up to Sydney Airport . The line would then extend to the Sydney CBD then to Sydney 's Northern Beaches via Chatswood . Christie suggested that even if the entire line were not to be built , the first stage between Cronulla , the Airport and the City would provide " essential capacity relief " for the Illawarra line which would be " severely capacity @-@ constrained " within two decades . Both heavy rail and light rail were mooted as transport suggestions . 
 Christie was not the only person to suggest the F6 Corridor as an alternative . In 2002 , former Minister for Transport Carl Scully officially abandoned the corridor , reserved since 1951 for the extension of the Southern Freeway north to St Peters , and suggested that light rail , bus @-@ only roads or high @-@ frequency train services could run on the corridor . He wished to encourage innovative public transport solutions in the area , while maintaining the green space available near Botany Bay . The plan received support from environmental groups , with environmental transport group <unk> proposing their own 25 @.@ 5 km ( 15 @.@ 8 mi ) light rail line to supplement the Illawarra Line on the reservation , called the " Bay Light Express " . Since 2005 , however , the future of an alternative corridor has been in doubt , with State Treasurer Michael Costa announcing that the corridor would again be reserved for a motorway ; however metro lines in Sydney became a reality when the North West Rail Link ( now known as simply Sydney Metro Northwest ) was approved in 2013 and a rapid transit line supplementing the Illawarra Line may be possible in the future . 
 = 2006 Oklahoma Sooners football team = 
 The 2006 Oklahoma Sooners football team represented the University of Oklahoma in the 2006 NCAA Division I FBS football season , the 112th season of Sooner football . The team was led by two @-@ time Walter Camp Coach of the Year Award winner , Bob Stoops , in his eighth season as head coach . They played their homes games at Gaylord Family Oklahoma Memorial Stadium in Norman , Oklahoma . They were a charter member of the Big 12 Conference . 
 The season began on a bad note when starting quarterback Rhett Bomar and offensive lineman J.D. Quinn were kicked off the team for violating NCAA rules when they received payment for work they did not do the day before fall practice started . Paul Thompson , who had not practiced in the quarterback role for nearly a year , was asked to move back to quarterback , which he did . 
 Conference play began with a loss to the Texas Longhorns in the annual Red River Rivalry on October 7 , and ended with a win over the Nebraska Cornhuskers in the Big 12 Championship Game on December 2 . The Sooners finished the regular season with an 11 – 2 record ( 7 – 1 in Big 12 ) while winning their fourth Big 12 title and their 40th conference title overall . They received an automatic berth to the Fiesta Bowl , where they were upset by the Boise State Broncos , 42 @-@ 43 , in what many consider to be one of the greatest bowl games of all time . 
 Following the season , Adrian Peterson was selected seventh overall in the 2007 NFL Draft , Rufus Alexander was chosen in the 6th round , and C. J. Ah You was drafted in the 7th . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 After the previous year 's 8 – 4 season , the Sooners looked to return to past success in 2006 . Standout running back Adrian Peterson came into the season healthy and was also on the Maxwell Award watch list . Star linebacker Rufus Alexander ( a Bednarik Award hopeful ) returned for his senior campaign as did defensive ends C.J. Ah You , Larry Birdine , and Calvin <unk> ( Ah You and Birdine were Ted Hendricks Award hopefuls ) . Reggie Smith was also named to the Jim Thorpe Award watch list . 
 Nearly all major sports publications had the Sooners in the preseason Top 10 . Some had the Sooners as the preseason No. 1 pick including Athlon , Phil Steele and Gold Sheet . The team had a lot of young talent this year . The high school scouting website Rivals.com ranked Oklahoma 's 2005 recruiting class number one in the nation and the 2006 recruiting class number nine . Most of the 2006 signees redshirted and did not play in 2006 . When combined with statements from the Oklahoma coaching staff , the Sooners expected to be back in contention for the national title this year . On July 24 , 2006 , the Sooners were a 5 – 1 favorite to win the National Championship . 
 The Sooners adopted a different jersey design in 2006 , which included the removal of the players ' last names from the back of the jersey due to the design of the uniform 's shoulders and back , and a darker crimson color for the jersey and helmet . 
 On August 2 , 2006 , quarterback Rhett Bomar and offensive lineman J.D. Quinn , both sophomores , were dismissed from the team . It was reported that they violated NCAA regulations regarding receiving extra compensation . It was later determined Bomar received $ 7 @,@ 406 @.@ 88 and Quinn $ 8 @,@ 137 @.@ 17 . The loss of these two key players affected the team 's placement in many publications ' preseason polls as well as their chances of winning a national championship . The team turned to starting quarterback Paul Thompson ( a converted wide receiver in 2005 ) and backup Joey <unk> to lead the team . 
 After investigating the Bomar scandal , on July 11 , 2007 , the NCAA announced a finding of " failure to monitor " the employment of student athletes and handed out penalties . These included a verdict that all wins from the 2005 Oklahoma season were vacated , changing the team 's record from 8 – 4 to 0 – 4 for that year . The University of Oklahoma appealed the finding , and the wins were later restored . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Roster = = 
 In 2006 , the Sooners competed with a relatively young team . Oklahoma listed 72 players on the roster and only nine of them were scholarship seniors . Following the dismissal of quarterback Rhett Bomar , fifth @-@ year senior Paul Thompson reconverted back to his former role of quarterback after spending 2005 as a wide receiver . Junior college transfer Joey <unk> was slotted as his backup . Thompson had several wide receivers to look to in 2006 , including Malcolm Kelly , Manuel Johnson , and <unk> Iglesias . Not to mention junior Adrian Peterson , the team 's main running back . Most of the Sooners ' experience was on the other side of the ball . The Sooner linebackers were the most experienced players on the team . The squad was anchored by Rufus Alexander and Zach Latimer . Alexander was ranked as the third best linebacker in the country at the beginning of the season by College Football News . Behind them were other key players such as <unk> Pleasant and Lewis Baker . Sophomore Ryan Reynolds , a notable player coming out of high school , was injured in the preseason and therefore was unable to contribute in 2006 . In addition to a veteran linebacker squad , Oklahoma had a number of big @-@ name defensive ends . During the preseason , College Football News ranked Larry Birdine , Calvin <unk> and C.J. Ah You in the top 25 best defensive ends for the 2006 season ( ranked 14th , 20th , and 22nd , respectively ) . Oklahoma was the only team with three players in the top 25 . 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 Bob Stoops returned for his eighth season as Oklahoma 's head coach . During the off @-@ season , he was once again mentioned as a candidate for positions outside of Oklahoma . While Stoops decided to stay in Norman , the rest of the Oklahoma coaching staff did see some changes . The biggest change came at the offensive coordinator position . Former offensive coordinator Chuck Long left Oklahoma to take the head coaching job at San Diego State University . Stoops chose somebody already on the staff to fill Long 's spot . Kevin Wilson was named the new offensive coordinator after previously serving as the co @-@ offensive coordinator along with Long as well as the offensive line coach . Rejoining the staff was former Sooner quarterback Josh Heupel , who led Oklahoma to the 2000 National Championship . Heupel had served two years as a graduate assistant before taking a position with Mike Stoops , Bob Stoops 's brother , at the University of Arizona in 2005 . Heupel took over Long 's old position of quarterback coach . Leaving the staff was Darrell Wyatt , who spent four years as the wide receivers coach . He took a position with the NFL 's Minnesota Vikings . This move launched another reshuffle of duties on Stoops 's staff . Coach Kevin Sumlin took over Wyatt 's duties with the wide receivers and was also named co @-@ offensive coordinator with Wilson . Coach James Patton was hired on from Northwestern to take over Wilson 's duties with the offensive line . 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = UAB = = = 
 The Sooners began their season on September 2 against the UAB Blazers coached by Watson Brown . The Sooners ' offense performed well with quarterback Paul Thompson completing 58 % of his passes for 227 yards . Heisman hopeful Adrian Peterson performed well also , rushing for 139 yards , plus an additional 69 @-@ yard reception and two touchdowns . However , the Oklahoma defense did not perform as well as expected , giving up over 300 yards of offense . Bob Stoops himself said that " they weren 't nearly as good as they were billed to be . " Nevertheless , Oklahoma avoided another opening game upset and won 24 – 17 . 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 On September 9 , the Sooners took on the Huskies of Washington coached by Tyrone Willingham . Washington began with the ball and on the opening offensive play , Kenny James squeezed through Oklahoma 's line and dodged Keenan Clayton 's tackle to race 54 yards for a touchdown . Before the end of the 1st quarter , Paul Thompson hit wide receiver Malcolm Kelly in the back of the endzone to tie the game 7 – 7 . Washington answered with a field goal early in the 2nd quarter and Oklahoma and Washington continued to trade field goals to end the 1st half tied 13 – 13 . Oklahoma , however , came out strong in the second half and took the game away from the Huskies . Oklahoma scored 24 consecutive points before Washington scored a late @-@ game touchdown to bring the final score in favor of Oklahoma , 37 – 20 . 
 Adrian Peterson continued his march up the Oklahoma record books with 165 rushing yards . Peterson was named the Big 12 's Offensive Player of the Week for his performance . Quarterback Paul Thompson improved over his season debut , going 21 @-@ for @-@ 33 including 9 @-@ for @-@ 11 in the second half . Some began to see the emergence of a " dynamic trio " in Thompson , Peterson , and Kelly . 
 = = = Oregon = = = 
 Heading into the game against Mike Bellotti 's Oregon Ducks , Oklahoma defensive coordinator Brent Venables made some major changes to the defensive depth chart after giving up four long running plays through the heart of the defensive line against Washington . The starters at defensive tackle , cornerback , and strong safety were all demoted , opening opportunities for some freshmen to step up . D.J. Wolfe was replaced by Marcus Walker at cornerback while senior Jason Carter started in place of Keenan Clayton at strong safety . Carter replaced Clayton in the game against Washington after a missed tackle by the freshman led to a Husky touchdown on their first offensive play . Even though all four players at defensive tackle had almost the same number of plays , Steven Coleman was moved off the top of the depth chart as well . 
 After a controversial ending , the Oregon Ducks defeated the Oklahoma Sooners 34 – 33 giving Oklahoma their first loss of the season and making their record 2 – 1 . Oklahoma led Oregon by 13 points late in the game , but Oregon scored a touchdown with 72 seconds remaining , bringing the score to 27 – 33 in favor of Oklahoma . Oregon then tried for an onside kick and was awarded the ball by the officiating crew despite an Oklahoma player ending up with the ball and over the protests of the Oklahoma sideline who claimed that the ball did not travel the required 10 yards before being touched by Oregon . The instant replay officials took several minutes to review the call while the on @-@ air commentators came to the conclusion that the ball should go to Oklahoma , effectively giving Oklahoma the win as well . The officials , however , awarded the ball to Oregon . ESPN called the decision an " obvious mistake " . The network also questioned the Pac @-@ 10 policy of using conference officiating crews for inter @-@ conference games . Other conferences typically use neutral officials or ones from the visiting team 's conference , although Big 12 officials were used for Oklahoma 's non conference games against UAB and the University of Washington . The Oregon offense then drove down the field and scored the go ahead touchdown to win the game , 34 – 33 . 
 Oklahoma President David Boren wrote a letter to Big 12 commissioner Kevin Weiberg asking for the loss to be erased from Oklahoma 's record , something that Weiberg did not support . Weiberg did say that he would raise concerns about the Pac @-@ 10 policy of using their own officials for inter @-@ conference games in Pac @-@ 10 stadiums . Bob Stoops said that he may cancel the 2008 game scheduled at Washington if the Pac @-@ 10 officiating policy is not changed . 
 The Pac @-@ 10 conference suspended the entire officiating crew , including both on @-@ field and instant @-@ reply officials , for one game . The replay official , Gordon <unk> , requested and was granted a leave of absence for the remainder of the season . Reise was quoted as saying , " I feel so bad I missed that call , it 's driving me crazy , " and that he was " struggling " with his mistake . On @-@ field official David <unk> had his suspension delayed so that he could officiate the September 23rd game between the University of Southern California and the University of Arizona due to a shortage of Pac @-@ 10 conference officials . 
 Mike Stoops , the Arizona head coach and brother to Oklahoma head coach Bob Stoops , said he felt it " was ridiculous that they couldn 't get all of the angles . It was pretty obvious , and not to see that Oklahoma had recovered those were just errors that are the fundamentals of refereeing , " He said he favored changing the Pac @-@ 10 rules so that out @-@ of @-@ conference officials will be brought in for non @-@ conference games . 
 Those calling for the move from conference @-@ paid officials to officials working in a national pool included Texas Longhorns coach Mack Brown . His defending national championship team was called for a record number of penalties in a game against Rice . Brown said " You find when you go outside your league sometimes , people call things differently than our league ... Believe it or not , there are still a lot of different interpretations that make it uncomfortable some during a ballgame . " Less supportive of Oklahoma was Bob Knight , head basketball coach of the Texas Tech Red Raiders . Knight had called for Oklahoma to forfeit its basketball game against Tech in 2003 , when the Sooners won 69 – 64 because of two bad timekeeping decisions . The controversial Knight stated " ... [ H ] ad Oklahoma forfeited that game against us like I suggested , they would have gotten far more positive publicity out of that than if they had gone to the Final Four that year . Now I guess the ' duck ' is swimming in the other pond . " 
 = = = Middle Tennessee = = = 
 The Middle Tennessee Blue Raiders ( 2 – 1 ) were relatively new to Division I @-@ FBS having joined the Sun Belt Conference in 2000 after one year as an independent . Oklahoma and the Blue Raiders had not played against each other before . The Blue Raiders ' star players ( linebacker J.K. <unk> , a Butkus Award hopeful at the beginning of the season , and quarterback Clint Marks , who was on the list for the Davey O 'Brien Award ) had mixed results against their counterparts from Oklahoma . Marks ended the day 3 @-@ for @-@ 9 with 40 yards and an interception , but <unk> was able to make a game @-@ high 6 solo tackles with four tackles for loss . Other than linebacker coach Art Kaufman , all of the Middle Tennessee coaches were in their first year at the school ( including head coach Rick <unk> ) . 
 Malcolm Kelly broke a school record for receiving yards in a quarter that had stood since 1962 when he pulled down 134 yards in the first . He ended the day with 164 yards on 5 receptions and one touchdown . Adrian Peterson gained 128 yards on 27 carries and did not play after Oklahoma 's first possession of the second half . Coach Stoops forced him to sit out because of the chance that " something freakish could happen " and he would be unavailable for the game against Texas . Paul Thompson had a good day as well , throwing 13 @-@ for @-@ 18 for 257 yards and three touchdowns . On defense , linebacker Zach Latimer and cornerback Nic Harris each had an interception ; Latimer returned his 22 yards for a touchdown while Harris was pushed out at the one @-@ yard line . 
 Oklahoma had 462 total yards of offense ( 272 through the air , 190 on the ground ) while limiting <unk> to only 95 total yards . The 59 point loss was the largest for the Blue Raiders since 1933 . 
 = = = Texas ( Red River Rivalry ) = = = 
 The Longhorns and the Sooners met at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas for their annual rivalry game known as the Red River Rivalry ( previously called the Red River Shootout ) . This marked the 101st meeting between the schools . Texas came into the game leading the series 56 – 39 – 5 overall and 44 – 35 – 4 at the Cotton Bowl . In 2005 , the Longhorns broke a five @-@ year losing streak on their way to win the national championship in the Rose Bowl against USC . 
 The teams alternate home and away each year , and this year the Sooners played host . They occupied the bench under the press box and wore their red home jerseys while Texas wore their all @-@ white road uniform . The stadium , as usual , was split down the 50 @-@ yard line with Sooner fans sitting on the south side of mid @-@ field . The division is visually striking and the difference in crowd noise levels from one end of the stadium to the other almost always has a direct impact on the game . 
 As intense as the rivalry between the schools is , there were many factors that tied the programs together in 2006 . Texas head coach Mack Brown was the offensive coordinator for the Sooners in 1984 ( the Red River Shootout ended in a 15 – 15 tie that year ) . He is also the brother of UAB head coach Watson Brown , who lost to Oklahoma at the beginning of the 2006 season . Oklahoma co @-@ defensive coordinator and defensive backs coach Bobby Jack Wright was an assistant coach at Texas from 1986 to ' 97 . Oklahoma also had two Austin natives on their roster , QB Hays McEachern and WR Fred Strong . McEachern 's father was the Texas quarterback in 1977 and 1978 and his mother was a Longhorn cheerleader . 
 There were few bright points for the Sooners after half @-@ time in this installment of the Red River Rivalry . Though they held the Longhorns to only a single offensive yard in the second quarter , the defense gave up two big pass plays on Texas ' first series of the third , including a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Limas Sweed that broke the defense 's will . The offense seemed equally under @-@ motivated in the second half , going three @-@ and @-@ out on their opening drive . Oklahoma also committed numerous turnovers in the second half , including a bad lateral pass that turned into a Texas touchdown , and two interceptions of quarterback Paul Thompson . 
 Texas quarterback Colt McCoy had solid , albeit mediocre , numbers , but was central to the drive that put the Longhorns ahead for good . Bob Stoops said after the game that McCoy " managed the game for [ Texas ] in a really good way . " Texas ' defense was also able to shut down Adrian Peterson and limit him to only 109 yards and one long run ( a 29 @-@ yard touchdown run up the middle in the second quarter ) . Oklahoma 's star wide receiver Malcolm Kelly was limited to only two catches for 31 yards . 
 = = = Iowa State = = = 
 Both teams came into this game after losses the previous week . Iowa State dropped to 3 – 3 ( 0 – 2 Big 12 ) with a 28 – 14 loss to Nebraska in Ames . There were three Cyclone touchdowns negated by the officials in that game ( one called caught out of bounds , two on offensive penalties ) . Oklahoma lost to Texas for the second straight year in the Red River Rivalry in Dallas and was unable to mount a successful offensive drive for the entire second half . The Sooners also committed 11 penalties ( a full third of their season total at the time ) and five turnovers in that game . After equally disappointing weeks , both teams were looking to rebound . 
 Oklahoma held a significant advantage in contests between the schools with the series record at 65 – 5 – 2 . Iowa State had not won in Norman since 1990 and had dropped nine straight games to the Sooners . The Cyclones ' head coach Dan <unk> was 0 – 5 against Oklahoma while Bob Stoops was 3 – 0 against Iowa State and 22 – 3 against teams from the North Division of the Big 12 . 
 Iowa State took some outstanding players to Norman , but in the end it was not enough to win . Quarterback Brent Meyer was the all @-@ time leader in passing yards and total offense at ISU . He finished the season with the Cyclone record for career touchdowns as well . Meyer was complemented by wide receiver Todd Blythe who led the nation in career yards per catch ( 19 @.@ 0 ) and was fifth on the career touchdown receptions list ( 25 ) before the game . ISU linebacker Alvin Bowen also led the nation in tackles per game this season and had 17 against Nebraska . The special teams of the Cyclones was led by Ryan Baum who was averaging 18 @.@ 0 yards per punt return and had scored one touchdown . 
 A win by Oklahoma where they never trailed was marred by an injury to Adrian Peterson . At the end of a 53 yard run in the fourth quarter , Peterson dove into the end zone and , as Stoops put it , " when he landed , he landed wrong . " The result was a broken collarbone that put him on the sideline for the remainder of the regular season . During the post @-@ game press conference Stoops said , " the earliest [ Peterson ] would be ready to play would be a bowl game . " This put an end to Peterson 's chase of the Oklahoma all @-@ time rushing record ; he was 150 yards from breaking Billy Sims ' mark set in 1979 at the time . 
 Other Sooners also had big days against Iowa State . Paul Thompson went 16 of 27 for 195 yards and two touchdowns , both to Malcolm Kelly . Kelly had a total of four receptions for 50 yards on the day while sophomore Manuel Johnson had four grabs for 48 yards . Linebacker Rufus Alexander pulled down his first interception of the season in the third quarter . Iowa State 's only offensive points came on a 31 @-@ yard touchdown pass late in the first quarter from Meyer to standout receiver Todd Blythe . 
 = = = Colorado = = = 
 This week was homecoming for the Sooners , and there were some special celebrations planned . All season , Oklahoma had been remembering and recognizing the career of the late Prentice <unk> , the first African @-@ American football player at the university . <unk> 's jersey number ( 38 ) was not issued this season to any players and for the game against Colorado the 38 yard @-@ line on both halves of the field was highlighted with crimson . This year also marked the 50th anniversary of the 1956 National Championship won by the Sooners . At least 34 members of that team were expected to attend the game , including former All @-@ Americans Bill <unk> , Tommy McDonald , and Clendon Thomas . 
 Going into the game , the series between Oklahoma and Colorado stood at 38 – 16 – 2 with the Sooners taking the advantage . Stoops was 4 – 1 against Colorado with a four @-@ game winning streak . Before the first of those wins ( in Norman on November 2 , 2002 ) , the Sooners dropped nine straight games to the Buffs , the most consecutive losses to a single opponent in the history of the program . Two of Stoops 's wins over Colorado came in Big 12 Championship games ( 2002 and 2004 ) . Colorado coach Dan Hawkins was in his first year at the school and had not coached against Oklahoma before . 
 From the beginning , this game went heavily in the Sooner 's favor . Both defenses played well , but Oklahoma 's squad was able to limit Colorado to only 113 total yards , 51 of which came on the Buff 's only scoring drive late in the fourth quarter . Oklahoma 's offense was also held down , totaling only 271 yards mostly on runs and short underneath passes . Allen Patrick , filling in for the injured Adrian Peterson , was the player of the game and was the first person all season to run for over 100 yards against Colorado . He managed 110 yards on 35 carries with one touchdown run early in the fourth . For 218 consecutive games across 18 years , the Buffaloes had not been shut out ; kicker Mason Crosby saved the streak with a 39 – yard field goal into the wind late in the game . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 Gary <unk> 's Missouri team was the surprise of the conference in 2006 , having already matched their win total from the previous year . They shared the lead for the Big 12 North division with Nebraska ( who they lost to November 4 in Lincoln ) . The Tigers won their homecoming game against Kansas State 41 – 21 . The Sooners also won their homecoming game against Colorado by a score of 24 – 3 . This was the beginning of a long road stretch for Oklahoma ; they played four of their last five games on the road . This was the 91st meeting between the schools with the Sooners holding the advantage 63 – 23 – 5 . 
 In the words of Coach Bob Stoops , the Sooners played " opportunistic " football against Missouri ; converting four take @-@ aways into 19 points ( and adding a touchdown on a drive that saw new life after a " roughing the kicker " penalty ) to beat the Tigers in Columbia . It was the first home loss of the season for Missouri and broke an eight @-@ game home winning streak that stretched back into the 2005 season . 
 Missouri quarterback Chase Daniel was 23 for 44 with 248 yards and no touchdowns , but he did throw three interceptions . Daniel rushed 20 times for 75 yards and a TD while the rest of the Tiger 's offense was only able to add one rushing yard on seven carries . The Sooners ' QB Paul Thompson went 11 for 19 with two touchdowns and no interceptions . He also ran for 28 yards and a score while Allen Patrick added 162 yards on 36 carries . Meanwhile Malcolm Kelly became the fastest player in Oklahoma history to reach 1 @,@ 000 career receiving yards , after only his 19th game . 
 = = = Texas A & M = = = 
 This game was Bob Stoops 's 100th as head coach at Oklahoma ; it was also the 25th meeting between the programs . The Sooners held a narrow 14 – 10 lead in the series going into the game , though A & M had won five of the eight played in College Station . Both the Sooners and the Aggies were coming off a four @-@ game winning streak . 
 The two programs were very similar in their offensive philosophies . Texas A & M came in averaging a very balanced 213 @.@ 7 yards per game rushing and 209 @.@ 1 passing while the Sooners averaged 178 @.@ 4 yards on the ground and 204 @.@ 8 through the air . Oklahoma was surrendering an average of 36 fewer yards per game on defense . 
 The game started well for the Sooners . Allen Patrick had 101 yards on 14 carries and Oklahoma scored two touchdowns in the first quarter to A & M 's one field goal . After Oklahoma failed to recover an early surprise onside kick , however , the Aggies closed the gap to 4 points with a scoring drive capped by a one yard rumble from running back <unk> Lane . The defenses stiffened in the second half and both teams had to settle for field goals in the third and fourth quarters . In his second risky call of the game , Stoops had the Sooners attempt to convert a fourth @-@ and @-@ inches with 1 : 29 left to play and the ball almost to the offense 's 30 yard line . The run by Thompson was successful but unnecessary as A & M was penalized for having too many men on the field and Oklahoma was able to run out the clock . 
 Paul Thompson had a disappointing day as he completed only three of his twelve passing attempts for a total of 39 yards . A & M 's Stephen McGee was slightly better completing 8 of 18 for 63 yards , though he was picked off by Marcus Walker in the third quarter ; Garrett Hartley kicked a field goal after the Sooners offense could not advance the ball after the turnover . The Aggies forced two fumbles of their own ( one from Patrick and one from Thompson ) , but they were forced to punt after their own offense was also stymied . The player of the game was Allen Patrick , who finished the day with a career @-@ high 173 yards on 32 carries and one touchdown . However , he suffered a sprained ankle during the last minutes of the game . Coach Wilson questioned whether he would be 100 % for the next game . Texas A & M coach Dennis Franchione dropped to 0 – 4 against the Sooners . 
 = = = Texas Tech = = = 
 Oklahoma played its last home game of the season against Texas Tech ( coached by former Oklahoma assistant Mike Leach ) , and bid farewell to the smallest class of seniors in Stoops 's tenure as head coach . The previous smallest class was 12 in 2001 ; this year there were eleven ( nine on scholarship ) . During the pre @-@ game ceremony , all the seniors and their families were introduced and the Don Key Award was presented to quarterback Paul Thompson . Going into the game , the series between the two schools was 10 – 3 in favor of Oklahoma , and the Red Raiders had not won in Norman in 10 years . 
 With Adrian Peterson still recovering from breaking his collar bone against Iowa State and Allen Patrick on the sidelines in an ankle brace after suffering a late @-@ game sprain the week before , many aspects of the offense were in doubt coming into this game . Paul Thompson responded by putting up a career @-@ high 309 yards passing , completing 24 of 31 attempts . True @-@ freshman running back Chris Brown also stepped up to the challenge and ran for 84 yards and two touchdowns , both in the fourth quarter ; this was the first time in 16 games that a Sooner back did not run for over 100 yards . 
 The only serious injury of the game came when wide receiver Manuel Johnson was knocked unconscious after hitting helmets with Texas Tech defensive back Chris Parker . Johnson was unresponsive on the sidelines for about 35 seconds before he opened his eyes . He was taken to the hospital by ambulance , treated for " a real bad concussion , " and kept overnight . According to Coach Stoops , Johnson would not play against Baylor , but he returned for the regular season finale . 
 Tech played well also , especially on defense where they were able to create four turnovers including Thompson 's first interception in 99 pass attempts . Defensive back Antonio Huffman returned the pick 54 yards for a touchdown and put the Red Raiders up 24 – 10 late in the second quarter . Texas Tech was able to capitalize on the other take @-@ aways as well , turning them into 14 more points and held the lead until the fourth quarter . Two missed field goals and a fired @-@ up Sooner defense held the Red Raiders off , however , and the Sooners were able to put the game away with a two @-@ yard touchdown run by Brown . 
 = = = Baylor = = = 
 The Baylor game marked the beginning of a two @-@ game stretch of road games to finish the season for Oklahoma . The Sooners traveled to Baylor in Waco for the 16th meeting between the schools and the seventh at Floyd Casey Stadium . Oklahoma had never lost to the Bears , though the game in 2005 in Norman went into double @-@ overtime . This was the last game of the season for Baylor ; even with a win they would not be bowl @-@ eligible . 
 Baylor 's passing offense had been strong all year . This was the first time they had been held below 21 points in their last seven conference games and they had two wide receivers with over 50 catches each . Unfortunately for the Bears , their starting quarterback Shawn Bell suffered a season @-@ ending injury against Texas A & M on October 28 . 
 Paul Thompson had a career @-@ high 309 passing yards against Texas Tech , including a string of 14 straight completions after throwing his sixth interception of the year . At the time , he was also sixth on the Oklahoma single @-@ season touchdown passes list with 17 and eighth on the season passing yards list with 2 @,@ 092 . 
 The Sooner defense played extremely well in Waco , limiting Baylor to 148 total yards and <unk> yards of rushing . That was the fewest yards Baylor had produced all season and their worst performance on the ground in the program 's history ; it was also the second @-@ best performance by an Oklahoma defense ever . Defensive back Reggie Smith also pulled down two interceptions , returning the first one 42 yards for a touchdown . 
 Oklahoma was also unable to avoid turning the ball over , however , losing four fumbles and throwing one pick . Baylor set up a field goal on the first fumble by Smith after he failed to catch a punt return and Baylor 's <unk> Davis returned a fumble by Chris Brown for a touchdown late in the game . Another fumble by Smith on a second return and one by Malcolm Kelly put premature ends to other Sooner drives . 
 = = = Oklahoma State ( Bedlam Series ) = = = 
 The Bedlam Series between Oklahoma and Oklahoma State has been played all but two years since 1904 and is the most lopsided series between schools in the same state in the nation . Going into the game , Oklahoma led the series , 77 – 16 – 7 . This was the last game of the regular season and held major bowl implications for both programs . Head coach Mike Gundy had managed to bring Oklahoma State to bowl @-@ eligibility with six wins , but they were still not guaranteed a bowl berth . The Big 12 had eight contract bowl spots this year and nine bowl – eligible teams . Since only teams with six wins can be selected for a bowl game after all available teams with seven or more have been selected , OSU needed Kansas to lose to Missouri to have any hope of a bowl game . After Missouri beat the Jayhawks 42 – 17 , both Kansas and OSU had 6 – 6 records and the bowl selection committees would choose which team would be invited . 
 Aside from the rivalry and bowl implications , this game also decided who would represent the South Division at the Big 12 Championship Game in Kansas City . At the beginning of the week , Texas and Oklahoma were tied for the lead with Texas holding the tie @-@ breaker due to their win in the Red River Rivalry earlier in the year . However , since Texas lost to Texas A & M on November 24 , a Sooner victory at State would win them the division outright and let them play Nebraska for the Big 12 title and a spot in the Fiesta Bowl ( awarded contractually to the Big 12 winner if they are not selected to play in the national championship game ) . 
 As with the previous five games , the absence of Adrian Peterson did not keep the Sooners from running the ball on the ground . Allen Patrick returned from missing the last two games with a sore ankle and put up 163 yards on 23 carries , including a 65 @-@ yard touchdown scamper to start the second half . Chris Brown had an additional 19 carries for 74 yards and two touchdowns as Patrick 's backup . At the end of the day , Paul Thompson only threw 11 passes , 7 completions for 77 yards with one touchdown and no interceptions , and Oklahoma had 238 yards of rushing . 
 Oklahoma State 's passing attack was more active , with both Zac Robinson and Bobby Reid completing 8 passes ( on 17 attempts for 149 yards for Robinson , 12 and 82 for Reid ) . However , they were still only able to connect for one touchdown ( Reid to D <unk> Woods in the fourth quarter ) and Robinson missed high on a last @-@ second " Hail Mary " that would have tied the game ( the PAT would have put the Cowboys up by one with only a few seconds left in the game ) . The Cowboys were also able to produce 119 yards and two touchdowns on the ground . 
 = = = Nebraska ( Big 12 Championship Game ) = = = 
 Called " The Battle of the Big Reds " , the rivalry between the University of Oklahoma and the University of Nebraska was one of the most heated contests of the old Big Eight Conference . Played every Thanksgiving weekend for 71 years ( from 1927 to 1998 ) , this contest produced many memorable games – including the Game of the Century in 1971 . The rivalry cooled somewhat since the creation of the Big 12 as Bill Callahan 's Nebraska Cornhuskers and Stoops 's Oklahoma Sooners were split a home @-@ and @-@ home two of every four years . 
 This was only the fourth time that the teams had met at a neutral site . The last time was the 1979 Orange Bowl where the Sooners won 31 – 24 . Oklahoma held the lead in the all @-@ time series with 42 wins , 37 losses and 3 ties and had never lost to Nebraska on neutral turf ( one 7 – 7 tie in 1919 in Omaha ) . Bob Stoops was 3 – 1 against Nebraska and had a two @-@ game winning streak ; Callahan had never beaten Oklahoma . 
 This was the first time the two teams had met in the Big 12 Championship Game to determine the Big 12 Conference champion . Nebraska played in the championship game three of the first four years , winning in 1997 and 1999 , but had not made it back since . Oklahoma missed the first four games but represented the South Division four of the next six years , topping the conference in 2000 , 2002 , and 2004 . Oklahoma had the most appearances in the championship game ( 5 ) and conference titles ( 4 ) of any team in the Big 12 . 
 Nebraska received the ball to start the game but Maurice <unk> fumbled on the first play from scrimmage . Oklahoma recovered the ball at the Nebraska 2 @-@ yard @-@ line and scored a touchdown to take the lead 7 – 0 with 48 seconds expired off the clock . It was the fastest score in Big 12 Championship Game history . With 5 : 35 left in the first quarter , Oklahoma 's quarterback completed a touchdown pass to Malcolm Kelly to go up 14 – 0 . With 4 : 37 left in the first half , Nebraska 's Zach Taylor threw a touchdown pass and the extra point shaved Oklahoma 's lead to 14 – 7 , which was still the score as the game went to half @-@ time . 
 At the start of the half , Oklahoma started with the ball but was unable to advance , as Nebraska recorded their first quarterback sack of the game and caused Oklahoma to punt after going three @-@ and @-@ out . Later in the third quarter , Oklahoma used eleven plays , three minutes and 21 seconds , to go 99 yards and score a touchdown with 1 : 25 left in the third quarter . It was the longest scoring drive in Big 12 Championship history . 
 With 8 : 53 left in the game , Nebraska threw what was almost a touchdown pass , but Nic Harris made a diving catch to intercept the ball in the end @-@ zone for a touchback . Neither team scored in the fourth quarter , so Oklahoma won the game 21 – 7 . It was their fourth Big 12 Conference football championship , which was the most for any team in the conference ( Nebraska and Texas each had two ) . 
 = = = Boise State ( Fiesta Bowl ) = = = 
 Since Oklahoma won the Big 12 Championship game , they represented the Big 12 Conference in the Fiesta Bowl in Glendale , Arizona . Contractually , the Fiesta Bowl hosts the Big 12 Champion and then picks , from among the BCS eligible teams , the opponent . For 2007 , the Fiesta Bowl picked Boise State as Oklahoma 's opponent . The game took place on New Year 's Day in the then @-@ new University of Phoenix Stadium , home of the Arizona Cardinals . The Broncos led the Sooners the majority of the game , but the Sooners made up an 18 point deficit late in the game and led by a touchdown with a minute left in regulation . With 18 seconds left , the Sooners had the Broncos in a fourth @-@ and @-@ 18 situation from midfield , but were stunned when the Broncos executed a hook and lateral for the tying score . This would be only the first of three Boise State trick plays that helped elevate this game to epic status . 
 The Sooners had the ball first in overtime , with Adrian Peterson scoring on their first play . Boise State then drove the ball toward the goal line , but faced fourth – and – goal from the 2 . They then sent quarterback Jared <unk> into motion and snapped to backup wide receiver Vinny <unk> , who ran an option pass and found Derek <unk> in the end zone . The Broncos chose to go for the two @-@ point conversion and the win instead of kicking for the tie . They then ran a Statue of Liberty play , with <unk> faking a pass to the right side and handing the ball behind his back to Ian Johnson , who ran left and entered the end zone untouched , giving the Broncos a stunning 43 – 42 win . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 The Sooners led the conference in many defense statistics , including pass efficiency defense , scoring defense , total defense , and sacks allowed . They finished second in rushing defense . They also ranked in the top 20 nationally in all the above categories . The Sooners ' weakness came on offense where they finished in the middle of the pack in the conference . The Sooners ' rushing offense ranked third in the conference but passing offense ranked tenth , total offense eighth and passing efficiency sixth . 
 = = = Team = = = 
 = = = Scores by quarter = = = 
 Statistics from : " Oklahoma Sooners – Cumulative Season Statistics " . University of Oklahoma Department of Intercollegiate Athletics . Archived from the original on December 1 , 2007 . Retrieved December 5 , 2007 . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 As the 2006 college football season neared the end , many organizations began to announce finalists and winners of various post @-@ season awards . Sooner players and coaches appeared on many of these lists . Head coach Bob Stoops was unanimously named Coach of the Year on the AT & T All @-@ Big 12 Coaches Team . This was the third time he 'd won the award , more than any other coach in the conference . Stoops was also named a finalist for the Eddie Robinson Coach of the Year award , a national award handed out by the Football Writer 's Association of America . Oklahoma defensive coordinator / linebacker coach / associate head coach Brent Venables was named one of five finalists for the Broyles Award which goes to the nation 's best assistant coach . 
 Several players for the Sooners were also honored . Oklahoma junior kicker Garrett Hartley was named a finalist for the Lou Groza Award . Oklahoma senior linebacker Rufus Alexander was named the AT & T All @-@ Big 12 Defensive Player of the Year . He was the third Oklahoma player to earn this honor , following Teddy Lehman in 2003 and Roy Williams in 2001 . He was also Oklahoma 's lone All @-@ American this year was linebacker , and was given first team All @-@ American status by the American Football Coaches Association . The following Oklahoma players were also named to the All – Big 12 First , Second , and Honorable Mention Team : 
 Adrian Peterson finished his last season at Oklahoma with 1 @,@ 012 yards . This brought his career total to 4 @,@ 045 which placed him third all @-@ time at Oklahoma . He would remain 26 yards behind Joe Washington and 73 yards behind Billy Sims . 
 = = = 2007 NFL Draft = = = 
 The 2007 NFL Draft was held on April 28 – 29 , 2007 at Radio City Music Hall in New York City . The following Oklahoma players were either selected or signed as undrafted free agents following the draft . Adrian Peterson was the highest Sooner drafted since Cedric Jones was drafted as the fifth pick in 1996 . 
 = Sing for Me ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Sing for Me " is a song recorded by American recording artist Christina Aguilera for her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was written by Ginny Blackmore , Aguilera and producer Aeon " Step " Manahan . Described by Aguilera as being one of the more emotional tracks on Lotus , the song was inspired by the music of Whitney Houston , Mariah Carey , and Etta James , to which she had frequently listened while growing up . 
 " Sing for Me " received positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised Aguilera 's vocal performance . One critic described the song as a new version of " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) , while many felt that the song was produced in response to the commercial failure of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) . Upon the release of Lotus , the song debuted on the South Korea international singles chart at number 125 with digital download sales of 2 @,@ 306 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film called Burlesque and recorded its accompanying soundtrack . Aguilera became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and was featured on Maroon 5 's single " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which was on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart for four consecutive weeks . After these events , Aguilera revealed that she had begun to work on her seventh studio album , saying that she wanted to find high quality and " personal " songs for to record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . " Sing for Me " was initially written by Blackmore about her experience with the music industry ; upon hearing the song Aguilera had trouble identifying with some of its lyrics , so she and Blackmore met up and rewrote parts of the song . 
 = = Production and inspiration = = 
 " Sing for Me " was co @-@ written by Aguilera with Aeon " Step " Manahan and Ginny Blackmore , and was produced by Step . Her vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California and all instrumentation and programming was carried out by Step . For Lotus , Aguilera wrote and recorded a lot of songs that would " hopefully inspire the next generation of vocalists . " She revealed that her experience as a coach on The Voice has prompted her to " dig deeper " and find some new inspiration , due to how she feels as though she needs to " uphold a certain vocal standard " . In an interview with Billboard , Aguilera further commented on how being a coach encouraged her to record " Sing for Me " and why it is special for her : 
 Seeing all the singers , you really come face to face with a lot of people that are predominantly younger . That 's inspiring , because they come up to you and they 're such big fans and they share with you what song touched them the most and how they had to learn every single ad lib and dissect it . As a vocalist it brought me back to , ' Yeah , that 's what I used to do to my Whitney Houston record and my Mariah Carey record and my Etta James record . ' It brings you back to a place where it becomes your personal responsibility to infuse the next generation with more information about learning every intricate note . That 's why a song called ' Sing for Me ' is a special song . It 's one of those singer 's songs where if you 're not a vocalist you can 't mess with that song . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Sing for Me " is a power ballad , with a duration of four minutes ( 4 : 00 ) . Its instrumentation consists of " soft " strings , a " delicate " piano melody and " 80s power ballad @-@ type drums " at its close . The key in which the structure was composed is changed during the course of the song . Aguilera 's vocal performance garnered a comparison to Gabby Douglas and the vocal gymnastics that she projects from Mike Wass for Idolator . He also noted that although Carey would consider the vocals runs as " over @-@ the @-@ top " , they fit with the nature of the song . The song features a " thunderous " ironic chorus which consists of the lyrics " ' Cause when I open my mouth , my whole heart comes out . " According to Chris Younie for 4Music , Aguilera belts the song out " as if her life depends on it . " The " reflective ballad " may be what was created as a result of Aguilera singing " Beautiful " alone in her bedroom after the weak commercial response of Bionic . It represents a " fine line " between the " her hurt over the Bionic backlash and the woe @-@ is @-@ me territory she occasionally veers into on some of the album ’ s worst tracks . " Aguilera tries to " shake her insecurities " during the lines " I don 't care what the world thinks or how I sound . " According to Annie Zaleski for The A.V. Club , Aguilera " discusses working through regret and reclaiming her sense of self . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sing for Me " garnered positive reception from music critics . Chris Younie of 4Music expressed admiration for " Sing for Me " , writing that Aguilera proves her worth as a singer and that she does not need " hot pants and skintight outfits " to make an impression . Idolator 's Mike Wass declared the song as a " standout " on Lotus . Mesfin Fekadu of The Huffington Post described " Sing for Me " as a personal anthem for Aguilera . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that " Sing for Me " was reminiscent of the " old Christina " and that her " voice veers volcanic . " Billboard 's Andrew Hampp wrote that if " Army of Me " is Lotus ' answer to her 2003 song " Fighter " then " Sing for Me " has " aims of being " a new version of her 2002 song " Beautiful " . He also noted that the song is a gift to " diehard " Aguilera fans . Jim Farber of the New York Daily News thought that the singer appeared to be snarling as she sings about " nothing can take away the glory and power she derives from her voice " . Melinda Newman of HitFix thought that starts to sound " defensive " as the song progresses , but is " otherwise glorious " . The song generated disappointment for Sal Cinquemani for Slant Magazine , writing that although Aguilera 's vocals runs are " pretty " , they are " enough to save the otherwise too @-@ bombastic and rote power ballad . " When listing the five most underrated songs by her ( this song being at number 5 ) , Billboard commented favorably that " Aguilera 's love for the music is front and center . " 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Sing for Me " appeared on the South Korean singles chart at number 125 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 2 @,@ 306 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Ginny Blackmore , Christina Aguilera , Aeon " Step " <unk> . 
 Production – Aeon " Step " <unk> 
 Vocal recording – Oscar Ramirez 
 All programming and instruments – Step 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Ginny Blackmore version = = 
 " Sing For Me " co @-@ writer Ginny Blackmore recorded her own version , titled " SFM " , and released it as a B @-@ side to her single " Bones " . " SFM " peaked at No.21 on the New Zealand Singles Chart in November 2013 . A music video was made , directed by Claire Littler and Ralph Matthews . 
 = Slotted line = 
 Slotted lines are used for microwave measurements and consist of a movable probe inserted into a slot in a transmission line . They are used in conjunction with a microwave power source and usually , in keeping with their low @-@ cost application , a low cost Schottky diode detector and VSWR meter rather than an expensive microwave power meter . 
 Slotted lines can measure standing waves , wavelength , and , with some calculation or plotting on Smith charts , a number of other parameters including reflection coefficient and electrical impedance . A precision variable attenuator is often incorporated in the test setup to improve accuracy . This is used to make level measurements , while the detector and VSWR meter are retained only to mark a reference point for the attenuator to be set to , thus eliminating entirely the detector and meter measurement errors . The parameter most commonly measured by a slotted line is SWR . This serves as a measure of the accuracy of the impedance match to the item under test . This is especially important for transmitting antennas and their feed lines ; high standing wave ratio on a radio or TV antenna can distort the signal , increase transmission line loss and potentially damage components in the transmission path , possibly even the transmitter . 
 Slotted lines are no longer widely used , but can still be found in budget applications . Their main drawback is that they are labour @-@ intensive to use and require calculation , tables , or plotting to make use of the results . They need to be made with mechanical precision and the probe and its detector need to be adjusted with care , but they can give very accurate results . 
 = = Description = = 
 The slotted line is one of the basic instruments used in radio frequency test and measurement at microwave frequencies . It consists of a precision transmission line , usually co @-@ axial but waveguide implementations are also used , with a movable insulated probe inserted into a longitudinal slot cut into the line . In a co @-@ axial slotted line , the slot is cut into the outer conductor of the line . The probe is inserted past the outer conductor , but not so far that it touches the inner conductor . In a rectangular waveguide , the slot is usually cut along the centre of the broad wall of the waveguide . Circular waveguide slotted lines are also possible . 
 Slotted lines are relatively cheap and can perform many of the measurements done by more expensive equipment such as network analysers . However , slotted line measurement techniques are more labour @-@ intensive and often do not directly output the desired parameter ; some calculation or plotting is frequently required . In particular , they can only carry out a measurement at one spot frequency at a time so producing a plot of a parameter versus frequency is very time consuming . This is to be compared to modern instruments like network and spectrum analysers which are intrinsically frequency swept and produce a plot instantly . Slotted lines have now largely been superseded , but are still found where capital costs are an issue . Their remaining uses are mostly in the millimetre band , where modern test apparatus is either prohibitively expensive or not available at all , and with academic laboratories and hobbyists . They are also useful as a teaching aid as the user is more directly exposed to basic line phenomena than with more sophisticated instruments . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The slotted line works by sampling the electric field inside the transmission line with the probe . For accuracy , it is important that the probe disturbs the field as little as possible . For this reason the probe diameter and slot width are kept small ( usually around 1 mm ) and the probe is inserted in no further than necessary . It is also necessary in waveguide slotted lines to place the slot at a position where the current in the waveguide walls is parallel to the slot . The current will then not be disturbed by the presence of the slot as long as it is not too wide . For the dominant mode this is on the centre @-@ line of the broad face of the waveguide , but for some other modes it may need to be off @-@ centre . This is not an issue for the co @-@ axial line because this operates in the TEM ( transverse electromagnetic ) mode and hence the current is everywhere parallel to the slot . The slot may be tapered at its ends to avoid discontinuities causing reflections . 
 The disturbance to the field inside the line caused by the insertion of the probe is minimised as far as possible . There are two parts to this disturbance . The first part is due to the power the probe has extracted from the line and manifests as a lumped equivalent circuit of a resistor . This is minimised by limiting the distance the probe is inserted into the line so that only enough power is extracted for the detector to operate effectively . The second part of the disturbance is due to energy stored in the field around the probe and manifests as a lumped equivalent of a capacitor . This capacitance can be cancelled out with an inductance of equal and opposite impedance . Lumped inductors are not practical at microwave frequencies ; instead , an adjustable stub with an inductive equivalent circuit is used to " tune out " the probe capacitance . The result is an equivalent circuit of a high impedance in shunt across the line which has little effect on the transmitted power in the line . The probe is more sensitive as a result of this tuning and the distance it is inserted can be further limited as a result . 
 = = Test setup = = 
 A typical test setup with a waveguide slotted line is shown in figure 2 . Referring to this figure , power from a test equipment source ( not shown ) enters the apparatus through the co @-@ axial cable on the left and is converted to waveguide format by means of a launcher ( 1 ) . This is followed by a section of waveguide ( 2 ) providing a transition to a smaller size of guide . An important component in the setup is the isolator ( 3 ) which prevents power being reflected back into the source . Depending on the test conditions , such reflections can be large and a high @-@ power source may be damaged by the returning wave . The power entering the slotted line is controlled by a rotary variable attenuator ( 4 ) . This is followed by the slotted line itself ( 5 ) above which is the probe mounted on a movable carriage . The carriage also carries the probe <unk> : ( 6 ) is the probe depth adjustment , ( 7 ) is a length of co @-@ axial section with tuning adjustments , and ( 8 ) is a crystal detector . The right @-@ hand end of the slotted line is terminated in a matched load ( 9 ) which absorbs all the power exiting the end of the waveguide . The load can be replaced by the component or system that it is desired to test . It can also be replaced with a reference short @-@ circuit ( 10 ) which is used to calibrate the slotted line . The carriage can be moved along the slotted line by means of a rotary knob ( 11 ) which simultaneously moves a vernier gauge ( 12 ) for accurate measurement of the probes position along the line . 
 The probe is connected to a detector and a display meter ( not shown in figure 2 ) . These can be , respectively , a thermistor and power meter , or an envelope detector and VSWR meter . The detector can be a crystal detector or a Schottky barrier diode . The detector is mounted on the probe assembly , usually a distance λ / 4 from the probe tip as shown in figure 3 . This is because the detector looks almost like a short circuit to the transmission line , and this distance will convert it to an open circuit through the quarter @-@ wave impedance transformer effect . Thus , the detector has minimal effect on loading the line . The probe tuning stub can be seen on figure 3 branching from the line linking the probe to the detector . Figure 2 has a slightly different arrangement ; the main probe into the waveguide leads to a vertical co @-@ axial tuning and adjustment section but the detector is on a horizontal side @-@ section with a secondary probe into the upright co @-@ axial section . 
 = = Measurements = = 
 Measurements of microwave power can be made directly , usually with a thermistor based detector and meter . However , these instruments are expensive and a common meter used in measurements with a slotted line is instead a cheaper low @-@ frequency VSWR meter . The microwave power source is amplitude modulated with , typically , a 1 kHz signal which is recovered by the envelope detector in the probe and sent to the VSWR meter . This scheme is preferred to simply detecting the unmodulated carrier directly , which would result in a DC output , because a stable , narrowband , tuned amplifier can be used to amplify the 1 kHz signal . A large amplification is required in the VSWR meter because the limit of the square law range of the detector diode is no more than 10 <unk> . 
 = = = Maxima and minima = = = 
 When the slotted line is terminated with a precision matching load there is no variation in the detected power along the line , other than a very small decrease due to losses in the line . However , when this is replaced by a device under test ( DUT ) which is not perfectly matched to the line there will be a reflection back towards the source . This causes a standing wave to be set up on the line with periodic maxima and minima ( collectively , extrema ) due to alternating constructive and destructive interference . These extrema are found by moving the probe back and forth along the line and the level at that point can then be measured on the meter . 
 The extrema are not of any great interest in themselves , but are used in the calculation of several more useful parameters . Some of these parameters require the measurement of the exact position of the extremum . Either maxima or minima can equally be used , from a mathematical point of view , but minima are preferred because they are always much sharper than maxima , especially for large reflections , as shown in figure 4 . Additionally , the probe causes less disturbance to the field near a minimum than it does near a maximum . 
 = = = Wavelength = = = 
 Wavelength is determined by measuring the distance between two adjacent minima . This distance will be λ / 2 . There is no need for a DUT , better results are obtained with the reference short in position . 
 = = = Standing wave ratio = = = 
 Standing wave ratio ( SWR or VSWR ) is a basic parameter and the one most commonly measured on a slotted line . This quantity is of particular importance for transmitter antennae . A high SWR indicates a poor match between the feed line and the antenna , which increases wasted power , can cause damage to components in the transmission path , possibly including the transmitter , and cause distortion to TV , FM stereo and digital signals . With the input power set so that the maxima are at 0 <unk> , a measurement of a minimum in decibels will directly give SWR ( after discarding the minus sign ) . 
 = = = Reflection coefficient = = = 
 The reflection coefficient , ρ , is the ratio of the reflected wave to the incident wave . In general it is a complex number . The magnitude of the reflection <unk> can be calculated from the VSWR measurement by , 
 <formula> 
 where VSWR is the standing wave ratio expressed as a voltage ratio ( not in decibels ) . However , to completely characterise the reflection coefficient , the phase of ρ must also be found . This is done on a slotted line by measuring the distance of the first minimum from the DUT . Moving the probe right up to the DUT is not practicable so a different approach is usually adopted . The position of the first minimum when the reference short is in place is noted . The distance back along the line from this reference point to the next minimum when the DUT is in place will be the same as the distance from the DUT to the first minimum . This is so because the reference short guarantees a minimum at the DUT position . 
 The phase part of ρ is given by , 
 <formula> 
 where λ is the wavelength and x is the distance to the first minimum as described earlier . The magnitude and phase representation of ρ can , if required , be expressed as real and imaginary parts instead by the usual manipulation of complex numbers . 
 = = = Impedance = = = 
 The impedance , Z , of the DUT can be calculated from the reflection coefficient by , 
 <formula> 
 where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of the line . An alternative method is to plot the VSWR and distance to the node ( in wavelengths ) on a Smith chart . These quantities are directly measured by the slotted line . From this plot the DUT impedance ( normalised to Z0 ) can be read directly off the Smith chart . 
 = = Accuracy considerations = = 
 Good slotted lines are precision made instruments . They need to be because mechanical defects can affect accuracy . Some of the mechanical issues that are relevant to this include backlash of the vernier , concentricity of the inner and outer conductor , circularity of the outer conductor , centrality and straightness of the inner conductor , variations in cross @-@ section , and the ability of the carriage to maintain a constant probe depth . Issues with probe tuning and disturbances to the field have already been discussed , but the insulated spacers holding the centre conductor in place can also disturb the field . Consequently , these are made as discrete as is compatible with mechanical strength . However , the greatest source of inaccuracy is usually not the slotted line itself , but the characteristics of the detector diode . 
 The detected voltage signal output of the Schottky barrier diodes typically used in microwave detectors have a square law relationship to the power being measured and meters are calibrated accordingly . However , as the power increases , the diode deviates significantly from a square law and remains accurate up to an output voltage of only around 5 @-@ 10 mV . This can be improved a little by adding a load resistor to the detector output , but this also has the undesirable effect of decreasing sensitivity . Another technique is to reduce the range of power being measured ( so that it is brought within the square law range of the detector ) by measuring at a point other than a maximum . The maximum is then calculated from the known mathematical shape of the standing wave pattern . This has the objection that it adds significantly to the labour required to make the measurements , as does the technique of precisely calibrating the detector and adjusting the readings on the meter according to a calibration chart . 
 It is possible to completely eliminate errors in the detector and meter if a precision variable attenuator is used in the test setup . In this technique a minimum is first found and the attenuator adjusted so that the meter is indicating precisely some convenient mark . A maximum is then found and the attenuation increased until the meter is indicating the same mark . The amount the attenuation had to be increased is the VSWR of the standing wave . Accuracy here depends on the accuracy of the attenuator and not at all on the detector . 
 = Little Catawissa Creek = 
 Little Catawissa Creek is a tributary of Catawissa Creek in Columbia County and Schuylkill County , in Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 10 @.@ 8 miles ( 17 @.@ 4 km ) long and flows through Conyngham Township in Columbia County and Union Township and North Union Township in Schuylkill County . The named tributaries of the creek include Stony Run and Trexler Run . The creek has some alkalinity and is slightly acidic . The main rock formations in the watershed of it are the Mauch Chunk Formation , the Pocono Formation , and the Pottsville Formation . A number of other rock formations occur in small areas of the watershed as well . The main soils in the watershed are the Leck Kill soil and the Hazleton soil . 
 The watershed of Little Catawissa Creek has an area of 16 @.@ 70 square miles ( 43 @.@ 3 km2 ) . A number of bridges cross the creek . There are a number of major roads in the watershed of the creek and most of the creek is within several hundred meters of a road . The creek is a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery and Class A Wild Trout Waters in some places . In other places , it is a Coldwater Fishery and Class D Wild Trout Waters . There are many species of fish inhabiting the creek , including brook trout , brown trout , and others . The creek has been surveyed at least nine times by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . 
 = = Course = = 
 Little Catawissa Creek begins in a narrow valley in Conyngham Township . It flows east for a few miles in the valley , flowing roughly parallel to Aristes Ringtown Road . The creek eventually exits Conyngham Township and Columbia County . 
 Upon exiting Columbia County , Little Catawissa Creek enters Union Township , Schuylkill County . It continues east and its valley becomes narrower and shallower . Over the next several miles , the creek turns east @-@ northeast and its valley gets broader again . It then turns abruptly north and passes through a ridge . The creek briefly turns northeast before turning north @-@ northeast after a few hundred feet . Approximately a mile downstream , it receives its first named tributary , Trexler Run . At this point , the creek turns abruptly east @-@ northeast . After some distance , it begins meandering northeast for a few miles , receiving the tributary Stony Run . It then begins meandering east for a few miles , briefly entering North Union Township , Schuylkill County before reentering East Union Township . Shortly afterwards , the creek turns north @-@ northeast , crosses into North Union Township again . A few tenths of a mile downstream , it reaches its confluence with Catawissa Creek . 
 Little Catawissa Creek joins Catawissa Creek 24 @.@ 24 miles ( 39 @.@ 01 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Little Catawissa Creek has a number of tributaries . These include Stony Run , Trexler Run , and an unnamed tributary known as " Trib <unk> To Little Catawissa Creek " . Trexler Run flows through Roaring Creek Township , Columbia County and Union Township , Schuylkill County . Stony Run flows through Union Township , Schuylkill County . Stony Run joins Little Catawissa Creek 1 @.@ 96 miles ( 3 @.@ 15 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 2 @.@ 24 square miles ( 5 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Trexler Run joins Little Catawissa Creek 4 @.@ 24 miles ( 6 @.@ 82 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 3 @.@ 81 square miles ( 9 @.@ 9 km2 ) . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Little Catawissa Creek is infertile in its upper reaches , from its headwaters to T431 , 8 @.@ 10 miles ( 13 @.@ 04 km ) upstream of its mouth . The creek is infertile and slightly acidic from T431 to T435 ( 8 @.@ 10 miles ( 13 @.@ 04 km ) upstream of the mouth to 2 @.@ 90 miles ( 4 @.@ 67 km ) upstream of the mouth ) . When the waters of the creek flow into Catawissa Creek , they help offset some of the acidity of the latter creek , contributing to relatively high water quality downstream of the confluence . 
 At 8 @.@ 90 miles ( 14 @.@ 32 km ) above its mouth , the concentration of alkalinity in Little Catawissa Creek is 2 milligrams per liter ( 1 @.@ 2 × 10 − 6 oz / cu in ) milligrams per liter . The pH of the creek at this location is 6 @.@ 4 . The creek at this location is infertile and acidic , with the potential to be affected by acid precipitation . Between T431 and T435 , the creek 's concentration of alkalinity ranges from 10 to 13 milligrams per liter ( 5 @.@ 8 × 10 − 6 to 7 @.@ 5 × 10 − 6 oz / cu in ) and its pH ranges from 6 @.@ 8 to 7 @.@ 0 . The concentration of water hardness in the creek 's waters 8 @.@ 90 miles ( 14 @.@ 32 km ) upstream of its mouth is 16 milligrams per liter ( 9 @.@ 2 × 10 − 6 oz / cu in ) . 5 @.@ 40 miles ( 8 @.@ 69 km ) upstream of its mouth , the water hardness is 28 milligrams per liter ( 1 @.@ 6 × 10 − 5 oz / cu in ) and 3 @.@ 85 miles ( 6 @.@ 20 km ) upstream of its mouth it is 22 milligrams per liter ( 1 @.@ 3 × 10 − 5 oz / cu in ) . The water hardness of the creek 's waters 2 @.@ 90 miles ( 4 @.@ 67 km ) upstream of its mouth is 24 milligrams per liter ( 1 @.@ 4 × 10 − 5 oz / cu in ) . 
 At 1 : 00 P.M. on June 26 , 1997 , the air temperature in the vicinity of Little Catawissa Creek 8 @.@ 90 miles ( 14 @.@ 32 km ) upstream of its mouth was 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) . The water temperature of the creek at this place and time was 19 @.@ 8 ° C ( 67 @.@ 6 ° F ) . At 12 : 40 P.M. on June 27 , 1997 , the air temperature near the creek was 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) and the water temperature was 21 @.@ 0 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . At 3 @.@ 85 miles ( 6 @.@ 20 km ) upstream of the creek 's mouth , the air temperature was 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) and the water temperature was 18 @.@ 4 ° C ( 65 @.@ 1 ° F ) on June 27 , 1997 at 11 : 00 A.M. At 11 : 10 A.M. on June 30 , 1997 , the air temperature of the creek 2 @.@ 90 miles ( 4 @.@ 67 km ) upstream of its mouth was 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) and the water temperature was 17 @.@ 1 ° C ( 62 @.@ 8 ° F ) . 
 The specific conductivity of the waters of Little Catawissa Creek is 80 micro @-@ mhos 8 @.@ 90 miles ( 14 @.@ 32 km ) upstream of its mouth . The specific conductivity of the creek 's waters 5 @.@ 40 miles ( 8 @.@ 69 km ) and 3 @.@ 85 miles ( 6 @.@ 20 km ) upstream of its mouth is 86 and 76 micro @-@ mhos respectively . The specific conductivity 2 @.@ 90 miles ( 4 @.@ 67 km ) upstream of its mouth is 80 micro @-@ mhos . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Little Catawissa Creek is 833 feet ( 254 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is between 1 @,@ 360 feet ( 410 m ) and 1 @,@ 380 feet ( 420 m ) above sea level . 
 Little Catawissa Creek flows over rock of the Mauch Chunk Formation for its entire length . Most of the rest of the watershed is also on this rock formation . However , other rock formations also occur in the watershed . A substantial area of the Pocono Formation can be found in the northwestern part of the watershed and large areas of rock of the Pottsville Formation occupy portions of the southern and western parts of the watershed . Small areas of the Spechty Kopf Formation and the <unk> Run Member of the Catskill Formation are found in the northwestern part of the watershed . 
 Little Catawissa Creek flows over Leck Kill soil for most of its length . However , its headwaters are on Hazleton soil . Additionally , the westernmost and southernmost parts of the watershed are on Hazleton soil , as is the northwestern part of the watershed . 
 Little Catawissa Creek is flanked by areas prone to flooding between the point where it enters Schuylkill County and its mouth . The tributary Stony Run also flows through some areas prone to flooding and a few areas near Trexler Run are susceptible to flooding as well . Other small areas prone to flooding are scattered throughout the watershed of the creek . 
 Between the headwaters of Little Catawissa Creek and T431 , the width of the creek is 3 @.@ 0 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide . Between T431 and T435 , the creek is 5 @.@ 3 meters ( 17 ft ) wide and between T435 and the creek 's mouth , its width is 6 @.@ 2 metres ( 20 ft ) . The gradient of the creek upstream of T431 is 20 @.@ 8 meters per kilometer ( 110 ft / mi ) . The gradient between T431 and T435 is 5 @.@ 6 meters per kilometer ( 30 ft / mi ) and the gradient between T435 and the mouth of the creek is 7 @.@ 7 meters per kilometer ( 41 ft / mi ) meters per kilometer . 
 There is a flooded strip mine in the western part of the watershed of Little Catawissa Creek . The headwaters of the creek are on a mountain known as Big Mountain . The creek is a freestone stream . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Little Catawissa Creek has an area of 16 @.@ 70 square miles ( 43 @.@ 3 km2 ) . Most of the watershed is in Union Township , Schuylkill County . However , substantial portions are in Conyngham Township , Columbia County and Columbia County . Smaller parts of the watershed are in southern North Union Township , Schuylkill County and western Ringtown , also in Schuylkill County . 
 Major roads in the watershed of Little Catawissa Creek include Zion Grove Road , Little Mountain Road , and Aristes Road . Additionally , Pennsylvania Route 42 traverses the western edge of the creek 's watershed . Between its headwaters and T431 , none of the creek 's length is within 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of a road , but all of its length is within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) of a road . Between T431 and T435 , 29 percent of the creek 's length is within 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of a road , 66 percent is within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) and 81 percent is within 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . Between T435 and the creek 's mouth , 21 percent of the creek 's length is within 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of a road , 40 percent is within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) of one , and 66 percent is within 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) of one . 
 In 1990 , the population density of the upper reaches of the watershed of Little Catawissa Creek was 30 people per square kilometer . The population density in the middle reaches of the creek 's watershed was 40 people per square kilometer and the density in the lower reaches of the watershed was 31 people per square kilometer . The creek is completely closed to public access between T435 and its mouth . 
 There are large areas of agricultural land in the middle reaches of the watershed of Little Catawissa Creek , but most of the agricultural operations in the watershed are relatively small . The main areas of residential development in the watershed are the communities of Aristes and Ringtown . The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection has issued four mining permits in the watershed of the creek . All of these permits are for mining on a ridge on the northern edge of the watershed . There are a number of other land uses in the creek 's watershed . These include private forests and rural residences . 
 Little Catawissa Creek is on the United States Geological Survey quadrangles of Ashland , Shenandoah , and Nuremberg . It is managed by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission between T431 , 8 @.@ 10 miles ( 13 @.@ 04 km ) upstream of the mouth and T435 , 2 @.@ 90 miles ( 4 @.@ 67 km ) upstream of the mouth . 
 A reservoir known as the Ringtown Reservoir is on an unnamed tributary of Little Catawissa Creek . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Little Catawissa Creek is named for the fact that it is smaller than Catawissa Creek . 
 Little Catawissa Creek was historically stocked with trout from near the border between Columbia County and Schuylkill County downstream to the mouth of the creek . The creek was surveyed by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission nine times between 1939 and 1985 . The first survey was performed in 1936 . This was the first time that the creek was recommended for trout stocking . The creek was also surveyed by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission several times in the 1950s , 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s . 
 A number of bridges have been built over Little Catawissa Creek . A steel stringer bridge was built over the creek in 1914 and restored in 1939 . This bridge is 40 @.@ 0 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) long . Another bridge was built over the creek in 1930 . It is a concrete arch bridge that is 60 @.@ 0 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) long . In 1961 , a prestressed box beam bridge was built across the creek . This bridge is 47 @.@ 9 feet ( 14 @.@ 6 m ) long . A concrete slab bridge was built over the creek in 1973 and a prestressed box beam bridge was built over it in 1990 . These bridges are 30 @.@ 8 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) and 57 @.@ 1 feet ( 17 @.@ 4 m ) long , respectively . 
 John <unk> constructed a sawmill and gristmill on Little Catawissa Creek 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) west of Ringtown in 1853 . Little Catawissa Creek was used as an emergency water supply in the early 1900s . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Little Catawissa Creek is considered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to be a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery between its headwaters and Reservoir Road . Between Reservoir Road and the mouth of the creek , it is considered to be a Coldwater Fishery . The upper reaches of the creek , between its headwaters and a point slightly downstream of where it enters Schuylkill County are considered by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission to be Class A Wild Trout Waters and the rest of the creek 's length is considered to be Approved Trout Waters . The upper reaches of the creek were Class A Wild Trout Waters in 1976 before becoming Class D Wild Trout Waters in 1984 . This change was due to acid mine drainage and sediment buildup . However , the creek rebounded to Class A Wild Trout Waters by 1997 . The creek is considered to be Class D Wild Trout Waters between T431 and T435 . The tributary Trexler Run is also considered to be Class A Wild Trout Waters throughout its length . 
 Wild brook trout naturally reproduce in Little Catawissa Creek . However , introducing rainbow trout into the creek is forbidden , although they were historically stocked there by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . River chubs were historically present in the creek , but have disappeared . The reason for this disappearance is unknown . 
 Between the headwaters of Little Catawissa Creek and 8 @.@ 10 miles ( 13 @.@ 04 km ) upstream of its mouth , at T431 , there are three species of fish : brook trout , creek chub , and blacknose dace . White suckers were also observed in this part of the creek in 1976 . There are twelve species of fish in the creek between T431 and T435 , including brook trout , brown trout , and green sunfish . Additionally , numerous more have been historically observed in this stretch of the creek , but are not any more . Eight fish species , including brown trout , were observed on the creek between T435 and its mouth during a 1976 survey . The brown trout ranged from 300 to 324 millimeters ( 11 @.@ 8 to 12 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 The biomass of wild trout in Little Catawissa Creek upstream of T431 is 30 @.@ 85 kilograms per hectare ( 27 @.@ 52 lb / acre ) . This includes 24 @.@ 81 kilograms per hectare ( 22 @.@ 13 lb / acre ) of brook trout that are less than 175 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) long and 6 @.@ 04 kilograms per hectare ( 5 @.@ 39 lb / acre ) of brook trout that are more than 175 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) long . The trout in this part of the creek range from 25 to 224 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 to 8 @.@ 82 in ) . The biomass of wild trout in the creek between T431 and <unk> is 5 @.@ 08 kilograms per hectare ( 4 @.@ 53 lb / acre ) . 4 @.@ 97 kilograms per hectare ( 4 @.@ 43 lb / acre ) kilograms per hectare come from brown trout ( including 0 @.@ 98 kilograms per hectare ( 0 @.@ 87 lb / acre ) from brown trout shorter than 175 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) and 3 @.@ 99 kilograms per hectare ( 3 @.@ 56 lb / acre ) from brown trout longer than 175 millimeters ) and 0 @.@ 11 kilograms per hectare ( 0 @.@ 098 lb / acre ) come from brook trout over 175 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) long . The brown trout range from 50 to 299 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 to 11 @.@ 8 in ) long and the brook trout range from 50 to 224 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 to 8 @.@ 8 in ) long . 
 Between the headwaters of Little Catawissa Creek and T431 , there are 799 brook trout per square kilometer that are shorter than 175 millimeters and 23 per kilometer that are longer . There are 2997 brook trout per hectare that are less than 175 millimeters long and 88 that are more than 175 millimeters long . In the creek between T431 and T435 , there is one brook trout per kilometer that is less than 175 millimeters long and one per kilometer that is more than 175 millimeters long . On the other hand , there are 197 brown trout per kilometer less than 175 millimeters long and 25 per kilometer that are more than 175 millimeters long . There is one brook trout per hectare that are less than 175 millimeters long and one that is more than 175 millimeters long . There are 230 brook trout per hectare that are less than 175 millimeters long and 31 that are more than 175 millimeters long . 
 A 1997 report stated that Little Catawissa Creek was a poor site for angling . 
 Little Catawissa Creek has a diverse population of aquatic macroinvertebrates . 
 = Episode 5 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 5 " , also known as " Cooper 's Dreams " , is the sixth episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by series co @-@ creator Mark Frost and directed by Lesli Linka Glatter . " Episode 5 " features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Michael Ontkean and Richard Beymer , with guest appearances by Chris Mulkey and David Patrick Kelly . 
 Glatter has noted that the episode exemplifies the themes of longing and desire which she feels characterize the series ; she has also called to attention its careful balance between tragic and comic elements . Exterior scenes in the episode were filmed in California 's Angeles National Forest and blended with stock footage of Washington to enhance the setting . 
 FBI agent Dale Cooper ( MacLachlan ) and Twin Peaks sheriff Harry Truman ( Ontkean ) continue to investigate a murder in the small mountain town , while local businessman Benjamin Horne ( Beymer ) schemes to burn down its sawmill to further his property empire . First airing on May 10 , 1990 , " Episode 5 " was viewed by approximately 18 percent of the available audience during its broadcast ; it has received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate , and initial suspicion has fallen upon Palmer 's boyfriend Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and the man with whom she was cheating on Briggs , James Hurley ( James Marshall ) . However , other inhabitants of the town have their own suspicions : the violent , drug @-@ dealing truck driver Leo Johnson ( Eric Da Re ) is seen as a possible suspect , especially to his wife Shelley ( Mädchen Amick ) , who has found a bloodstained shirt among his belongings . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Cooper is woken early by the sound of a raucous party in the Great Northern Hotel . He leaves to meet Truman , while Jerry Horne ( David Patrick Kelly ) meets his brother Benjamin ( Richard Beymer ) to discuss the new Icelandic investors in their property developments . Leland Palmer ( Ray Wise ) arrives , disoriented and wishing to return to work , but the <unk> send him home . Cooper , Truman and Doctor Hayward ( Warren Frost ) discuss Johnson 's bloodied shirt , learning that the blood is not Laura 's but that of drug smuggler Jacques Renault . 
 Johnson 's wife Shelley is having breakfast with her lover Bobby Briggs ; the two roleplay the idea of shooting Johnson , while they toy with Shelley 's pistol . When Deputy Andy Brennan ( Harry Goaz ) arrives to enquire about Johnson , Briggs hides and Shelley attempts to make Johnson seem deeply involved in Laura 's death and Renault 's disappearance . Elsewhere , lovers Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) and Norma Jennings ( Peggy Lipton ) meet to discuss their spouses . Jennings ' husband Hank ( Chris Mulkey ) has been released from prison , while Hurley 's volatile wife Nadine is increasingly becoming mentally unwell . Jennings leaves , feeling that things are going nowhere , leaving Hurley crestfallen . Meanwhile , Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) is interviewed for a job at her father 's department store and blackmails the interviewer into giving her a position at the shop 's perfume counter — where Laura and Ronette Pulaski worked before their abduction . 
 Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) meets with James Hurley and Donna Hayward ( Lara Flynn Boyle ) at the RR Diner . They discuss Laura 's death ; Hurley and Hayward believe Laura hid a diary at her home and want Ferguson , who is now staying there , to look for it . They leave as Jennings and Shelley arrive ; Hank is seated at another table and pulls Jennings aside to asks to start working to earn her trust . Meanwhile , using a photograph from Renault 's home and the clues from Cooper 's dream , the investigators find a log cabin in the woods that they believe to be the scene of the murder ; on the floor Cooper finds a fragment of a One Eyed Jacks casino chip that matches the piece found in Laura 's stomach , and Truman finds Waldo , the caged myna bird . 
 That same afternoon , Bobby attends family counseling with Dr. Jacoby ( Russ Tamblyn ) , the town psychiatrist who also saw Laura as a patient prior to her death . Bobby is initially dismissive of Jacoby 's attempt at analysis , but once he is isolated from his parents , he breaks down and confesses that Laura had told him that she wanted to die — and that she had pressured Bobby into dealing drugs so that she could use them herself . 
 At a party in the Great Northern to welcome the new investors , Benjamin and Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) secretly discuss their plan to burn the town 's sawmill and buy the land cheaply . Leland begins sobbing hysterically when a piece of music begins , and Martell escorts him away . Meanwhile , Shelley waits at home with her gun , as Johnson arrives back . Hank attacks him beside his truck , threatening him ; Johnson returns home and lashes out at Shelley , and she draws the gun and shoots him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 5 " was written by Mark Frost , who created Twin Peaks along with David Lynch . Frost had previously penned " Pilot " , " Episode 1 " and " Episode 2 " with Lynch ; this was his first solo writing credit for the series , and he would pen a further seven episodes as the series progressed . The episode was directed by Lesli Linka Glatter , making her first contribution to the series . Glatter later returned to helm three more episodes in the second season . 
 Glatter has praised MacLachlan 's involvement in his role , believing that he fully embraced and explored the character of Cooper ; she noted that he was as devoted to the character 's comedic elements as to his dramatic side and that the crew had difficulty completing takes featuring Cooper without laughing at his comic delivery . She has also noted that although the writers and directors on the series tended to emphasize the rapport between Cooper and Fenn 's character Audrey Horne , there was never any intention to bring the characters together as a couple . 
 Glatter also highlighted Da Re 's menacing character , finding it to be a contrast to the actor 's real @-@ life " sweet " personality . Da Re 's mother , Johanna Ray , was the casting director for Twin Peaks . Glatter similarly lauded the comic performances of most of the cast , particularly singling out the " dry wit " of Beymer and his chemistry with guest star Kelly . She felt that the series struck a good balance between its humorous elements and its dark subject matter , playing its serious moments with an appropriate level of gravitas and avoiding becoming a " self parody " . She also has expressed her belief that the main thematic concern of the series was " longing " , and that most characters were driven by their desires for each other ; she particularly noted the affair between Briggs and Shelley Johnson as an example of this expressed , but secret , longing . 
 Throughout the series , scenes set in the Great Northern Hotel 's dining room — seen at the beginning of most episodes — almost always featured a convention of some sort , whether this was intended to be noticed or not . " Episode 5 " features a group of American Indian Movement members in this capacity . Exterior scenes in the woods were filmed at Angeles National Forest in California and blended with establishing shots of the Washington landscape that had been filmed to provide the series with stock footage . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 5 " was first broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company on May 10 , 1990 . In its initial airing , it was viewed by 11 @.@ 5 percent of US households , 18 percent of the available audience . For the following episode , these figures would drop to 10 @.@ 6 percent of the population and 17 percent of the available audience . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps rated the episode an " A − " , noting the scene in which Leland breaks down while dancing to " Pennsylvania 6 @-@ 5000 " as a highlight . Phipps felt that the episode advanced the plotlines of the series and the development of its characters equally well , adding that it showed Twin Peaks " wasn 't just a fleeting phenomenon but an honest @-@ to @-@ goodness great show " . AllRovi 's Andrea LeVasseur awarded the episode four stars out of five . Daniel J. Blau of Television Without Pity pointed out the sexual undertones of the episode , noting in particular Briggs and Shelley 's playing with a pistol as clear phallic imagery . However , Blau was heavily critical of Marshall 's acting , finding his performance to be a " train wreck " . 
 = <unk> shark = 
 The smalltail shark ( Carcharhinus porosus ) is a species of requiem shark , and part of the family Carcharhinidae . It is found in the western Atlantic Ocean , from the northern Gulf of Mexico to southern Brazil . It inhabits shallow waters close to shore , particularly over muddy bottoms around estuaries . It tends to swim low in the water column and forms large aggregations segregated by sex . A slim species generally not exceeding 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , the smalltail shark has a rather long , pointed snout , a broad , triangular first dorsal fin , and a second dorsal fin that originates over the midpoint of the anal fin base . It is plain gray in color , without prominent markings on its fins . 
 The diet of the smalltail shark consists mainly of bony fishes such as croakers , while crustaceans , cephalopods , and smaller sharks and rays may also be consumed . It is viviparous , meaning the developing embryos are sustained by a placental connection . Females bear litters of two to nine young on a biennial cycle , following an approximately 12 @-@ month gestation period . The smalltail shark is often caught as bycatch and may be used for meat , fins , liver oil , cartilage , and fishmeal . The impact of fishing on its population is largely unknown except off northern Brazil , where it seems to have declined significantly since the 1980s . Therefore , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has listed it as Data Deficient overall and as Vulnerable in Brazil . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Italian naturalist Camillo <unk> published the first scientific description of the smalltail shark , in an 1839 volume of Novi Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum <unk> <unk> . He named the new shark Carcharias porosus from the Greek <unk> ( " pore " ) , referring to the prominent pores behind its eyes . The type specimen , a 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) -long male from Brazil , has since been lost . This species was moved to the genus Carcharhinus by later authors . Its Trinidadian name is puppy shark . 
 The evolutionary relationships of the smalltail shark are uncertain . Based on morphology , Jack Garrick in 1982 and Leonard Compagno in 1988 tentatively placed it in a group defined by the whitecheek shark ( C. dussumieri ) and the blackspot shark ( C. sealei ) . This grouping was equivocally supported by Gavin Naylor 's 1992 allozyme @-@ based phylogenetic analysis . Alternately , a 2011 phylogenetic study by Ximena Vélez @-@ Zuazoa and Ingi Agnarsson , based on nuclear and mitochondrial genes , found close relationships between the smalltail shark , the <unk> shark ( <unk> <unk> ) , the blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) , and the finetooth shark ( C. isodon ) . The Pacific smalltail shark ( C. <unk> ) was once mistakenly synonymized with C. porosus , until 2011 when José Castro resurrected it as a distinct taxon . An undescribed species closely similar to C. porosus is known from Southeast Asia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The smalltail shark is a slender @-@ bodied species with a fairly long , pointed snout . The leading margin of each nostril is enlarged into a narrow , pointed lobe . The large , circular eyes are equipped with nictitating membranes , and behind them are a series of prominent pores . The mouth bears short furrows at the corners and contains 13 – 15 tooth rows on either side of both jaws ( usually 14 upper and 13 lower ) . The upper teeth are tall and triangular with strong serrations , becoming increasing oblique towards the sides . The lower teeth are comparatively narrower and more upright , with finer serrations . The five pairs of gill slits are short . 
 The small pectoral fins are falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) with relatively pointed tips . The first dorsal fin is broad , forming nearly an equilateral triangle in adults , with a blunt apex ; it originates over the pectoral fin rear tips . The second dorsal fin is small and originates over the midpoint of the anal fin base . There is no ridge between the dorsal fins . The pelvic fins are small with pointed to narrowly rounded tips , and the anal fin has a deep notch in its trailing margin . The asymmetrical caudal fin has a strong lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The dermal denticles are mostly non @-@ overlapping ; each has 3 – 5 horizontal ridges leading to posterior teeth , with the central one the longest . This shark is plain gray to slate above and whitish below , with a faint lighter stripe on the flanks . The pectoral , dorsal , and caudal fins may darken toward the tips . The smalltail shark reaches a maximum known length of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) , though 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 6 ft ) is typical . Females grow larger than males . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The known range of the smalltail shark extends from the northern Gulf of Mexico to southern Brazil , excluding the Caribbean islands ( aside from Trinidad and Tobago ) . Its center of abundance is along the northern Brazilian coast , off Pará and Maranhão , where it is the most common shark . This species has not been reported east of the Mississippi River in the past 50 years , despite historical evidence of a nursery area off Louisiana . The smalltail shark can usually be found close to the bottom in inshore waters no deeper than 36 m ( 118 ft ) . Off northern Brazil , its environment is characterized by tides up to 7 m ( 23 ft ) high and reaching 7 @.@ 5 knots ; the salinity fluctuates between 14 ppt in the rainy season and 34 ppt in the dry season , and the temperature ranges from 25 to 32 ° C ( 77 to 90 ° F ) . It favors estuarine areas with muddy bottoms . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The smalltail shark forms large aggregations segregated by sex , with the males generally found deeper than the females . It feeds mainly on bony fishes , including sea catfish , croakers , jacks , and grunts . Shrimp , crabs , and squid are secondary food sources , while adults are also capable of taking young sharpnose sharks ( Rhizoprionodon ) , hammerhead sharks ( Sphyrna ) , and stingrays ( Dasyatis ) . Opportunistic in habits , the dietary composition of this shark generally reflects what is most available in its environment ; off northern Brazil , the most important prey species are the croakers <unk> <unk> and <unk> naso . Juveniles consume a wider variety of prey than adults . In turn , the smalltail shark may potentially be preyed upon by larger sharks . 
 Like other members of its family , the smalltail shark is viviparous : once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the yolk sac develops into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment . Females produce litters of two to nine ( typically four to six ) young every other year ; litter size increases with the size of the female . The gestation period lasts approximately 12 months . Reproduction occurs throughout the year , with a peak in birthing from September to November . There are known nursery areas in shallow , murky waters off northern Brazil and Trinidad , where many bays and estuaries provide shelter and food . The newborns measure 30 – 33 cm ( 12 – 13 in ) long and grow an average of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) per year in their first four years of life . Males and females mature sexually at 70 – 93 cm ( 28 – 37 in ) and 71 – 85 cm ( 28 – 33 in ) long respectively , corresponding to six years of age for both sexes . The average growth rate slows to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) per year after maturation . The maximum lifespan is at least 12 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the smalltail shark is caught incidentally by gillnet and longline fisheries throughout its range . The meat is sold fresh , frozen , or dried and salted . In addition , the dried fins are exported for use in shark fin soup , the liver oil and cartilage are used medicinally , and the carcass is processed into fishmeal . In 2006 , the IUCN assessed this species , including Pacific populations now separated as C. <unk> , as Data Deficient due to a lack of fishery data . In Trinidad , its abundance makes it the most economically important shark . Off northern Brazil , substantial numbers are caught by gillnet fisheries targeting the Serra Spanish mackerel ( Scomberomorus brasiliensis ) . In the 1980s , this species constituted roughly 43 % of the shark and ray catch , but has since declined to around 17 % . This apparent decline is thought to have resulted from increasing fishing effort , the large proportion of juveniles captured , and the shark 's low reproductive rate . Consequently , the IUCN has assessed the smalltail shark in Brazil as Vulnerable , and noted the urgent need for conservation measures given that northern Brazil represents the center of the species ' range . Although the smalltail shark was ostensibly given protection by inclusion on the 2004 Official List of Endangered Animals in Brazil , fishing remains effectively unmanaged . 
 = Neuroacanthocytosis = 
 Neuroacanthocytosis is a label applied to several neurological conditions in which the blood contains misshapen , <unk> red blood cells called acanthocytes . 
 The ' core ' neuroacanthocytosis syndromes , in which acanthocytes are a typical feature , are chorea acanthocytosis and McLeod syndrome . Acanthocytes are seen less frequently in other conditions including Huntington 's disease @-@ like syndrome 2 ( <unk> ) and <unk> kinase @-@ associated neurodegeneration ( <unk> ) . 
 The neuroacanthocytosis syndromes are caused by a range of genetic mutations and produce a variety of clinical features but primarily produce neurodegeneration of the brain , specifically the basal ganglia . 
 The diseases are hereditary but rare . 
 = = Acanthocytes = = 
 The hallmark of the neuroacanthocytosis syndromes is the presence of acanthocytes in peripheral blood . <unk> originated from the Greek word <unk> , meaning thorn . Acanthocytes are <unk> red blood cells and can be caused by altered distribution of membrane lipids or membrane protein / skeleton abnormalities . In neuroacanthocytosis , acanthocytes are caused by protein but not lipid membrane abnormalities 
 = = Common features = = 
 The ' core ' neuroacanthocytosis syndromes are chorea acanthocytosis and McLeod syndrome . Acanthocytes are nearly always present in these conditions and they share common clinical features . Some of these features are also seen in the other neurological syndromes associated with neuroacanthocytosis . 
 A common feature of the core syndromes is chorea : involuntary dance @-@ like movements . In neuroacanthocytosis , this is particularly prominent in the face and mouth which can cause difficulties with speech and eating . These movements are usually abrupt and irregular and present during both rest and sleep . 
 Individuals with neuroacanthocytosis also often suffer from parkinsonism , the uncontrolled slowness of movements , and dystonia , abnormal body postures . Many affected individuals also have cognitive ( intellectual ) impairment and psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety , paranoia , depression , obsessive behavior , and pronounced emotional instability . Seizures may also be a symptom of neuroacanthocytosis . 
 Onset differs between individual neuroacanthocytosis syndromes but is usually between ages 20 and 40 . Affected individuals usually live for 10 – 20 years after onset . 
 = = Core neuroacanthocytosis syndromes = = 
 = = = Chorea acanthocytosis = = = 
 Chorea acanthocytosis is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the <unk> , also called <unk> , on chromosome <unk> . The gene encodes the protein <unk> protein sorting @-@ associated protein 13A , also known as <unk> . The protein 's function is unknown . 
 Chorea acanthocytosis is characterised by dystonia , chorea and progressive cognitive , behavioural changes and seizures . <unk> , many people with chorea acanthocytosis uncontrollably bite their tongue , lips , and the inside of the mouth . Eye movement abnormalities are also seen . 
 There are about 500 – 1 @,@ 000 cases of chorea acanthocytosis worldwide and it is not specific to any particular ethnic group . 
 = = = McLeod syndrome = = = 
 McLeod syndrome is an X @-@ linked recessive disorder caused by mutations in the XK gene encoding the <unk> blood type antigen , one of the Kell antigens . 
 Like the other neuroacanthocytosis syndromes , McLeod syndrome causes movement disorder , cognitive impairment and psychiatric symptoms . The particular features of McLeod syndrome are heart problems such as arrhythmia and dilated cardiomyopathy ( enlarged heart ) . 
 McLeod syndrome is very rare . There are approximately 150 cases of McLeod syndrome worldwide . Because of its X @-@ linked mode of inheritance , it is much more prevalent in males . 
 = = Other neurological conditions causing acanthocytosis = = 
 Many other neurological conditions are associated with acanthocytosis but are not considered ' core ' acanthocytosis syndromes . The commonest are : 
 <unk> kinase @-@ associated neurodegeneration , an autosomal recessive condition caused by mutations in <unk> . 
 Huntington 's disease @-@ like syndrome type 2 , an autosomal dominant condition caused by mutations in <unk> that closely resembles Huntington 's disease . 
 Bassen @-@ Kornzweig disease , or Bassen @-@ Kornzweig Syndrome ( see also History ) . 
 Levine @-@ Critchley syndrome ( see History ) . 
 <unk> movement disorders associated with <unk> mutations . 
 Familial acanthocytosis with paroxysmal exertion @-@ induced dyskinesias and epilepsy ( <unk> ) . 
 Some cases of mitochondrial disease . 
 = = Management = = 
 Currently , no treatment slows the neurodegeneration in any of the neuroacanthocytosis disorders . Medication may be administered to decrease the involuntary movements produced by these syndromes . Antipsychotics are used to block dopamine , anticonvulsants treat seizures and botulinum toxin injections may control dystonia . Patients usually receive speech , occupational and physical therapies to help with the complications associated with movement . Sometimes , physicians will prescribe antidepressants for the psychological problems that accompany neuroacanthocytosis . Some success has been reported with Deep brain stimulation . 
 Mouthguards and other physical protective devices may be useful in preventing damage to the lips and tongue due to the orofacial chorea and dystonia typical of chorea acanthocytosis . 
 = = History = = 
 Neuroacanthocytosis was first identified in 1950 as Bassen @-@ Kornzweig disease , or Bassen @-@ Kornzweig Syndrome , a rare , autosomal recessive , childhood @-@ onset disorder in which the body fails to produce <unk> , low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) and very low density lipoprotein ( <unk> ) . Symptoms include ataxia , peripheral neuropathy , retinitis pigmentosa and other forms of nerve dysfunction . It was first noted by the North American physician Frank Bassen , who later partnered with the ophthalmologist Abraham Kornzweig to identify and describe causes and symptoms of the disease . Affected children appear normal at birth but usually fail to thrive during their first year . 
 A second form of neuroacanthocytosis , Levine @-@ Critchley syndrome , was discovered by the American internist Irvine M. Levine in 1960 and reported in Neurology in 1964 , and again in 1968 . Subsequently , similar symptoms were identified and described by the British neurologist MacDonald Critchley in 1968 . In both cases , the physicians described a hereditary syndrome that combined acanthocytosis with neurological peculiarities but normal serum lipoprotein . Specific symptoms included tics , grimacing , movement disorders , difficulty swallowing , poor coordination , <unk> , chorea , and seizures . Patients often mutilated their tongues , lips , and cheeks . The diseases appeared in both sexes , and were usually diagnosed in infancy . 
 = = Research = = 
 Research is underway worldwide to increase scientific understanding of these disorders as well to identify prevention and treatment methods . Known genetic mutations provide a basis for studying some of the conditions . 
 = The French Democracy = 
 The French Democracy is a short 2005 French political film made by Alex Chan using computer animation from Lionhead Studios ' 2005 business simulation game The Movies . The plot centers on three Moroccan men who turn to rioting after facing different forms of discrimination . Chan , a French native of Chinese descent , created the film to convey his view that racism caused the riots of the 2005 civil unrest in France . Although Chan was restricted by shortcomings and technical limitations in The Movies , he finished the film after four days of production . 
 The film was uploaded to The Movies Online , Lionhead 's website for user @-@ created videos , on 22 November 2005 and was soon covered by American and French press . Although real @-@ time @-@ rendered , three @-@ dimensional computer animation ( machinima ) had been used in earlier political films , The French Democracy attained an unprecedented level of mainstream attention for political machinima . While acknowledging the film 's flaws , such as the grammatically poor English subtitles , commentators praised its clear political message and compared it to films such as La Haine and Do the Right Thing . The French Democracy inspired other politically conscious machinima works and fueled discussion about the art form 's potential for political expression . Some raised concerns that video game companies would use their copyrights to control the content of derivative machinima films . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The French Democracy begins with a re @-@ enactment of the real @-@ life 27 October 2005 event that triggered riots in France : the electrocution of two teenagers , <unk> Benna and <unk> Traoré . In the film , the youths attempt to hide from police in a building near an electric power station . In a televised speech , the Minister of the Interior vows to increase efforts to fight crime . Three fictional Moroccan men discuss the recent events and disagree with means used by the police , and feel that blacks are unfairly targeted . They face different forms of discrimination : overnight detention for lack of a passport during an identity check , refusal of employment and housing rental , and police brutality . Angered , the three riot using Molotov cocktails . A white family watches television coverage of the chaos , and the film ends with a dedication to Benna and Traoré , lamenting the loss of the French ideals of freedom , equality , and fraternity . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Alex Chan , 27 years old at the time of the civil unrest , was a French @-@ born freelance industrial designer whose parents were Chinese immigrants from Hong Kong . Although Chan was successful professionally , he felt that there was racial and cultural discrimination in France , based on his own previous attempts to find housing and violence directed towards him . He lived in Seine @-@ Saint @-@ Denis , a suburb of Paris , near housing projects where rioting had caused the destruction of cars owned by acquaintances . In the aftermath of the unrest , Chan was dissatisfied , stating that " the media , especially in the United States , ... linked what was happening , the riots , to terrorism and put the blame on the Muslim community " . Chan wanted instead to depict " more human " rioters who turned to violence in response to racism . According to Chan , the title The French Democracy is meant to be ironic , in that the youths express themselves by rioting rather than through the political system . He elaborated : 
 [ The French Democracy is ] a shortcut made with The Movies technology about the recent events concerning riots in French suburbs . This movie is trying to help people have a better understanding of the origin of these events , as some reasons that pushed all this youth to have such violent acts . As a matter of fact <unk> offers a sincere inside view from a French citizen who lives in one of these neighborhoods where the riots took place . This fictional documentary is strongly inspired by real events and reactions and tries to make the spectator think more about how French society could and should potentially be . 
 Although he had no previous film @-@ making experience , Chan decided to make his public statement as a film after he bought The Movies , a business simulation game released by Lionhead Studios on 8 November . After he progressed in the game far enough to unlock the desired film @-@ making tools , he switched to Sandbox mode , in which he completed the film in three or four days . Because Chan had no computer microphone , the film presents dialogue in English subtitles . Despite his lack of fluency , he chose English to broaden his audience . Production was also affected by the limitations of The Movies . Restricted to the scenery provided by the software , Chan set the electrocution deaths in a shack . The game 's Manhattan @-@ based setting forced him to approximate the Paris Métro with the New York City Subway and to include the Empire State Building in the background . Given the game 's choices for skin color , Chan needed to apply the lightest pigment available for blacks to one character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Under the pseudonym <unk> , Chan uploaded the finished film to The Movies Online on 22 November 2005 . Some viewers praised it , but others criticized the poor subtitles or the portrayal of police action against minorities . According to Libération , criticism was stronger in France than elsewhere . Lionhead 's selection of The French Democracy as a " hot pick " led to redistribution from other Internet sites , followed by coverage in mainstream media — including The Washington Post , BusinessWeek , USA Today , and Libération . The Washington Post and MTV originally created religious connotations by incorrectly labeling Chan 's characters as Muslims ; they issued corrected stories after Chan complained . In 2006 , the film was shown at the Flash Festival at Centre Georges Pompidou and at the World Wide Short Film Festival in Toronto . 
 By Chan 's own assessment , The French Democracy is unpolished . The Washington Post found " broken English " in the subtitles , and BusinessWeek deemed them " stilted and ungrammatical " . Josh Lee of PopMatters deemed the character animations of The Movies too exaggerated for the film 's serious message ; he felt that they made the film 's depiction of police brutality seem better suited for the silent film comedy series Keystone Cops . <unk> , a French Internet publication about media issues related to immigration , called the characters " très <unk> " ( very <unk> ) . 
 However , some critics felt that these problems with production quality helped to convey the film 's message . In a <unk> article , Franck Beau considered the film 's aesthetic a strong point because , having originated in video games , it completely differed from those of traditional animation and filming . He argued that the work 's power lay in its " simplicité <unk> " ( extreme simplicity ) and in the " <unk> <unk> " ( logical operation ) of the underlying video game . BusinessWeek wrote that " the combination of amateurish technique and a strong emotional message is oddly moving " , and Henry Lowood of Stanford University similarly thought that the awkward subtitles and cinematography created a sense of authenticity . Lee found a filming precedent in Mathieu <unk> 's 1995 work La Haine , also " lauded for its low @-@ budget aesthetic as much as for its expressions of rage , fear , and alienation " . A discussion panel at the AMAS ' 2006 Machinima Film Festival compared Chan 's work to Do the Right Thing ( 1989 ) and The Battle of Algiers ( 1966 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although earlier political machinima films existed , The French Democracy attained an unprecedented level of mainstream attention , according to Paul Marino , executive director of the Academy of Machinima Arts & Sciences ( AMAS ) . Based on the interest , Marino considered adding a documentary or commentary category to the AMAS ' awards . Xavier <unk> , founder of <unk> , stated that no previous machinima work had " such a clear and prominent political message " . Others further contrasted The French Democracy 's serious nature with the prevalence of gaming @-@ related references in other machinima works , such as the Leeroy Jenkins video and Rooster Teeth Productions ' comedy series Red vs. Blue : The Blood Gulch Chronicles . Berkeley stated that The French Democracy was a rare exception to machinima 's basis in " accepted cinematic and televisual conventions " . 
 The French Democracy was , according to <unk> , " evidence that ' technological innovations are being used to satisfy the thirst for public expression " , and Olli <unk> felt that the work justified further research into connections between citizenship and video gaming . Peter Molyneux , chief executive officer of Lionhead Studios , praised Chan 's " timely and poignant " work for inspiring other commentary films on American and British society and for " demonstrating the potential power and impact that these films can have " . In <unk> , Elijah <unk> wrote that <unk> Nguyen 's 2006 An Unfair War , a criticism of the Iraq War , similarly attempts " to speak for those who cannot " . Joshua Garrison mimicked Chan 's " political pseudo @-@ documentary style " in his Virginia Tech Massacre , a controversial Halo 3 – based re @-@ enactment of the eponymous real @-@ life event . Although initially undecided , Chan eventually became a professional machinima film @-@ maker . His later work includes World of Electors , a series about the 2007 French presidential election . 
 Writing for The Escapist , Allen Varney felt that the political awareness was overstated because the percentage of The Movies films that offered social commentary remained small and because the machinima and political communities were mostly separate . He argued that machinima 's outstanding copyright issues and possible marginalization constrained potential for expression . Marino and others added concerns that , although game developers had condoned machinima , a controversial film could prompt them to control machinima content by enforcing their copyrights . 
 = Gravity ( film ) = 
 Gravity is a 2013 British @-@ American science fiction film co @-@ written , co @-@ edited , produced and directed by Alfonso Cuarón . It stars Sandra Bullock and George Clooney as astronauts who are stranded in space after the mid @-@ orbit destruction of their space shuttle , and their subsequent attempt to return to Earth . 
 Cuarón wrote the screenplay with his son Jonás and attempted to develop the film at Universal Pictures . The rights were sold to Warner Bros. Pictures , where the project eventually found traction . David Heyman , who previously worked with Cuarón on Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ( 2004 ) , produced the film with him . Gravity was produced entirely in the United Kingdom , where the British visual effects company Framestore spent more than three years creating most of the film 's visual effects , which make up over 80 of its 91 minutes . 
 Gravity opened the 70th Venice International Film Festival on August 28 , 2013 and had its North American premiere three days later at the Telluride Film Festival . Upon its release in both the Telluride Film Festival in August , and its October 4 , 2013 release in the United States and Canada , Gravity was met with near @-@ universal critical acclaim , and has been regarded as one of the best films of 2013 . Emmanuel Lubezki 's cinematography , Steven Price 's musical score , Cuarón 's direction , Bullock 's performance , Framestore 's visual effects , and its use of 3D were all particularly praised by numerous critics . The film became the eighth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2013 with a worldwide gross of over US $ 723 million . 
 At the 86th Academy Awards , Gravity received a leading ten Academy Award nominations ( tied with American Hustle ) and won seven ( the most for the ceremony ) , including the following : Best Director ( for Cuarón ) , Best Cinematography ( for Lubezki ) , Best Visual Effects , Best Film Editing , Best Sound Mixing , Best Sound Editing , and Best Original Score ( for Price ) . The film was also awarded six BAFTA Awards , including Outstanding British Film and Best Director , the Golden Globe Award for Best Director , seven Critics ' Choice Movie Awards and a Bradbury Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Ryan Stone ( Sandra Bullock ) is a biomedical engineer aboard the NASA space shuttle Explorer for her first space mission , STS @-@ 157 . Veteran astronaut Matt Kowalski ( George Clooney ) is commanding his final mission . During a spacewalk to service the Hubble Space Telescope , Mission Control in Houston warns the team about a Russian missile strike on a defunct satellite , which has inadvertently caused a chain reaction forming a cloud of debris in space . Mission Control orders that the mission be aborted and the crew begin re @-@ entry immediately because the debris is speeding towards the shuttle . Communication with Mission Control is lost shortly thereafter . 
 High @-@ speed debris from the Russian satellite strikes the Explorer and Hubble , detaching Stone from the shuttle and leaving her tumbling through space . Kowalski , using a Manned Maneuvering Unit ( MMU ) , recovers Stone and they return to the Explorer . They discover that it has suffered catastrophic damage and the rest of the crew is dead . They decide to use the MMU to reach the International Space Station ( ISS ) , which is in orbit about 1 @,@ 450 km ( 900 mi ) away . Kowalski estimates they have 90 minutes before the debris field completes an orbit and threatens them again . 
 En route to the ISS , the two discuss Stone 's home life and her daughter , who died young in an accident . As they approach the substantially damaged but still operational ISS , they see that its crew has evacuated in one of its two Soyuz modules . The parachute of the remaining Soyuz has deployed , rendering the capsule useless for returning to Earth . Kowalski suggests using it to travel to the nearby Chinese space station Tiangong , 100 km ( 60 mi ) away , in order to board a Chinese module to return safely to Earth . Out of air and maneuvering power , the two try to grab onto the ISS as they fly by . Stone 's leg gets entangled in the Soyuz 's parachute cords and she grabs a strap on Kowalski 's suit , but it soon becomes clear that the cords will not support them both . Despite Stone 's protests , Kowalski detaches himself from the tether to save her from drifting away with him , and she is pulled back towards the ISS while Kowalski floats away to certain death . He continues to support her until he is out of communications range . 
 Stone enters the ISS via an airlock . She cannot re @-@ establish communication with Kowalski and concludes that she is the sole survivor . A fire breaks out , forcing her to rush to the Soyuz . As she maneuvers the capsule away from the ISS , the tangled parachute tethers prevent it from separating from the station . She spacewalks to release the cables , succeeding just as the debris field completes its orbit and destroys the station . Stone aligns the Soyuz with Tiangong but discovers that its engine has no fuel . 
 After a poignant attempt at radio communication with an Eskimo – Aleut @-@ speaking fisherman on Earth , Stone resigns herself to being stranded and shuts down the cabin 's oxygen supply to commit suicide . As she begins to lose consciousness , Kowalski enters the capsule . <unk> her for giving up , he tells her to rig the Soyuz 's soft landing jets to propel the capsule toward Tiangong . Stone then realizes that Kowalski 's reappearance was not real , but has nonetheless given her the strength of will to continue . She restores the flow of oxygen and uses the landing jets to navigate toward Tiangong on momentum . 
 Unable to maneuver the Soyuz to dock with the station , Stone ejects herself via explosive decompression and uses a fire extinguisher as a makeshift thruster to travel the final metres to Tiangong , which is rapidly deorbiting . Stone enters the Shenzhou capsule just as Tiangong starts to break up on the upper edge of the atmosphere . Stone radios that she is ready to head back to Earth . After re @-@ entering the atmosphere , Stone hears Mission Control , which is tracking the capsule . But due to a harsh reentry and the premature jettison of the heat shield , a fire is starting inside the capsule . 
 After speeding through the atmosphere , the capsule lands in a lake , but dense smoke forces Stone to evacuate immediately after splashdown . She opens the capsule hatch , allowing water to enter and sink it , forcing Stone to shed her spacesuit and swim ashore . Ryan then watches the remains of the Tiangong re @-@ enter the atmosphere and takes her first shaky steps on land . Meanwhile , NASA tracks down the crash site of Ryan 's landing capsule , and proceeds to send a rescue team in hopes of finding her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sandra Bullock as Dr. Ryan Stone , a medical engineer and mission specialist who is on her first space mission . 
 George Clooney as Lieutenant Matt Kowalski , the commander of the team . Kowalski is a veteran astronaut planning to retire after the Explorer expedition . He enjoys telling stories about himself and joking with his team , and is determined to protect the lives of his fellow astronauts . 
 Ed Harris ( voice ) as Mission Control in Houston , Texas . 
 Orto <unk> ( voice ) as <unk> , a Greenlandic Inuit fisherman who intercepts one of Stone 's transmissions . <unk> also appears in a self @-@ titled short , written and directed by Gravity co @-@ writer Jonás Cuarón , which depicts the conversation between him and Stone from his perspective . 
 Phaldut Sharma ( voice ) as Shariff Dasari , the flight engineer on board the Explorer . 
 Amy Warren ( voice ) as the captain of Explorer . 
 Basher Savage ( voice ) as the captain of the International Space Station . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Alfonso Cuarón wrote the screenplay with his son Jonás . Cuarón told Wired magazine , " I watched the Gregory Peck movie Marooned ( 1969 ) over and over as a kid . " That film is about the first crew of an experimental space station returning to Earth in an Apollo capsule that suffers a thruster malfunction . Cuarón attempted to develop his project at Universal Pictures , where it stayed in development for several years . After the rights to the project were sold , it began development at Warner Bros. In 2010 , Angelina Jolie , who had rejected a sequel to Wanted ( 2008 ) , was in contact with Warner Bros. to star in the film . Scheduling conflicts involving Jolie 's Bosnian war film In the Land of Blood and Honey ( 2011 ) and a possible Salt ( 2009 ) sequel led Jolie to exit her involvement with Gravity , leaving Warner Bros. with doubts that the film would get made . 
 In March , Robert Downey , Jr. entered discussions to be cast in the male lead role . In mid @-@ 2010 , Marion Cotillard attended a screen test for the female lead role . By August 2010 , Scarlett Johansson and Blake Lively were potential candidates for the role . In September , Cuarón received approval from Warner Bros. to offer the role without a screen test to Natalie Portman , who was praised for her performance in Black Swan ( 2010 ) at that time . Portman rejected the project because of scheduling conflicts , and Warner Bros. then approached Sandra Bullock for the role . In November 2010 , Downey left the project to star in How to Talk to Girls — a project in development with Shawn Levy attached to direct . The following December , with Bullock signed for the co @-@ lead role , George Clooney replaced Downey . 
 Shooting long scenes in a zero @-@ g environment was a challenge . Eventually , the team decided to use computer @-@ generated imagery for the spacewalk scenes and automotive robots to move Bullock 's character for interior space station scenes . This meant that shots and blocking had to be planned well in advance for the robots to be programmed . It also made the production period much longer than expected . When the script was finalized , Cuarón assumed it would take about a year to complete the film , but it took four and a half years . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Made on a production budget of $ 100 million , Gravity was filmed digitally on multiple Arri Alexa cameras . Principal photography began in late May 2011 . CG elements were shot at Pinewood and Shepperton Studios in the United Kingdom . The landing scene was filmed at Lake Powell , Arizona — where the astronauts ' landing scene in Planet of the Apes ( 1968 ) was also filmed . Visual effects were supervised by Tim Webber at the London @-@ based VFX company Framestore , which was responsible for creating most of the film 's visual effects — except for 17 shots . Framestore was also heavily involved in the art direction and , along with The Third Floor , the previsualization . Tim Webber stated that 80 percent of the movie consisted of CG — compared to James Cameron 's Avatar ( 2009 ) , which was 60 percent CG . To simulate the authenticity and reflection of unfiltered light in space , a manually controlled lighting system consisting of 1 @.@ 8 million individually controlled LED lights was built . The 3D imagery was designed and supervised by Chris Parks . The majority of the 3D was created by stereo rendering the CG at Framestore . The remaining footage was converted into 3D in post @-@ production — principally at Prime Focus , London , with additional conversion work by Framestore . Prime Focus 's supervisor was Richard Baker . 
 Filming began in London in May 2011 . The film contains 156 shots with an average length of 45 seconds — fewer and longer shots than in most films of its length . Although the first trailer had audible explosions and other sounds , these scenes are silent in the finished film . Cuarón said , " They put in explosions [ in the trailer ] . As we know , there is no sound in space . In the film , we don 't do that . " The soundtrack in the film 's space scenes consists of the musical score and sounds astronauts would hear in their suits or in the space vehicles . 
 For most of Bullock 's shots , she was placed inside a giant , mechanical rig . Getting into the rig took a significant amount of time , so Bullock chose to stay in it for up to 10 hours a day , communicating with others through a headset . Costume Designer Jany Temime said the spacesuits were fictitious – " no space suit opens up at the front – but we had to do that in order for her to get out . So I had to redesign it and readapt all the functions of the suit for front opening . " 
 Cuarón said his biggest challenge was to make the set feel as inviting and non @-@ claustrophobic as possible . The team attempted to do this by having a celebration each day when Bullock arrived . They nicknamed the rig " Sandy 's cage " and gave it a lighted sign . Most of the movie was shot digitally using Arri Alexa Classics cameras equipped with wide Arri Master Prime lenses . The final scene , which takes place on Earth , was shot on an Arri 765 camera using 65mm film to provide the sequence with a visual contrast to the rest of the film . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although Gravity is often referred to in the media as a science fiction film , Cuarón told BBC that he sees the film rather as " a drama of a woman in space " . 
 Despite being set in space , the film uses motifs from shipwreck and wilderness survival stories about psychological change and resilience in the aftermath of a catastrophe . Cuarón uses the character , Stone , to illustrate clarity of mind , persistence , training , and improvisation in the face of isolation and the consequences of a relentless Murphy 's law . The film incorporates spiritual or existential themes , in the facts of Stone 's daughter 's accidental and meaningless death , and in the necessity of summoning the will to survive in the face of overwhelming odds , without future certainties , and with the impossibility of rescue from personal dissolution without finding this willpower . <unk> occur but only the surviving astronauts see them . 
 The impact of scenes is heightened by alternating between objective and subjective perspectives , the warm face of the Earth and the depths of dark space , the chaos and unpredictability of the debris field , and silence in the vacuum of space with the background score giving the desired effect . The film uses very long , uninterrupted shots throughout to draw the audience into the action , but contrasts these with claustrophobic shots within space suits and capsules . 
 Some commentators have noted religious themes in the film . For instance , Fr . Robert Barron in The Catholic Register summarizes the tension between Gravity 's technology and religious symbolism . He said , " The technology which this film legitimately celebrates ... can 't save us , and it can 't provide the means by which we establish real contact with each other . The Ganges in the sun , the St. Christopher icon , the statue of Budai , and above all , a visit from a denizen of heaven , signal that there is a dimension of reality that lies beyond what technology can master or access ... the reality of God " . 
 The film also suggests themes of humanity 's ubiquitous strategy of existential resilience ; that , across cultures , individuals must postulate meaning , beyond material existence , wherever none can be perceived . Human evolution and the resilience of life may also be seen as key themes of Gravity . The film opens with the exploration of space — the climax of human civilization — and ends with an allegory of the dawn of mankind when Dr. Ryan Stone fights her way out of the water after the crash @-@ landing , passing a frog , grabs the soil , and slowly regains her capacity to stand upright and walk . Director Cuarón said , " She ’ s in these murky waters almost like an amniotic fluid or a primordial soup . In which you see amphibians swimming . She crawls out of the water , not unlike early creatures in evolution . And then she goes on all fours . And after going on all fours she ’ s a bit curved until she is completely erect . It was the evolution of life in one , quick shot " . Other imagery depicting the formation of life includes a scene in which Stone rests in an embryonic position , surrounded by a rope strongly resembling an umbilical cord . Stone 's return from space , accompanied by meteorite @-@ like debris , may be seen as a hint that elements essential to the development of life on Earth may have come from outer space in the form of meteorites . 
 = = Music = = 
 Steven Price composed the incidental music for Gravity . In early September 2013 , a 23 @-@ minute preview of the soundtrack was released online . A soundtrack album was released digitally on September 17 , 2013 , and in physical formats on October 1 , 2013 , by WaterTower Music . Songs featured in the film include : 
 " Angels Are Hard to Find " by Hank Williams , Jr . 
 " Mera <unk> Hai <unk> " by <unk> and Shankar <unk> 
 " <unk> <unk> " by <unk> <unk> 
 " Destination Anywhere " by Chris Benstead and Robin Baynton 
 " Ready " by Charles Scott ( featuring Chelsea Williams ) 
 In most of the film 's official trailers , Spiegel im Spiegel , written by Estonian composer Arvo Pärt in 1978 , was used . 
 = = Release = = 
 Gravity had its world premiere at the 70th Venice International Film Festival on August 28 , 2013 , and had its North American premiere three days later at the Telluride Film Festival . It was released in the USA in 3D and IMAX 3D on October 4 , 2013 and in the UK on November 8 , 2013 . The film 's United States release coincided with the beginning of World Space Week , which was observed from October 4 to 10 . The film was originally scheduled to be released in the USA on November 21 , 2012 , before being rescheduled for a 2013 release to allow the completion of extensive post @-@ production work . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Preliminary reports predicted the film would open with takings of over $ 40 million in North America . The film earned $ 1 @.@ 4 million from its Thursday night showings , and reached $ 17 @.@ 5 million on Friday . Gravity topped the box office and broke the record held by Paranormal Activity 3 ( 2011 ) as the highest @-@ earning October and autumn openings , grossing $ 55 @.@ 8 million from 3 @,@ 575 theaters . 80 percent of the film 's opening weekend gross came from its 3D showings , which grossed $ 44 @.@ 2 million from 3 @,@ 150 theaters . $ 11 @.@ 2 million — 20 percent of the receipts — came from IMAX 3D showings , the highest percentage for a film opening of more than $ 50 million . The film stayed at number one at the box office during its second and third weekends . IMAX alone generated $ 34 @.@ 7 million from 323 theaters , a record for IMAX opening in October . 
 Gravity earned $ 27 @.@ 4 million in its opening weekend overseas from 27 countries with $ 2 @.@ 8 million from roughly 4 @,@ 763 screens . Warner Bros. said the 3D showing " exceeded all expectations " and generated 70 % of the opening grosses . In China , its second largest market , the film opened on November 19 , 2013 and faced competition with The Hunger Games : Catching Fire which opened on November 21 , 2013 . At the end of the weekend Gravity emerged victorious , generating $ 35 @.@ 76 million in six days . It opened at number one in the United Kingdom , taking GB £ 6 @.@ 23 million over the first weekend of release , and remained there for the second week . The film 's high notable openings were in Russia and the CIS ( $ 8 @.@ 1 million ) , Germany ( $ 3 @.@ 8 million ) , Australia ( $ 3 @.@ 2 million ) , Italy ( $ 2 @.@ 6 million ) and Spain ( $ 2 @.@ 3 million ) . The film 's largest markets outside North America were China ( $ 71 @.@ 2 million ) , the United Kingdom ( $ 47 million ) and France ( $ 38 @.@ 2 million ) . By February 17 , 2014 , the film had grossed $ 700 million worldwide . Gravity grossed $ 274 @,@ 092 @,@ 705 in North America and $ 449 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 in other countries , making a worldwide gross of $ 723 @,@ 192 @,@ 705 — making it the eighth @-@ highest grossing film of 2013 . Calculating in all expenses , Deadline.com estimated that the film made a profit of $ 209 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Gravity received critical acclaim . Critics praised the acting , direction , cinematography , visual effects , and use of 3D . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes records 96 % positive reviews based on 306 critics , and an average score of 9 / 10 . The site 's consensus states : " Alfonso Cuarón 's Gravity is an eerie , tense sci @-@ fi thriller that 's masterfully directed and visually stunning . " On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 based on reviews from critics , the film has a score of 96 based on 49 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " , making it the second @-@ highest scoring widely released film of its year . In CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend , cinema audiences gave Gravity an average grade of A- on an A + to F scale . 
 Matt Zoller Seitz , writing on RogerEbert.com , gave the film four out of four stars , calling it " a huge and technically dazzling film and that the film 's panoramas of astronauts tumbling against <unk> and floating through space station interiors are at once informative and lovely " . Justin Chang , writing for Variety , said that the film " restores a sense of wonder , terror and possibility to the big screen that should inspire awe among critics and audiences worldwide " . Richard Corliss of Time praised Cuarón for playing " daringly and dexterously with point @-@ of @-@ view : at one moment you 're inside Ryan 's helmet as she surveys the bleak silence , then in a subtle shift you 're outside to gauge her reaction . The 3 @-@ D effects , added in post @-@ production , provide their own extraterrestrial startle : a hailstorm of debris hurtles at you , as do a space traveler 's thoughts at the realization of being truly alone in the universe . " 
 Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film five out of five stars , writing " a brilliant and inspired movie @-@ cyclorama ... a glorious imaginary creation that engulfs you utterly . " Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph also awarded the film five out of five stars . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film four out of four stars , stating that the film was " more than a movie . It 's some kind of miracle . " A. O. Scott , writing for The New York Times , highlighted the use of 3 @-@ D which he said , " surpasses even what James Cameron accomplished in the flight sequences of Avatar " . Scott also said that the film " in a little more than 90 minutes rewrites the rules of cinema as we have known them " . Quentin Tarantino said it was one of his top ten movies of 2013 . Empire , Time , and Total Film ranked the film as the best of 2013 . 
 Some critics have compared Gravity with other notable films set in space . Lindsey Weber of Vulture.com said the choice of Ed Harris for the voice of Mission Control is a reference to Apollo 13 . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter suggests the way " a weightless Stone goes floating about in nothing but her underwear " references Alien ( 1979 ) . Other critics made connections with 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) . James Cameron praised the film and stated , " I think it 's the best space photography ever done , I think it 's the best space film ever done , and it 's the movie I 've been hungry to see for an awful long time " . Empire Online , Ask Men and The Huffington Post also considered Gravity to be one of the best space films ever made , though The Huffington Post later included Gravity on their list of " 8 Movies From The Last 15 Years That Are Super Overrated " . 
 Gravity was ranked second on Metacritic 's Film Critic Top Ten List scorecard for 2013 . 
 = = = File sharing = = = 
 According to the tracking site Excipio , Gravity was one of the most @-@ infringed films of 2014 with over 29 @.@ 3 million illegal downloads via torrent sites . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Gravity received ten nominations at the 86th Academy Awards ; together with American Hustle it received the greatest number of nominations for the 2014 ceremony , including Best Picture , Best Actress for Bullock , and Best Production Design . The film won the most of the night with seven Academy Awards : for Best Director , Best Cinematography , Best Visual Effects , Best Film Editing , Best Original Score , Best Sound Editing , and Best Sound Mixing . The film is second only to Cabaret ( 1972 ) to receive the most Academy Awards in its year without achieving the award for Best Picture . 
 Alfonso Cuarón won the Golden Globe Award for Best Director , and the film was also nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Actress – Drama for Bullock and Best Original Score . 
 Gravity received eleven nominations at the 67th British Academy Film Awards , more than any other film of 2013 . Its nominations included Best Film , Outstanding British Film , Best Director , Best Original Screenplay , and Best Actress in a Leading Role . Cuarón was the most @-@ nominated person at the awards ; he was nominated for five awards , including his nominations as producer for Best Film awards and editor . Despite not winning Best Film , Gravity won six awards , the greatest number of awards in 2013 . It won the awards for Outstanding British Film , Best Direction , Best Original Music , Best Cinematography , Best Sound , and Best Visual Effects . 
 Gravity also won the 2014 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Gravity was released on digital download on February 11 , 2014 , and was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and Blu @-@ ray 3D on February 25 , 2014 , in the United States and on March 3 , 2014 , in the United Kingdom . As of March 16 , 2014 , Gravity has sold 908 @,@ 756 DVDs along with 957 @,@ 355 Blu @-@ ray discs for $ 16 @,@ 465 @,@ 600 and $ 22 @,@ 183 @,@ 843 , respectively , for a total of $ 38 @,@ 649 @,@ 443 . Gravity was also offered for free in HD on Google Play and Nexus devices from late October 2014 to early November 2014 . 
 A " special edition " Blu @-@ ray was released on March 31 , 2015 . The release includes a " Silent Space Version " of the film which omits the score composed by Steven Price . 
 = = Scientific accuracy = = 
 Cuarón has stated that Gravity is not always scientifically accurate and that some liberties were needed to sustain the story . " This is not a documentary , " Cuarón said . " It is a piece of fiction . " The film has been praised for the realism of its premises and its overall adherence to physical principles , despite several inaccuracies and exaggerations . According to NASA Astronaut Michael J. Massimino , who took part in Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Missions STS @-@ 109 and STS @-@ 125 , " nothing was out of place , nothing was missing . There was a one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind <unk> we used on one of my spacewalks and sure enough they had that <unk> in the movie . " 
 Astronaut Buzz Aldrin called the visual effects " remarkable " , and said , " I was so extravagantly impressed by the portrayal of the reality of zero gravity . Going through the space station was done just the way that I 've seen people do it in reality . The spinning is going to happen — maybe not quite that vigorous — but certainly we 've been fortunate that people haven 't been in those situations yet . I think it reminds us that there really are hazards in the space business , especially in activities outside the spacecraft . " Former NASA astronaut Garrett Reisman said , " The pace and story was definitely engaging and I think it was the best use of the 3 @-@ D IMAX medium to date . Rather than using the medium as a gimmick , Gravity uses it to depict a real environment that is completely alien to most people . But the question that most people want me to answer is , how realistic was it ? The very fact that the question is being asked so earnestly is a testament to the verisimilitude of the movie . When a bad science fiction movie comes out , no one bothers to ask me if it reminded me of the real thing . " 
 Astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson , astronomer and skeptic Phil Plait , and veteran NASA astronaut and <unk> Scott E. Parazynski have offered comments about some of the most " glaring " inaccuracies . The Dissolve characterized these complaints as " absurd " , problems " only an astrophysicist would find " . 
 Examples of differences from reality include : 
 Several observers ( including Plait and Tyson ) said that in the scene in which Kowalski <unk> his tether and floats away to his death to save Stone from being pulled away from the ISS , Stone would simply need to tug the tether gently to pull Kowalski toward her . According to the film 's science adviser Kevin Grazier and NASA engineer Robert Frost , however , the pair are still decelerating with Stone 's leg caught in the parachute cords from the Soyuz . The cords stretch as they absorb her kinetic energy . Kowalski thinks that the cords are not strong enough to absorb his kinetic energy as well as hers , and that he must release the tether to give Stone a chance of stopping before the cords fail and doom both of them . 
 By the time the first module of Tiangong @-@ 1 , the Chinese space station , was launched in 2011 , the US Space Shuttles had been retired from service . 
 Stone is shown not wearing liquid @-@ cooled ventilation garments or even socks , which are always worn under the EVA suit to protect against extreme temperatures in space . Neither was she shown wearing space diapers . 
 Stone 's tears first roll down her face in micro @-@ gravity , and are later seen floating off her face . After being pushed from her eye by her eyelid , the surface tension is not sufficient to continue adhering the tears to her jawline . However , the movie correctly portrays the spherical nature of drops of liquid in a micro @-@ gravity environment . 
 The Hubble Space Telescope , which is being repaired at the beginning of the movie , previously had an altitude of about 559 kilometres ( 347 mi ) and an orbital inclination of 28 @.@ 5 degrees . As of the release of the movie , the ISS had an altitude of around 420 kilometres ( 260 mi ) and an orbital inclination of 51 @.@ 65 degrees . The significant differences between orbital parameters would have made it impossible to travel between the two spacecraft without precise preparation , planning , calculation , the appropriate technology , and a large quantity of fuel at the time . 
 The unprofessional " banter " among the three spacewalking astronauts in the movie 's opening scene was criticized by Time Magazine 's Jeffery Kluger as being unrealistic , as well as Clooney 's use of the MMU as his personal jet pack zipping around the spacewalking scene . NASA 's spacewalks are strictly choreographed in advance to minimize movement and the use of oxygen , and as much as the " frat house @-@ like " lingo is a part of NASA lore , it is used very rarely on actual missions . 
 Despite the inaccuracies in Gravity , Tyson , Plait and Parazynski said they enjoyed watching the film . Aldrin said he hoped that the film would stimulate the public to find an interest in space again , after decades of diminishing investments into advancements in the field . 
 = Oxford Street = 
 Oxford Street is a major road in the City of Westminster in the West End of London . It is Europe 's busiest shopping street , with around half a million daily visitors , and as of 2012 had approximately 300 shops . It is designated as part of the A40 , a major road between London and Fishguard , though it is not signed as such , and traffic is regularly restricted to buses and taxis . 
 The road was originally a Roman road , part of the Via <unk> between Essex and Hampshire via London . It was known as Tyburn Road through the Middle Ages and was once notorious as a street where prisoners from Newgate Prison would be transported towards a public hanging . It became known as Oxford Road and then Oxford Street in the 18th century , and began to change character from a residential street to commercial and retail purposes by the late 19th century , also attracting street traders , confidence tricksters and prostitution . The first department stores in Britain opened on Oxford Street in the early 20th century , including Selfridges , John Lewis and HMV . Unlike nearby shopping streets such as Bond Street , it has retained an element of downmarket street trading alongside more prestigious retail stores . The street suffered heavy bombing during World War II , and several longstanding stores including John Lewis were completely destroyed and rebuilt from scratch . 
 Despite competition from other shopping centres such as Westfield Stratford City and the Brent Cross shopping centre , Oxford Street remains in high demand as a retail location , with several chains hosting their flagship stores on the street , and has a number of listed buildings . The annual switching on of Christmas lights by a celebrity has been a popular event since 1959 . However , the combination of a very popular retail area and a main thoroughfare for London buses and taxis has caused significant problems with traffic congestion , safety and pollution . Various traffic management schemes have been proposed by Transport for London , including a ban on private vehicles during daytime hours on weekdays and Saturdays , and improved pedestrian crossings . 
 = = Location = = 
 Oxford Street runs for approximately 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) . From Marble Arch , where it meets Park Lane , Edgware Road , and its westward continuation Bayswater Road , it runs east past Vere Street , New Bond Street and Bond Street station , up to Oxford Circus , which is the junction with Regent Street . 
 Beyond Oxford Circus , it meets Great Portland Street , Wardour Street and Rathbone Place and ends at St Giles Circus , the junction with Charing Cross Road and Tottenham Court Road , next to Tottenham Court Road station . The eastward continuation is New Oxford Street , and then Holborn . The road is entirely within the City of Westminster . 
 The street is classified as part of the A40 , most of which is a trunk road running from London to Fishguard ( via Oxford , Cheltenham , Brecon and Haverfordwest ) , although like many roads in Central London that are no longer through routes , it is not signposted with the road number . It is within the London Congestion Charging Zone . Numerous bus routes run along Oxford Street , including 10 , 25 , 55 , 73 , 98 , 390 and Night Buses N8 , N55 , N73 , N98 and N207 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Oxford Street follows the route of a Roman road , the Via <unk> , which linked Calleva Atrebatum ( near Silchester , Hampshire ) with Camulodunum ( now Colchester ) via London and became one of the major routes in and out of the city . 
 Between the 12th century and 1782 , it was variously known as Tyburn Road ( after the River Tyburn that ran just to the south of it , and now flows underneath it ) , Uxbridge Road ( this name is still used for the portion of the London @-@ Oxford road between Shepherds Bush and Uxbridge ) , Worcester Road and Oxford Road . On Ralph <unk> ' " Plan of London " , published in the 16th century , the road is described partly as " The <unk> to Uxbridge " followed by " Oxford Road " , showing rural farmland where the junction of Oxford Street and Rathbone Place now is . 
 Despite being a major coaching route , there were several obstacles along it , including the bridge over the Tyburn . A turnpike trust was established in the 1730s to improve upkeep of the road . It became notorious as the route taken by prisoners on their final journey from Newgate Prison to the gallows at Tyburn near Marble Arch . Spectators drunkenly jeered at prisoners as they carted along the road , and could buy rope used in the executions from the hangman in taverns . By about 1729 , the road had become known as Oxford Street . 
 The street began to be redeveloped in the 18th century after many of the surrounding fields were purchased by the Earl of Oxford . In 1739 , local gardener Thomas Huddle began to build property on the north side . John Rocque 's Map of London , published in 1746 , shows urban buildings as far as North Audley Street , but only intermittent rural property thereafter . Buildings began to be erected on the corner of Oxford Street and Davies Street in the 1750s . Further development along the street occurred between 1763 and 1793 . The Pantheon , a place for public entertainment , opened on No. 173 in 1772 . 
 The street became popular with entertainers including bear @-@ <unk> , theatres and public houses . However , it was not attractive to the middle and upper classes due to the nearby Tyburn gallows and St Giles , then a notorious rookery , or slum . The gallows were removed in 1783 , and by the end of the century , Oxford Street was built up from St Giles Circus to Park Lane , containing a mix of residential houses and entertainment . The Princess 's Theatre opened in 1840 , and is now the site of Oxford Walk shopping area . 
 = = = Retail development = = = 
 Oxford Street changed character from residential to retail towards the end of the 19th century . Drapers , cobblers and furniture stores began to appear on the street , and were later expanded into the first department stores . Street vendors began to sell tourist souvenirs on the street during this time . A plan of Oxford Street in Tallis 's London Street Views , published in the late 1830s , remarks that almost all the street , save for the far western end , was primarily retail . John Lewis started in 1864 as a small shop at No. 132 , while Selfridges opened on 15 March 1909 at No. 400 . Most of the southern side of Oxford Street west of Davies Street was completely rebuilt between 1865 and 1890 , allowing a more uniform freehold ownership . By the 1930s , the street was almost entirely retail , a position that remains today . However , unlike nearby streets such as Bond Street and Park Lane , there remained a seedy element including street traders and prostitutes . Aside from a number of fixed places on the street , there are no provisions for selling licensed goods on Oxford Street . The advent of closed @-@ circuit television has reduced the attraction of the area to scam artists and illegal street traders . 
 Oxford Street suffered considerable bombing during the Second World War . During the night and early hours of 17 to 18 September 1940 , 268 Heinkel He 111 and Dornier Do 17 bombers targeted the West End , particularly Oxford Street . Many buildings were damaged , either from a direct hit or subsequent fires , including four department stores : John Lewis , Selfridges , Bourne & Hollingsworth and Peter Robinson . George Orwell wrote in his diary for 24 September that Oxford Street was " completely empty of traffic , and only a few pedestrians " , and saw " innumerable fragments of broken glass " . John Lewis caught fire again on 25 September and was reduced to a shell . It remained a bomb site for the remainder of the war and beyond , finally being demolished and rebuilt between 1958 and 1960 . Peter Robinson partially reopened on 22 September , though the main storefront remained boarded up . The basement was converted into studios for the BBC Eastern Service . Orwell made several broadcasts here from 1941 to 1943 . 
 Selfridges was bombed again on 17 April 1941 , suffering further damage , including the destruction of the Palm Court Restaurant . The basement was converted to a communications base , with a dedicated line run along Oxford Street to Whitehall , and allowed British Prime Minister Winston Churchill to make secure and direct telephone calls to the US President Franklin D. Roosevelt . The store was damaged again on 6 December 1944 after a V2 rocket exploded on nearby Duke Street , causing its Christmas tree displays to collapse into the street outside . Damage was quickly repaired and the shop re @-@ opened the following day . 
 In September 1973 a shopping @-@ bag bomb was detonated by the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) at the offices of the Prudential Assurance Company on Oxford Street , injuring six people . A second bomb was detonated by the IRA on the street in December , injuring three people . 
 The human billboard Stanley Green began selling on Oxford Street in 1968 , advertising his belief in the link of proteins to sexual libido and the dangers therein . He regularly patrolled the street with a placard headlined " less passion from less protein " , and advertised his pamphlet Eight Passion Proteins with Care until his death in 1993 . His placards are now housed in the British Museum . 
 Centre Point , just beyond the eastern end of Oxford Street next to Tottenham Court Road station , was designed by property developer Harry Hyams and opened in 1966 . It failed to find a suitable tenant and sat empty for many years , eventually being occupied by squatters who used it as a centre of protest against the lack of suitable accommodation in Central London . In 2015 , the building began to be converted into residential flats , with development expected to finish in 2017 . 
 = = Notable buildings = = 
 Oxford Street is home to a number of major department stores and flagship retail outlets , containing over 300 shops as of 2012 . It is the most frequently visited shopping street in Inner London , attracting over half a million daily visitors in 2014 , and is one of the most popular destinations in London for tourists , with an annual estimated turnover of over £ 1 billion . It forms part of a shopping district in the West End of London , along with other streets including Covent Garden , Bond Street and Piccadilly . 
 The New West End Company , formerly the Oxford Street Association , is a group that oversees stores and trade along the street ; its objective is to make the place safe and desirable for shoppers . They have been critical of the overcrowding and quality of shops and started to clamp down on abusive traders , who have then been refused licences . 
 Several British retail chains regard their Oxford Street branch as the flagship store . Debenhams originally opened as Marshall & Snelgrove in 1870 ; in 1919 they merged with Debenhams , which had opened in nearby Wigmore Street in 1778 . The company was owned by Burton between 1985 and 1998 . The London flagship store of the House of Fraser began as D H Evans in 1879 and moved to its current premises in 1935 . It was the first department store in the UK with escalators serving every floor . Selfridges , Oxford Street , the second @-@ largest department store in the UK and flagship of the Selfridges chain , has been in Oxford Street since 1909 . 
 Marks & Spencer has two stores on Oxford Street . The first , Marks & Spencer Marble Arch , is at the junction with Orchard Street . A second branch between Regent Street and Tottenham Court Road stands on the former site of the Pantheon . 
 The music retailer HMV was opened at No. 363 Oxford Street in 1921 by Sir Edward Elgar . The Beatles made their first recording in London in 1962 , when they cut a 78rpm demo disc in the store . A larger store at No. 150 was opened in 1986 by Sir Bob Geldof , and was the largest music shop in the world at 60 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 000 m2 ) . As well as music and video retail , the premises supported live gigs in the store . Due to financial difficulties , the store closed in 2014 , with all retail moving to No. 363 . 
 The 100 Club , in the basement of No. 100 , has been running as a live music venue since 24 October 1942 . It was thought to be safe from bombing threats due to its underground location , and played host to jazz musicians , including Glenn Miller . It was renamed the London Jazz Club in 1948 , and subsequently the Humphrey Lyttelton Club after Lyttelton took over the lease in the 1950s . Louis Armstrong played at the venue during this time . It became a key venue for the trad jazz revival , hosting gigs by Chris Barber and Acker Bilk . It was renamed the 100 Club in 1964 after Roger Horton bought a stake in the venue , adding an alcohol licence for the first time . The venue hosted gigs by several British rhythm and blues bands , included the Who , the Kinks and the Animals . It was an important venue for punk rock in the UK and hosted the first British punk festival on 21 September 1976 , featuring the Sex Pistols , the Damned and the Buzzcocks . 
 The Tottenham is a Grade II * listed public house at No. 6 Oxford Street , near Tottenham Court Road . It was built in the mid @-@ 19th century and is the last remaining pub in the street , which once had 20 . 
 The London College of Fashion has an Oxford Street campus , which is on John Prince 's Street near Oxford Circus . The college is part of the University of the Arts London , formerly the London Institute . 
 The cosmetics retailer Lush opened a store in Oxford Street in 2015 . Measuring 9 @,@ 300 square feet ( 860 m2 ) and containing three floors , it is the company 's largest retail premises . 
 = = Transport links = = 
 Oxford Street is served by many major bus routes and by four tube stations of the London Underground . From Marble Arch eastwards , these stations are as follows : 
 Marble Arch , on the Central line 
 Bond Street , on the Central line and Jubilee line 
 Oxford Circus , on the Central line , Bakerloo line and Victoria line 
 Tottenham Court Road , on the Central line and Northern line 
 The four stations serve an average of 100 million passengers every year , with Oxford Circus being the busiest . 
 Crossrail , a major project involving an east @-@ west rail route across London , will have two stations serving Oxford Street , at Bond Street and Tottenham Court Road . Each station will be " double @-@ ended " , with exits through the existing tube station and also some distance away : to the east of Bond Street , in Hanover Square near Oxford Circus ; to the west of Tottenham Court Road , in Dean Street . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 Oxford Street has been ranked as the most important retail location in Britain and the busiest shopping street in Europe . The street is often congested both on the pavements , due to the large number of shoppers and tourists , many of whom arrive at one of the tube stations , and on the roadway as a result of the many buses routed along the street . 
 There is heavy competition between foot and bus traffic on Oxford Street , which is the main east @-@ west bus corridor through Central London . Around 175 @,@ 000 people get on or off a bus on Oxford Street every day , along with 43 @,@ 000 further through passengers . Taxis are popular , particularly along the stretch between Oxford Circus and Selfridges . Between 2009 and 2012 , there were 71 accidents involving traffic and pedestrians . In 2016 , a report suggested buses generally did not travel faster than 4 @.@ 6 miles per hour ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ) , compared to a typical pedestrian speed of 3 @.@ 1 miles per hour ( 5 @.@ 0 km / h ) . 
 There have been several proposals to reduce congestion on Oxford Street . Horse @-@ drawn vehicles were banned in 1931 , and traffic signals were installed in the same year . To alleviate congestion and help traffic flow of buses , most of Oxford Street is designated a bus lane during peak daytime hours , when private vehicles are banned . It is only open to buses , taxis and two @-@ wheeled vehicles between 7 : 00am and 7 : 00pm on all days except Sundays . The ban was introduced experimentally in June 1972 . It was considered a success , with an estimated increase of £ 250 @,@ 000 in retail sales . In 2009 , a new diagonal crossing opened at Oxford Circus , allowing pedestrians to cross from one corner of Oxford Street to the opposite corner without having to cross the road twice or use the pedestrian underpass . This doubles the pedestrian capacity at the junction . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 From 2005 to 2012 , Oxford Street was completely traffic @-@ free on a Saturday before Christmas , which became known as VIP Day ( for " Very Important Pedestrians " ) . The scheme was popular and boosted sales by over £ 17m in 2012 . In 2013 , the New West End Company announced that the scheme would not go ahead that year as it wanted to do " something new " . In 2014 Liberal Democrat members of the London Assembly proposed that Oxford Street should be pedestrianised by 2020 . 
 In 2006 , the New West End Company and the then Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone , put forward proposals to <unk> Oxford Street with a tram service running end to end . However the next Mayor , Boris Johnson , elected in 2008 , announced that the scheme would not go ahead as it was not cost effective and too disruptive . In response to a request from Johnson , Transport for London undertook to reduce the bus flow in Oxford Street by 10 % in both 2009 and 2010 . Subsequently , the New West End Company called for a 33 % reduction in bus movements in Oxford Street . 
 In 2014 , Transport for London suggested that pedestrianisation may not be a suitable long @-@ term measure due to Crossrail reducing the demand for bus services along Oxford Street , and proposed to ban all traffic except buses and cycles during peak shopping times . <unk> of existing traffic signals along the street , including Pedestrian Countdown signals , have also been proposed . Transport for London is concerned that in the long term traffic problems may affect trade on Oxford Street , which is now competing with shopping centres such as Westfield London , Westfield Stratford City and the Brent Cross shopping centre . In 2015 , while campaigning for election as London Mayor , Labour 's Sadiq Khan favoured the full pedestrianisation of Oxford Street , which was supported by other parties . After election , he pledged the street would be completely pedestrianised by 2020 , including a complete ban on buses and taxis . 
 = = Pollution = = 
 In 2014 , a report by a King 's College , London scientist showed that Oxford Street had the world 's highest concentration of nitrogen dioxide pollution , at 135 micrograms per cubic metre of air ( μg / m3 ) . However , this figure was an average that included night @-@ time , when traffic was much lower . At peak times during the day , levels up to 463 μg / m3 were recorded – over 11 times the permitted EU maximum of 40 μg / m3 . Because of the diesel @-@ powered traffic in the street ( buses and taxis ) , annual average NO2 concentrations on Oxford Street are around 180 μg / m3 . This is 4 @.@ 5 times the EU target of 40 μg / m3 ( Council Directive 1999 / 30 / EC ) . 
 = = Christmas lights = = 
 Every Christmas , Oxford Street is decorated with festive lights . The tradition of Christmas lights began in 1959 , five years after the neighbouring Regent Street . There were no light displays in 1976 or 1977 due to economic recession , but the lights returned in 1978 when Oxford Street organised a laser display , and they have been there every year since . 
 Current practice involves a celebrity turning the lights on in mid- to late @-@ November , and they remain lit until 6 January ( Twelfth Night ) . The festivities were postponed in 1963 due to the assassination of John F. Kennedy and in 1989 to fit Kylie Minogue 's touring commitments . In 2015 , the lights were switched on earlier , on Sunday 1 November , resulting in an unusual closure of the street to all traffic . 
 The following celebrities have turned on the lights since 1981 : 
 = = Listed buildings = = 
 Oxford Street has several Grade II listed buildings . In addition , the facades to Oxford Circus tube station are also listed . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Oxford Street is mentioned in several works by Charles Dickens . In A Tale of Two Cities , the street ( as Oxford Road ) is described as having " very few buildings " , though in fact it was heavily built up by the late 18th century . It is also referred to in Sketches by Boz and Bleak House . 
 The street is a square on the British Monopoly game board , forming part of the green set ( together with Regent Street and Bond Street ) . The three streets were grouped together as they are all primarily retail areas . In 1991 , music manager and entrepreneur Malcolm McLaren produced The Ghosts of Oxford Street , a musical documentary about life and history in the local area . 
 = 40th Infantry Division Slavonska = 
 The 40th Infantry Division Slavonska was an infantry formation of the Royal Yugoslav Army that formed part of the Yugoslav 4th Army during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 . It was raised from the Slavonska military district , and was a very large and unwieldy formation which was almost entirely reliant on animal transport for mobility . Largely manned by Croat troops , many of whom saw the Germans as potential liberators from Serbian oppression during the interwar period , the division also lacked modern arms and sufficient ammunition . 
 The preliminary attacks launched across the Drava by the Germans on 6 April were enough to spark revolts within the units of the division . One of its three infantry regiments rebelled the following day , and by 8 April the rebels had taken over Bjelovar . The division continued to disintegrate over the following days , then crumbled in the face of the combined arms assault of the 8th Panzer Division when it broke out of its bridgehead at Barcs on 10 April . A few mainly Serb remnants of the division continued to withdraw into Bosnia over the next week until a ceasefire was negotiated on 15 April . The Yugoslav Army surrendered on 18 April . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Royal Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VKJ ) was formed after World War I as the Army of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( Kingdom of SCS ) , when that country was created on 1 December 1918 . To defend the new kingdom , an army was formed around the nucleus of the victorious Royal Serbian Army combined with armed formations raised in the former parts of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire that joined with the Kingdom of Serbia to form the new state . Many former Austro @-@ Hungarian officers and soldiers became members of the new army . From its beginning , the army , like other aspects of public life in the new kingdom , was dominated by ethnic Serbs , who saw the army as a means by which to secure Serb hegemony in the new state . 
 The development of the army was hampered by the poor economy of the kingdom , and this continued through the 1920s . In 1929 , King Alexander changed the name of the country to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , at which time the army became the VKJ . The army budget remained tight , and as tensions rose across Europe during the 1930s , it became hard to secure weapons and munitions from other countries . Consequently , at the time World War II broke out in September 1939 , the VKJ had several serious weaknesses , which included reliance on draught animals for transport , and the large size of its formations . For example , Yugoslav infantry divisions had twice the number of men of contemporary British infantry divisions . These characteristics resulted in slow , unwieldy formations , and the inadequate supply of arms and munitions meant that even the very large Yugoslav formations had low firepower . Older generals better suited to the trench warfare of World War I , were combined with an army that was not equipped or trained to resist the fast @-@ moving combined arms approach used by the Germans in Poland and France . 
 The weaknesses of the VKJ in strategy , structure , equipment , mobility and supply were exacerbated to a significant degree by the lack of unity across Yugoslavia which had resulted from two decades of Serb hegemony , and the attendant lack of political legitimacy achieved by the central government . Attempts to address the lack of unity came too late to ensure that the VKJ was a cohesive force . Fifth column activity was also a serious concern , not only from the Croatian nationalist Ustaše , but from the Slovene and ethnic German minorities in the country . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Peacetime organisation = = = 
 According to regulations issued by the Royal Yugoslav Army in 1935 , the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska was to be raised from the Slavonska military district , which was headquartered in Bjelovar . The Slavonska military district was under the command of the 4th Army district headquartered in Zagreb . It was named after the Slavonia region . In September 1939 , after the German invasion of Poland , the division underwent a trial mobilisation which included a large proportion of its units . The divisional district included the regimental districts of the 42nd , 43rd and 108th Infantry Regiments . 
 = = = Wartime organisation = = = 
 The wartime organisation of the Royal Yugoslav Army was laid down by regulations issued in 1936 – 37 , and the strength of an infantry division was 26 @,@ 000 – 27 @,@ 000 men . A total of 11 @,@ 200 horses and other pack and draught animals were required to provide mobility for each infantry division . The theoretical wartime organisation of a fully mobilised Yugoslav infantry division was : 
 headquarters 
 divisional infantry headquarters , with three or four infantry regiments 
 divisional artillery headquarters , with one or two artillery regiments 
 a cavalry battalion with two squadrons , a bicycle squadron and a machine gun platoon 
 a pioneer battalion of three companies 
 an anti @-@ tank company , equipped with twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) or 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) anti @-@ tank guns 
 a machine gun company 
 an anti @-@ aircraft machine gun company 
 a signals company 
 logistics units 
 Each infantry regiment was to consist of three infantry battalions , a machine gun company , and the divisional artillery regiments were animal @-@ drawn and largely equipped with World War I @-@ vintage pieces . An artillery regiment consisted of four battalions , one of 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) light howitzers , one of 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) or 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) mountain guns , and two of 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) or 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) field guns . 
 = = Planned deployment = = 
 The 40th Infantry Division Slavonska was a component of the 4th Army as part of the 1st Army Group , which was responsible for the defence of northwestern Yugoslavia . The 4th Army was to deploy in a cordon along the western sector of the Hungarian border , with the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska opposite the Hungarian town of Barcs , between Kloštar Podravski and Čađavica , with the main line of defence along the northern slopes of the Bilogora mountain range , and divisional headquarters at <unk> Slavonska . On the left flank of the division was the 27th Infantry Division Savska opposite the Hungarian village of Gyékényes , and on the right flank was the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska of the 2nd Army , which formed part of the 2nd Army Group , with the boundary running from just east of Slatina through Požega towards Banja Luka . Border guard units in the division 's area of responsibility consisted of the 2nd Battalion of the 393rd Reserve Regiment . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Mobilisation = = = 
 As the Axis invasion began , the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska was partially mobilised , with some elements of the division still mobilising , some in concentration areas , and only a small proportion actually deployed in their planned positions : 
 the divisional commander Brigadni đeneral Ratko Raketić and his headquarters staff were mobilising in Bjelovar 
 the 42nd Infantry Regiment with two battalions was marching towards their positions near Daruvar , while the rest of the regiment was mobilising in Bjelovar and could not move due to lack of draught animals 
 the 43rd Infantry Regiment , with about 75 – 80 percent of its troops and 30 percent of its animals , was marching from its mobilisation centre in Požega towards Našice , but had only reached Jakšić , 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) northeast of Požega 
 the 108th Infantry Regiment was marching from Bjelovar but had only reached Severin 
 the 40th Artillery Regiment was still mobilising with the headquarters and one battalion in Osijek and two battalions in Varaždin 
 the divisional cavalry battalion and machine gun battalion were unable to deploy from Virovitica due to lack of animals , although on 5 April , Nedeljković had requisitioned private cars for the machine gun battalion and ordered it to concentrate at <unk> northeast of Virovitica 
 the remainder of the divisional units were at their mobilisation centres in and around Bjelovar 
 The 43rd Infantry Regiment was ordered to march east to join the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska , which was part of the 2nd Army Group 's 2nd Army . The 89th Infantry Regiment , originally allocated to the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska , was ordered to march from its mobilisation location in Sisak and join the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska to replace the 43rd Infantry Regiment . The divisional cavalry battalion did not receive sufficient horses , and had to deploy on foot as infantry . The division was without artillery support throughout the fighting because the 40th Artillery Regiment did not complete mobilisation . 
 = = = 6 April = = = 
 German Army headquarters wanted to capture the bridges over the Drava intact , and from 1 April had issued orders to the 2nd Army to conduct preliminary operations aimed at seizing the bridge at Barcs and the railway bridge northeast of Koprivnica by coup de main . As a result , limited objective attacks were launched along the line of the Drava by the XLVI Motorised Corps , despite the fact that they were not expected to launch offensive operations until 10 April . During the day , the German Luftwaffe bombed and strafed Yugoslav positions and troops on the march , and by the evening it had become clear to the Germans that the Yugoslavs would not be resisting stubbornly at the border . XLVI Motorised Corps was then ordered to begin seizing bridges over the Drava , including at Barcs . The local attacks were sufficient to inflame dissent among the Croat troops of the 4th Army , who refused to resist Germans they considered their liberators from Serbian oppression during the interwar period . 
 The continuing mobilisation and concentration of the 4th Army was hampered by escalating fifth column activities and propaganda fomented by the Ustaše . Some units stopped mobilising , or began returning to their mobilisation centres from their concentration areas . The Yugoslav radio network linking the division with the 4th Army and flanking divisions was sabotaged by the Ustaše on 6 April , and radio communications within the 4th Army remained poor throughout the fighting . 
 = = = 7 April = = = 
 About 19 : 00 on 7 April , German units in regimental strength with a few tanks began to cross the Drava near Barcs in the divisional sector . They quickly overcame the resistance of the 2nd Battalion of the 393rd Reserve Regiment , which was influenced by Ustaše propaganda . The border guards abandoned their positions and weapons and retreated to Virovitica . The 108th Infantry Regiment of the division had mobilised in Bjelovar and on 7 April was marching towards Virovitica to take up positions . That night , Croat members of the regiment revolted , arresting the Serb officers , non @-@ commissioned officers and soldiers . The regiment then marched back to Bjelovar , where it joined up with other rebellious units about noon on 8 April . 
 As the 108th Infantry Regiment was responsible for the right sector of the divisional defence , this meant that the 42nd Infantry Regiment , which was originally responsible only for the left sector , had to extend across the entire divisional frontage . During the night , the commander of the divisional cavalry battalion sent patrols towards the German bridgehead , but local Ustaše sympathisers misled them into believing the Germans were already across the Drava at Barcs in strength . The Germans were subsequently able to consolidate their bridgehead at Barcs overnight . 
 = = = 8 April = = = 
 On 8 April , the German XLVI Motorised Corps continued with its limited objective attacks to expand their bridgehead at Barcs . A German regiment broke through the border troops and approached Virovitica . At this point , the entire divisional sector was defended by a single unit , the divisional cavalry battalion , which had been transported there in requisitioned cars due to the lack of horses . Two understrength and wavering battalions of the 42nd Infantry Regiment arrived at <unk> , 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) southwest of Virovitica . 
 By noon , the rebels of the 108th Infantry Regiment were approaching Bjelovar , and were joined by elements of the 42nd Infantry Regiment and other units of the division . The leader of the rebels in Bjelovar was Kapetan Ivan Mrak , a reserve aviator . When 4th Army commander Armijski đeneral Petar Nedeljković became aware of the rebels ' approach , he ordered the local gendarmerie commander to maintain order , but was advised this would not be possible , as local gendarmerie conscripts would not report for duty . His headquarters reported the presence of the rebels to the headquarters of the 1st Army Group , suggesting that the Royal Yugoslav Air Force could bomb the rebel units . The 8th Bomber Regiment at Rovine was even warned to receive orders to use its Bristol Blenheim Mk I light bombers to bomb the 108th Infantry Regiment , but the idea was subsequently abandoned . Instead , it was decided to request that the leader of the Croatian Peasant Party , Vladko Maček intervene with the rebels . 
 Josip Broz Tito and the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia , then located in Zagreb , along with the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Croatia , sent a delegation to 4th Army headquarters in Bjelovar urging them to issue arms to workers to help defend Zagreb . Pavle Gregorić , who was a member of both Central Committees , went to the headquarters twice , and was able to speak briefly with Nedeljković , but could not convince him to do so . On the same day , Maček , who had returned to Zagreb after briefly joining the post @-@ Yugoslav coup d 'état government of Dušan Simović , agreed to send an emissary to the 108th Infantry Regiment urging them to obey their officers , but they did not respond to his appeal . 
 Later in the day , two trucks of rebels arrived at 4th Army headquarters with the intention of killing the staff . The headquarters guard force prevented this , but the operations staff immediately withdrew from Bjelovar to Popovača . After the rebels issued several unanswered ultimatums , around 8 @,@ 000 rebels attacked Bjelovar , assisted by fifth @-@ columnists within the city . The city then surrendered , and many Yugoslav officers and soldiers were captured by the rebels . When Nedeljković heard of the fall of the city , he called the Mayor of Bjelovar , Julije Makanec and threatened to bomb the city if the prisoners were not immediately released . Detained officers from 4th Army headquarters and the 108th Infantry Regiment were then sent to Zagreb . About 16 : 00 , Nedeljković informed the Ban of Croatia , Ivan Šubašić of the revolt , but Šubašić was powerless to influence events . About 18 : 00 , Makanec proclaimed that Bjelovar was part of an independent Croatian state . 
 = = = 9 April = = = 
 On the morning of 9 April , the German bridgehead at Barcs had expanded to <unk> , 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) north of Virovitica . Following up the withdrawal of the divisional cavalry battalion , the Germans seized <unk> Polje , west of Virovitica , cutting the main road to Slatina , and the rebel Croat troops at Bjelovar made contact with them . By 11 : 00 , the divisional front line consisted of the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the 42nd Infantry Regiment and a company of the divisional cavalry battalion on the right , and the 4th Battalion of the 42nd Infantry Regiment and a company of the divisional cavalry battalion on the left . The 3rd Battalion of the 42nd Infantry Regiment was held in depth . The left flank was screened by the rest of the divisional cavalry battalion deployed around <unk> . The 89th Infantry Regiment , marching from its concentration area in Sisak , arrived at divisional headquarters at <unk> Slavonska , to replace the 43rd Infantry Regiment , which had been transferred to the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska . 
 Other reinforcements included elements of the 4th Army anti @-@ aircraft units sent from Lipik , but the divisional artillery regiment had not completed mobilisation . The rebels in Bjelovar issued false orders to the 1st Battalion of the 42nd Infantry Regiment , directing it to fall back to Bjelovar . At 11 : 15 , Nedeljković arrived at divisional headquarters and shortly afterwards ordered Raketić to launch a counterattack on the German bridgehead at Barcs at dawn the following day . Nedeljković also visited Divizijski đeneral Dragoslav Milosavljević , the commander of the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska on the right flank of the 4th Army , to arrange support from that division during the pending attack . However , because the majority of that division 's troops had yet to arrive from Bosnia , all it was able to do was advance its left flank , stationing battalions in <unk> and <unk> west of Slatina . The 40th Infantry Division Slavonska spent the remainder of the day preparing for the counterattack , but were hindered by German artillery and air attacks . In an indication of the state of his division , during a visit to the front line , Raketić and his chief of staff were fired at by troops of the 42nd Infantry Regiment . 
 Elements of the 4th Army began to withdraw southwards on 9 April . On the night of 9 / 10 April , those Croats that had remained with their units also began to desert or turn on their commanders , and in the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska , almost all the remaining troops were Serbs . Due to the increasing momentum of the revolt , the commander of the 1st Army Group , Armijski đeneral Milorad Petrović concluded that the 4th Army was no longer an effective formation and could not resist the Germans . Maček issued a further ineffectual plea to calm the rebellion . On the evening of 9 April , Generaloberst Maximilian von Weichs , commander of the German 2nd Army , was ready to launch major offensive operations from the bridgeheads on the following day . His plan involved two main thrusts . The first would be spearheaded by the 14th Panzer Division breaking out of the Gyékényes bridgehead and drive towards Zagreb , and the second would see the 8th Panzer Division break out of the Barcs bridgehead and turn east between the Drava and Sava rivers to attack towards Belgrade . 
 = = = 10 April = = = 
 The 40th Infantry Division Slavonska was battered by German artillery fire during the night 9 / 10 April . Seriously depleted by desertion and weakened by revolt , it was unable to mount the ordered counterattack against the Barcs bridgehead on the morning of 10 April . The 42nd Infantry Regiment could only muster 600 men , and the 89th Infantry Regiment only slightly more . The divisional cavalry battalion was also heavily reduced in strength , and divisional artillery amounted to one anti @-@ aircraft battery . The border units , responsible for demolition tasks on the line from Bjelovar south to Čazma , refused to follow orders . Having abandoned the counterattack , Raketić decided to establish a defensive line at <unk> to hinder German movement east towards Slatina . 
 Soon after dawn , the main thrust of the XLVI Motorised Corps , consisting of Generalmajor Walter Neumann @-@ <unk> 's 8th Panzer Division leading the 16th Motorised Infantry Division , crossed the Drava at Barcs . Anti @-@ tank fire destroyed a few of the lead tanks , but after the Germans reinforced their vanguard , the resistance of the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska had been broken by noon . The remaining troops of the 42nd Infantry Regiment were either captured or fled into the hills to the south . Units of the 89th Infantry Regiment , which had been providing depth to the defensive position , began retreating south towards Slavonska Požega . Ustaše sympathisers and Yugoslav Volksdeutsche ( ethnic German ) troops either ran away or surrendered . By 13 : 30 , the hard @-@ pressed divisional cavalry battalion began to withdraw south towards Daruvar , attacking rebelling troops along their route . Raketić himself fled to Nova Gradiška via Voćin and Slavonska Požega , during which his car was again fired on by rebel troops . The 8th Panzer Division continued southeast between the Drava and Sava rivers , and meeting almost no further resistance , had reached Slatina by evening . Right flank elements of the 8th Panzer Division penetrated south into the Bilogora range , reaching Daruvar and Voćin by evening . 
 Late in the day , as the situation was becoming increasingly desperate throughout the country , Simović , who was both the Prime Minister and Yugoslav Chief of the General Staff , broadcast the following message : 
 All troops must engage the enemy wherever encountered and with every means at their disposal . Don 't wait for direct orders from above , but act on your own and be guided by your judgement , initiative , and conscience . 
 The XLVI Motorised Corps encountered little resistance from the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska , and by the evening of 10 April the whole 4th Army was disintegrating . About 23 : 00 , German 2nd Army headquarters directed the 8th Panzer and 16th Motorised Infantry Division to drive to the north of Belgrade to link up with the First Panzer Group which was thrusting to towards Belgrade from the east . At midnight , 2nd Army headquarters declared that the Yugoslav northern front had been decisively defeated , and tasked corps engineer units to consolidate bridging across major rivers . The main body units of the XLVI Motorised Corps moved forward to Virovitica and Slatina . At midnight , the corps commander , General der Panzertruppe Heinrich von Vietinghoff issued orders for the 8th Panzer Division to continue towards Belgrade via Osijek , but directed the 16th Motorised Infantry Division to thrust west as far as Sremska Mitrovica then turn south to drive towards Sarajevo via Zvornik . 
 = = = 11 April = = = 
 On 11 April , the rear area staff of 4th Army headquarters were captured by Ustaše at Topusko , and were soon handed over to the Germans by their captors . Nedeljković and his operations staff escaped , and made their way to Prijedor . Other units were retreating into Bosnia , including two battalions and 2 – 3 artillery batteries from the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska . Nedeljković attempted to deploy rear area units of the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska into a defensive line along the Una at Bosanska Dubica , Bosanska Kostajnica , Bosanski Novi , Bosanska Krupa and Bihać , and called Yugoslav Supreme Command in Sarajevo to request reinforcements . With his remaining troops , Raketić attempted to establish a defensive line along the Sava between Jasenovac and the mouth of the Vrbas . These efforts were significantly hampered by Ustaše propaganda . The German orders for the following day were to pursue the remnants of the Yugoslav Army through Bosnia towards Sarajevo , where they would be met by the First Panzer Group attacking from the south and east . The 8th Panzer Division and 16th Motorised Infantry Division faced almost no resistance as they drove east towards Belgrade , capturing Našice , Osijek , Vinkovci and Vukovar during the day . On the night of 11 / 12 April , they captured Sremska Mitrovica , Ruma and secured a crossing over the Danube via an undamaged bridge near Bogojevo . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 The following day , the northern column of the 14th Panzer Division drove via Glina and crossed the Una at both Bosanska Kostajnica and Bosanski Novi before continuing its push east . Elements of the LI Corps also pushed east , establishing bridgeheads over the Kupa . A fragment of the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska , numbering around 300 troops , which had been holding a position on the Sava at Bosanska Gradiška , retreated to Jajce via Banja Luka . When they arrived at Jajce , Nedeljković ordered them to take up blocking positions in the narrow Vrbas valley at Krupa on the road between Banja Luka and Mrkonjić Grad . The rear area units of the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska were ordered to block the road from Kotor Varoš to Doboj . 
 In response to Nedeljković 's request for reinforcements , Simović had sent a number of units by rail via Tuzla . These included a cadet battalion and a company of the 27th Infantry Regiment , detached from the 1st Infantry Division <unk> . By the time the reinforcements arrived , Banja Luka had been evacuated in the face of German tanks and an Ustaše @-@ led revolt . The cadet battalion was redirected to Ključ to block the road Ključ – Mrkonjić Grad – Jajce . Nedeljković did not have the option of withdrawing via Bugojno or Prozor as those towns had been taken over by the Ustaše . 
 On 14 April , under pressure from the 14th Panzer Division , remnants of the 4th Army continued to withdraw towards Sarajevo via Jajce and Travnik . The cadet battalion at Ključ managed to briefly delay the German advance through Mrkonjić Grad , but were overcome by tanks and air attacks . The bridge at Jajce was demolished at 23 : 15 , and Nedeljković withdrew his headquarters to Travnik . The remaining units of the 4th Army continued to disintegrate . The vanguard of the northern column of 14th Panzer Division surged forward to Teslić , with the central column only reaching Jajce . 
 Early on 15 April , the northern column of the 14th Panzer Division closed on Doboj , and after overcoming resistance around that town , arrived in Sarajevo at 20 : 45 . Before noon , Nedeljković received orders that a ceasefire had been agreed , and that all 4th Army troops were to remain in place and not fire on German personnel . After a delay in locating appropriate signatories for the surrender document , the Yugoslav Supreme Command unconditionally surrendered in Belgrade effective at 12 : 00 on 18 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals and papers = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Scribblenauts = 
 Scribblenauts is an emergent puzzle action video game developed by 5th Cell and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for the Nintendo DS . The game was released on September 15 , 2009 in North America , September 30 , 2009 in Australia , October 9 , 2009 in Europe and on January 27 , 2011 in Japan as Flash Puzzle : Maxwell 's Mysterious Notebook ( <unk> <unk> , Hirameki <unk> : <unk> no Fushigi na <unk> ) by Konami . It is the third Nintendo DS video game made by 5th Cell , the first two being Drawn to Life and Lock 's Quest . The objective of Scribblenauts , as implied by its catchphrase " Write Anything , Solve Everything " , is to complete puzzles to collect " Starites " , helped by the player 's ability to summon any object ( from a database of tens of thousands ) by writing its name on the touchscreen . The game is considered by its developers to help promote emergent gameplay by challenging the player to solve its puzzles within certain limitations or through multiple solutions . 
 Jeremiah Slaczka , creator and director of Scribblenauts , envisioned the game as a combination of solving life situation puzzles alongside Mad Libs . His vision was brought to realization through the " Objectnaut " engine created by 5th Cell 's technical director , Marius Fahlbusch . Objectnaut allowed for a data driven approach , and a significant portion of the development time was spent researching nouns and their properties , and categorizing them into the Objectnaut database . This , along with the simple art designs of 5th Cell 's Edison Yan , allowed for the team to easily add new words to the database without expending much effort to program new behavior . 
 Scribblenauts was first shown in a playable form at the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo , and became a sleeper hit , winning several " Best of Show " awards , being the first portable console game to win such praise . Reviewers believed that 5th Cell delivered on their promise to allow nearly any possible object to be created for use in Scribblenauts , but also lamented that the choice of controls in the game hampered their full enjoyment of the title . The success of the title has led to a number of sequels including Super Scribblenauts , Scribblenauts Remix , and Scribblenauts Unlimited . The series has sold over 13 million copies . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Scribblenauts is an exclusively side @-@ scrolling game controlled almost entirely with the Nintendo DS stylus , with the D @-@ pad and face buttons controlling the camera and the left and right shoulder buttons rotating objects . The player controls a character named Maxwell , who must collect objects called " Starites " to complete each level . Maxwell is guided by tapping the touchscreen , or if the player taps an object , Maxwell will pick it up or be given other options for interacting with that object , such as riding a horse or bicycle or shooting at an object if he holds a weapon . A fundamental element of Scribblenauts is the ability of the player to summon myriad objects into the game . This is achieved by writing the name of an object on the touchscreen . For example , the player can write " ladder " , summoning a ladder , which the player may use to climb to an out @-@ of @-@ reach <unk> . The player may turn the ladder on its side and set it on fire . The player may also chain objects together , such as chaining a piece of meat to a pole and holding it while riding on a raptor . 
 Summoned objects range among animals , weapons , forces of nature , famous people ( both fictional and real ) , vehicles , household objects , easter eggs of the development team , and even internet memes . However , the game does not include trademarked terms , nor potential profanity ( summoning " ass " will spawn a donkey ; summoning " cock " will spawn a rooster ) . The game includes a homonym system to offer the player possible choices between similar @-@ sounding objects , such as distinguishing between a toy balloon and a hot @-@ air balloon ; there is also a <unk> to provide close matches for misspelled words . The North American release includes support for other languages including Brazilian Portuguese , French , and Spanish , with French @-@ Canadian and Latin American variants available for words in the French and Spanish language sets , respectively . The UK version also accounts for difference between American and British English , such as the differing meanings of the word " football " . 5th Cell has stated that the limit to what objects may be summoned is up to the player 's imagination . Players , using special software , claimed to have discovered that the full list of words is greater than 22 @,@ 800 unique entries , but , in response , Slaczka said there were many more than this number . 
 The game is segmented into 220 levels over 10 themed areas , and each given a 4 star ranking based on its difficulty , with later areas featuring more high ranked levels . Puzzles are given a par for the number of objects they can summon , typically being between two and four , though the player is free to summon more , so long as there is space in the meter at the top screen ( summoning the same number of objects as the par or less earns more points ) . There are two types of levels — puzzle and action levels . Puzzle levels are real @-@ life situations ( such as having to open a piñata ) where the <unk> is awarded once the puzzle is solved , while action levels will appeal to gamers that prefer side @-@ scrolling platformers , featuring switches , spike traps , and other similar elements . Players are awarded " merits " for completing levels while meeting certain requirements , such as not summoning any weapon @-@ like object . Once the player completes a level , a silver star appears on the level selection button and a " Free play " mode is unlocked . At that point , the player is given the option to play through the level three consecutive times without reusing objects . Successfully completing the challenge grants the player a gold star for that level . Scribblenauts presents a simplistic storyline , as the developers wished to focus on engaging gameplay . The game always rewards the player with " Ollars " , its in @-@ game money , to allow them to purchase new areas , different avatars and other visual changes to the game . 
 The game includes a level editor , allowing users to share these levels over the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi system . The player can start with any level that they have already beaten from the main game , and add new objects with new game properties . These new properties can vary significantly from the normal behavior , such as having a bear able to eat a plane . 
 = = Development = = 
 Scribblenauts was first conceived in the second quarter of 2007 , near the same time that they had envisioned Lock 's Quest . Creative Director for 5th Cell , Jeremiah Slaczka , stated that they were seeking counterparts of Nintendogs and Brain Age , games that had attracted a much wider demographic than most other niche games , that 5th Cell could develop . The concept of Scribblenauts came from a combination of a previous idea he had for the DS that was similar to Mad Libs and a dream of his . An example given for the Mad Libs was that players could write a Mad Lib of a " dog walking through a forest " , and a dog would appear in a forest and walk through it . However , he realized the game would be tedious and that players would only be interested in using keywords . The dream was of being inside an Aztec temple and having to solve puzzles ; one in particular involved three paintings , with the objective being straightening them and then moving on to the next room through a portal . While he thought it was a good idea for a game , he also felt that it lacked both a hook and replayability . He debated whether this would work best on the Wii or the DS , but later decided to combine the writing element with a puzzle element to fix the lack of replayability . Slaczka realized that the concept of the game might be considered impossible by other programmers , but found that 5th Cell 's Technical Director Marius Fahlbusch felt confident they could create the required elements . The developers considered that the nature of the flexible and sometimes unforeseen solutions made the game strongly promote emergent gameplay . 
 During development , Slaczka and the team tried to figure out what they could do with the DS hardware , trying to make Scribblenauts appeal to everyone . As Lock 's Quest was thought of first , they focused on releasing that game first while beginning the development of Scribblenauts . The game entered beta around May 2009 , and had numerous play @-@ testers exploring the game . About half of 5th Cell 's staff worked on the game . It was developed alongside the DS version of Drawn to Life : The Next Chapter . 
 Scribblenauts was originally developed without having a publisher for the game . Slaczka noted that unlike other games where the developers could complete and polish a single level to garner interest while work on the rest of the game continued , Scribblenauts needed to show support for its large dictionary from the start , making it difficult to promote the game . The company was in negotiations with a publisher in the early part of 2009 , letting that publisher decide when it would be best to announce the game . Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment officially announced itself as the publisher for Scribblenauts in May 2009 . Slaczka noted that of the other publishers they talked to , they felt Warner Bros. was the best one , particularly due to their proximity to 5th Cell and their interest in the title . 
 Scribblenauts was originally titled " Wordplay " , but the team felt that this was " generic " . The title Scribblenauts began as a temporary name that would be effective for pitching the game , but as development proceeded , the team couldn 't think of a better one , so the name stuck and became the final title of the product . 
 Konami published the game in Japan on January 27 , 2011 ; this localized version features Konami characters such as Old Snake , Manaka Takane and the Vic Viper . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 The core engine of Scribblenauts is a data @-@ driven engine called " Objectnaut " created by Fahlbusch . Within Objectnaut , each object is given a set of properties , including physical characteristics , artificial intelligence behavior , and how the player ( through Maxwell ) can interact with it . Five people from the team spent six months researching dictionaries and encyclopedias to create a large database of objects within the Objectnaut 's framework , and then mapped out a hierarchy of data from this information . For example , every mammal @-@ based object in the game is given the property of having " organic flesh " , allowing it to be eaten or turned into meat , without having to specify these functions for each type of mammal they used . The Objectnaut approach allowed the team to create two distinct objects for words that may have similar meanings simply by adjusting each word 's properties in the database : " lion " , " tiger " and " leopard " while similar will behave differently and have different art assets , while the only difference in the game between " croissant " and " danish " is that the danish may be able to roll like a wheel . The team made sure to balance the abilities of the various objects that could be summoned to avoid creating an " uber character " that would act as a skeleton key for solving all of the levels , and give players more courage to try different elements . Slaczka noted that he would be frequently asked if certain difficult words were in the game when interviewed by the press , most of the time being able to respond affirmatively to these questions . In an example given by Slaczka , a " hardcore " journalist wanted twenty minutes with the game to try to stump it during the 2009 E3 convention , but , according to Slaczka , " he had a real hard time stumping it and shook my hand " after that period . 
 Designing each item required the developers to go word @-@ by @-@ word . Slaczka stated that certain kinds of words , such as cheeses , require little to no differences , besides items such as <unk> which would scare people away from it . He stated that the developers used discretion when deciding what to make look different , providing a cyborg , robot , and android , which he felt were different enough to require their own individual designs . He later stated that there was no way to test out each item and each way they interact with another item , as it was virtually impossible for them to accomplish this , using an example of an airplane being frozen , brought back in time , placing an old man on top of it , bringing it back to present time , and setting it on fire . Slaczka stated that while many games create a first level with enemies and platforms , polishing the level and moving on , the players can write any item available in level one that they can write in a later level . He commented that if players wrote " anvil " and it was missing its " heavy " property , they may be turned off of the game . They spent roughly 80 % of the development fine @-@ tuning the various items , and as such , they could not provide a preview to demonstrate the game . 
 Each of the words programmed into the game has associated art with it led by 5th Cell artist Edison Yan . The task of creating the art was simplified through the " minimal " design style of 5th Cell 's previous games . Each object is rendered as in 3D with objects acting as doll on a 2D plane . This was chosen to avoiding having to create a large number of animations for 2D . The development team had to design each AI @-@ controlled object by hand , according to Slaczka , describing how the objects moves , and what it likes and dislikes , how much health it has , and other possible characteristics . Level design focused on providing a large variety of situations , including splitting levels between Puzzle and Action types , to avoid having the player develop a limited toolbox of common words and not exploring other possible solutions . Much of the initial level development was done on paper and to explore situations not commonly found in video games , due to their vocabulary system . They ended up selecting more than a hundred levels out of over seven hundred they had generated internally for the game . Both Merits and Ollars were added to reward the player for completion , with Slaczka comparing these to Xbox Live Achievements . 
 The game primarily uses the touchscreen to control Maxwell and other objects ; the developers considered using the directional pad of the DS but realized that they would still need to rely on the touchscreen for certain actions and thus focused most of the game 's controls through that interface . The game includes 5th Cell 's own handwriting recognition system for writing down objects which Slaczka considered to be better than Nintendo 's own system for Brain Age . The team included a virtual keyboard in addition to this system knowing that even " the human brain can 't understand chicken scratch " . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Players who pre @-@ ordered the game at GameStop and EB Games in the United States , Canada , and Australia received a replica of Maxwell 's " rooster hat " , a term coined by Destructoid according to Slaczka . The game was launched by a special event at the Nintendo World Store in New York City on September 13 , 2009 , with Slaczka and other 5th Cell developers on hand for the event . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 The game was well received at the 2009 E3 Convention and was considered the " sleeper hit " of the show . Scribblenauts is the first portable video game in history to win " Best of Show " awards for E3 from any major gaming media outlet . The game was named " Best Original Game " and " Best Handheld Game " by the Game Critics Awards . Scribblenauts was named the overall " Best of Show " by Gamespot , Gamespy , and IGN , in addition to other awards . 1UP.com named Scribblenauts their E3 's " Most Innovative " title . X @-@ Play gave the game its E3 " Best Original Game " and " Best Handheld Game " awards . Ars Technica considered the game as the show 's " Most Pleasant Surprise " . Joystiq performed a ten @-@ word test of the game , and found only one word , " <unk> " , was not yet present in the game , but were promised it would be in the final version . Part of the success at E3 was considered partially due to the inclusion of then @-@ recent Keyboard Cat Internet meme , which led to a grassroots @-@ type excitement about the game at the convention . Adam Sessler of G4 TV believed that Scribblenauts 's E3 success was from being a small but successful game from a small company in contrast to numerous other premier titles from other major developers and publishers that have become standard for the convention , such that the uniqueness of everything about the game made it the standout title of the show . Scribblenauts was given a much more predominate display in Warner Bros. Interactive 's booth at the next major convention , the 2009 Comic @-@ Con International . IGN listed Scribblenauts in a preview of Nintendo DS games in 2009 , labeling it as one of their top picks for the year . They described it as " quite possibly one of the system 's most ambitious designs yet . " 
 One example of the possibilities of Scribblenauts that led to further attention to the game are given in the ESRB 's attempt to describe the " cartoon violence " and " comic mischief " within the game as to grant it an " E10 + " rating . The ESRB 's description includes possible examples of the game 's level of violence as " a club can be used to hit an animal ; steak can be attached to a baby to attract lions ; rockets can be lobbed at a man " . In a post at <unk> within a thread dedicated to the game , user " Feep " relayed the experience of discovering during E3 that he was able to go back in time with a time machine to collect a dinosaur in order to defeat an army of robot zombies that could not be defeated with regular weapons . The story , as memorialized as " Post 217 " , has led to 5th Cell artist Edison Yan creating a desktop wallpaper image of the story , in appreciation of the positive fan response to the game , and the terms " Post Two One Seven " , " Feep " , and " <unk> " have been included as summonable objects in the game . Slaczka credits the word @-@ of @-@ mouth popularity of " Post 217 " for part of the game 's success at E3 , and noted that he had contacted Feep to gain his permission to include " Feep " ( appearing as a robot zombie ) within the game . The <unk> forums proceeded to expand on their praise for the game by creating a series of avatars of video game and other related characters ( which will not otherwise appear in the game due to trademark issues ) for their forums inspired by Yan 's art design , and even some of the members that created the avatars were contacted to work in the second game , Super Scribblenauts . Yan himself has drawn several more avatars in the same style for other games such as Street Fighter II and Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Scribblenauts was found by reviewers to live up to the premise that the game was built on the ability to bring about nearly any object imagined into the game . John Walker of Eurogamer considered the game " an incredible achievement " , with its word database " so utterly complete in its collection of everything ever in the universe " and its <unk> on these terms . Craig Harris of IGN asserted that " the developers fully deliver on [ the ] promise " of allowing player to summon nearly any imagined object , and , based on the core game alone , is an " incredibly versatile Nintendo DS experience " . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica praises the game as " undeniably new and impressive " and urged players to support games that take risks with their innovation . Ray Barnholt of 1UP.com noted that while the game " isn 't exactly the be @-@ all end @-@ all videogame " that it received prior to release , the game remains " unmissable " due to its sheer novelty value . The game 's feature of forcing the player to consider different solutions when replaying levels was seen by Anthony Gallegos of Gamespy as a " really clever way to encourage replayability while subtly upping the challenge " . 
 However , reviewers complained about the game 's poor controls , to the point that the implementation " almost kills a fantastic game " , according to IGN 's Harris . Reviews specifically commented how the touch screen is used both to manipulate the objects placed in the game and to move Maxwell ; this would result in inadvertently having Maxwell walk to his death or to disrupt a delicately prepared arrangement of objects prior to being ready to move him . Craig Harris of IGN notes that while one can direct Maxwell indirectly , the character would often fail to avoid or overcome simple obstacles , similar to troop movements in real @-@ time strategy games , such that overcoming these issues requires a significant amount of precise controls by the player . It was suggested that while it was understood why 5th Cell opted to use the touchscreen in this manner to avoid too much flipping between the stylus and face @-@ button controls , they would have appreciated the option for customizing the controls . The decision to use the touch screen controls was described by Walker as " possibly the most wildly stupid design decision of all time " , and that if the movement controls were mapped to the face buttons , the game would have been a " beautiful thing " . Walker also questioned the choice to have the game 's camera snap back to Maxwell as soon as the controls for it were released by the player , as it made it both difficult to set up objects that were off @-@ screen from Maxwell , and to watch the results of certain interactions , such as fights between computer @-@ controlled characters , that occurred off @-@ screen . 
 When it is possible to connect objects to other objects , reviewers found that finding the connection points to be difficult , and would often trigger Maxwell to move . Barnholt described the entire game as feeling like a prototype with its odd physics , and not as polished as 5th Cell 's previous games , though acknowledged the overall game is still an impressive feat for the small development team . IGN 's Ryan Geddes criticized the game 's poor controls and physics , demanding patience to overcome , and raised concerns that the title was rushed to market after its overwhelming positive response from the E3 convention . In a postmortem , <unk> Cell 's co @-@ founder Joseph <unk> stated that they were aware that the controls would take " a big hit " from game reviewers , and attempted to work in a face @-@ button control scheme , but would have not been able to complete it within the deadline set by their self @-@ funded schedule . <unk> further noted that they did not spend as much time on the stylus controls earlier in development , and would have considered sacrificing another feature , like the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi , to improve them . 
 Reviewers also identified some unexpected behavior from some objects or combinations of them , such as attempting to direct a non @-@ player character in picking up an object , leading to an inconsistency in the difficulty of the various puzzles . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica , in calling Scribblenauts " a frustrating , often maddening game " , described that he often encounters puzzles that , after trying several solutions that should have worked by common sense , he eventually happened upon a less logical solution that worked . Walker considered the puzzles range " between uninspired and simple and frustratingly obscure and fiddly " . Many critics experienced that after getting stumped on a puzzle , they would often resort to playing around in the free play mode . Edge magazine identified that the free play mode was more enjoyable as it masked the problems with controls , physics , and the general structure of the puzzle game that followed it , and considered what improvements in these modes could be made to create an experience closer to that of LittleBigPlanet . In particular for the action levels , reviewers found that they would be less likely to explore alternate solutions and fall into the pattern of using the same set of objects , making these levels repetitive towards the end . On the other hand , the puzzle levels were well @-@ received ; Andrew Reiner of Game Informer stated the time spent while solving the puzzle levels was when his " creative juices were joyously sapped " . The presence of the " Ollars " currency system allows players to skip levels they found difficult . <unk> also noted that with some puzzles , the game is often better played with others , including young children , as the combination of imaginative ideas will likely eventually stumble upon a solution . Simon Parkin of Game Set Watch agreed , believing the game is best enjoyed when one thinks like a child as " free of the dry , efficient logic of adulthood , a child ’ s imagination also opens the game up in ways beyond most adults ’ reach " . Seth Schiesel of the New York Times considers the ultimate experience of the game a let @-@ down after the E3 hype due to the controls and obfuscation of the puzzles , and though it was not a " great game " , he considers the concept a " great idea " that can be built upon for a possible sequel . 
 According to the NPD Group , Scribblenauts sold 194 @,@ 000 units in the United States during September 2009 , following Mario & Luigi : Bowser 's Inside Story and Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days in top Nintendo DS sales . The game also showed strong sales during December 2009 , becoming the 16th best selling game of that month in North America . By February 2010 , the game had sold more than one million units worldwide . It was the 5th best @-@ selling Nintendo DS game for 2009 in North America and the 1st best selling 3rd party game on DS . 
 Time named Scribblenauts the 7th best video game of 2009 . Scribblenauts won the " Outstanding Innovation in Gaming " , " Portable Game of the Year " , and " Outstanding Achievement in Portable Game Design " awards , and was nominated for the " Casual Game of the Year " award for the 13th Annual Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . The game won " Innovation " and " Best Handheld Game " at the 10th annual Game Developers Choice Awards . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 In May 2013 , Charles Schmidt and Christopher Orlando Torres , the creators of the Keyboard Cat and Nyan Cat characters respectively , jointly sued 5th Cell and Warner Bros. for copyright infringement and trademark infringement for the appearances of these characters without permission across Scribblenauts and its sequels . Schmidt and Torres have both registered copyrights on their characters and have pending trademark applications on the names . The case was settled out of court , with Warner Bros. officially licensing the two cat characters for use in the game . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 = = = Super Scribblenauts = = = 
 A Nintendo DS sequel to Scribblenauts titled Super Scribblenauts was released on October 12 , 2010 . In addition to addressing issues with the control scheme , Super Scribblenauts includes a larger vocabulary including the use of adjectives to modify nouns , influencing the objects ' behavior . 
 = = = Scribblenauts Remix = = = 
 Scribblenauts Remix , a version of Scribblenauts for the iOS platform , was released by Warner Bros. Interactive on October 12 , 2011 . Ported to the platform by developers Iron Galaxy , the iOS version provides forty levels from both Scribblenauts and its sequel , along with ten new levels for the iOS . The mechanics of the game are based on Super Scribblenauts , allowing for the use of adjectives in addition to nouns . The game uses built @-@ in features of iOS , such as the touch keyboard , and was released simultaneously with iOS version 5 , incorporating new features such as cloud storage to play the game across multiple devices . An Android version was released on June 26 , 2013 . 
 = = = Scribblenauts Unlimited = = = 
 A fourth title , Scribblenauts Unlimited , was released for Wii U , PC and Nintendo 3DS on November 13 , 2012 . The game features multiple worlds which Maxwell must find out how to help various non @-@ player characters to gain Starites , using the extended vocabulary abilities of Super Scribblenauts to solve puzzles . An Android version was released on December 15 , 2015 . 
 = = = Scribblenauts Unmasked : A DC Comics Adventure = = = 
 A fifth game in the franchise , Scribblenauts Unmasked : A DC Comics Adventure , was announced in development for Wii U , PC and Nintendo 3DS , featuring over 2000 characters from the DC Comics universe . The game was released on September 24 , 2013 . 
 = = = Scribblenauts : Fighting Words = = = 
 A sixth game in the series , titled Scribblenauts : Fighting Words , was in development for iOS since 2014 , but was cancelled in 2016 after 5th Cell laid off 45 employees , including lead animator Tim Borrelli . 
 = Cockiness ( Love It ) = 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna , from her sixth studio album Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . The song was written by Rihanna , Candice Pillay , D. Abernathy and Shondrae Crawford , with production helmed by Mr. Bangladesh . Conceptualized by Mr. Bangladesh , the producer revealed in an interview with MTV that the song had undergone many different versions before the final cut was included on the album . He stated that while he was writing and developing the song , Rihanna was the principal artist whom he wanted to record it . 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) " is a dubstep and dancehall track . Instrumentation is provided by vocal whoops , drums and horns . The lyrics of the song revolve around declaring the singer 's desire for sex . " Cockiness ( Love It ) " received mixed reviews from music critics . Whilst some praised the song 's memorability and compositional structure , others criticized its overtly sexual lyrical content . Upon the release of Talk That Talk , the song charted in lower regions on the singles charts in South Korea , the United Kingdom , and the United States . 
 = = Background and conception = = 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) " was written by Candice Pillay , D. Abernathy , Shondrae Crawford and Robyn Fenty , with production helmed by Crawford under his stage name Mr. Bangladesh . In an interview with MTV , Mr. Bangladesh revealed that Rihanna was the principal artist who he wanted to record " Cockiness ( Love It ) " . The producer continued to say that the song had undergone " many different guises " before the final version including on Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) , saying " ' Cockiness ' , it 's layers of things I had sampled for a long time , never really messed with it too much . " Mr. Bangladesh continued to describe " Cockiness ( Love It ) " ' s development and song @-@ writing process , saying : 
 I was in LA , and I had just pulled it out , chopped it up , made it a beat . My artist Candice Pillay , my other writers , Dem Jointz , they wrote the song . It wasn 't ' Cockiness ' at first , it was something else . They had the ' I love it ' part . ... [ They ] came up with that part first , and that wasn 't even on that track . It was just an idea . I was going to make a whole new beat out of it , what they wrote to it that day , it wasn 't really all the way done . A couple days later , they revisited it and came up with the ' Cockiness ' . 
 After revealing that the song was finished , Mr. Bangladesh stated that he wanted to wait until the right artist came along to record the song . He later decided that it would be Rihanna , saying , " I was like , ' That 's dope . That 's Rihanna all day ' . They sent the song back , and I finished producing it . I put the ' I love it ' on it that they had already had ... She loved it , and that 's what it was . " 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 As a dubstep and dancehall song , " Cockiness ( Love It ) " features dancehall stylised vocals and a rap bridge by Rihanna . Claire Suddath of Time Entertainment noted that the speed in which Rihanna delivers her vocal is so fast that it blends in with the composition , which she wrote " becomes the basis for the beat . " The instrumentation of " Cockiness ( Love It ) " consists of vocal whoops , cracking drums and bawling horns . 
 Throughout the song , Rihanna sings in a taunting nature , taking pleasure in being able to tease the listener . T 'Cha Dunlevy of The Montreal Gazette compared Rihanna 's " [ taunting ] " vocals in the lyrics “ Suck my cockiness / Lick my persuasion " to the style in which Britney Spears sings on her 2009 single " If U Seek Amy " ( Circus , 2008 ) . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine noted that Rihanna 's vocals in the lyrics " I love it , I love it , I love it when you eat it " offer " coos " about wanting sex , whilst sarcastically writing that " we 're pretty sure she 's not talking about the chicken pot pie she left for dinner . " James Montgomery of MTV noted that the lyrics " Suck my cockiness / Lick my persuasion " , are , in his opinion , the best " come @-@ on " line of 2011 alongside Lady Gaga 's " Heavy Metal Lover " ( Born This Way , 2011 ) lyrics " I want your whiskey mouth / All over my blond south " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics . Andy Kellman of Allmusic praised the song and its memorability , writing " ' Cockiness ( Love It ) , ' [ is ] one of the most hypnotic and wicked beats of the last decade " . Priya Elan of NME described the lyrics " Suck my cockiness , [ lick ] my persuasion " as " cringey " , but complimented the song 's compositional structure , writing that it provides a " genuine elastic thrill , twisting into all sorts of jaw @-@ dropping musical shapes " . Randell Roberts of the Los Angeles Times described " Cockiness ( Love It ) " and another track from the album , " Birthday Cake " , as the " breast and booty " of Talk That Talk but noted that they failed to capture the raunchiness that they set out to achieve . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly also wrote that " Cockiness ( Love It ) " and " Birthday Cake " were the most provocative songs on the album , describing them as " I @-@ like @-@ it @-@ rough tracks " , but criticized them for being album fillers designed to get the listener out of the bedroom and on to the dance floor . 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that Rihanna appeared to be channelling Swedish singer @-@ songwriter and rapper Neneh Cherry on " Cockiness ( Love It ) " in a " pseudo @-@ melodic " impersonation . Caramanica continued to praise the song and called it a " triumph " , writing that the singer " [ eases ] out come @-@ ons as if she were lapping up milk " . Despite raising concerns for younger audiences with regard to the song 's overt sexual lyrics , a reviewer for Flavour magazine praised Mr. Bangladesh 's production on " Cockiness ( Love It ) . Pip Ellwood of Entertainment @-@ Focus noted that " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , along with " Birthday Cake " , " leave you under no misunderstanding that Rihanna is as sexual as she ’ s ever been throughout her career . " Arwa Haider of Metro wrote that the song is " predictably filthy " . Nathan S. of DJ Booth noted that " Cockiness ( Love It ) " is " by far the album ’ s most explicit offering , " and listed the song , along with " Watch n ' Learn " as his top two songs from Talk That Talk . 
 Lindsay Zoladz of Pitchfork Media was critical of the song , writing " Rihanna 's always been singing about sex – she 's just never shown such an unfortunate proclivity for cheesy lyrics and dessert metaphors . ' Suck my cockiness / Lick my persuasion , ' [ Rihanna ] commands on the embarrassingly literal ' Cockiness ( Love It ) ' , hoping the boldness of the delivery will distract you from thinking about what a clunky line it is ( it won 't , though Bangladesh 's beats might ) . " <unk> Nguyen of The A.V. Club commented that although Rihanna evokes a " raunchy " appeal during the verses , he criticized the singer for providing " stony , <unk> [ vocals ] . " Simon Price of The Independent shared the same opinion as Nguyen with regard to Rihanna 's vocal performance , writing , " It 's a shame that [ Cockiness ( Love It ) ] , like every Rihanna vocal , is delivered in a voice which sounds as bored as a sex @-@ line worker filing her nails . " Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail labelled the song as " hardly subtle " as Rihanna asks the listener to be her " sex slave " . Mike Diver for the BBC was critical of the song 's inclusion on the album , writing " A forgettable vocal from Jay @-@ Z on the title @-@ track foreshadows an awful exercise in quasi @-@ erotic wordplay on Cockiness ( Love It ) . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of Talk That Talk , " Cockiness ( Love It ) " debuted on multiple world charts . The song debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 62 on November 26 , 2011 , with sales of 6 @,@ 918 digital downloads . In the United Kingdom , " Cockiness ( Love It ) " debuted at number 33 on the UK R & B Chart on November 27 , 2011 . It also debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 121 in the chart issue December 3 , 2011 . In the United States , the song debuted on the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 17 in the chart issue December 10 , 2011 . The song failed to enter the Billboard 's Hot 100 . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Rihanna performed " Cockiness ( Love It ) " for the first time at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 , as the fourth song on the set list . She also performed the song at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards which placed on September 6 when she opened the award show alongside ASAP Rocky and closed her performance with " We Found Love " . The song was later included as part of the setlist on her Diamonds World Tour during the first act . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Album version 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) " – 2 : 58 
 Digital remix single 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) [ Remix ] " ( featuring ASAP Rocky ) – 3 : 39 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Sofitel Paris Le Faubourg , Room 538 . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Remix = = 
 " Cockiness ( Love It ) " was officially remixed featuring a guest appearance from American rapper and music video director ASAP Rocky , rapping the first verse . The song was digitally released on September 7 , 2012 , as the sixth and final single from Talk That Talk . On September 4 , 2012 , via her Twitter account Rihanna streamed the official remix of " Cockiness ( Love It ) " through her MTV page . On September 6 , 2012 , Rihanna and ASAP Rocky performed the remix at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards in a medley with " We Found Love " . 
