 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The single failed to attain chart success . It peaked at number two on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . The remix has sold 54 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Leigh Woods National Nature Reserve = 
 Leigh Woods is a 2 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) area of woodland on the south @-@ west side of the Avon Gorge , close to the Clifton Suspension Bridge , within North Somerset opposite the English city of Bristol and north of the Ashton Court estate , of which it formed a part . Stokeleigh Camp , a hillfort thought to have been occupied from the third century BC to the first century AD and possibly also in the Middle Ages , lies within the reserve on the edge of the Nightingale Valley . On the bank of the Avon , within the reserve , are quarries for limestone and celestine which were worked in the 18th and 19th centuries are now derelict . 
 In 1909 part of the woodland was donated to the National Trust by George Alfred Wills , to prevent development of the city beside the gorge following the building of the Leigh Woods suburb . Areas not owned by the National Trust have since been taken over by the Forestry Commission . Rare trees include multiple species of Sorbus with at least nine native and four imported species . Bristol rockcress ( Arabis scabra ) which is unique to the Avon Gorge can be seen flowering in April ; various species of orchids and western spiked speedwell ( Veronica spicata ) are common in June and July . It is a national nature reserve and is included in the Avon Gorge Site of Special Scientific Interest , 
 = = Topography = = 
 The woods , which cover an area of 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , are on a ridge which mainly consists of limestone , with some sandstone which runs from Clifton to Clevedon , 10 miles ( 16 km ) away on the Bristol Channel coast . At the southern end of the woods is Nightingale Valley ( one of several thus named in the area ) , a dry valley which is cut into the side of the gorge . Its area slopes from the highest point nearly opposite the north gate of Ashton Court to the River Avon beside the western buttress of the Clifton Suspension Bridge . The woods are on the Monarch 's Way long @-@ distance footpath . 
 = = History = = 
 Within Leigh Woods is Stokeleigh Camp , a hill fort thought to have been occupied from the third century BC to the first century AD and also in the Middle Ages . It is situated on a promontory , bounding the north flank of the Nightingale Valley and occupying around 7 @.@ 5 acres ( 3 @.@ 0 ha ) . Stokeleigh Camp is thought to have been occupied from the late pre @-@ Roman Iron Age , when it was in the area controlled by the Dobunni . Archaeological investigations suggest during the 1st century Belgae tribes may have been present with some of the pottery showing the influence of the Durotriges . There may have been a break in occupation before reuse in the middle to late 2nd century . In addition to the pottery recovered a possible coin of Gallienus dating from his reign between 253 and 268 has been recovered . An iron @-@ <unk> brooch of the La Tène II type has also been found . It is unclear whether the occupation of Stokeleigh Camp in the 3rd century was for a formal garrison or whether it was just used by " squatters " or as a place of refuge in times of crisis . Stokeleigh might have been connected with the Wansdyke , a series of defensive linear earthworks , consisting of a ditch and an embankment running at least from Maes Knoll in Somerset , to the Savernake Forest near Marlborough in Wiltshire , however there is little evidence for this . It is also possible that the site was occupied in the Middle Ages . 
 North of Stokeleigh Camp are a series of limestone and mineral quarries , overlooking the River Avon , which are now disused . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries this had an important celestine quarry and a tramway which linked it to a dock on the Avon ; both are now derelict . The area has in recent years been restored as an arboretum . At the northern end of the woods is Paradise Bottom . This is included in the Leigh Court Estate and was part of the ground laid out by Humphry Repton for Philip John Miles . Some of the first plantings of the giant redwood ( Sequoiadendron giganteum ) and the Weymouth pine ( Pinus strobus ) , among other " exotics " imported to the UK , were made here by Sir William Miles in the 1860s . 
 To the south of the woods is an affluent suburb of Bristol also known as Leigh Woods . It is situated at the western end of the Clifton Suspension Bridge , which opened in 1864 , making the development of Leigh Woods as an upmarket residential area practicable . Houses in varying styles were built from the mid @-@ 1860s until the First World War . 
 In 1857 the mutilated body of a murdered woman was found in Nightingale Valley ; the following year , John Beale was hanged at Taunton for the crime in January 1858 . Another violent death occurred in 1948 when George Henry Chinnock , who had been living in the woods , was found with head injuries . 
 In 1909 part of the woodland was donated to the National Trust by the tobacco company owner George Alfred Wills . He did this to prevent housing development on the western side of the gorge as Bristol grew in size and population . Areas not owned by the National Trust have since been taken over by the Forestry Commission . 
 The Portishead Railway runs close to the river at the bottom of the woods . It was opened on 18 April 1867 , but closed on 3 April 1981 . The Great Western Railway built a small station with the aim of attracting tourists to the area ; Nightingale Valley Halt was not very successful and was only in use for less than five years , from 9 July 1928 until 12 September 1932 . The line was reopened for freight traffic as far as Royal Portbury Dock on 21 December 2001 and local councils are proposing to reintroduce a passenger service to Portishead as part of their MetroWest plans , although this would not happen before 2019 . 
 In 1957 a Filton @-@ based RAF Vampire jet from 501 Squadron crashed into Leigh Woods . The pilot , Flying officer John Greenwood , was killed after he flew under the deck of the suspension bridge while performing a victory roll . 
 Small mountain biking circuits are present in the woods and the area is a popular walking area for Bristolians . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Because of the rare flora and fauna , the woods have been included in the Avon Gorge Site of Special Scientific Interest , which received the designation in 1952 , and 140 hectares ( 350 acres ) has been designated as a national nature reserve . 
 The south part of the woods is an area of former pasture woodland with old <unk> , mainly oak and some small @-@ leaved lime . To the north , the area comprises ancient woodland of old coppice with standards and contains a rich variety of trees . Rare trees include Bristol whitebeam ( Sorbus <unk> ) and wild service tree ( Sorbus <unk> ) . There are multiple species of Sorbus within the woods with at least nine native and four imported species , making it one of the most important sites in Britain for this tree . Birds which live in the woods include the raven ( Corvus ) and peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ) . Many butterflies and moths can be seen in summer including the white @-@ letter hairstreak ( Satyrium w @-@ album ) . 
 On the steep grassy slopes above the River Avon , Bristol rockcress ( Arabis scabra ) which is unique to the Avon Gorge can be seen flowering in April ; orchids and western spiked speedwell ( Veronica spicata ) are common in June and July . In autumn the woodland hosts over 300 species of fungi . <unk> , a scarce plant in the Bristol area , is found in Leigh Woods , as is the parasitic plant yellow bird 's @-@ nest ( <unk> <unk> ) . Lady orchid ( Orchis purpurea ) was discovered here in 1990 , in Nightingale Valley ; there is doubt as to whether this was a wild plant or an introduction . Green @-@ flowered Helleborine ( <unk> <unk> ) is found on the western side of the gorge , in a wooded area next to the towpath below Leigh Woods . 
 = SMS Roon = 
 SMS Roon was the lead ship of her class of armored cruisers of the Imperial German Navy . The ship was authorized under the second Naval Law in 1902 , and built at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel at the cost of 15 @.@ 3 million marks . The ship was named after Albrecht von Roon , a Prussian general and politician . She displaced up to 9 @,@ 875 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 719 long tons ; 10 @,@ 885 short tons ) and was armed with a main battery of four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns . Her top speed was 20 @.@ 4 knots ( 37 @.@ 8 km / h ; 23 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 The ship participated in several actions during the First World War , including the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , where she acted as a scout for the High Seas Fleet . Roon also saw duty in the Baltic Sea , including a battle in July 1915 against Russian cruisers and shore bombardment missions . After 1916 , Roon was used as a training and barracks ship in Kiel until the end of the war . It was intended to convert the ship into a seaplane tender , but the plan was eventually abandoned . The ship was struck from the naval register in 1920 and scrapped thereafter . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Roon was ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Kaiser and built at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel under construction number 28 . Her keel was laid in 1902 and she was launched on 27 June 1903 . Fitting @-@ out work was lengthy , but was completed by 5 April 1906 , being commissioned into the Imperial German Navy the same day . She had cost the Imperial German Government 15 @,@ 345 @,@ 000 Goldmarks . 
 Roon displaced 9 @,@ 087 t ( 8 @,@ 943 long tons ; 10 @,@ 017 short tons ) as built and 9 @,@ 875 t ( 9 @,@ 719 long tons ; 10 @,@ 885 short tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 126 @.@ 50 m ( 415 ft ) , a beam of 19 @.@ 60 m ( 64 ft 4 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 43 m ( 24 ft 5 in ) forward . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion engines , which developed a total of 17 @,@ 272 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 880 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 20 @.@ 4 knots ( 37 @.@ 8 km / h ; 23 @.@ 5 mph ) on trials . She carried up to 1 @,@ 630 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of up to 5 @,@ 080 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 410 km ; 5 @,@ 850 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 She was armed with four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns arranged in two twin gun turrets , one on either end of the superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of ten 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , fourteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns and four 45 cm ( 18 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow , one in the stern , and one on both beams . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Roon was laid down in August 1902 at the Kiel dockyard , and launched in June 1903 , during which the inspector general Alfred von Waldersee was made patron of the ship . The ship was completed in April 1906 , at a cost of 15 @,@ 345 @,@ 000 Marks . In April 1907 , Roon and the light cruiser Bremen sailed to the United States to participate in the Jamestown Exposition commemorating the anniversary of the arrival of colonists in Chesapeake Bay on 26 April . In addition to the German delegation , the international fleet consisted of warships from Great Britain , Japan , Austria @-@ Hungary , France , Italy , and several other nations . 
 In 1908 , Roon was serving as the flagship for Rear Admiral Jacobsen , in the Second Group of the Scouting Division of the High Seas Fleet , along with her sister ship Yorck . After being replaced as the flagship of the Scouting Group on 30 September by the new battlecruiser Moltke , Roon was decommissioned in 1911 ; however , she was recommissioned three years later at the outbreak of World War I. At the start of hostilities , Roon was serving as the flagship of the III Scouting Group . On 3 November 1914 , she participated in the operation to bombard Yarmouth . 
 = = = Bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby = = = 
 A month later , on 15 – 16 December , she participated in the bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby . Along with the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich , Roon was assigned to the van of the High Seas Fleet , which was providing distant cover to Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers while they were conducting the bombardment . During the operation , Roon and her attached destroyers encountered the British screening forces ; at 06 : 16 , Roon came in contact with HMS Lynx and Unity , but no gunfire was exchanged and the ships turned away . Following reports of British destroyers from Roon as well as from Hamburg , Admiral von Ingenohl ordered the High Seas Fleet to turn to port and head for Germany . At this point , Roon and her destroyers became the rearguard for the High Seas Fleet . 
 At 06 : 59 , Roon , by this time joined by the light cruisers Stuttgart and Hamburg , encountered Commander Jones ' destroyers . Jones shadowed Roon until 07 : 40 , at which point Stuttgart and Hamburg were detached to sink their pursuers . At 08 : 02 , Roon signaled the two light cruisers and ordered them to abandon the pursuit and retreat along with the rest of the High Seas Fleet . At 07 : 55 , Beatty received word of Roon 's location , and in an attempt to intercept the German cruisers , detached HMS New Zealand to hunt the German ships down , while his other three battlecruisers followed from a distance . By 09 : 00 , Beatty had become aware that the German battlecruisers were shelling Hartlepool , so he decided to break off the pursuit of Roon and turn towards the German battlecruisers . 
 = = = Operations in the Baltic = = = 
 Admiral Reinhard Scheer decided that because Roon and the other armored cruisers of the III Scouting Group were slow and lacked thick enough armor , they were unsuitable for service in the North Sea . Therefore , after April 1915 , she operated in the Baltic Sea , participating in several bombardment missions . On 11 May , the British submarine E9 spotted Roon and several other ships en route to Libau , which had been recently captured by the German army . E9 fired five torpedoes at the German flotilla ; two passed closely astern of Roon while the other three missed their targets as well . 
 On 2 July 1915 , Roon participated in a battle with Russian cruisers off the shores of Gotland , Sweden . The light cruiser Augsburg and three destroyers were escorting the minelaying cruiser SMS Albatross when they were attacked by four Russian cruisers — the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and light cruisers Bogatyr and Oleg . Augsburg escaped while the destroyers covered the retreat of the Albatross , which was severely damaged and forced to seek refuge in neutral Swedish waters . Roon and the light cruiser Lübeck sortied to relieve the beleaguered German destroyers . Upon arriving at the scene , Roon engaged Bayan , and Lübeck opened fire on Oleg . Shortly thereafter , the Russian cruiser Rurik , along with a destroyer , arrived to reinforce the Russian flotilla . In the following artillery duel , Roon was hit several times , and the German ships were forced to retreat . 
 On 10 August , Roon and Prinz Heinrich shelled Russian positions at Zerel on the Sworbe Peninsula . There were several Russian destroyers anchored off Zerel ; the German cruisers caught them by surprise and damaged one of them . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 The fog of war led to several instances where the Royal Navy misidentified several vessels as Roon in 1916 . On 16 February 1916 , Roon was mistakenly reported as having been captured by a British cruiser in the North Atlantic . The ship was also mistakenly reported to have taken part in the Battle of Jutland as the flagship of the screening force for the main body of the High Seas Fleet . This mistake appeared in historical works published shortly after the First World War , but later works have corrected it . 
 In November 1916 , Roon was disarmed and converted into a training and accommodation ship . Stationed at Kiel , she served in this capacity until 1918 . The German Navy had previously experimented with seaplane carriers , including the conversion of the old light cruiser Stuttgart early in 1918 for service with the fleet . Stuttgart could carry only two aircraft , however , which was deemed insufficient for fleet support . As a result , plans were drawn up to convert Roon into a seaplane carrier , with a capacity for four aircraft . The ship 's main battery would have been removed and replaced with only six 15 cm guns and six 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns ; the large hangar for the seaplanes was to have been installed aft of the main superstructure The plan did not come to fruition , primarily because the German Navy relied on zeppelins for aerial reconnaissance , not seaplanes . Roon was struck from the naval register on 25 November 1920 and scrapped the following year , in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 = Typhoon Ken ( 1982 ) = 
 Typhoon Ken , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Tering , was the fourth typhoon to strike Japan during the 1982 Pacific typhoon season . Forming along the western end of the monsoon trough in the Philippine Sea , the system had organized into a tropical depression on September 16 , and by that night a tropical storm . As a compact system , rapid intensification continued , with Ken becoming a typhoon on the evening of September 17 and a major typhoon on September 18 . The cyclone up to this point had a history of progressing slowly west @-@ northwest , but Ken eventually stalled on September 20 and became a larger cyclone . As a mid @-@ latitude trough to its north deepened , Ken took off to the northeast towards Okinawa . Ken made landfall upon Shikoku early on September 25 , and moved onward into the Sea of Japan where it evolved into an extratropical cyclone . Five people were killed while 18 others were hurt . A total of 114 mudslides were reported , resulted in over 2 @,@ 000 homes flooded . Additionally , 12 homes were damaged or destroyed . Seventy @-@ four flights were cancelled as well . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During mid @-@ September , a monsoon trough was present in the Philippine Sea . On September 14 , a persistent area disturbance weather was first visible on satellite imagery . On September 15 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started to monitor the system . The next day , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported a closed atmospheric circulation . Based on this , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) upgraded the storm into a tropical depression , without issuing a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) . Six hours later , the storm was upgraded into a tropical storm . Around this time , the JMA followed suit and upgraded the system into a tropical storm . Initially , Ken was expected by the JTWC to move west and pass near Luzon , but this did not occur . At 0600 UTC on September 17 , Ken was upgraded into a severe tropical storm by the JTWC and the JMA . That evening , Ken was upgraded to typhoon status by both the JTWC and the JMA when the hunters recorded a pressure of 976 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Ken continued to gain strength ; at 1800 UTC on September 18 , the Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . This wind speed is equivalent to a low @-@ end Category 3 typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) . Several hours later , the JTWC reported that Ken attained peak intensity of 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) while centered about 800 km ( 495 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Taiwan . 
 The typhoon moved west @-@ northwest at a slower rate than expected , but on September 19 , Typhoon Ken , a subtropical ridge moved west @-@ southwest , moving into south China and the South China Sea . As such , many tropical cyclone forecast models showed Ken turning north @-@ northeast , but Ken began to stall on September 20 instead . Around this time , the JMA estimated peak wind speeds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a peak pressure of 940 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . Initially , Ken was small , but around this time the storm began to grow in size . The cause of the structural change is unknown , but it is possible that some dry air got induced into the storm 's circulation , which also caused the eye to collapse and the storm to weaken . 
 By September 21 , Ken began to move erratically due to a deepening trough that was centered north of Typhoon Ken before taking off in the general direction of Japan . Weakening ensued thereafter due to increased wind shear . By September 23 , the <unk> reported that winds had diminished below Category 2 @-@ <unk> strength on the SSHWS while the JMA reported winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . At this time , Ken was located around 650 km ( 405 mi ) south of Tokyo . By the next day , however , this weakening trend had leveled off ; data from the JMA suggests that the storm did not weaken further until September 25 . After according to the JTWC , maintain winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) during September 24 , the typhoon weakened slightly . Ken made landfall near Shikoku early on September 25 with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , and after weakening a little according to the JTWC , Ken passed over Honshu . That day , the system moved into the Sea of Japan , where it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while producing winds just below typhoon @-@ force . Despite this , the JMA kept an eye on the system for two more days . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Because Ken posed a threat to shipping lanes , a tropical cyclone warning was issued for shipping lanes for a span of 66 hours , lasting from 0900 UTC September 19 until 0300 UTC September 22 . Upon making landfall in Japan , Ken became the fourth storm to strike the nation during the season . Ken was responsible strong winds , including a 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) wind speed on Honshu . Additionally , wind gusts of 221 km / h ( 137 mph ) were measured on Shikoku . Torrential rains were also recorded ; a peak rainfall total was measured at 500 mm ( 20 in ) in Funato , which also sustained the highest hourly rainfall total of 79 @.@ 0 mm ( 3 @.@ 11 in ) . In Uwajima on the island Shikoku ( the smallest of the four main Japanese islands ) , a peak six @-@ hour total of 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) was recorded . Additionally , a daily rainfall peak of 280 mm ( 11 in ) was measured at Kadena . Somewhere in Shikoku , 470 mm ( 19 in ) of rain was recorded in a two @-@ day time span . 
 Heavy rains resulted in 114 mudslides , which destroyed eight homes . According to nation 's police service , a total of 2 @,@ 440 dwellings were flooded including over 450 in <unk> . Four homes were also damaged in Shikoku . Two minor bridges were washed away due to flooding rivers . Airlines cancelled 74 flights and the Japan National Railways halted 17 trains on the southernmost main island of Kyushu . A total of five people were killed by the storm , including three oh Shikoku . An elderly couple was killed in their bed while a 30 @-@ year @-@ old man drowned in his car . In addition to these fatalities , 18 persons were hurt ; five of these injuries occurred on Shikoku . Overall , the storm directly affected 21 districts of Japan . 
 = John Mitchell ( American football coach ) = 
 John Mitchell , Jr . ( born October 14 , 1951 ) is an American football coach and former collegiate player . Over the course of his career , Mitchell has broken several racial barriers and has had the opportunity to work with many icons of the sport . Currently , he is the defensive line coach and assistant head coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers in the National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 As a player , Mitchell was the first African @-@ American to play football for the storied Alabama Crimson Tide . In his second year with the program he became the first African @-@ American co @-@ captain at the school . The next year he became the team 's first black assistant coach and also the youngest coach to have ever been hired at Alabama . Later he would break another barrier by becoming the first black defensive coordinator in the Southeastern Conference . 
 His coaching career has spanned nearly 40 years during which time he has worked with several icons of the football coaching pantheon , including college coaching greats Bear Bryant and Lou Holtz as well as Bill Belichick and Bill Cowher in the pros . Teams he has coached have won championships at both the college and professional levels . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Mitchell was born in Mobile , Alabama on October 14 , 1951 ; the third of five children of Helen and John Mitchell , Sr. His father worked as a civil engineer for the United States Coast Guard . 
 At Williamson High School in Mobile , which was an all @-@ black school , Mitchell played football and basketball . As a senior he played on the offensive line . Though standing 6 feet 3 inches ( 191 cm ) , he weighed just 195 pounds ( 88 kg ) , which major colleges considered too light for the position . His lack of size explains why he was not offered a football scholarship out of high school by any major colleges in his home state . He did , however , field football scholarship offers from historically black powerhouses like Grambling State University and Tennessee State University . 
 Sports were not everything for Mitchell ; he finished third in the nation in a science fair with a group of classmates . All five members of the science fair team were offered academic scholarships by the University of Alabama and Auburn University . Although these were the two schools Mitchell had dreamed of playing football for , neither was recruiting black football players at the time , and Mitchell very much wanted to play " big @-@ time college football " . 
 Mitchell determined that his best chance of eventually playing Division I football was by going the junior college route . He accepted a football scholarship from Eastern Arizona Junior College in Thatcher , Arizona . 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 Mitchell played on both the offensive and defensive lines at Eastern Arizona . He was named a Junior College All @-@ American in each of his two years in the program . More significantly , he added 35 pounds ( 16 kg ) of muscle to his frame in the school 's weight training program , which was an amenity his high school lacked . Even with the added bulk , he showed no appreciable loss of speed . He also earned an associate 's degree in social work from Eastern Arizona . 
 Based on his junior college performance and increased bulk , Mitchell was recruited by several major college programs , but he originally committed to John McKay at the University of Southern California . While on the golf course with University of Alabama coach Paul " Bear " Bryant , McKay casually mentioned that he had received a commitment from an Alabama native . McKay assumed that Bryant wouldn 't be interested in Mitchell because he was black and Alabama had no black players on their roster . Bryant swooped in and recruited Mitchell aggressively . Although Mitchell originally was a bit nervous about the reception he would receive at Alabama , as well as the amount of playing time he could garner , his family encouraged him to return home and accept Bryant 's scholarship offer . Besides his family 's encouragement and Bryant 's assurances that his race would not be a problem , Mitchell 's opinion that Alabama 's School of Social Work was one of the country 's best was a big factor in his decision . 
 In 1971 Mitchell , along with Wilbur Jackson , became the first African @-@ American to play football for the Crimson Tide . He started all 24 games in his two seasons at Alabama , during which time the team compiled a 21 – 3 record and won two Southeastern Conference championships . In 1972 , Mitchell became the first African @-@ American to be named a co @-@ captain at Alabama . The same year he was named an All @-@ American by the American Football Coaches Association . He was selected to the All @-@ SEC team in each of his two seasons at Alabama . Mitchell earned a B.S. in social welfare , completing his degree requirements a semester early . 
 The San Francisco 49ers selected Mitchell in the seventh round of the 1973 NFL Draft . Although he played primarily defensive end in college , he was once again considered undersized to fill that role in the pro game ; the 49ers wanted to make him a linebacker . He signed a contract with the 49ers and attended training camp , but after being slowed in camp by an illness he was cut by the team prior to the season . 
 Upon being cut by the 49ers , Mitchell chose to close the book on this playing career even though he may have been able to pursue an opportunity in the fledgling World Football League , saying , " I had a chance , whatever happened , good or bad , and I figured a guy 's got to work someday . " 
 = = = Coaching career = = = 
 = = = = Alabama = = = = 
 Mitchell decided to return to Alabama to attend law school in the fall of 1973 . When he asked coach Bryant for help in finding a campus job to make ends meet while he worked on his graduate degree , Bryant instead offered him a full @-@ time coaching position . In giving up his law school plans to accept the offer to coach defensive ends , Mitchell became the first African @-@ American assistant coach for the Crimson Tide . He was also the youngest coach to have been hired by the school . In addition to coaching , he was instrumental in the recruiting of top African @-@ American players to play football at Alabama . One player whom Mitchell helped recruit was Ozzie Newsome , who went on to have a Hall of Fame career . 
 In Mitchell 's first year of coaching at Alabama , the team compiled an 11 – 1 record and won the national championship in addition to the SEC championship . Over each of the next two seasons , they matched that 11 – 1 record , added two more SEC titles and finished inside the top @-@ five in the polls . In 1976 , which would be Mitchell 's last with the team , they fell off a bit with a 9 – 3 record , but they still remained in the top @-@ fifteen nationwide . Mitchell helped develop Leroy Cook who was a two @-@ time All @-@ America selection drafted in the 10th round of the 1976 NFL Draft by the Dallas Cowboys and selected as one of two defensive ends on the All @-@ time Alabama team named by Sports Illustrated in 2006 . 
 = = = = Arkansas = = = = 
 In early 1977 , Mitchell accepted a position coaching defensive ends at the University of Arkansas under Lou Holtz , after deciding the move was " at least horizontal " . Following his first season with the Razorbacks in which the team went 11 – 1 and beat second @-@ ranked Oklahoma in the Orange Bowl , Holtz gushed , 
 In the course of the six years Mitchell would spend at Arkansas , the team compiled a record of 54 – 16 – 2 , won a Southwest Conference championship , played in a bowl game each year and failed to finish in the top @-@ 20 in the polls only once . Among the defensive linemen who came through the Arkansas program during Mitchell 's tenure were future Pro Football Hall of Fame member Dan Hampton and Ron Faurot an All @-@ American who was drafted in the second round and played two seasons in the NFL . During his time in Arkansas , Mitchell regularly participated in pick @-@ up basketball games with Bill Clinton , who was at the time a law professor at the school . 
 = = = = USFL = = = = 
 Mitchell left Arkansas in 1983 to pursue an opportunity to coach at the professional level in his home state with the Birmingham Stallions of the newly created United States Football League ( USFL ) . He coached linebackers for the Stallions for the team 's ( and league 's ) entire three @-@ year existence . In 1985 , outside linebacker Herb Spencer made the All @-@ League team . When the team quit paying its coaches on New Year 's Day in 1986 , Mitchell returned to the college ranks , taking at a job at Temple University . 
 = = = = Temple = = = = 
 At Temple Mitchell coached defensive tackles and defensive ends under head coach Bruce Arians , with whom he would later work on the Steelers coaching staff . Arians called Mitchell " a super football coach and a great person " , adding " I think we had more quarterback sacks this year in our third game than we had all last year . " At Temple , Mitchell coached Ralph Jarvis whom the Chicago Bears chose in the third round of the 1988 NFL Draft . 
 = = = = Louisiana State = = = = 
 After a single season at Temple , Mitchell returned to the SEC in 1987 at Louisiana State University ( LSU ) where he served as outside linebackers coach under Mike Archer . After two seasons coaching linebackers Mitchell was promoted to defensive coordinator in early 1990 succeeding Pete Jenkins and becoming the first African @-@ American to serve in that capacity in the SEC . 
 Mitchell resigned his position at LSU in March 1990 due to improper accounting of some hotel expenses over the previous two years . He was reinstated two months later following an investigation and repayment of the disputed funds . 
 With Mitchell leading the defense , the Tigers finished a disappointing 5 – 6 in 1990 ( including 2 – 5 in the SEC ) leading to the firing of head coach Archer following the season . Mitchell was offered a chance to return to his post coaching outside linebackers by Archer 's replacement , Curley Hallman , with whom Mitchell had coached at Alabama . However , Mitchell chose to leave LSU a couple of months later to return to the professional ranks . 
 = = = = NFL = = = = 
 = = = = = Cleveland Browns = = = = = 
 After leaving LSU , Mitchell was hired as defensive line coach of the Cleveland Browns of the National Football League ( NFL ) in 1991 . He coached for the Browns under head coach Bill Belichick for three seasons , helping to develop Michael Dean Perry ( who twice made the Pro Bowl in Mitchell 's three seasons with the team ) and Rob Burnett ( who made his only Pro Bowl in Mitchell 's final year with the club ) . 
 = = = = = Pittsburgh Steelers = = = = = 
 In 1994 he moved on to become the defensive line coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers under Bill Cowher , replacing Steve Furness . He 's been with the Steelers ever since , making him the club 's longest tenured coach , and one of the longest serving coaches with his current team in the NFL . With the arrival of Mike Tomlin in 2007 , Mitchell replaced Russ Grimm as the team 's assistant head coach while retaining his responsibilities in coaching the defensive line . 
 The Steelers led the league in stopping the run four times in the first fifteen years of Mitchell 's tenure ( through 2008 ) . Steelers defensive linemen have participated in the Pro Bowl eight times since Mitchell 's arrival : Casey Hampton ( five Pro Bowls ) , Aaron Smith ( once ) , Brett Keisel ( once ) and Joel Steed ( once ) . The team as a whole has also had tremendous success during Mitchell 's tenure , making the playoff eleven times and reaching the AFC Championship Game eight times in his first 18 years . They 've also made it to four Super Bowls , winning the championship in 2005 and again in 2008 . 
 In Super Bowl XL in February 2006 , the Steelers faced a tough test in slowing Seattle Seahawks All @-@ Pro running back Shaun Alexander who ran for 1 @,@ 880 yards and scored an NFL record 28 touchdowns in the regular season behind an offensive line that featured All @-@ Pro linemen Walter Jones and Steve Hutchinson on the left side . The defensive line would need to slow down the Seahawks running attack to keep the Steelers in the game , a challenge which Mitchell took personally . The players came through holding Alexander under the 100 @-@ yard plateau and most importantly preventing him from scoring , which was crucial to a Steelers win . After the game , Mitchell said of the strategy , " Our thing was ' keep him out of the end zone . ' We didn 't care if he got 300 yards ; don 't let him in the end zone . " 
 In Super Bowl XLIII in 2009 , they again faced a formidable offense in the Arizona Cardinals . The defensive line once again came through with a great performance , holding the Cardinals to just 33 yards on the ground . 
 Mitchell coaches in a quiet and cerebral style which he picked up from the first head coach under who he worked , saying with typical understatement , " Coach Bryant wasn 't a screamer , and I noticed he had some success . " He has further described his approach to coaching thusly : 
 This style and the results it has brought have earned Mitchell the respect of his peers in the NFL . Clarence Brooks coaches defensive linemen for the Steeler division rival the Baltimore Ravens and thus meets the Steelers at least twice a year . Brooks assessed his counterpart saying , 
 Mitchell is held in extremely high regard by his fellow Steelers coaches as well . Steelers defensive coordinator Dick LeBeau has said he 's " always had great confidence in him " . Head coach Mike Tomlin has called Mitchell a " trailblazer " and described him as " a very respected coach in this league and well respected in this organization " . 
 = = = Personal = = = 
 Mitchell lives with his wife , Joyce , in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ; the couple have no children . Mitchell had expressed interest in becoming the head football coach at Alabama when that position had been open in the past . However , despite this interest and his connection with the program he has never been pursued for the position . 
 Away from football , Mitchell 's avocations include collecting art , fine wine and vintage jazz as well as studying history . He has stated that he plans to retire around 2012 to 2013 , at which time he will return to Birmingham , Alabama . He was elected to the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame with the class of 2009 . Mitchell said of his selection : " I 'm from the state of Alabama , and this is big . The state of Alabama is putting me , John Mitchell , a black kid from Mobile , in their sports hall of fame . There 's nothing bigger in my life . " 
 = = Coaching tree = = 
 = Union Films = 
 Union Films was a film production company located in Batavia , Dutch East Indies ( now Jakarta , Indonesia ) . Established by ethnic Chinese businessmen Ang Hock Liem and Tjoa Ma Tjoen in 1940 , it produced seven black @-@ and @-@ white films before it was dissolved in 1942 ; all are thought to be lost . The company 's films were directed by four men , mostly ethnic Chinese , and launched the careers of actors such as Rendra Karno and Djoewariah . 
 Established during the revival of the Indies film industry , Union released its first film , Kedok Ketawa , in July 1940 . This was followed by a series of films penned by Saeroen which were increasingly oriented towards the Indies ' growing intelligentsia and attempted to distance themselves from the theatrical conventions which were common in the contemporary film industry . This continued after Saeroen left for Star Film in 1941 , with Union 's final two productions emphasising realism . Following the Japanese occupation of the Indies in March 1942 , Union was dissolved , though its films continued to be screened into the mid 1940s . 
 = = History = = 
 Following the commercial successes of Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ; 1937 ) , Fatima ( 1938 ) , and Alang @-@ Alang ( Grass ; 1939 ) , the film industry of the Dutch East Indies – which had been severely weakened by the Great Depression – was revived . Film production increased and , in 1940 , four new production houses were opened , including Union Films . The company was funded by ethnic Chinese businessman Ang Hock Liem , who is credited as producer for the majority of the company 's releases ; daily operations , however , were handled by Tjoa Ma Tjoen . Union was headquartered in Prinsenlaan , Batavia ( now Mangga Besar , Jakarta ) , and , according to a press release , established to " improve the quality of Indonesian art " . 
 The fledgling Union 's first film , Kedok Ketawa , was released in July 1940 . Following a young couple who face off against criminals with the help of a masked bandit , this film was directed by Jo An Djan and starred Oedjang , Fatimah , and Basoeki Resobowo . It received positive reviews ; the journalist Saeroen wrote in Pemandangan that the film 's quality was comparable to imported Hollywood productions , and a review in Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad praised the cinematography . Following these positive reviews , Union hired Saeroen – who had previously written Terang Boelan and several works for Tan 's Film – as a screenwriter . He made his debut for the company with Harta Berdarah , directed by new hires R Hu and Rd Ariffien , following Jo An Djan 's departure for Populair 's Film . The film , in which a young man convinces a miserly hajji to be more charitable , was released in October 1940 and starred the singer Soelastri and martial artist Zonder . 
 Union released their third production , Bajar dengan Djiwa , by February 1941 . Directed by R Hu , this film – a drama in which a young woman is sold to a loan shark in order to pay her father 's debt – marked the film debut of Djoewariah ; she later became Union 's leading lady . Ariffien , meanwhile , was tasked with directing Asmara Moerni , based on a script by Saeroen . Attempting to reach the educated audiences by casting a young doctor , Adnan Kapau Gani , opposite Djoewariah , this romance told of a young man who is ultimately able to marry his former maid after she receives an education . Released in April , the film received mixed reviews : one , in the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad , found the film " fascinating " , while another for the same paper considered the film dependent on the stage traditions which its advertisements had denounced . 
 In July 1941 Union released Wanita dan Satria , a Djoewariah vehicle which follows a well @-@ born womaniser who abuses his social status to gain women 's trust before ultimately getting his comeuppance . In advertising Wanita dan Satria , the company again emphasised the non @-@ theatrical background of the film 's cast , which also included Moesa , Djoewita and Hidajat . The film received positive reviews ; one , from the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad , wrote that Wanita dan Satria " gives a clear picture of the precarious position of Indonesian women and motivates the desire for a firmer outline of her rights in the Moslem society . " This was the company 's last film to be directed by Ariffien or written by Saeroen ; both men migrated to rival company Star Film soon afterwards . 
 Hu remained with Union and directed the company 's next production , Soeara Berbisa , with peranakan sound technician Boen Kin Nam serving as assistant director . Written by Djojopranoto , the work followed two young men who compete for the love of a woman before learning that they are long @-@ lost brothers . Djoewita had left the company at this point , and the studio hired Raden Soekarno for the leading role of this late 1941 release . The company 's final completed production , Mega Mendoeng , was directed by Boen and announced soon after shooting for Soeara Berbisa had begun . This film , a romance starring Soekarno and new find Sofiati , was released in early 1942 . In producing both films , Union emphasised realism and targeted educated audiences . 
 By the end of 1941 , the government of the Dutch East Indies were concerned that Empire of Japan could invade the colony . This fear reached the general populace , and the February 1942 edition of the film magazine Pertjatoeran Doenia dan Film reported that several studios would move away from the colonial capital of Batavia or go on a production hiatus . Union , though already beginning production of a film set in the Majapahit era titled Damar <unk> , was forced to stop filming . When the Japanese occupied the Indies in March 1942 , Union was closed , never to reopen . 
 Aside from Ariffien , who continued directing into the 1960s , none of Union 's directors or producers returned to the film industry after the conclusion of the Japanese occupation in 1945 . Several actors , however , continued their careers . Djoewariah , for instance , made her first film after leaving Union , <unk> <unk> ( One Life , One Death ) , in 1949 , and continued acting until the mid @-@ 1950s . The career of Soekarno , meanwhile , lasted through the 1970s ; he was mostly credited as Rendra Karno after changing his name in the 1950s . Others had careers behind the screen ; Kedok Ketawa star Basoeki Resobowo , for instance , became art director on films such as Darah dan Doa ( The Long March ; 1950 ) . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 In a period of two years , Union released seven films ; all were feature length , made in black @-@ and @-@ white , and received wide releases in the Dutch East Indies . Several were screened in nearby Singapore , including Bajar dengan Djiwa and Asmara Moerni . Though its films were screened at least into the 1940s , the company 's output is likely lost . 
 Kedok Ketawa ( Laughing Mask ; 1940 ) 
 Harta Berdarah ( Bloody Treasure ; 1940 ) 
 Bajar dengan Djiwa ( Pay with [ One 's ] Soul ; 1941 ) 
 Asmara Moerni ( True Love ; 1941 ) 
 Wanita dan Satria ( The Woman and the Hero ; 1941 ) 
 Soeara Berbisa ( Venomous Voice ; 1941 ) 
 Mega Mendoeng ( 1942 ) 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Evil Queen ( Disney ) = 
 The Evil Queen , also known as the Wicked Queen or just the Queen , and sometimes instead identified by her given name as Queen Grimhilde , is the primary antagonist in Disney 's 1937 animated film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and a villain character in the extended Disney 's Snow white franchise . She is based on the Evil Queen character from the European fairy tale " Snow White " . 
 In the film , similar to the Brothers Grimm story , the Evil Queen is cold , cruel , and extremely vain , and obsessively desires to remain the " fairest in the land " . She becomes madly envious over the beauty of her stepdaughter , Princess Snow White , as well as the attentions of the Prince from another land ; such love triangle element is one of Disney 's changes to the story . This leads her to plot the death of Snow White and ultimately on the path to her own demise , which in the film is indirectly caused by the Seven Dwarfs . The film 's version of the Queen character uses her dark magic powers to actually transform herself into an old woman instead of just taking a disguise like in the Grimms ' story ; this appearance of hers is commonly referred to as the Wicked Witch or alternatively as the Old Hag or just the Witch . The Queen dies in the film , but lives on in a variety of noncanonical Disney works . 
 The film 's version of the Queen was created by Walt Disney and Joe Grant , and originally animated by Art Babbit and voiced by Lucille La Verne . Inspiration for her design came from several sources , including the characters of Queen Hash @-@ a @-@ <unk> from She and Princess <unk> from Die Nibelungen , as well as actors such as Joan Crawford and Gale Sondergaard . The Queen has since been voiced by Eleanor Audley , June Foray , Janet Waldo , Eda Reiss <unk> , Louise Chamis and Susanne Blakeslee , and was portrayed live by Anne Francine ( musical ) , Jane Curtin ( 50th anniversary TV special ) , and Olivia Wilde ( Disney Dream Portraits ) , Kathy Najimy ( Descendants ) , and in an alternative version , by Lana Parrilla ( Once Upon a Time ) . 
 This interpretation of the classic fairy tale character has been very well received by film critics and general public , often being considered one of Disney 's most iconic and menacing villains . Besides in the film , the Evil Queen has made numerous appearances in Disney attractions and productions , including not only these directly related to the tale of Snow White , such as Fantasmic ! , The Kingdom Keepers and Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , sometimes appearing in them alongside Maleficent from Sleeping Beauty . The film 's version of the Queen has also become a popular archetype that influenced a number of artists and non @-@ Disney works . 
 = = In Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs = = 
 = = = Storyline = = = 
 In " another land , far away , " " many , many years ago , " about the time of fairy tales of castles , knights , fair maidens , romance , magic and witches , " a mysterious and icily beautiful woman with magical powers ( a 1938 promotional brochure suggests she is able to work her witchcraft having sold " herself body and soul to the bad spirits " of the Harz mountains ) has gained her royal position by marrying the widowed King , giving her rule over his kingdom before he died . " From that time on the cruel Queen ruled all alone , her every word was law , and all trembled in mortal fear of her anger . " The vain Queen owned a magical mirror with which she could look upon whatever she wished . The Magic Mirror shows a haunted , smoky face of her familiar demon which replies to the Queen 's requests . She regularly asks the mirror who is the fairest in the realm ( " Magic mirror on the wall , who is the fairest one of all ? " which is often misquoted as " Mirror mirror on the wall , who is the fairest of them all " ) , and the mirror would always reply that she is . 
 One day , however , the mirror tells her that there is a new fairest woman in the land , her 14 @-@ year @-@ old stepdaughter , Princess Snow White . She became obsessively jealous of the princess ' emerging beauty , therefore turning her into a scullery maid in her own home . After observing the handsome Prince from another kingdom singing a love song to Snow White , the proud Queen , in a jealous rage , commands her faithful Huntsman , Humbert , to take the princess deep into the forest and kill her . He is ordered to bring back her heart in a box to prove that he had done so . Humbert cannot bear to kill the young princess , so he tells Snow White of the Queen 's plot and tells her to run away and never to come back . To escape the penalty , he comes back with a pig 's heart and gives it to the Queen . When she questions her mirror , it again replies that Snow White is the fairest in the land , and that she is living at the cottage of the Seven Dwarfs , revealing that the box contains the heart of a pig . The Dwarfs are fearful of the Queen 's black magic but decide to take in Snow White anyway . 
 Furious that Humbert tricked her , the Queen decides that first Snow White shall die by her own hand and at any cost . She goes down the dungeon to her secret room where she practices her dark magic , complete with a pet raven that " knows all her secrets , " and in desperation uses her spellbook and cauldron to mix a potion that transforms her into a hag . Her beauty is shrouded in ugliness and age , though presumably reversible . She then conjures a poison apple , which will cause " the Sleeping Death " , and proceeds to leave the castle via a moat boat . She is sure that no one would know or perform the counter @-@ curse to her spell , and believes the Dwarfs would bury her rival alive , thinking her dead . The Queen comes to the cottage , followed by two vicious vultures , and finds Snow White baking a pie for Grumpy the dwarf . Somehow Snow White 's animal friends realize that the old hag is the Queen . After an unsuccessful attempt to warn Snow White by attacking the Queen , they go to warn the Dwarfs of the Queen 's arrival . The Queen tricks the princess into letting her inside the cottage and eating the bewitched apple , telling her that it is a magic wishing apple . Snow White takes a bite and falls to the floor , apparently dead . 
 The Queen rejoices in her victory , but is soon discovered by the angry Seven Dwarfs , who grab pickaxes and chase her deep into the forest as a great storm begins . She climbs up into the mountains , where she gets trapped upon a precipice that overlooks a seemingly bottomless canyon . She tries to push down a large boulder to crush the approaching Dwarfs . Just then a lightning bolt strikes between her and the boulder , destroying the precipice and sending the Queen ( along with the boulder ) down the cliff to her doom , screaming while she falls to the jagged rocks below . As the Dwarfs look wide @-@ eyed over the cliff 's edge , they cannot see her , but the vultures descend into the chasm . The Queen 's dark reign is over , and her castle is then taken over and the revived Snow White and the Prince who broke the spell . ( A 1936 pre @-@ release Good Housekeeping novelization by Dorothy Ann Blank , a member of the film 's story team , affirms that the Queen in fact dies : " Far below , in a chasm as dark as her own wicked soul , lay the body of the hateful Queen . No magic would ever bring her to life again . " ) 
 = = = Conception , design and portrayal = = = 
 Early concepts for the film called for a " fat , batty , cartoon type , self @-@ satisfied " Queen . However , Walt Disney became concerned that such an approach would make the character seem less plausible . Sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen , he advised that attention be paid exclusively to " scenes in which only Snow White , the Dwarfs , and their bird and animal friends appear . " Disney further developed the main plot himself ( Ollie Johnston said the film 's story was based on the idea that the Queen 's character was going to murder " another drawing " and Disney decided to make it appear believable ) , finding a dilemma in the characterization of the Queen , whom he envisioned as a mixture of Lady Macbeth and the Big Bad Wolf , and decided to set on " a high collar stately beautiful type " whose " beauty is sinister , mature , plenty of curves – she becomes ugly and menacing when scheming . " According to the 1993 Disney Classics series of trading cards , " she is really two characters , the beautiful evil Queen and the grotesquely evil witch . " 
 The Queen 's appearance was inspired by the " ageless ice goddess " character of Queen Ayesha ( " She who must be obeyed " ) from the 1935 film She , played by Helen Gahagan . The Queen was originally to be named Grimhilde ( but who is never actually named in the film ) , was also modeled in part on Princess <unk> in the 1924 film Die Nibelungen . It is also possible that the Queen 's looks may have been inspired by the faces of Joan Crawford and Gale Sondergaard , and her costume and general silhouette may have been inspired by a column statue at the Naumburg Cathedral depicting Uta von <unk> , the wife of Eckard II , Margrave of Meissen who was widely regarded as the most beautiful woman of Medieval Germany . Also noted was her resemblance to two 1930s American movie stars from Europe , Greta Garbo and Marlene Dietrich . The Queen and Snow White were refined by Grim Natwick and Norm Ferguson , who would often override Walt Disney 's instructions . As in the case of other characters for the film , the Queen 's appearance had to be approved by Albert Hurter before being finalised . One pre @-@ final version of the queen had her wear a looser hood and a different crown and the edge of her cape was fur trimmed , as it can be seen in Gustaf Tenggren 's pictures . 
 None of Art Babbit 's lead animation work on the character was rotoscoped and the animators were noted to prefer to draw the Queen over Snow White " because she was more real and complex as a woman , more erotic , and driven to desperate acts by her magic mirror . " The character , however , turned out to be especially problematic for the animators , as she had to be " regally beautiful , with confined but graceful movements , " and " the experiments on her lovely cruel mouth and eyes alone represent drawings enough to fill a paper house . " The sequence of her transformation in particular was the film 's toughest to visualise using trick effects , especially since Disney insisted on showing how the Queen felt as she changed . 
 According to a description in her card in the Disney Villains set , " the Witch 's ugliness symbolises the evil disguised by the Queen 's beauty . " Her castle might have been inspired by Spain 's Alcázar of Segovia and the throne she is uses has a peacock motif to symbolise her extreme vanity . The Queen is clad mostly in black and other " negative " dark colors , providing a contrast to Snow White 's bright colorful wardrobe , and has " shiny black hair " under her hood . Her royal costume was painted with specially developed paints made to look like satin for her collar and like velvet for her robe . The Queen 's music tracks were created with low <unk> notes , basses , and bassoons ; the scribblings in her book of spells were written in Italian . 
 Notably , the Queen was the first character to ever speak in an animated feature film . She was voiced by Lucille La Verne , who achieved her voice change for the role of the Witch by removing her false teeth . Joe Grant , who contributed the design for her Witch form , noticed La Verne 's changing attitude and posture when voicing the Queen and Witch , and sketched these poses and her body language down for animation reference . He also said he based the Witch 's concept art on a woman who lived across the street from him . The character 's foreign dubbing voice actresses included <unk> <unk> in Czechoslovakia , Clara Pontoppidan , Kirsten <unk> , Lise <unk> in Denmark , <unk> <unk> and <unk> Sella in Finland , Claude <unk> in France , Dagny Servaes in Germany , <unk> <unk> in Hungary , Tina <unk> and Dina Romano in Italy , <unk> Kitabayashi in Japan , Blanca de <unk> and Cristina Montt in Mexico , Zinaida <unk> in Russia , and Helena <unk> , <unk> Petterson and Lil <unk> in Sweden . 
 The Queen was also the first character to meet death in a Disney film . As part of elimination of the original story 's more gruesome aspects , and to make Snow White seem more a " nice girl " , the Wicked Queen is no longer cannibalistic and her destruction was made " just as certain but more merciful " than in the original story , where she is forced to dance to her death in red @-@ hot iron shoes on her feet as an invited guest at Snow White 's wedding . Snow White 's role in the Queen 's demise is removed , and the Queen " dies more neatly and quickly , " as justice is served without resorting to killing or torture . She also invites her own downfall while pushing the boulder , and her fate is only suggested rather than shown . One of the Witch 's animators was Ward Kimball , whom Walt Disney also let to draw the two vultures watching her fall " to make it a little easier " for him , as Kimball has been reassigned after his own sequence was cut from the film , since Disney thought these additional dwarfs gag scenes would distract from " the real drama " of the tension between Snow White and her wicked stepmother that was supposed to drive the film . 
 = = = Abandoned concepts = = = 
 The original outline of the story featured the Queen 's attempt to kill Snow White with a poisoned comb , an element taken from the Grimms ' version of the tale ( the Dwarfs would arrive in time to remove it ) . The envious Queen would also decide to take possession of Snow White 's attractive young suitor , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Prince ( described in a press kit as " every woman 's dream man " ) for herself , offering him an opportunity to share the throne with her through a marriage . With the Prince refusing to marry her , the Queen would have him captured by her guards and taken to her dungeon to be suspended in chains in a torture chamber . She would later visit him there and used her sorcery to taunt him by bringing the dungeon 's skeletons ( also chained to the walls ) to life and making them dance , identifying one skeleton as " Prince Oswald " , only for the Prince to defy her again . She then has him given to the torturers , described as " the Nubians " , and " exits with a dirty laugh . " 
 According to production story @-@ meeting notes from October 1934 , " Queen wants to marry Prince , but he refuses to acknowledge ' that she is the fairest in the land , ' since he has seen Snow White . " It is written in story notes that the Queen has magical power only over her own domain , which is the castle . Another note states about their meeting in the dungeon : " This is a sequence of gruesome comedy ― of dancing skeletons ― fantastic shadows ― witchcraft and <unk> . " The name Prince Oswald was an inside joke reference to Oswald the Lucky Rabbit . The Queen was originally intended to have seven black panthers guarding the entrance to her secret room with the Mirror ; a concept art of the Queen walking a pet panther can be seen in The Walt Disney Family Museum and at Disney California Adventure . 
 The books Snow White : Magic Mirror Book and The Complete Story of Walt Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs reveal that the Huntsman was afraid to disobey a command to kill Snow White because the Queen 's might feed him to her panthers or shrink him magically " to the size of a walnut " . In one 1937 novelization , the Queen vows the Huntsman would pay dearly for allowing her stepdaughter to escape , but first she would deal with Snow White herself . In another version , the Huntsman would too be dragged to the dungeon when the Queen finds out that he has betrayed her , and the Queen might smash her own Mirror in anger . Later , after transforming herself , she decides to punish the Prince for having scorned her . She informs the Prince of her plan to have the Dwarfs bury Snow White alive and then leaves him to his death , still chained and trapped in a subterranean chamber filling with water to slowly drown . She then makes her way to the Dwarfs ' cottage with the poisoned apple , while birds and forest animals were to help the Prince escape the Queen 's minions and find his horse as would race to try and save Snow White . 
 This plotline described above was not used in the final film , although it was carried out to the drawing and cel stage , and several inspirational sketch pictures of the dungeon scenes were drawn by Ferdinand Hovarth . It is said that Disney " knew that the Queen would have to look scary without being too scary . " Some skeletons are briefly featured in the finished film in the other parts of the dungeon , except in Australia 's censored original theatrical release version . Similar motifs and scenes were later used in Disney 's Sleeping Beauty and Aladdin . Elements of this sub @-@ plot have also made their way into some other Disney 's Snow White fiction and visitor attractions . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 = = = Attractions = = = 
 The Evil Queen is a primary character in the Disneyland rides Snow White 's Scary Adventures ( first opened in 1955 ) , where she is seen more than any other character in all four versions of the ride , recreating a number of scenes from the film , sometimes including the torture chamber from an abandoned concept , with " a few skeletons of her past victims . " In one new scene , she turns into a hag while standing in front of the mirror ( back to the visitors ) and intoning : " Magic Mirror on the wall , with this disguise I 'll fool them all ! " She also appears in her hag form at the roller coaster Seven Dwarfs Mine Train , first opened in 2014 . 
 In the The Disney Villains Mix and Mingle and Mickey 's Boo @-@ to @-@ You Halloween Parade shows during Magic Kingdom 's Mickey 's Not @-@ So @-@ Scary Halloween Party , the Evil Queen is one of the villains led by Maleficent that appear during the Cinderella Castle Forecourt Stage . Susanne Blakeslee voiced the Queen at 2001 's Share A Dream Come True Parade , where she could be seen transform herself into a hag . The Wicked Queen is one of the " favourite " villains included in Magic Kingdom Park 's special pre @-@ parade procession " It 's Good to be Bad " a night before the annual Main Street Electrical Parade . One event featured a giant interactive mirror and included the Queen and two other " Divas of Evil " , Maleficent and Cruella de Vil . She also prominently appears at Villains Unleashed party , a separately ticketed event at Disney 's Hollywood Studios that was introduced in 2014 . 
 In the interactive gallery Walt Disney : One Man 's Dream , the Queen appears alongside Maleficent and Judge Frollo in the villains ' act of the show , where she seems to be the leader of the trio . On the cruise ship Disney Fantasy , the Queen , appearing with her raven , is one of the seven suspects ( and sometimes the culprit ) in the interactive gallery <unk> Detective Agency 's story " The Case of The Plundered Paintings " . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 The Queen is featured in some Disney television specials like Our Unsung Villains ( 1956 ) and Disney 's Greatest Villains ( 1977 ) . Segments of the Queen 's appearance are also shown in Disney 's Halloween Treat ( 1982 ) and in A Disney Halloween ( 1983 ) . She makes small cameo appearances in the animated series Disney 's House of Mouse , voiced by Susanne Blakeslee ( where she is seen sitting with Lady Tremaine in her queen form , and with Madam Mim and Witch Hazel in her witch form ) and in the films Who Framed Roger Rabbit ( 1988 ) and Runaway Brain ( 1995 ) , shown there in her witch form . 
 In the live @-@ action television special Disney 's Golden Anniversary of Snow White ( 1987 ) , the Queen is played by Jane Curtin in a parodic scenario . She casts a spell on Grumpy in an attempt to get him to persuade the other Dwarfs to retire and destroy the original film after the 50 years . After the failure of this , her Mirror convinces her to finally quit " this whole curse business " and focus on her current career as a television horror host . 
 The Queen ( voiced by Susanne Blakeslee ) is the main villain in the 2005 direct @-@ to @-@ video animated film Once Upon a Halloween , but appears only in the Witch version despite misleading cover art ( furthermore , only her shadow is shown ) . In it , the Queen plots to conquer Halloween and asks her cauldron to show several villains to which one of them helps her in her plan . The cauldron also explains its origins as it is one of the cauldrons formerly owned by the three witches from The Black Cauldron . Eventually , the cauldron turns against the Wicked Queen and makes her vanish into nothingness . 
 In Mike Disa 's and Evan Spiliotopoulos ' abandoned pitch for the <unk> ' Snow White prequel film The Seven Dwarfs , a beautiful girl named Narcissa appears to aid the dwarfs against an evil wizard , who would be eventually revealed as her father whom she would betray and trap him inside a mirror . Narcissa steals the ancient magic secrets of the Olden Dwarfs , marries and then murders Snow White 's father , and " begins her reign as the Evil Queen , with the damned soul of her own father forever encased in the Magic Mirror as her slave . Thus , the dwarfs must live in hiding to protect their families from the Queen 's vengeance . " Three computer @-@ animated sequels to The Seven Dwarfs " were to follow the title characters return home to families and friends after the Evil Queen 's death in Snow White . " 
 In a 2015 Disney Channel Original Movie titled Descendants , the aged Evil Queen ( played by Kathy Najimy ) is among a host of other villains who have been imprisoned on a forbidden Isle of the Lost , and her daughter Evie ( played by Sofia Carson ) is among their offspring who are allowed to return into the kingdom to attend school alongside the offspring of iconic Disney heroes ( Evie 's father is unidentified . ) . The Evil Queen is portrayed as Maleficent 's closest confident and best friend . Its title image features the iconic red apple of the Evil Queen , which was also prominently featured in a teaser trailer . 
 In Justin Merz 's and Evan Daugherty 's script for the live @-@ action spin @-@ off Rose Red , currently in development , Snow White 's sister Rose Red is going to " join Grumpy and the fellow Dwarves on a journey to find the Evil Queen and break her curse . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In the 1949 audiobook release , the Evil Queen ( voiced by Eleanor Audley ) wears a yellow dress and a red cape . She tells the Huntsman to take her stepdaughter Snow White to the forest and leave her there to die . In the end of the book , after being chased by the dwarfs , the Queen dies when she slips while climbing the mountain and falls into the sea . 
 The novel Fairest of All : A Tale of the Wicked Queen by Serena Valentino , published by Disney Press in 2009 , tells a story much more sympathetic to the Queen than most other Disney media . The book shows how the Queen became the villain from the film , much in the style of The Killing Joke , with the Magic Mirror , here possessed by the spirit of her abusive father , having been a corrupting influence . According to the book , her mother was a witch and the King died in a war against another kingdom prior to the events of the film . After her husband 's death , the Queen slowly descends into madness . By the end of novel , Snow White gets the mirror and the Queen becomes the spirit inside the mirror after her death in the film . 
 The Evil Queen is one of the <unk> , villains of The Kingdom Keepers novel series . She was introduced in 2011 in the fourth book of the saga , Power Play , alongside Cruella De Vil . Like Maleficent , she is very powerful and is able to cast almost any spell with a flick of her finger ; she can also transform herself and other characters . In Power Play , when Maleficent and Chernabog are captured by the Keepers , the Queen becomes the new leader of the <unk> . 
 One chapter in Todd Strasser 's 1993 Disney 's the Villains Collection / Stories from the Films is dedicated to Snow White and the Queen . She is also a subject of one of the illustrated books in the Disney Princess series My Side of the Story , titled Snow White / The Queen ( 2004 ) , which portrays her as a misunderstood positive character . 
 Melissa de la Cruz wrote the Descendants prequel novel Isle of the Lost . In that book , it is revealed that the Evil Queen once tried to overthrow Maleficent as the ruler of the Isle . 
 = = = Theatrical shows = = = 
 As in the film , the Evil Queen character is featured in 1979 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs musical version , played by Anne Francine . In the Disney on Ice reenactment of the movie in 1986 @-@ 1987 , and then in 1994 – 1997 and again in 2000 – 2001 , she was voiced by Louise Chamis and played by various skaters beginning with Melanie Scott in 1986 @-@ 1987 , and including Elena <unk> , who was substituted by Davina Lee @-@ Gooding in 1995 . Francine also played her in the 1980 stage play and television program Snow White Live and Chamis voiced her in Disneyland 's Snow White – An Enchanting Musical in 2004 and 2006 . The Evil Queen was also featured in Disney Live 's Three Classic Fairy Tales in the section based on the film . 
 In the night @-@ time fireworks and visual <unk> show Fantasmic ! , first played in 1992 , the Queen , voiced by Louise Chamis , is the main villain and the leader of all the Disney Villains . She is introduced in the second act , when her Magic Mirror ( voiced by Tony Jay ) tells her that there are now three princesses ( Snow White , Ariel and Belle ) fairer than her . Enraged , the Queen transforms herself into a hag and uses the Mirror and her cauldron to summon various " all the forces of evil " in the form of a collection of Disney villains to come to her aid . They include Maleficent , who transforms into a dragon . ( In the Tokyo DisneySea version , she also traps Mickey inside her mirror . ) At the climax of the show , Mickey is able to defeat the dragon and vanquish all the villains with a magic sword . The Witch is the last to die , transforming back into the Queen before she is destroyed . 
 In the Disney Dream cruise ship show Villains Tonight ! , first played in 2010 , Hades calls forth Disney 's most powerful villains for help to regain his evil . The Queen , changing from the Witch form , denies his invitation since Hades also invited Maleficent , her rival for Hades ' affections and for the status of " the most evil in the land " . The Queen claims not to be Hades ' girlfriend , but they just had " an interesting weekend " on Castaway Cay . In the end , the Queen and Maleficent put their differences aside as all villains should stick together and advise Hades to find evil within himself , and not from others . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The Witch is an antagonist in the unreleased Snow White game for the Atari 2600 . In 2001 's Walt Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs for the Game Boy Color , the players need to solve a puzzle minigame for the Queen to consult her mirror , and later guide a deer to warn the Dwarfs and then lead the Dwarfs in pursuit of the Witch before he can go to her castle . 
 The Evil Queen is one of the four Disney Villains that appear in 1999 video game Disney 's Villains ' Revenge , voiced by Louise Chamis . Jiminy Cricket and the player venture into the worlds of the stories to restore the happy endings . In the altered ( and game 's final ) story , where there is no Prince , the Queen ( appearing in both of her forms ) has built a lair resembling her poisoned apple inside the scary wood , and has put Snow White to eternal sleep in her dungeon and intends to do the same to the Seven Dwarfs . The player needs to correctly mix ingredients for several potions including the True Love Potion to magically summon the Prince and save the day . It is followed by the fight with the Queen where she tries to get away and the player has to reflect her magic ball spells , until she retreats to her lair . There , while asking her mirror , she suddenly transforms into a hag and the mirror breaks . 
 In 2010 's video game Kingdom Hearts : Birth by Sleep , the Queen ( voiced by Kyoko Satomi in Japanese and Susanne Blakeslee in English ) appears in the Dwarf Woodlands world . She recruits the protagonist Terra to kill Snow White and bring back her heart in return for allowing him to use the Magic Mirror to locate Master Xehanort . Terra , like the huntsman , ultimately does not go through with this , and the Queen , learning of his betrayal , forces the Mirror to consume him , but Terra manages to fight the Mirror off and the Queen reluctantly gives him the information he looks for . She later appears briefly in Ventus 's scenario , where she crosses paths with him on her way to poison Snow White . She drops the poisoned apple , which Ventus returns to her . She notices Ventus 's Keyblade and muses that Terra threatened her with a similar weapon . She is then only briefly mentioned in Aqua 's storyline , when the Magic Mirror tells Aqua that the Queen is dead and he is no longer under her control . 
 In 2013 's free @-@ to @-@ play mobile game Snow White : Queen 's Return ( also known as Seven Dwarfs : The Queen 's Return ) , an uncanonical continuation of the film , the Queen has survived the fall at the climax of the film because there was a lake at the bottom of the <unk> . She then reverted to her youthful form and , seeking revenge , cast an evil curse on Snow White as well as the dwarfs and their entire forest . The game 's updates were supposed to allow the players to " meet ( and defeat ) " the Queen , adding quests involving a search for her hideout to " help the Dwarfs rid the enchanted forest of the evil queen , " but the story was ultimately left unresolved as the game was discontinued in May 2014 . 
 A 2014 weekly challenge in Disney Infinity : Toy Box included " Mirror Mirror " obstacle course that pit Snow White against the Evil Queen in a race for the poisonous apple . Downloadable Queen @-@ themed avatar costumes were made available for the users of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game consoles . A webcam browser game Become Your Inner Villain hosted on Disneyland Resort ’ s Facebook page enables the player turn into one of four villains including the Evil Queen . Her dungeon and laboratory ( complete with the Mirror ) are featured in the online game <unk> @-@ Choo . 
 In the 1990 video game Castle of Illusion Starring Mickey Mouse , an old witch named Mizrabel takes the of the Evil Queen after draining the youth from Minnie Mouse . In 2012 's Epic Mickey : Power of Illusion , the previously defeated Mizrabel returns to transform into various Disney villains , including the Queen , before setting on Maleficent . In 2013 's HD remake of Castle of Illusion , Mizrabel looks like a cross between the Queen and Maleficent in her youthful form and professes her ambition to be " the fairest of them all " . 
 The Evil Queen is also featured in a number of traditional games , albeit usually as a mere obstacle for the players . She is , however , playable in some of them , such as Snow White and the Severn Dwarfs Game in the <unk> franchise and Disney Villains Collector 's Edition Monopoly . 
 Jim Razzi 's 1985 children 's gamebook Snow White in the Enchanted Forest ( Choose Your Own Adventure : Walt Disney # 1 ) features the Prince @-@ like character 's confrontations with evil Queen as she is searching for Snow White , who is hiding with the Dwarfs , to " put an end to her , once and for all ! " In it , she has much greater powers than in the film , including being able to instantly change between her hag and queen forms at will , magically disappear in a cloud of smoke , change herself into an animal and back , and turn others into animals with magic beams from her hands . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 The 1937 – 1938 film tie @-@ in serial comic strip " Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs " was written by Merrill De Maris , one of the writers of the film . The comic further explores the source of the Queen 's descent into a murderous envy , as she learns that the Prince came to her castle seeking the most beautiful woman in all the world and is shocked when he says he meant Snow White . Like in the abandoned film concept , the Queen ( here actually named Grimhilde ) has the Prince arrested . In her Witch form , she later tells the captive Prince that she is going to get rid of Snow White and make him hers , while the Prince is defiant and calls her a " miserable hag " . This scene is followed by his escape from prison , in much less dramatic circumstances than the film 's drowning concept . The film was also adapted into other comics , such as by Carl <unk> and Richard Moore in 1983 , and by Régis Maine and Santiago <unk> in 1993 . In one American 1944 sequel comic , the dead Queen 's castle is taken over by her bother , the Wicked Prince . 
 The Queen has made frequent appearances in various other Disney comics , where , under the alias the Witch , she comes back to antagonize Disney characters like Chip ' n Dale and Tinkerbell , occasionally cooperating with <unk> characters . Notable examples of such appearances include the 1948 Four Color comic book story " The Golden Christmas Tree " with Donald Duck , the 1949 Four Color comic book Walt Disney 's Seven Dwarfs , and the 1958 stand @-@ alone booklet Mystery of the Missing Magic . In the story " A Pirate 's Tale " , the greedy old Witch transforms herself into a rat as she plans to steal a treasure and turn the dwarfs into cheese and eat them , but Dopey destroys her with a cat . In the 1966 Walt Disney 's Comics and Stories parody of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , " The Wizard of <unk> " , the Witch is unexpectedly turned into an old tree trunk by Daisy Duck while her castle turns to sand . In the 1958 comic strip " The Seven Dwarfs and the Witch @-@ Queen " , written by Floyd <unk> , the Witch shrinks all the dwarfs except of Dopey who manages to save his brothers . 
 Many of these stories have been first published in Italian Disney digest comic series , in particular in Topolino . They include " The Seven Dwarfs and the Spell of the Queen " ( I Sette Nani e l <unk> della regina , 1961 ) , " Snow White and the Castle of Four Winds " ( Biancaneve al castello dei quattro venti , 1961 ) , " The Seven Dwarfs and the Heroic <unk> " ( I Sette Nani e l <unk> <unk> , 1962 ) , " The Seven Dwarfs and the Brew of Seven Herbs " ( I Sette Nani e l <unk> delle <unk> <unk> , 1963 ) , " Snow White and the Silver Rose " ( Biancaneve e la rosa d <unk> , 1964 ) , and " The Seven Dwarfs and the Joker Wizard " ( I Sette Nani e il <unk> <unk> , 1967 ) , among others . For instance , " Snow White and the Shattered Mirror " ( Biancaneve e lo <unk> <unk> , 1956 ) , has the old Witch , terminally ill , discover she has only one day to live , but she refuses to accept her destiny and finds a way to conquer death . In 1956 's " Goofy the Magician and the Seven Dwarfs " ( <unk> <unk> e i Sette Nani ) , the Queen 's four goon henchmen attack the dwarfs and steal their treasure but then decide to keep it for themselves and Grimhilde seeks help from the wizard <unk> to stop their run ; eventually , it is the Prince who defeats the robbers . 1967 's " Donald <unk> : ( <unk> Fracassa ) is a parody of the adventure film Captain <unk> in which Snow White is blinded by the Queen and Donald Duck needs to heal her . In 1989 's " The Seven Dwarfs and Christmas in Danger " ( I Sette Nani e il Natale in <unk> ) the Queen goes to steal a comet stardust as the last ingredient for her spell to destroy Snow White . In 1990 's " The Seven Dwarfs and the Covenant of the Queen " ( I Sette Nani e il <unk> della regina ) , she conjures the demon Shadow Lord Oren and makes a pact with him to take the soul of Snow White . She once again attempts to eliminate Snow White with the help of seven evil dwarfs , but in doing so she burns ends up burning all of her vital energy and Oren takes her with him . 1992 's " The Seven Dwarfs and the Christmas Fairy " ( I Sette Nani e la <unk> di Natale ) presents a scenario in which the Queen successfully casts a forever @-@ sleep <unk> on Snow White , but while trying to zap Dopey she accidentally falls victim of her own witchcraft and the Christmas fairy , freed from her prison , saves Snow White . In Italian comics , the Queen is usually wearing a red dress . She is also often shown using a crystal ball to spy on the good characters . 
 Many of the Topolino Snow White comics were the works of Romano Scarpa . His 1986 comic " The Seven Dwarfs and King Arbor 's Crystal " ( I Sette Nani e il <unk> di Re Arbor ) provides explanation how the Queen would have survived her apparent death in the film ( as some branches and bushes eased the fall and she was rescued by her loyal guards ) and why she could not change back to her normal self ( as her castle was burned down by the Huntsman and her book of magic is gone ) . In this story , Grimhilde ( <unk> ) enlists the aid of her great admirer and past suitor , the evil King Arbor of <unk> , in a plot to use a magic crystal device to swap her old body with Snow White 's . The intrigue is foiled by the dwarves who destroy the crystal , and the resigned Arbor allows the Witch to live with her , saying he will try to remember she was " the most beautiful among queens " . The uneasy relationship between Grimhilde and <unk> continued in the comic " The Seven Dwarfs and the Fountainhead " ( I Sette nani e la <unk> <unk> ) , published later that same year . In it , she desperately attempts to regain her youth , but instead only turns into a childlike version of her Witch form for a short time . 
 Other comics by Romano Scarpa have the Queen in her youthful form . In 1953 's three @-@ part " Snow White and the Green Flame " ( Biancaneve e verde <unk> ) , the Queen flies on a broom to the great gathering of witches , who declare that her inability to deal with just a little girl and few dwarfs has disgraced them all and she should be punished for this according to the laws of Hell . The Queen begs the High Witch for mercy and is given a magic wand with the power of transformation , but if she would not succeed this time she will be turned into a magic broom for a more " honorable " witch to fly . The Queen uses the wand to gain trust of Snow White and turn her a figurine , than takes the princess ' form to ambush the dwarfs and do the same with them , and waits for the Prince 's arrival to kill him . Only Dopey escapes and eventually manages to outwit the Queen , using her want to restore his friends and transform her into a figurine , which later turns into a broom when her sentence is carried over . In 1957 's " The Seven Dwarfs and the Throne of Diamonds " ( I Sette Nani e il <unk> di <unk> ) , Jiminy Cricket is deeply enamored by the Queen 's beauty and attempts to convince her to become good , but the Queen refuses to be redeemed and orders her soldiers to steal the throne the Dwarfs make for Snow White in a plot to turn her rival into an old woman . Eventually , the Queen is defeated by another witch <unk> and Snow White is saved . 1959 's " Snow White and the Chained Fairy " ( I Sette Nani e la fata <unk> ) , sees the dwarfs struggle to free the fairy Fawn who was captured by the Queen in an underground cavern for saving Snow White when Grimhilde flew to strike down the princess with a thunderbolt . She takes on many forms trying to thwart them in various ways , and one @-@ by @-@ one the dwarfs sacrifice their lives , until only Dopey remains but he manages to get hold of magical water that brings back all of them to life . The freed fairy 's magic makes the cavern collapse down on the helpless Queen to make sure she will never hurt anyone again . In 1960 's " The Seven Dwarfs and the <unk> Ring " ( I Sette Nani e l <unk> di <unk> by Romano Scarpa ) , the Queen learns about the eight Dwarf named Ginger ( <unk> ) , who has left the his companions to go in search of fortune traveling the world , and transforms into a pixie named <unk> to send him home and sow discord among his brothers . The Queen also transforms into a pixie , named <unk> , in " Snow White and Easter in the Woods " ( Biancaneve e la Pasqua nel <unk> ) , where , after her attempt to kill Snow White with magic is foiled by woodland creatures , she is so enraged that she calls upon the infernal powers to " take her " and her castle burns into flames and crumbles around her . In 1963 's " The Seven Dwarfs and the Wolf 's Cliff " ( I Sette Nani e la <unk> del <unk> ) , she sends three of her bandit minions ( <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) to kidnap Snow White . 1964 's " Snow White and the Bewitched Dress " ( Biancaneve e l <unk> <unk> ) has the Queen magically disguise herself as an old gypsy to give Snow White a cursed dress and capture her , then start her work on the spell to rid of the dwarfs and all the forest creatures . But Dopey infiltrates her castle , frees Snow White , and locks up the Queen in her laboratory set ablaze , after which the whole castle is consumed by fire and explodes after the dwarf and the princess escape . 
 The Queen also appears in the 2005 Disney manga series Kilala Princess , where the protagonists Rei and Kilala Reno find themselves in the world of Snow White , and meet and befriend the princess . They go the Queen 's castle to ask the Magic Mirror how to find Kilala 's friend Erika , but discover the Queen is still alive ( and even commanding the two vultures , as well as wolves ) as she appears and demands Kilala 's magical tiara . The children try to flee but are attacked by wolves and locked up in the dungeon . The Queen transforms into the Witch and prepares to turn Kilala into an ugly creature . Snow White appears and agrees to sacrifice herself to save them , but Kilala stops her at last moment before she can eat a poison apple . Rei then attacks the Queen , who falls into her cauldron , turns into a vulture , and flies away in a defeat . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The character was also featured in a wide variety of Disney merchandise , such as in the Designer Villains " stylized and fashion @-@ forward " series of limited edition dolls and make @-@ up products , or the <unk> Beautiful entry in the Beautifully Disney collection of cosmetic products . Various other such merchandise include many dolls , figurines / statuettes , costumes , clothing items , watches / clocks / mirrors , key chains / blanks , mugs , other tableware , bags / purses / suitcases , containers , prints / posters / cards / stickers , pins / buttons / magnets , holiday ornaments , plush toys , puzzles , other beauty products , and so forth . One hand @-@ made figure costing $ 2 @,@ 000 was the most expensive out of 200 @,@ 000 items being sold at the Disney World shopping village in 1985 . 
 = = In Once Upon a Time = = 
 An almost entirely alternate take on the character of the Evil Queen is Regina Mills , the main antagonist in the first season of the 2011 Disney ( ABC ) live @-@ action TV series Once Upon a Time where she is played by Lana Parrilla . Regina is the mayor of the idyllic town of Storybrooke , Maine , but is secretly the Evil Queen of legend , having cursed many beloved fairytale characters to live in a land without magic , where they will never get their happy endings . The show is not directly based on the Disney animated films , but is inspired by them and makes many references to them . One of its episodes is titled " The Evil Queen " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Disney version of the character was very well received by film critics , even as some were disturbed ( columnist Dorothy Kilgallen for instance urged Disney to not make future villains as scary as the Witch ) . Stephen Hunter included her being " cool " among the " wonderful truths about Snow White . " Janet Maslin wrote the film 's Snow White " exists only to be victimized by her wicked stepmother - a far more interesting character . The image of the wicked Queen ( initially conceived as a raven @-@ haired glamour girl , and the epitome of late @-@ 1930s sophistication ) who drinks an aging potion and then shrivels , sprouting warts and claws , turning before our eyes from a sexy , <unk> creature into a <unk> old crone , must leave as powerful an impression on the audience as Snow White 's chirpy feminity . " Similarly , Roger Ebert wrote Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was " not so much about Snow White as it was about the Seven Dwarfs and the Evil Queen , " opining this was the reason it has remained " the ultimate animated masterpiece " by 2001 instead of having been forgotten soon after its premiere in 1937 . 
 Feminism academic Camille Paglia said that she used to be transfixed by this " temperamental diva bitch " , due to the contrast with the ideal of womanhood that she had been presented to as a child : " Mary , this silent mother ; and here was the witch queen who has this weird dialogue in the mirror and it didn 't have to be charitable and it didn 't have to be nice . I thought she was fabulous . " Likewise , Lana Parrilla , who later herself played the Evil Queen in Once Upon A Time , said that whenever she watched Disney 's Snow White as a young girl she rooted for and " loved the evil queen ― every time the evil queen came on , I was like ' OK ! ' She was just so fascinating to me . " Author Deborah Lipp wrote : " As I 've said before and will doubtless say again , given a choice of being Snow White ( helpless , sweet , voiceless ) and the Wicked Queen , with the cool castle and the magic and the minions , give me my Magic Mirror now ! " Film director John Waters said he too rooted for the evil queen to win , and Chay Yew said that if he were a Disney character , he would be the evil queen from Snow White . 
 Once Upon the Time co @-@ creator Adam Horowitz said that his earliest Disney memory was seeing a re @-@ release of Disney 's Snow White when he was " terrified by the Evil Queen while also being unable to look away and that stuck with me through the years . " Similarly , fashion designer and Angelina Jolie 's Maleficent collaborator Stella McCartney said : " My favorite Disney film was Snow White . I remember growing up watching [ it ] and being completely freaked out by that scene where the evil queen becomes the old witch and she makes the poison apple . " Film maker and actor Terry Gilliam listed the film 's Queen among his eight favourite villains , commenting how " truly strange " is that " vanity and beauty are what she 's all about , yet the identity she assumes when she becomes the old beggar woman is practically the ugliest in all the kingdom . " Fairy tale lecturer Jack Zipes alike noted that " it is somewhat strange that the queen believes the mirror , for the picture of Snow White reveals that she is a pretty pubescent red @-@ cheeked ordinary girl while the queen is a stunning beautiful mature woman who might easily win a beauty contest . " 
 Jim Lentz , Director of Animation Art at Heritage Auctions , said in 2015 : " The Evil Queen is , to this day , one of the great villains of cinema , and she was at her terrifying best when she became the Old Hag and set off to destroy Snow White . " According to film maker and actor Brad Bird , back in 1937 " they had to re @-@ <unk> the seats in a very large movie palace in New York because little kids were peeing on the seats when the witch came on in Snow White . " The Queen ranked as tenth in the American Film Institute 's 2003 list of the 50 Best Movie Villains of All Time , being the highest @-@ ranked animated villain . When Walt Disney Parks and Resorts held their 2011 Disney Villains popularity poll for Wicked <unk> Apple Awards ( named after the Queen 's poison apple ) , the Evil Queen came first and won in three out of five categories : " Sinister <unk> " ( for the most fashionable villain ) , " <unk> ! Foiled Again ! " ( for the villain who received the best comeuppance ) , and the ultimate " <unk> of Them All " ( for the most evil villain ) . Jeff <unk> 's 2005 book Disney Villains : The Top Secret Files ranks her as " the greatest villain of them all " . 
 In 2013 , the Queen was among the 20 terrifying kids ' movie characters by Digital Spy , commenting that " Julia Roberts and Charlize Theron may have taken a stab at this role in two competing 2012 blockbusters , but they didn 't get anywhere near the kind of creepiness of Disney 's evil Queen , " as well as among ten scariest Disney villains of all time by <unk> In 2014 , E ! ranked " the original head bitch in charge " as the seventh top Disney Villain , while WatchMojo.com ranked her as the ninth top Disney animated villain and the fifth greatest female movie villain of all time . Nerdist put the Disney <unk> " starting in 1937 with the Evil Queen " at top spot in a 2015 ranking of " most bad ass " female villains in pop culture , while Gay Times ranked her third among the " top five wicked women of Disney " and MTV listed her as one of the nine Disney Villains who were " way better than the good guys . " That same year , Moviepilot included her among the seven most <unk> and evil Disney Villains as " she may be the prettiest woman in the list , but sadly , that beautiful facade covers an ugly and wicked soul , " while Gulf News , ranking her as the second greatest Disney Villain , commented she " still stands today - 78 years after the release of the first movie , " as the most evil personality that Disney has ever created . Moviepilot also proposed " Disney could give Snow White the Maleficent treatment and make a version telling the story through the Evil Queen ’ s perspective , " suggesting she should be played by Megan Fox . In 2016 , The Frisky described her and Maleficent as " two of the best @-@ realized female villains in movie history . " 
 During an auction in 1988 , an animation cel from the iconic scene of the Queen holding her heart box sold for a record @-@ setting price of $ 30 @,@ 000 . In 1997 , another cel from the same scene sold for $ 21 @,@ 275 and a cel of the Witch offering an apple to Snow White realized $ 13 @,@ 800 . Another cel showing the Queen reading her spellbook sold for $ 8 @,@ 050 in an earlier in auction in 1995 . In 2015 , a Hag cell was sold on an <unk> for $ 48 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 According to Maria Tatar , an academic specializing in children 's literature , the film turned " the evil queen into a figure of gripping narrative energy and makes Snow White [ the character ] so dull that she requires a supporting cast of seven to enliven her scenes . Ultimately it is the stepmother 's disruptive , disturbing , and divisive presence that invests the film with a degree of fascination that has facilitated its widespread circulation and that has allowed it to take such powerful hold in our own culture . " 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Alan Charles Kors and Edward Peter credited the Queen 's character 's influence in changing the popular visual image of witches in film and other fiction as specifically female , more often young and attractive than old and ugly , and dressed in a characteristically defining costume . A part of <unk> Nurmi 's inspiration for her character of Vampira came from Nurmi being fascinated by the Queen after watching Disney 's Snow White at the age of 14 . Brigitte Nielsen said she has also based her role as the Black Witch ( who also kidnaps a prince character out of jealously for a princess ) in the 1992 Italian film <unk> 2 on that version of the Queen . When she was cast for the 1939 's The Wizard of Oz as the Wicked Witch of the West , Gale Sondergaard ( who herself has earlier served as one of inspirations for Disney ) insisted on playing a glamorous vision of the character , similar to the Disney 's interpretation of the Queen from Snow White ; when Sondergaard 's idea was rejected by producers Mervyn LeRoy and Arthur Freed in favor of making the Wicked Witch ugly , she withdrew from the project and Margaret Hamilton was cast instead . 
 The Queen 's character design from the film was also used in some other Snow White adaptations , such as the Turkish film Pamuk <unk> ve Yedi <unk> ( 1970 ) , as well as for the inspired main antagonist characters in the otherwise unrelated titles , such as the stepmother queen / with in the Russian animated film The Wild Swans ( 1962 ) , the Witch Queen in the Spanish film Tom Thumb and Little Red Riding Hood ( 1962 ) , the goddess Venus in the anime version of <unk> , Queen <unk> in the American film The <unk> Bunch ( 1985 ) , and the queen of the witches in the video game Curse of Enchantia ( 1992 ) . Lady Macbeth in Orson Welles ' 1948 Macbeth resembles the Queen in her costume , make @-@ up , and even the manner of her death ; Lady Macbeth was also visually based on the Queen in a 1982 comic book adaptation . The evil Queen Bavmorda from 1988 's film Willow bears a resemblance too , so much that Cinefantastique editor Frederick S. Clarke described her as " simply Snow White 's Wicked Queen , right down to her hooded costume . " Robin Wood has drawn a connection between the looks of the Witch and of the Emperor in the Star Wars franchise . According to the designer Steve Brown , the Queen 's old Witch form served as an inspiration for the main character Witch Queen in the video game Cauldron ( 1985 ) . 
 An official Disney.com blog Oh My Disney stated the Evil Queen has been " the original Disney villain , and we ’ re really not exaggerating . " According to The Daily Telegraph , La Verne 's role as the Queen " was credited as the model for such future villains as Ursula in The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) and Scar in The Lion King ( 1994 ) . " Lady Bane , a vain evil sorceress from Disney 's Adventures of the Gummi Bears , bears a similarity to the Evil Queen in her costume and character . Four wicked witches of the East , West , North and South , resembling the Witch from Disney 's Snow White , are also the villains Mickey has to kill to save Disneyland in 1988 's Mickey Mouse : The Computer Game . The first names for the magic @-@ wielding antagonist couple The <unk> in Disney XD 's own series The 7D ( 2014 ) ― set in a timeframe before the Seven Dwarfs first met Snow White ― might have been inspired by the Evil Queen character 's alternate name " Grimhilde " , with the bumbling warlock husband named " Grim " and the determined witch wife named " Hildy " . 
 Susan Sarandon 's character of Queen Narissa in Disney 's own Enchanted ( 2007 ) , had her characteristics , powers , and physical features were inspired by the Queen from the film and by Maleficent from Sleeping Beauty . Early on into the project , Enchanted was actually supposed to be a direct @-@ to @-@ video animated sequel to Disney 's Snow White ( with a working title of " Snow White 2 " ) in which Narissa ( back then often misspelled as " <unk> " ) was the evil Queen 's sister who would kidnap six of the dwarfs to lure Snow White , the Prince , and their 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Rose aided by Dopey , into a trap . When Filmation announced their own animated sequel to the fairy tale , the studio was sued by Disney until Filmation promised their characters would not resemble the ones from the Disney film ; the settlement stated there could not be a " wicked witch " character in the film which instead was made to feature the Queen 's brother in a vendetta to avenge her death ( the title was also changed , from Snow White in the Land of Doom to Happily Ever After ) . 
 = = = Homages and parodies = = = 
 The character has also made several parodic cameo and homage appearances in non @-@ Disney media . In the 1945 radio program This Is My Best , the Queen uttered a curse so dreadful that the Magic Mirror shattered into a thousand pieces and where the Queen once stood was nothing but a heap of ashes from which black spiders crawled and scuffled off into the night . In Woody Allen 's live @-@ action film Annie Hall ( 1977 ) , Alvy mentions that when he saw Disney 's Snow White , he was attracted to the Queen while all the other children had a crush on Snow White . This is followed by an animated sequence of the Wicked Queen , resembling Annie and voiced by Diane Keaton , talking to the cartoon version of the daydreaming Alvy , but turns out that even the Queen scolds him ; Alvy attributes it to her having her period mood , to which the Queen reminds him she is just a cartoon character . 
 In The Simpsons episode " Four Great Women and a Manicure " ( 2009 ) , the Queen escapes the dwarves after poisoning Snow White , only to be lynched by a mob of angry woodland creatures . In the U.S. Acres two @-@ part cartoon " Snow Wade and the 77 Dwarves " , <unk> appears as the Wicked Queen with a costume is based off the Disney version . In the Family Guy 2009 episode " Road to the Multiverse " , Herbert appears as the disguised Queen . The Muppet Show character Miss Piggy is the Queen in the 2010 parody comic book miniseries Muppet Snow White . Cassie <unk> played the Evil Queen in the 2013 YouTube parody music video Cell Block Tango . The Queen also appears in Counting Scars , Oh My Disney 's Halloween 2014 parody music video of OneRepublic 's " Counting Stars " . 
 = 1856 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1856 Atlantic hurricane season featured six tropical cyclones , five of which made landfall . The first system , Hurricane One , was first observed in the Gulf of Mexico on August 9 . The final storm , Hurricane Six , was last observed on September 22 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . Only two tropical cyclones during the season existed simultaneously . One of the cyclones has only a single known point in its track due to a sparsity of data . Operationally , another tropical cyclone was believed to have existed in the Wilmington , North Carolina area in September , but HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – excludes this system . Another tropical cyclone that existed over the Northeastern United States in mid @-@ August was later added to HURDAT . 
 Four tropical cyclones reached hurricane status , including two which became major hurricanes , Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . However , in the absence of modern satellite and other remote @-@ sensing technologies , only storms that affected populated land areas or encountered ships at sea are currently known , so the actual total could be higher . An undercount bias of zero to four cyclones per year between 1886 and 1910 has been estimated . The strongest cyclone of the season , the first hurricane , peaked at Category 4 strength with 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds . Known as the 1856 Last Island hurricane , it brought devastation to southern Louisiana . More than 200 people were killed after a storm surge submerged Last Island , making it one of the deadliest hurricanes in Louisiana history . Hurricane Two brought heavy rains and squalls to Barbados and Grenada , causing " considerable " damage . Tropical Storms Three and Four had a minor impact on the Northeastern United States and Cuba , respectively . Additionally , Hurricane Five caused four deaths in Inagua , Bahamas and had a minor impact on Cuba and the United States . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 49 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 On August 9 , a minimal hurricane was observed near the Dry Tortugas . The storm moved northwestward and strengthened , becoming a Category 2 hurricane about 12 hours later . The hurricane reached Category 3 strengthened late on August 9 . It continued to deepen and became a Category 4 hurricane on the following day . At 1800 UTC on August 10 , the hurricane attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 934 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Simultaneously , the storm made landfall in Last Island , Louisiana . It rapidly weakened inland and fell to tropical storm intensity on August 11 . The system then drifted northeastward , until dissipating over Mississippi early on August 12 . 
 Offshore , at least 183 people drowned after steamers and schooners sunk in rough seas produced by the hurricane . A storm surge between 11 and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 and 3 @.@ 7 m ) lashed Last Island , Louisiana . The island was completely submerged , with virtually every structure destroyed , including the hotels and casinos , while all crops were ruined . Additionally , Last Island itself split in two . Inland , heavy rainfall caused the <unk> River , destroying crops and every house in Abbeville . The storm produced up to 13 @.@ 14 inches ( 334 mm ) of precipitation to New Orleans . In Plaquemines Parish , rice fields were under several feet of water , while many orange trees lost their fruit . The storm resulted in at least 200 fatalities , making it one of the deadliest tropical cyclones in the history of Louisiana . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A hurricane with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) was initially observed about 750 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) northwest of the coast of Venezuela on August 13 . The cyclone tracked due westward and crossed Grenada , before entering the eastern Caribbean . Heavy rain and squalls were reported in Barbados and Grenada . This system was last noted near La <unk> , Venezuela on August 14 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 The third tropical storm of the season developed on August 19 about 170 miles ( 270 km ) southeast of Cape Fear , North Carolina . At 1100 UTC that day , it made landfall near Cape Lookout with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm traveled north and emerged into the Chesapeake Bay near Norfolk , Virginia . The storm continued travelling northward just offshore of the east coast of the US before finally dissipating off Rhode Island on August 21 . Heavy rains and strong winds were reported in Connecticut , Massachusetts , New York , and Washington , D.C. This system was known as the Charter Oak Storm , because it felled the famed Charter Oak in Hartford , Connecticut . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 A limited number of sources indicate that a tropical storm was briefly active in the vicinity of Havana , Cuba on August 21 . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 A hurricane formed north of Hispaniola on August 25 . It moved westward , passing over the Inagua Islands before striking the north coast of Cuba as a Category 2 hurricane on August 27 . The cyclone weakened to Category 1 strength as it crossed the island , close to Matanzas , but regained first Category 2 and then Category 3 strength as it moved north through the Gulf of Mexico . The cyclone made landfall near Panama City , Florida , on August 31 as a Category 2 hurricane . Thereafter , it then quickly weakened to a tropical storm while moving northward through Georgia and South Carolina . The storm entered the Atlantic from the state of Virginia on next day and dissipated on September 3 . 
 The hurricane destroyed thirty houses on Inagua and four people died there . Several vessels were run ashore on the Cuban coast . In Florida , high tides were reported along the coast . The SS Florida was tossed ashore at St. Joseph Bay and completely destroyed , while streets were inundated with water in Apalachicola . Inland , strong winds and heavy winds brought very damage inland , especially at Marianna , which was considered " a wreak . " In Georgia , flooding damaged numerous bridges , damns , and corn and cotton crop fields . Many streets and sidewalks in Columbus were blocked by falling trees . At Norfolk , Virginia , on September 1 , the spire of a church was blown down by the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 A sixth tropical storm was first observed by the brig Caroline E. Kelly on September 18 , which experienced a heavy gale while located about 930 miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . With initial winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , the storm slowly strengthened while moving north @-@ northwestward . At 1200 UTC on September 19 , it reached hurricane status and peaked with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The storm decelerated and remained at this intensity for over 24 hours . Late on September 21 , the system re @-@ curved westward and weakened to a tropical storm . It was last seen by the Pride of the Sea on September 22 , while located about 695 miles ( 1 @,@ 120 km ) south of Cape Race , Newfoundland . 
 = Nikita Filatov = 
 Nikita Vasilyevich Filatov ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ; born May 25 , 1990 ) is a Russian professional ice hockey left winger currently playing for Admiral Vladivostok of the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . He has previously played for CSKA Moscow and Salavat Yulaev Ufa of the KHL . Prior to 2012 , Filatov played in North America for the Ottawa Senators and Columbus Blue Jackets of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , along with their respective affiliates in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . 
 At the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , Filatov was selected sixth overall by the Columbus Blue Jackets . Filatov was the top @-@ ranked European skater by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . Filatov played two seasons with the Blue Jackets organization . During the 2009 – 10 season , Filatov was unhappy with his situation in Columbus and was loaned to CSKA Moscow for the remainder of the season . At the 2011 NHL Entry Draft , the Blue Jackets then traded him to Ottawa in exchange for a third @-@ round draft pick . In December 2011 , the Senators loaned Filatov to CSKA Moscow for the balance of the 2011 – 12 season . The following season , Filatov signed with Salavat Yulaev . The Senators chose not to tender Filatov a qualifying offer , making him a free agent . 
 Filatov has represented Russia in international hockey at two World U18 Championships , winning gold and silver medals , and three World Junior Championships , where he has won two bronze medals . He was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team at the 2008 World U18 Championships and the 2009 World Junior Championships . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Filatov played minor and junior hockey in the CSKA Red Army hockey system from the age of 13 . At the age of 15 during the 2005 – 06 season , he made his debut for CSKA @-@ 2 — the club 's junior team — where he continued to play during the 2006 – 07 season , and averaged more than three points per game . In the same season , Filatov made his international debut for Russia at the World Under 18 Championship . 
 During the 2007 – 08 season , Filatov made his professional Russian Superleague ( RSL ) debut with CSKA , seeing limited action in five games . He spent the majority of the season playing at the junior level in Russia . With his CSKA junior team , Filatov played in 23 games , scoring 23 goals and providing 24 assists . Leading up to the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , the League 's annual meeting at which the rights to amateur players are divided among teams , NHL 's Central Scouting Bureau , ranked Filatov as the top European skater in their mid @-@ term and final rankings . After the 2007 – 08 season , Filatov was subsequently selected sixth overall at the Draft by the Columbus Blue Jackets . 
 Filatov was also the first overall selection in the 2008 Canadian Hockey League Import Draft , selected by the Sudbury Wolves of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . Sudbury General Manager Mike <unk> was comfortable with the risks of not knowing whether Filatov would play at junior or professional level when he came to North America . Blue Jackets General Manager Scott Howson would not guarantee Filatov a place on their team , saying , " We 've already told Nikita that we 'll see how things go in training camp and we 'll decide what 's best for him . " 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 After being drafted by the Blue Jackets , Filatov signed a three @-@ year contract with the club on July 10 , 2008 . His base salary for the contract was $ 875 @,@ 000 , with bonus clauses that could bring the value as high as $ 1 @.@ 35 million per season . His signing with Columbus created some controversy within the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) , however , as League President Alexander Medvedev claimed that the Blue Jackets owed CSKA Moscow compensation of at least $ 1 @.@ 5 million for signing Filatov . Medvedev claimed that although the term of the contract had expired , under Russian law it did not terminate until an indemnity amount had been negotiated . The Blue Jackets and Filatov believed that giving his club 30 days notice was sufficient to terminate the contract . CSKA threatened to withhold Filatov 's transfer card , thus impeding his ability to play in another league , but Filatov , his lawyers and the Blue Jackets believed they had followed the necessary tenets of Russian law . Filatov 's contract was one of six reviewed by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) in an attempt to mediate the disputes between the KHL and NHL . During this investigation , the players were unable to play international hockey sanctioned by the IIHF . In September , the KHL dropped its opposition to Filatov 's contract with the Blue Jackets , and he received his transfer . 
 Filatov did not make the team after attending training camp with the Blue Jackets , instead making his North American professional debut for the Blue Jackets ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Syracuse Crunch . On October 15 , 2008 , however , Filatov was called up to the NHL , playing in his first game and scoring his first goal with the Blue Jackets on October 17 against the Nashville Predators . For the rest of the 2008 – 09 season , Filatov split time between the AHL and the NHL . He played eight games with the Blue Jackets , finishing the season with four goals . He became the first Blue Jackets rookie to record a hat @-@ trick in the January 10 , 2009 , game against the Minnesota Wild . At the end of the season , Filatov had played 39 games with the Crunch in the AHL , scoring 16 goals and 16 assists . For his performances , he was named as a starter for the PlanetUSA team in the 2009 AHL All @-@ Star Game . 
 At the start of the 2009 – 10 season , Filatov made the Blue Jackets roster after training camp . Although healthy , he did not play in six of the team 's first 18 games , a decision made by Columbus Head Coach Ken Hitchcock . Filatov was unhappy with his playing time and role on the team under Hitchcock and requested to be transferred back to his Russian club team . Hitchcock and the Blue Jackets coaching staff tried to improve Filatov 's attention to defensive aspects of the game . The Blue Jackets management agreed to Filatov 's request to return to Russia for the remainder of the season . This arrangement resulted from direct dealings between the Blue Jackets and CSKA Moscow , where Filatov 's salary was paid by the Russian club , and the Blue Jackets retained his rights . Shortly after his return to Russia , Filatov set a KHL record by scoring the game @-@ winning goal in three consecutive games . He was named the League 's best newcomer ( defined by the KHL as " a player born in 1987 or later , who has played no more than 20 top @-@ level matches in previous national tournaments " ) for November , and the League 's best rookie for the 11th week of the season . In his shortened season in Russia , Filatov played 26 games , scoring nine goals and adding 13 assists . Initial statements by both sides indicated the player would return to Columbus after the 2009 – 10 season , but since returning to Russia , Filatov has been less clear about his intentions for the 2010 – 11 season , stating , " I hope I 'll be back next year , but right now , it 's really hard to say because it will again be a tough decision . " Howson did not comment on Filatov 's stance , except to say that he expects Filatov to be at the team 's training camp prior to the 2010 – 11 season . Subsequently , Filatov stated after the 2009 – 10 season that he intended to return to Columbus for training camp . 
 During the off @-@ season , the Blue Jackets sent Development Coach Tyler Wright to Russia to train with Filatov to assess his readiness for the upcoming season , and to communicate the team 's desire to work with him . Blue Jackets Head Coach Scott Arniel was pleased to see Filatov arrive in Columbus six weeks ahead of the teams ' 2010 – 11 season , allowing him a chance to mend relationships with his teammates who may have been annoyed by Filatov 's departure . Howson said the team never doubted Filatov 's skill : " Nikita has the skill and the ability to play in a top @-@ six role . " Arniel was optimistic about Filatov 's return to the team , offering him a clean slate and a chance to earn a spot on one of the team 's top two lines . After speaking with his friend Sergei Shirokov ( who played for Arniel on the Manitoba Moose ) , Filatov was optimistic about working with Columbus ' new head coach . Filatov started the season with the Blue Jackets at the NHL level and recorded seven assists in 23 games . In December 2010 , Filatov was demoted to the AHL and spent the remainder of the season with the Springfield Falcons , Columbus ' new AHL affiliate . With the Falcons , he played in 36 games , scoring nine goals and adding 11 assists . 
 At the 2011 NHL Entry Draft , Columbus severed their ties with Filatov , trading him to the Ottawa Senators in exchange for a third @-@ round pick . Filatov left his family vacationing in the Dominican Republic and joined the Senators for their development camp at Scotiabank Place in Ottawa . He made the Senators out of training camp , but was a healthy scratch several times , splitting his time with Ottawa and the Binghamton Senators of the AHL . In November 2011 , the Ottawa Citizen 's Allen <unk> reported from sources in Columbus that Filatov had refused to play the style the Blue Jackets asked of him , saying to his coach , " Filly [ Filatov ] don 't do rebounds . " In December , the Senators offered Filatov the choice to play the rest of the season with CSKA Moscow of the KHL and Filatov agreed . Senators General Manager Bryan Murray suggested it was better for his development as Murray felt that Filatov needed to work on becoming stronger and compete harder to make it in the NHL . Head Coach Paul MacLean felt Filatov 's struggles in the NHL were surprising , considering he had 12 points in 15 games in the AHL . Filatov himself stated that he had to get better . MacLean had hoped that Filatov would have stayed and worked on his game in Binghamton , but Murray explained that it was more lucrative for Filatov to play in the KHL than at Binghamton , and did not block the transfer . Filatov did not immediately agree to terms with CSKA . For a few days it appeared that Filatov would not sign a contract with CSKA , so the Senators assigned him to Binghamton and threatened to suspend him in order to remove him from the Senators ' salary cap . On December 18 , 2011 , Filatov agreed to a contract with CSKA Moscow . 
 Despite Filatov leaving for the KHL , the Senators still had hopes to develop Filatov . Filatov 's contract was ready to expire in June 2012 , and the Senators planned to make a qualifying contract offer to Filatov to retain his NHL rights . However , in May 2012 , Filatov chose to stay in the KHL and agreed to a one @-@ year contract with Salavat Yulaev Ufa . After he signed with Salavat Yulaev , the Senators chose to not make the offer , making him an unrestricted free agent . After three seasons in the NHL , Filatov left with only six goals and eight assists in 53 NHL games . Stephen <unk> of The Globe and Mail identified him as one of the top five biggest " draft busts " in recent NHL history . Hockey 's Future also rated Filatov a bust . 
 In the 2012 – 13 season , Filatov played in 47 games with Salavat Yulaev , scoring ten goals and adding 11 assists . He remained with Salavat for the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = International play = = 
 Filatov has played extensively for Russia 's national teams in under @-@ 18 and under @-@ 20 tournaments . His first IIHF competition for Russia was the 2007 U18 Championship held in the Finnish cities of Rauma and Tampere . Russia won a gold medal in that tournament , and as an underaged player , Filatov contributed four goals and five assists in seven games . He led the Russian team in total points and was second to Alexei <unk> in goals scored . After this tournament , Russia 's coaches named Filatov as one of the team 's three best players . Filatov also played at the 2008 U18 Championship held in his native Russia , in Kazan . Filatov captained the team to a silver medal , scoring three goals and adding six assists . He was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . 
 At the 2008 World Junior Championship in Pardubice and Liberec , Czech Republic , Filatov made his debut with Russia 's under @-@ 20 junior squad . At the tournament , he scored four goals and added five assists , leading the Russian squad in total points and placing second to Viktor Tikhonov in goals scored . The Russian team captured bronze at the tournament after defeating the United States 4 – 2 . Filatov scored two goals in the bronze medal game , and was named Russia 's best player of the game by the IIHF . 
 The AHL 's Syracuse Crunch released Filatov to participate in the 2009 World Junior Championship held in Ottawa . Filatov served as Russia 's captain for the tournament . In seven games at the tournament , he scored eight goals and added three assists , which tied him for fourth in tournament scoring . The Russian team again captured the bronze medal , this time by defeating Slovakia 5 – 2 . Filatov was named best player of the game for a preliminary round game against Finland and for the bronze medal game against Slovakia , and he was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . 
 After returning to Russia early in the 2009 – 10 season , Filatov had the opportunity to compete in a third World Junior Championship at the 2010 tournament held in Saskatoon and Regina . As in 2009 , he served as Russia 's team captain . During preliminary round play , Filatov was named best player for Russia in their game against Finland . The tournament , however , was a disappointment for the Russians after they lost to Switzerland in the quarterfinals . Prior to the fifth place game against the Czech Republic , Filatov was stripped of his captaincy and replaced by teammate Kirill Petrov after criticizing the team personnel during a media scrum . After participating in three World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , Filatov is tied with Evgeny Kuznetsov as Russia 's all @-@ time leading scorer at the event — both forwards finished their junior careers with 26 points . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Scouting reports on Filatov were mixed in advance of the 2008 NHL Entry Draft . Sergei <unk> , head coach of Russia 's national junior team , said of Filatov , " He definitely has an NHL upside because he can score , is a well @-@ rounded player and is responsible in the defensive zone . " Independent scouting service Red Line Report at one point declared Filatov " the next best thing to Steven Stamkos " ( who was eventually selected first overall in the 2008 Draft ) . McKeen 's Hockey scouts described him as a cross between Ilya Kovalchuk and Maxim <unk> . His strengths included his skating and vision , as well as the inclination to play at high intensity . The NHL 's Director of European Scouting , Goran Stubb , assessed Filatov 's NHL readiness as , " Nikita is a leader , has a great attitude , an excellent work ethic and tons of talent . " Other scouts were not as impressed with his defensive game , however , preferring to focus on his offensive abilities . Off the ice , Filatov does not train in a traditional gym or weight room , preferring to run outside in sand and lift objects such as trees and boulders . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Filatov was born in Moscow , Russia , to parents Slava and Yelena . He speaks fluent English due in large part to his mother , a teacher who gave him lessons at home . When he started playing professional hockey in North America for Syracuse , his mother stayed for several weeks to help him get acclimated to his new surroundings . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics Sources 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = Campus of Michigan State University = 
 The campus of Michigan State University is located in East Lansing on the banks of the Red Cedar River , and comprises a contiguous area of 5 @,@ 200 acres ( 21 km2 ) , 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 km2 ) of which are developed . Built amid virgin forest , the campus opened in 1855 with three buildings , none of which remain . As an agricultural college , the campus was originally located several miles outside of the city of Lansing , but as the population of the college grew , the city of East Lansing developed just north of the area 's main avenue . 
 As the campus of a large university , MSU has many facilities that serve not only the school , but the entire metropolitan area . Public venues on campus include a football stadium , multipurpose arena , ice arena , concert hall , hotel , and golf course . The campus also has its own power plant , laundry service , incinerator , and Amtrak train station . 
 In terms of infrastructure , there are 556 buildings : 100 for academics , 131 for agriculture , 166 for housing and food service , and 42 for athletics . Overall , the university has 22 @,@ 763 @,@ 025 square feet ( 2 @,@ 114 @,@ 754 @.@ 2 m2 ) of total indoor space . MSU also owns 44 non @-@ campus properties , totaling 22 @,@ 000 acres ( 89 km2 ) in 28 different counties . However , the size of the campus , combined with its curving roads and lack of a centralized quadrangle , can make it difficult for newcomers to navigate . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the white settlement of the region , the area that is now East Lansing was a combination of dense virgin oak forest and tamarack swampland . In July 1855 a 677 @-@ acre site just north of the Red Cedar River was recommended to the State Board of Education , the report to the board noted that except for the occasional clearing the land was dense hardwood forest . It was in one of these " oak openings " that the school built its first three buildings in 1856 : a multipurpose building called College Hall , a dormitory building later known as " Saints ' Rest , " and a barn . College Hall contained classrooms , offices , laboratories , a library / museum , and a multifunctional lecture hall / chapel . It was also one of the first buildings in America to be used for the teaching of scientific agriculture . 
 Since the college was founded in a sparsely populated area with only a handful of nearby farmhouses , and it was an arduous stagecoach ride from Lansing , the College built four faculty houses in the first year of classes in 1857 . One of these original faculty houses , Cowles House , still exists as the President 's official residence , though only two walls and part of the foundation remain of the original construction . Ultimately , ten faculty homes were built on campus between 1857 and 1885 . Besides Cowles House , one other survived and was moved into the city of East Lansing ; the rest were demolished between 1922 and 1948 to make room for the north complex of residence halls and the Student Union , designed by Pond and Pond . 
 Michigan State 's campus was among the first to serve as a botanical laboratory for its faculty and students and is the site of what is , today , the oldest continuously operated botanical garden in the US . In December 1879 , Professor William J. Beal buried seeds of 23 common plants in 20 jars of sand ( to prevent water accumulation ) in various locations around campus . At certain fixed intervals , currently every 20 years , a jar is dug up to determine which seeds still germinate after their prolonged periods of unlit isolation . The most recent jar exhumation , April 2000 , found only a few specimens surviving to germinate , notably Verbascum <unk> ( moth mullein ) , after 120 years . Five buried jars remain , with the next unearthing scheduled for 2020 . 
 In 1871 , President Abbott proposed that the Board of Trustees " take steps to provide for the proper layout of the college grounds , planting of trees , location of buildings , etc . , by a competent landscape gardener , as soon as means can be spared . " In 1872 , Adam Oliver , a landscape gardener from Kalamazoo , was hired . During his tenure from 1872 – 1887 , he was oversaw the layout of walks and drives and the placement of numerous buildings , including Linton Hall in 1881 . He was responsible for the closed roadway system , an altered form of which remains today as West Circle Drive , and was also responsible for the informal arrangement of campus buildings . The character of the campus is described in President Abbott 's 1882 report to the Board as follows : " There are in the park no straight rows of buildings or of trees , but its ... buildings ... are separated by undulating lawns , shallow ravines , and groups of trees " . 
 In 1906 O. C. Simonds a well @-@ known prairie school landscape architect was hired , he simplified the road system , planned walks and planting areas . It was <unk> who first described this area around West Circle Drive as a " sacred space " and who reaffirmed the idea of as area of campus as a park to be protected from development . In a 1906 letter to the Board for Trustee 's " This area is , I am sure , that feature of the College which is most pleasantly and affectionately remembered by the students after they leave their Alma Mater , and I doubt if any instruction given has a greater effect upon their lives . " 
 In 1914 the college hired noted landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted , Jr. with bigger buildings like Olds and Agriculture Halls being built Olmsted faced the challenge of maintaining the informal character of campus while minimizing walking distance . In 1915 , the Olmsted Brothers firm issued a report its solution was a dramatic redesign of campus around quadrangles However , the plan was unpopular with students and alumni who wished to maintain the informal parklike feel of campus . After eight years of consulting and little in way of changes the school ended its relationship with Olmsted in 1922 . 
 The college in 1923 hired T. Glenn Phillips , Phillips ' 1926 plan for campus kept Simonds ' " sacred space " and it continued the curvilinear road system to the east , with buildings placed in an informal manner . His plan called for campus north of the river to be dedicated to academic purposes while all agriculture and athletic facilities were to be placed south of the river . Phillips ' plan would set the tone for campus development for the next 25 years . 
 Post WWII the large number of GI 's returning , President John A. Hannah 's push to expand resulting in a large increase in enrollment quickened in the pace of development south of the river . The driving factor in campus development of was the automobile this the south featuring buildings and streets generally laid out in a grid system with more land dedicated to parking lots . This growth resulted in the largest residence hall system in the United States . 16 @,@ 000 students live in MSU 's 23 undergraduate halls , one graduate hall , and three apartment villages . Though MSU has not built a new resident hall since 1967 , it has modernized several of its dormitories . In 2007 , MSU opened the Residential College in Arts & Humanities in a newly renovated Snyder @-@ Phillips Hall , the location of MSU 's first residential college , Justin Morrill College . 
 In 2001 a new master plan called 2020 Vision : A Community Concept for the MSU Campus was developed to guide future campus development . Amongst the recommendations it called for the removing of central campus parking to parking garages replacing it with green space , the removal of head @-@ in parking around West and East Circle Drives , adding more bike lanes and planting more trees on south campus in order to give it the look and feel of north campus . 
 = = Areas = = 
 = = = North campus = = = 
 The oldest part of campus is north of the Red Cedar River and south of Grand River Avenue and Michigan Avenue . Its buildings are an eclectic collection of architectural styles including Collegiate Gothic , Beaux Arts , and Richardsonian Romanesque . The north campus has plentiful trees and curving roads with few straight lines . In the center of the north campus lies the " Sacred Space " , which is surrounded on all sides by West Circle Drive . It was in this area that the College erected its first three buildings . None of these three buildings are still standing , but there are still some important historical buildings on and near the Sacred Space . These include Cowles House , the President 's official residence , and Beaumont Tower , a carillon clock tower marking the site of College Hall . To the east of the Sacred Space lies Laboratory Row , a group of laboratory buildings constructed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . These include Eustace @-@ Cole Hall and Marshall @-@ Adams Hall , America 's first freestanding laboratories for horticulture and bacteriology , respectively . 
 = = = South campus = = = 
 The campus south of the Red Cedar River consists mostly of buildings built after World War II . Many of them are built in the International and Brutalist styles , with relatively straight roadways and fewer trees than the north campus . South campus also has more surface parking lots , due partly to the sporting and performing arts venues . The " 2020 Vision " Master Plan proposes replacing these parking lots with parking ramps and green space , in order to replicate the park like feel of North Campus but these plans will take many years to reach fruition . Notable academic and research buildings on the South Campus include the Cyclotron and the College of Law . 
 = = = Service campus and beyond = = = 
 The majority of Michigan State 's academic and residential buildings are north of the Canadian National Railway . South of the CN line are service buildings such as the T. B. Simon Power Plant , laundry services , and the campus incinerator . Nevertheless , there are a growing number of academic buildings south of the railroad . The MSU Clinical Center and the Life Sciences Building are both in this part of campus , as is a nature preserve known as the Baker <unk> . South still of the university service buildings and the CSX railroad lie thousands of acres of university @-@ owned farmland and agricultural research related facilities such the MSU Pavilion . The proximity of the farmland to campus helps MSU retain a rural feel in keeping with its roots as an agricultural college that mixes with the more urban atmosphere of East Lansing just a mile north . Recently , The <unk> Center has been added to Michigan State University 's campus . The <unk> Center is an educational place for students , faculty , and community members to learn to safely handle firearms . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Michigan State is home to three bronze statues , two of which were erected in 2005 and one in 2003 . On the entrance plaza of the Administration Building that bears his name is the statue of former president John A. Hannah . Downstream on the south bank of the Red Cedar River is the new bronze statue of " The Spartan " . This 2005 replica replaced the original terra cotta statue , which can still be seen in the west concourse of Spartan Stadium . The third statue , erected in 2003 , is a 12 @-@ foot likeness of famed Spartan Basketball star and Los Angeles Laker , Earvin " Magic " Johnson . 
 Another landmark is the spray painted boulder known as " The Rock " . Lying east of Farm Lane just north of the river , it is a popular spot for campus events such as outdoor summer theatre , Greek house tailgating , and candlelight vigils . It was once used by Michigan Agricultural College ( forerunner to MSU ) students to study mineral contents . MSU has several botanical gardens , including the W. J. Beal Botanical Garden just across the river from the stadium , the Old Horticulture Gardens next to the building of the same name , the MSU Horticulture Gardens , and the adjoining 4 @-@ H Children 's Garden . 
 The university has several buildings for public gatherings and events . Spartan Stadium serves as the university 's football stadium . The Breslin Center is a multi @-@ purpose basketball arena . The Munn Ice Arena is used for ice hockey . The MSU Pavilion serves as a venue for agricultural expositions and other types of events . Michigan State has two separate buildings for theatre . The MSU Auditorium / Fairchild Theatre is used for the MSU Theatre Department 's shows , concerts , and public speakers . The Auditorium is on Farm Lane and the north bank of the river , in the heart of campus . To the southeast lies the main theatre for the Lansing metropolitan area , the Wharton Center for Performing Arts . The Wharton Center features Broadway plays and other performances , and was the site the 1992 U.S. presidential election debates . The university also has its own hotel / convention center , the Kellogg Center . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 MSU 's campus has a network of sidewalks , bike paths , roads ( often with bike lanes ) , and unpaved trails . Its transportation network consists of 27 miles ( 43 km ) of roads and 100 miles ( 160 km ) of sidewalks . Common , non @-@ motor vehicle methods of campus navigation used are : Walking , bicycling , rollerblading and skateboarding . <unk> and mopeds are also not uncommon . A few <unk> and public underground tunnels link some buildings on campus . The non @-@ motorized Lansing River Trail 's eastern trailhead is located on campus , extending west to downtown Lansing and then north towards the airport . The non @-@ motorized River Corridor runs across campus along the south side of the Red Cedar River , and is the primary east @-@ west route for non @-@ motorized traffic on campus . 
 The main roads that go through MSU 's campus are West Circle Drive , East Circle Drive , Shaw Lane , Farm Lane , Wilson Road , Bogue Road , and Red Cedar Road . Passing through crowded areas of campus , these roads receive high volumes of pedestrian and vehicle traffic . Another popular mode of transportation is the Capital Area Transportation Authority bus service , which has many routes across campus in addition to regular service outside campus in the Lansing , East Lansing , and Okemos areas . Many routes through campus are designated as " Spartan Service " , meaning they only operate during MSU fall and spring semesters . The MSU @-@ CTC ( MSU <unk> Transportation Center ) is the hub of bus service on campus , and many local destinations both on- and off @-@ campus may be reached from there . Buses are used especially frequently during the winter . 
 With two railroads crossing campus , MSU students have easy access to rail travel . The East Lansing Amtrak station is located on campus , offering daily direct service to and from Chicago , Kalamazoo , Flint , Port Huron , and several other cities throughout Michigan via the Blue Water line . Cities such as Detroit , Ann Arbor and Grand Rapids can be reached by transferring onto a different line . The station is also serviced by several Greyhound bus routes . Two airports are accessible from campus : Lansing Capital Region International Airport ( LAN ) in DeWitt Township and the Detroit Metro Airport ( <unk> ) outside Detroit . Bus service to and from <unk> is offered eight times daily by Michigan Flyer . 
 = Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song = 
 " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " is the 19th episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . The 100th episode of the series overall , it originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 28 , 1994 . In the episode , Superintendent Chalmers fires Principal Seymour Skinner after a disaster at the school . Bart Simpson , feeling partially responsible for Skinner 's firing , tries to help his old principal get his job back . 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Bob Anderson . It was selected for release in a 1999 video collection of selected episodes called The Simpsons : Greatest Hits . The episode features cultural references to films such as Alien and Full Metal Jacket . The title is a parody of the film Sweet Sweetback 's Baadasssss Song . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After dismissing the idea of taking Simpson family home videos and a <unk> , Bart brings Santa 's Little Helper to school for show and tell . Even though his show @-@ and @-@ tell presentation is well received by the class , the dog escapes into the school air ducts to follow the food scent coming from the kitchen and is spotted by Ralph Wiggum . Groundskeeper Willie is sent after the dog and catches it , but he chooses the wrong vent to exit and the fire department is called in to rescue him . As the firemen are attempting to rescue Willie , an outraged Superintendent Chalmers appears and fires Principal Skinner , much to Bart 's shock . 
 Chalmers hires Ned Flanders as the new principal of Springfield Elementary School , but when Flanders is hesitant to discipline the children , they run amok , and the school becomes a mad house . Meanwhile , Bart befriends the now jobless Skinner , as they laugh about anecdotes of Flanders 's failure that Bart relates . Feeling lonely , Skinner eventually decides to re @-@ enlist in the United States Army . 
 Instead of rejoicing in the discipline @-@ less school , Bart feels guilty about causing Skinner 's dismissal . In an effort to get Skinner his job back , Bart attempts to expose Flanders ' poor leadership to Chalmers . Despite the state of chaos at the school , Chalmers is not concerned . However , upon hearing Flanders utter a brief mention of God over the intercom , Chalmers immediately fires Flanders for reciting a school prayer . Skinner is soon re @-@ hired as principal . Bart and Skinner share an amicable chat about their typically antagonistic relationship , then affectionately pat each other on the back . However , as they turn from each other , it is revealed Bart has taped a " Kick Me " sign on Skinner 's back , and Skinner has taped a " Teach Me " sign on Bart. The two chuckle to themselves as they walk away . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Bob Anderson . Oakley and Weinstein decided to do a Skinner and Bart episode because the staff wanted to take a diversion from the relatively wacky , fast @-@ paced episodes that had comprised Season 5 so far and , according to show runner David Mirkin , " slow down parts of the show to take time for more emotional episodes like this one " . Much of Principal Skinner 's behavior in the episode is based on teachers Oakley and Weinstein had in high school who , according to Oakley , were " sad , lonely guys who lived with their mothers " . It was selected to air as the 100th episode of the show because the staff wanted that particular episode to focus on Bart. 
 Baby Gerald , Luigi Risotto , Assistant Superintendent Leopold , and Flanders ' parents make their first appearances on the show in this episode . Leopold and Luigi were designed by David Silverman , one of the show 's directors . Anderson thought Luigi was one of the funniest characters on the show when he first read Luigi 's lines in the script during a table read of the episode . When Anderson skimmed through the script and saw Luigi 's lines , he said he " frightened Julie Kavner because I was laughing to myself , but trying to keep the laughter in because it was so damn funny . " 
 " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 28 , 1994 . The episode was selected for release in a 1999 video collection of selected episodes called , The Simpsons : Greatest Hits , which also included the episodes " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , " Lisa 's First Word " , " Trash of the Titans " , and " Bart Gets an " F " " . The episode was again included in the 2003 DVD release of the Greatest Hits set , which also included all the other episodes except " Trash of the Titans " . " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " was also included in The Simpsons season five DVD set , which was released on December 21 , 2004 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a reference to the 1971 Melvin Van Peebles film Sweet Sweetback 's Baadasssss Song . Skinner 's quote " We 'll always have the laundromat " is a reference to a famous quote by Humphrey Bogart in Casablanca . The beginning scene of the episode , in which Marge , Lisa , and Bart watch a home video , is a parody of the television series The Wonder Years ; the Joe Cocker version of the song " With a Little Help from My Friends " from that series is also used in the background of the opening scene . The scene in which Santa 's Little Helper runs through the school vent is a reference to a scene in the film Alien , as is Skinner 's use of a heat @-@ seeking tracer to pin down the positions of Groundskeeper Willie and Santa 's Little Helper within the ventilation system . Skinner says he was shot in the back at a United Service Organizations ( USO ) show while trying to get " Joey Heatherton to put some pants on " , a reference to American actress Joey Heatherton . Skinner 's attire and shots of him running with his troops are references to the 1987 film Full Metal Jacket . Skinner tells Apu Nahasapeemapetilon of his plan to write a novel about an amusement park with dinosaurs called Billy and the <unk> , which Apu rightfully condemns as a concept of plagiarism ; the book is a reference to the Michael Crichton novel Jurassic Park . When Martin is in a cage , he is singing the Toreador Song from the opera Carmen . In describing the relationship of Bart and Skinner , Lisa Simpson compares them to Sherlock Holmes and Professor Moriarty , the famous characters from the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle detective stories ; she also compares them to Mountain Dew and Mello Yello , which she describes as mortal enemies . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " finished 16th in the ratings for the week of April 25 – May 1 , 1994 , with a Nielsen Rating of 12 @.@ 7 , translating to 12 million households . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " The 100th episode [ ... ] is a fine one , with Principal Skinner 's idea for a novel and the conduct of the staff at the Italian restaurant as highpoints . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said the opening scene of episode reminded him of when he was in second grade and got a puppy for Christmas . Jacobson said , " I still recall the excitement when my mom brought [ the dog ] into school for the others to see , and the first segment of [ the episode ] reflects the atmosphere caused by a doggie visit . The rest of the episode gets into Skinner ’ s life nicely . Toss in a great Alien reference and the episode offers yet another solid show . " Jacobson also said he liked the appearance of Flanders 's " beatnik father " . Gary <unk> of The News Journal called the episode " very funny " and named it one of his top @-@ ten favorite episodes . Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B + grade , and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave the episode a 4 out of 5 score . Dave Manley of DVDActive said in a review of The Simpsons : Greatest Hits that it was " certainly one of the weaker [ episodes on the DVD ] – I can only assume the fact that it was episode 100 is what gets it onto this disc . " 
 = Wonderwall Music = 
 Wonderwall Music is the soundtrack album to the 1968 film Wonderwall , and the debut solo release by English musician George Harrison . It was the first album to be issued on the Beatles ' Apple record label , and the first solo album by a member of that band . The songs are all instrumental pieces , except for occasional non @-@ English vocals , and a slowed @-@ down spoken word segment on the track " Dream Scene " . Harrison recorded the album between November 1967 and February 1968 , with sessions taking place in London and the Indian city of Bombay . Following his Indian @-@ styled compositions for the Beatles since 1966 , he used the film soundtrack to further promote Indian classical music by introducing rock audiences to musical instruments that were relatively little @-@ known in the West – including shehnai , sarod and santoor . 
 Harrison 's main collaborator on the project was classical pianist and orchestral arranger John Barham , while other contributors include Indian classical musicians Aashish Khan , Shivkumar Sharma , Shankar Ghosh and Mahapurush Misra . Harrison also recorded Western rock music selections for the album , which feature contributions from Tony Ashton and the latter 's band , the Remo Four , as well as guest appearances from Eric Clapton , Ringo Starr and Peter Tork . During the sessions , Harrison recorded many other pieces that appeared in Wonderwall but not on the soundtrack album , and the Beatles ' song " The Inner Light " also originated from his time in Bombay . Although the album 's release in November 1968 marked the end of Harrison 's direct involvement with Indian music , it inspired his later collaborations with Ravi Shankar , including the 1974 Music Festival from India . 
 The album cover consists of a painting by American artist Bob Gill in which , as in director Joe Massot 's film , two contrasting worlds are separated by a wall , with only a small gap allowing visual access between them . Harrison omitted his name from the list of performing musicians , leading to an assumption that he had merely produced and arranged the music ; the 2014 reissue of Wonderwall Music recognises his contributions on keyboards and guitar . The album was first remastered for CD release in 1992 , for which former Apple executive Derek Taylor supplied a liner @-@ note essay . 
 While viewed as something of a curiosity by rock music critics , Wonderwall Music is recognised for its inventiveness in fusing Western and Eastern sounds , and as being a precursor to the 1980s world music trend . The album 's title inspired that of Oasis ' 1995 hit song " Wonderwall " , and its music influenced the sound of Oasis ' fellow Britpop band Kula Shaker . Harrison 's full soundtrack for the film was made available on DVD in early 2014 , as part of the two @-@ disc Wonderwall Collector 's Edition . In September that year , the album was reissued in remastered form as part of the Apple Years 1968 – 75 Harrison box set , with the addition of three bonus tracks . 
 = = Background = = 
 The soundtrack to director Joe Massot 's film Wonderwall ( 1968 ) , Wonderwall Music was George Harrison 's first formal musical project outside the Beatles , created during a time when he was immersed in his discovery of Indian classical music . It also coincided with a period when Harrison had had minimal interest in the Beatles ' recent activities , namely their 1967 album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band and the TV film Magical Mystery Tour . 
 Having met the Beatles while the band were shooting their 1965 film Help ! , Massot offered the soundtrack project to Harrison after the Bee Gees had dropped out in October 1967 . Harrison viewed Wonderwall at Twickenham Film Studios and was intrigued by the storyline , in which a lonely professor ( played by Irish actor Jack <unk> ) first glimpses and then becomes obsessed by his glamorous female neighbour , a Vogue model ( played by Jane Birkin ) , via a hole in the wall separating their apartments . Harrison biographer Simon Leng writes : " The lack of dialogue left acres of room for music to speak , and a <unk> of cosmic apotheosis also helped . Beneath all its glaring <unk> , Wonderwall touched on themes that would come to preoccupy George Harrison – critically , the objectification of celebrities and the shallowness of fame . " 
 = = Concept and composition = = 
 With Massot allowing him full artistic control , Harrison treated the soundtrack as an opportunity to further educate rock and pop audiences in facets of Indian music . Following his use of Indian musical instruments such as sitar , tambura , swarmandal , dilruba and tabla in his work with the Beatles , Harrison chose to write pieces for less well @-@ known instruments . These included the oboe @-@ like shehnai , traditionally used in religious ceremonies ; the sarod , similar to a lute ; and the santoor , a type of hammered dulcimer with up to 100 strings . In addition , he would provide selections in the more familiar , rock music genre . 
 Harrison 's key collaborator on the project was John Barham , who , as a classically trained pianist and musical arranger , annotated the melodies that Harrison sang to him and transcribed them onto sheet music for the Indian musicians . Leng describes Barham as Harrison 's " fellow traveler " , due to the two musicians ' shared appreciation of Indian classical music , and writes that because Harrison needed a collaborator who " empathized with his [ musical ] ideas " , Barham was a natural choice over George Martin , the Beatles ' producer and orchestral arranger . 
 All of the soundtrack music was written by Harrison . As with his songs for the Beatles over this period , including the Indian @-@ styled " Within You , Without You " and " Blue Jay Way " , he composed many of the pieces on keyboard instruments such as piano or organ , rather than guitar . Harrison later described how he went about preparing the score : " I had a regular wind @-@ up stopwatch and I watched the film to ' spot @-@ in ' the music with the watch . I wrote the timings down in my book , then I 'd go to [ the recording studio ] , make up a piece , record it . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The recording sessions for Wonderwall Music began on 22 November 1967 at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in London . That day , Harrison recorded with a tabla player and flautists Richard <unk> and Jack <unk> , taping pieces titled " <unk> " , " India " , " Backwards Tabla " and " Backwards Tones " . On 23 November , he carried out further work on some of these selections , with a line @-@ up that included two oboe players , a trumpeter and two flautists . Authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter suggest that some of these recordings may have been used as musical cues in the film but excluded from the soundtrack album , while " <unk> " was a piece that Harrison incorporated into " Dream Scene " on the album . Over this period , Harrison also worked at another London studio , De Lane Lea Studios . According to a contemporary issue of Beatles Monthly magazine , further work continued at Abbey Road on 11 , 20 and 31 December . The Wonderwall sessions were officially Harrison 's first as a producer , although he had directed the recording of his songs " Love You To " and " Within You , Without You " over 1966 – 67 with minimal input from Martin and the other Beatles . 
 After another London session with Indian musicians on 5 January 1968 , Harrison recorded much of the album between 9 and 13 January at HMV Studios in Bombay , India . In contrast to the multitrack recording carried out at Abbey Road , the music taped in Bombay was captured on a two @-@ track machine converted from mono . In the book The Beatles Anthology , Harrison recalls that EMI India 's managing director , Bhaskar Menon , personally delivered the stereo recorder by train from Calcutta . The Bombay studio 's soundproofing was similarly inadequate , resulting in traffic noise from the street below appearing on pieces such as " In the Park " . 
 Following his return to England on 18 January , Harrison recorded more Western music for the soundtrack , again at Abbey Road , with much of the work being done on 30 January , according to musicologist Walter Everett . Final mixing began on the 31st , and a late overdubbing session took place on 11 February , when extra sound effects were added to " Dream Scene " . Harrison had finished the album before going back to India on 15 February , with fellow Beatle John Lennon and their wives , to take part in Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 's Transcendental Meditation course . 
 Having been allocated a budget of £ 600 , Harrison eventually spent £ 15 @,@ 000 on recording the film soundtrack , paying the difference himself . Also recorded in Bombay was the backing track to " The Inner Light " , which became the B @-@ side to " Lady Madonna " , the Beatles ' final single on Parlophone Records . Another product of the London sessions was the Remo Four song " In the First Place " , although it would remain unreleased until the late 1990s . 
 = = Contributing musicians = = 
 Before the 2014 reissue of Wonderwall Music , the album 's sleeve credits were found to be inaccurate or incomplete by authors such as Bruce Spizer , Peter Lavezzoli , and Madinger and Easter . Lavezzoli observes that many of the Indian names were misspelt , while Spizer comments on the incorrect recording information and he supplies a track @-@ by @-@ track line @-@ up of musicians , several of whom were omitted from the official credits . Everett provides a list of Indian musical instruments that appear on the album ; of these , tambura , swarmandal and dilruba are similarly given no mention on the sleeve . 
 Harrison 's name also does not appear among the performers on the original album sleeve , and many commentators have traditionally credited him only as producer and arranger at the sessions . After consulting Barham for his book While My Guitar Gently Weeps , Leng credits Harrison as a performing musician , and Spizer also recognises him in his track @-@ by @-@ track list . Among other changes , the performer credits in the 2014 reissue include Harrison , on piano and guitar . 
 = = = Indian selections = = = 
 Having used personnel from London 's Asian Music Circle on " Love You To " and " Within You , Without You " , Harrison was now keen to " go to the source " , Leng writes , and work with the best musicians in India . For their part , the Indian players were " fascinated " to be following Western rules of harmony in Harrison 's compositions , according to author Alan Clayson . They included sarodya Aashish Khan and tablist Mahapurush Misra , the last of whom was the regular accompanist to Khan 's father , Ali Akbar Khan . Aashish Khan and Misra 's contributions were recorded at Abbey Road Studios , however , after the two musicians had arrived in London in December 1967 . 
 The musicians in Bombay were recruited by Shambu Das , a student of sitarist Ravi Shankar , like Harrison and Barham . Harrison had sent a telegram to Das on 29 December 1967 , requesting " 2 or 3 shanhai 3 sitar and one <unk> shanhai " for the sessions . The <unk> players were Sharad Kumar and Hanuman Jadev , while the tar shehnai ( or <unk> shanhai , a bow @-@ played string instrument similar to an esraj ) was performed by Vinayak <unk> . Along with Das , <unk> Bhattacharya was one of the <unk> , and Chandrashekhar <unk> played surbahar ( bass sitar ) ; the tablist was Shankar Ghosh , although the original album credits listed him on sitar . 
 Rijram Desad , a multi @-@ instrumentalist whose past work included film scores and ballets with vocalists such as Lata Mangeshkar , played harmonium and tabla tarang . Shivkumar Sharma contributed on santoor , and <unk> ( flutes ) were played by S.R. <unk> and Hariprasad Chaurasia , although the latter does not appear in the album credits . 
 = = = Western selections = = = 
 Barham contributed substantially to the London sessions , playing piano , harmonium and flugelhorn , and providing orchestral arrangements for flutes , oboes and trumpet . The main participants on Wonderwall Music 's more rock @-@ oriented pieces were the Remo Four , a Liverpool instrumental group comprising Colin Manley ( guitars ) , Tony Ashton ( keyboards ) , Phillip Rogers ( bass ) and Roy Dyke ( drums ) . Spizer writes that Harrison played piano , guitar and Mellotron on the album . In addition , according to Manley , Harrison provided the steel guitar part on " Cowboy Music " , even though Manley is credited on the album sleeve . As well as his contributions on tack ( or jangle ) piano and organ , Ashton played the majority of the Mellotron parts on the album . 
 Other contributors included Ringo Starr and Eric Clapton , on the track " Ski @-@ ing " , and Peter Tork of the Monkees , who played banjo . Credited only on the US release , under the pseudonym " Eddie Clayton " , Clapton 's appearance marked the first of several collaborations between him and Harrison over 1968 – 70 . Also participating were Dutch designers the Fool – Simon Posthuma , <unk> Koger and <unk> <unk> – who created the psychedelic @-@ themed sets for Massot 's film . Tommy Reilly , well known for his theme tune to BBC television 's Dixon of Dock Green , came to the sessions after Harrison had asked George Martin to suggest a harmonica player . 
 = = Musical content = = 
 According to Madinger and Easter , in addition to most of what appears on the album , the Wonderwall film contained nineteen of Harrison 's " musical cues and tracks ... ranging anywhere from ten seconds to a couple of minutes in length " that were omitted from the soundtrack album . The nineteen selections that do appear on Wonderwall Music range from just over a minute to five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes ' duration . On some copies of the original vinyl LP , various pieces lacked mastering rills between them , such that , with these selections instead presented as medleys , the number of distinct album tracks was reduced to twelve . On many of the Indian selections , instruments such as sitar , surbahar and harmonium provide a drone @-@ like backing , over which Harrison 's chosen instrument plays the main musical theme . 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 The album opens with " Microbes " , which consists of call @-@ and @-@ response shehnai parts . " Red Lady Too " has Western instrumentation from the Remo Four and includes what Everett describes as " ' Moonlight ' Sonata @-@ like suspensions on piano , honky @-@ tonk piano , Mellotron , and drums " . On " Tabla and <unk> " , Mahapurush Misra plays the two types of hand drums named in the title , both mainstays of Hindustani classical music . " In the Park " features Sharma 's santoor alternating solos with surbahar . Neither of these last two tracks appear in the film . 
 Lavezzoli recognises " Harrison 's dry humor " in " the honky @-@ tonk , piano @-@ driven " " Drilling a Home " , which is subject to dramatic changing of pitch , from the key of G up to B ♭ , through the tape being sped up . In the film , only the portion up to the sound of a rainstorm is used . The ragtime feel of the track is accentuated by instrumentation such as tack piano , horns and banjo , the last of which Spizer credits as having been played by Tork . Author Ian Inglis writes of the effectiveness of " Drilling a Home " : " its jangle piano instantly recreates the mood of a crowded saloon in a frontier town , or a Laurel and Hardy or Keystone Cops pursuit . " The track segues into " Guru Vandana " , another Bombay @-@ recorded piece featuring doubled shehnai , followed by " Greasy Legs " , which consists of harmonium and various Mellotron parts . 
 On " Ski @-@ ing " , Clapton plays what Spizer describes as " a bluesy fuzz @-@ tone [ guitar ] riff " , over a heavy tambura drone . While Spizer and Everett credit all four electric guitar parts ( two of which were taped backwards ) to Clapton alone , the latter has said that " we put down this thing [ on tape ] and George then put backwards guitar on it . " The seagull @-@ like sounds of the guitars segue into " Gat <unk> " . Recorded in London , the latter is a fast @-@ paced Indian piece featuring Aashish Khan on sarod , backed by sitar and tabla . 
 " Dream Scene " is a combination of segments taped in London and Bombay that Harrison then edited together . The song consists of three distinct pieces , the first of which is a meditative section featuring phase @-@ shifted instrumentation such as tabla tarang , swarmandal and santoor , and singing that Leng describes as " hauntingly fragile male and female Indian voices in a love duet " . The music is delivered via backwards @-@ played tape loops as the vocals pan from one side to the other across the stereo image . This opening section then gives way to " a charging John Barham piano vamp answered by a host of flutes " , Leng continues . In what Leng terms an " abrupt white noise nightmare " , a trumpet solo marks the start of the third portion of " Dream Scene " , after which dual harmonica parts are interspersed with a police siren and more backwards tape loops , and the song fades out with a slowed @-@ down spoken voice over the sound of church bells . Leng notes that " Dream Scene " was recorded several months before Lennon 's experimental sound collage " Revolution 9 " , released on the double album The Beatles . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 " Party Seacombe " is a rock tune featuring an accompaniment that is similar in style to that of the band Pink Floyd , and the song equally recalls the Beatles ' instrumental " Flying " . Recorded with the Remo Four , it includes wah @-@ effected lead guitars , one of which resembles the sound of a human voice , according to Clayson ; phase @-@ shifted treatment on the acoustic rhythm guitar ; and additional drums and percussion , possibly played by Starr . Writing for NME Originals in 2005 , Adrian Thrills described the track as " Whimsical ' 60s psychedelia from George 's experimental <unk> " . 
 The two Indian pieces " Love Scene " and " Crying " form another medley , with the first track featuring Khan 's call @-@ and @-@ response sarod parts . Overdubbing was unprecedented in Indian music until this time , and Khan later said he was " thrilled " with the result on " Love Scene " , where the <unk> " [ play ] to each other like two lovers in a romantic mood " . Described by Madinger and Easter as " aptly titled " , " Crying " features the mournful tones of an esraj , according to Leng , although only the similar @-@ sounding tar shehnai is listed in the album credits . In 1981 , Harrison used part of this recording of " Crying " at the end of " Save the World " , the closing song on his album Somewhere in England . 
 The country @-@ styled " Cowboy Music " includes backing by the Remo Four , Reilly on harmonica , and harmonium by either Barham or Harrison , according to Spizer . " Fantasy Sequins " begins with the same bow @-@ played string instrument as on " Crying " , soon joined by harmonium ( played by Desad ) and Indian percussion . This track segues into " On the Bed " , although Madinger and Easter write that the correct title , as on early US copies of the album , should be " Glass Box " , which is the name given instead to the Indian piece that follows it . " On the Bed " opens with a piano riff from Harrison , which , in Leng 's description , is complemented by " spacey steel guitar , and a fugue of flugelhorn countermelodies , added by Barham " . The song includes backing from the Remo Four , and Big Jim Sullivan on bass . 
 " Glass Box " is " a high @-@ speed Indian raga " , Spizer writes , and features sitarist <unk> Bhattacharya . Everett describes " Wonderwall to Be Here " as a tune " based on a minor @-@ mode I- ♭ <unk> ♭ VI @-@ V progression , styled like <unk> variations on ' While My Guitar Gently Weeps ' " . Recorded in London , the song features , in Leng 's words , " a short stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness piano melody from Tony Ashton " , supported by instrumentation such as organ , acoustic guitar , drums and percussion . Leng views the piece as the soundtrack 's " best collective work " , adding : " This moving music was a close fit with the scene it covered – a mute passage in which the implied lust of the aging academic turns to compassion for Jane Birkin [ ' s character ] , whose suicide attempt he witnesses ... Harrison 's melody was strongly empathetic to the first appearance of human feeling in the film . " 
 The album closes with " Singing Om " , in which a male Indian voice chants the sacred term Om over a musical backing of harmonium and bansuri . Leng writes that this piece is an early example of Harrison blending " Vedic chants with Western harmonies " , a concept that he would explore further in his 1969 – 70 productions for devotees of the Radha Krishna Temple , and also in his post @-@ Beatles songs such as " My Sweet Lord " and " Awaiting on You All " . 
 = = Film premiere and aftermath = = 
 Harrison attended the world premiere of Wonderwall , held at the Cannes Film Festival on 17 May 1968 , accompanied by his wife Pattie Boyd , Starr and Birkin . Although he had expected the film 's producers to purchase the soundtrack rights and issue the album independently , they declined to do so , leading Massot to suggest that Harrison release it on the Beatles ' new label , Apple Records . Wonderwall Music therefore became Apple 's first album release , as well as the first solo album by a member of the Beatles . 
 Massot was impressed with " the accuracy with which [ Harrison 's music ] illustrated and enhanced the images on screen " , Inglis writes , and asked Harrison to provide the soundtrack for the next film he planned to make , Zachariah , a western with Ginger Baker in the title role . Although Harrison declined , he later supplied incidental music for Little Malcolm ( 1974 ) , a film he produced under the aegis of Apple Films , before going on to contribute to soundtracks for his HandMade Films productions in the 1980s , including Time Bandits and Shanghai Surprise . 
 Author Robert Rodriguez writes that scoring the Wonderwall film " got the [ Indian music ] genre out of Harrison 's system " . After taking part in filming for the Shankar documentary Raga in June 1968 , Harrison decided to abandon his sitar studies and return to his first instrument , the guitar . As another legacy of the Wonderwall soundtrack project , Harrison cited the Bombay sessions as the inspiration for his 1974 collaborations with Shankar – namely , the Music Festival from India and their subsequent North American tour – both of which featured Indian musicians Harrison first worked with in January 1968 . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 For the front cover of Wonderwall Music , American artist Bob Gill painted a picture in the style of Belgian surrealist René Magritte . The painting shows a formally dressed man " separated by a huge red brick wall from a group of happy bathing Indian maidens " , Spizer writes . Apple executive Derek Taylor , whom Harrison had invited to help run the Beatles ' label in early 1968 , later recalled of Gill 's submission : " It was a nice painting but missed the essence of hope . " To Gill 's chagrin , Harrison requested that a brick be removed from the wall , because he deemed it important to " give the fellow on the other side a chance , just as the Jack <unk> character had a chance [ in the film ] " . 
 For the back cover , Harrison chose a photo of part of the Berlin Wall , which designers John Kelly and Alan Aldridge then manipulated and mirrored to represent a corner . Taylor describes the result as innovative for its time , with the wall made to look " proud and sharp as the prow of a liner " . 
 The sleeve was designed so that the rear face appeared upside down relative to the front . In America , some copies of the LP had the Berlin Wall image mistakenly printed on the front , which made for " a less than exciting cover to be sure " , in Madinger and Easter 's opinion . Included on the LP 's sleeve insert was a black @-@ and @-@ white photograph of Harrison taken by Astrid Kirchherr , a friend since the Beatles ' first residency in Hamburg , Germany , in 1960 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Apple Records originally scheduled the release for late August 1968 to coincide with the label 's launch , marked by its " First Four " singles . As a result , parts of " Ski @-@ ing " , " Cowboy Music " and " Wonderwall to Be Here " were included in Apple , a film designed to promote the new label at distributor EMI 's international sales conferences . Delayed from this scheduled date , Wonderwall Music instead appeared in November , a few weeks before The Beatles . The release date was 1 November 1968 in Britain ( with Apple catalogue number <unk> 1 ) and 2 December in America ( as Apple ST 3350 ) . 
 Promotion for Wonderwall Music consisted of print advertising , including a full @-@ page advertisement in the 14 December issue of Billboard magazine , and an Apple @-@ prepared poster that superimposed details from Gill 's painting onto a photo of Harrison . The album failed to chart in the United Kingdom , but performed surprisingly well in the United States for a non @-@ vocal soundtrack album . On Billboard 's albums listings , it had a sixteen @-@ week chart run , peaking at number 49 for two weeks in March 1969 . On the US Cash Box and Record World charts , the album peaked at numbers 39 and 33 , respectively . Wonderwall Music also placed in the top 30 on Canada 's RPM albums chart and in Germany , where it peaked at number 22 . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 Having been out of print since the 1970s , Wonderwall Music was remastered and issued on CD in June 1992 , as part of Apple 's campaign to reissue its entire catalogue . The CD booklet contained liner notes by Taylor , as well as stills from Wonderwall and a photo of Harrison working with some of the Indian musicians in 1968 . 
 In November 1997 , Massot prepared a director 's cut of Wonderwall , which omitted many of the musical cues that had appeared in the original film but not on the soundtrack album , and instead repeated tracks such as " Ski @-@ ing " and " Cowboy Music " at different points in the film . Harrison supplied Massot with a tape containing various pieces recorded for Wonderwall , which led to the unearthing of the Remo Four 's song " In the First Place " . A Manley – Ashton composition , it was released as a single in January 1999 with Harrison credited as producer , after Massot had incorporated the song into his new audio for the film . Harrison had played on the recording , but according to an article by Martin Lewis , he eschewed any credit as a performer . 
 Portions of " Ski @-@ ing " and " Party Seacombe " appear in Martin Scorsese 's 2011 documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , during which Clapton and Birkin discuss their participation in the project . In March 2014 , Harrison 's full soundtrack for the film was made available on DVD as part of the two @-@ disc Wonderwall Collector 's Edition . 
 The album was remastered again and reissued in September 2014 , as part of the Harrison box set The Apple Years 1968 – 75 . The CD booklet includes a liner @-@ note essay by author Kevin Howlett and an introduction by Indian composer Nitin Sawhney . As bonus tracks , the reissue adds the previously unreleased Indian piece " Almost Shankara " , an alternate instrumental take of " The Inner Light " , and " In the First Place " by the Remo Four " . The reissue series was overseen by Harrison 's son Dhani , who , in an interview with music journalist David Fricke , described Wonderwall Music as his personal favourite of his father 's Apple solo albums , adding : " It 's such a deep , psychedelic record ... For people who haven 't heard that record , that 's the first thing you should listen to in the box [ set ] . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 While the album received little attention from music critics on release , as an instrumental film soundtrack , Alan Clayson writes of Films and Filming giving it a " glowing review " . In the March 1969 issue of that magazine , Gordon Gow wrote : " the Harrison music replaces dialogue , waxing almost vocal like a cinema organist from the silent days . " Geoffrey Cannon of The Guardian cited Wonderwall Music and individual projects by Lennon and Paul McCartney as evidence that the three bandmates had " musical ideas which cannot be related to the Beatles " , and he added : " Playing these albums again and again , the threat of the Beatles ' dissolution has become increasingly apparent to me . " 
 Later in 1969 , Village Voice critic Robert Christgau referred to Harrison 's soundtrack in a single @-@ sentence review for Frank Zappa 's Hot Rats album , saying : " Doo @-@ doo to you , Frank – when I want movie music I 'll listen to ' Wonderwall . ' " In his review of Harrison 's 1969 experimental album , Electronic Sound , Ed Ward of Rolling Stone said that Wonderwall Music " clearly shows " Harrison to be a " consummate musician " . Conversely , in their 1975 book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , NME journalists Roy Carr and Tony Tyler dismissed the soundtrack album as an " undistinguished film muzak sampler " on which " real music manages to surface " only on the Bombay @-@ recorded pieces . Carr and Tyler continued : " but these have little to do with Harrison and it is the [ Indian ] musicians ' own excellence which salvages the general disorganisation of the LP . " 
 In the 1980s , Harrison was dismissive of the Western music on the album , calling it " loads of horrible mellotron stuff and a police siren " . American film @-@ score composer Quincy Jones once described Wonderwall Music as " the greatest soundtrack he had heard " , according to Massot 's recollection to BBC Radio presenter Spencer Leigh . 
 = = = Retrospective assessment = = = 
 = = = = Professional reviews = = = = 
 In his review for AllMusic , Richard Ginell writes of the album : " With the subcontinental influence now firmly in the driver 's seat , the score is mostly given over to the solemn , atmospheric drones of Indian music . Yet , as a whole , it 's a fascinating if musically slender mishmash of sounds from East and West , everything casually juxtaposed or superimposed without a care in the world ... As this and Harrison 's second experimental release , Electronic Sound , undoubtedly proved , pigeonholing this Beatle was a dangerous thing . " Musician magazine said of the 1992 CD release : " Of all the Beatles @-@ related esoterica , this 1968 soundtrack album is one of the choicest treasures ... a freewheeling tapestry of music and sound ... [ and ] a pastiche @-@ like head trip with a mind all its own . " Billboard 's reviewer rated it a " Vital Reissue " ( signifying a re @-@ release or compilation that merits " special artistic , archival , and commercial interest " ) and described the album as , variously , an " often enchanting sequence of 19 harmonious themes and tone poems " and an " intriguing treat from the reflective former Fab " . 
 Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Mikal Gilmore described Wonderwall Music as " a soundtrack to a rarely seen film , though Harrison 's music was inventive and the album remains among his best works " . In the 2004 edition of The Rolling Stone Album Guide , Mac Randall gave the release 2 ½ stars ( out of five ) and grouped it with Electronic Sound as being " interesting , though only for established fans " . 
 In January 2012 , Bryan Bierman of Magnet featured Wonderwall Music in the magazine 's " Hidden Gems " series , lamenting that " the album has become an obscure piece of Beatles trivia instead of what it is : a fascinating experiment from one of popular music 's most interesting figures . " Bierman comments on the context of its 1967 – 68 creation : " At a time when rock ' n ' roll was changing on a daily basis , the Beatles were at the front , leading everyone into strange , uncharted depths . But with Wonderwall Music , Harrison began to venture on his own , creating fresh and unique sounds ... " 
 = = = = Biographers ' opinions = = = = 
 Among Beatles biographers , Madinger and Easter write that " the intermingling of the two styles [ on Wonderwall Music ] made for an extremely interesting listening experience " , while Peter Lavezzoli describes the album as " a charming potpourri of Indian and Western sounds " . In The Rough Guide to the Beatles , Chris Ingham deems it an " attractive sequence of Indian and pop vignettes " that " has endured rather better than the movie itself " . Robert Rodriguez writes that " the range explored even within the Western cues was astonishing " , and adds : " The Indian cuts too were quite varied stylistically , showing open @-@ minded listeners that there was more to the country 's music than twanging sitars and thumping tablas . " 
 Simon Leng considers Wonderwall Music to be " a companion in spirit " to Bill Evans ' Conversations with Myself ( 1963 ) , due to the double @-@ tracking of lead instruments on some of the Indian pieces ; he comments on the significance of Harrison recording in India in January 1968 , with regard to Lennon and McCartney : " There were now three Beatles who held firm artistic visions . The group was unraveling in earnest . " Leng praises " Dream Scene " in particular , describing it as a " musical acid trip " that " rivals anything on Sgt. Pepper for sheer freak @-@ out effect " . 
 Ian Inglis views Wonderwall Music as " an assured and varied collection of music that ... perfectly complemented the juxtaposition of the exotic and the ordinary that Massot 's film depicted " . Among the selections he highlights as transcending their soundtrack role , Inglis describes " Microbes " as " a beautiful example of Harrison 's ability to create forlorn , mournful , yearning soundscapes " and " Greasy Legs " as " a delicate and charming composition " . Inglis concludes of Harrison 's debut solo album : " it provides a fascinating summary of the myriad patterns of musical activity whose fusions stimulated the growth of psychedelic , underground , and progressive scenes in the late 1960s , and it is a key moment in the development of his preparations for life after the Beatles . " 
 = = = = 2014 appraisal = = = = 
 Reviewing the Apple Years remaster for Paste magazine , Robert Ham notes " a few moments of psychedelic pop " among the album 's Western tracks and writes of the Indian selections : " The performances by the sitar , shehnai and tabla players are lovely enough , but far too short to really convey the music 's hypnotic power . " Joe Marchese of The Second Disc describes Wonderwall Music as " a particularly enjoyable listen " in which " spacey mellotron , rollicking piano , sound effects , tape loops , and even rock textures " create " a beguiling tapestry of sound " , while opining that " the authentic Indian music stands out most on this hypnotic and entertaining mélange . " Writing for Vintage Rock , Shawn Perry views the album as " effectively a <unk> playground for Harrison 's pent @-@ up ideas " and adds : " Listening to it nowadays is nothing less than sheer delight . " 
 In a review for Uncut , Richard Williams writes that " the 18 tracks sound like an exploded diagram of a Beatles album " , which includes " [ d ] <unk> miniature ragas " , " a pub knees @-@ up gatecrashed by a Dixieland band ( ' Drilling A Home ' ) " and " the bones of early acid @-@ rock songs " . Williams concludes : " [ Wonderwall Music ] documents an innocent optimism that will always be worth a listen " . Writing for the website Elsewhere , New Zealand Herald critic Graham Reid considers " Dream Scene " to be " by far the most psychedelic and out @-@ there piece by any Beatle to that time " , adding that " towards the end you can almost anticipate Lennon 's Revolution 9 coming in . " Reid describes the album as , variously , " peculiar and terrific " and " one of the most interesting and courageously different of [ Harrison 's ] solo albums " . 
 = = Cultural influence and legacy = = 
 Leng credits Wonderwall Music with having established Harrison as " a pioneer in fusing global music " , and Madinger and Easter similarly describe the album as " an early example of what would eventually become known as ' World Music ' : the mixing of Western music with other types from around the globe " . In his book The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Lavezzoli considers Harrison a principal figure in the introduction of Indian music to Western audiences , along with Yehudi Menuhin and John Coltrane , and groups him with Paul Simon , Peter Gabriel and Mickey Hart as the rock musicians most responsible for popularising world music . Writing for Mojo magazine in 2011 , Michael Simmons described Wonderwall Music as a " groundbreaking blend of Bombay and London " , while Kevin Howlett comments in his 2014 liner @-@ note essay that Harrison 's decision to " travel to the source " and professionally record non @-@ Western music was " unprecedented for a pop musician " . 
 Clayson writes of the album 's influence on mid @-@ 1990s Britpop acts such as Oasis , Supergrass and Ocean Colour Scene . Of these bands , Oasis took the title of their international hit " Wonderwall " from that of Harrison 's album . Like Clayson , Ingham sees the most obvious example of Wonderwall Music 's legacy in the raga rock sound of Kula Shaker , who also adopted lyrical influences from Harrison 's work . The band 's 1996 single " Govinda " was a cover of a Harrison @-@ produced song by the Radha Krishna Temple , and its B @-@ side , " Gokula " , used an identical guitar riff to the one on " Ski @-@ ing " , resulting in a co @-@ writing credit for Harrison . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by George Harrison , except where noted . 
 Side one 
 " Microbes " – 3 : 42 
 " Red Lady Too " – 1 : 56 
 " Tabla and <unk> " – 1 : 05 
 " In the Park " – 4 : 08 
 " Drilling a Home " – 3 : 08 
 " Guru Vandana " – 1 : 05 
 " Greasy Legs " – 1 : 28 
 " Ski @-@ ing " – 1 : 50 
 " Gat <unk> " – 1 : 15 
 " Dream Scene " – 5 : 26 
 Side two 
 " Party Seacombe " – 4 : 34 
 " Love Scene " – 4 : 17 
 " Crying " – 1 : 15 
 " Cowboy Music " – 1 : 29 
 " Fantasy Sequins " – 1 : 50 
 " On the Bed " – 2 : 22 
 " Glass Box " – 1 : 05 
 " Wonderwall to Be Here " – 1 : 25 
 " Singing Om " – 1 : 54 
 2014 reissue bonus tracks 
 " In the First Place " ( Colin Manley , Tony Ashton ; performed by the Remo Four ) – 3 : 17 
 " Almost Shankara " – 5 : 00 
 " The Inner Light " ( alternative take , instrumental ) – 3 : 43 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Baa , Baa , Black Sheep = 
 " Baa , Baa , Black Sheep " is an English nursery rhyme , the earliest surviving version of which dates from 1731 . The words have changed little in two and a half centuries . It is sung to a variant of the 1761 French melody Ah ! vous <unk> @-@ je , maman . <unk> theories have been advanced to explain the meaning of the rhyme . These include that it is a complaint against Medieval English taxes on wool and that it is about the slave trade . In the twentieth century it was a subject of controversies in debates about political correctness . It has been used in literature and popular culture as a metaphor and allusion . The Roud Folk Song Index classifies the lyrics and their variations as number 4439 . 
 = = Modern version = = 
 Recent versions tend to take the following form : 
 The rhyme is a single stanza in trochaic metre , which is common in nursery rhymes and relatively easy for younger children to master . The Roud Folk Song Index , which catalogues folk songs and their variations by number , classifies the song as 4439 and variations have been collected across Great Britain and North America . 
 = = Original version = = 
 This rhyme was first printed in Tommy Thumb 's Pretty Song Book , the oldest surviving collection of English language nursery rhymes , published c . 1744 with the lyrics very similar to those still used today : 
 In the next surviving printing , in Mother Goose 's Melody ( c . 1765 ) , the rhyme remained the same , except the last lines , which were given as , " But none for the little boy who cries in the lane " . 
 = = Melody = = 
 The rhyme is usually sung to a variant of the 1761 French melody Ah ! vous <unk> @-@ je , maman , which is also used for " Twinkle Twinkle Little Star " and the " Alphabet song " . The words and melody were first published together by A. H. <unk> in ( Illustrated National ) Nursery Songs and Games , published in Philadelphia in 1879 . 
 = = Origins and meaning = = 
 As with many nursery rhymes , attempts have been made to find origins and meanings for the rhyme , most which have no corroborating evidence . Katherine Elwes Thomas in The Real <unk> of Mother Goose ( 1930 ) suggested that the rhyme referred to resentment at the heavy taxation on wool . This has particularly been taken to refer to the medieval English " Great " or " Old Custom " wool tax of 1275 , which survived until the fifteenth century . More recently the rhyme has been connected to the slave trade , particularly in the southern United States . This explanation was advanced during debates over political correctness and the use and reform of nursery rhymes in the 1980s , but has no supporting historical evidence . Rather than being negative , the wool of black sheep may have been prized as it could be made into dark cloth without dyeing . 
 = = Modern controversies = = 
 A controversy emerged over changing the language of " Baa Baa Black Sheep " in Britain from 1986 , because , it was alleged in the popular press , it was seen as racially dubious . This was based only on a rewriting of the rhyme in one private nursery as an exercise for the children there and not on any local government policy . A similar controversy emerged in 1999 when reservations about the rhyme were submitted to Birmingham City Council by a working group on racism in children 's resources , which were never approved or implemented . Two private nurseries in Oxfordshire in 2006 altered the song to " Baa Baa Rainbow Sheep " , with black being replaced with a variety of other adjectives , like " happy , sad , hopping " and " pink " . In 2012 , a private nursery in Kingston upon Thames replaced " black " with " little " for their Easter show . Commentators have asserted that these controversies have been exaggerated or distorted by some elements of the press as part of a more general campaign against political correctness . 
 In 2014 , there was controversy in the Australian state of Victoria , where some kindergartens changed the words " black sheep , " because of concerns over the racial connotations of the word " black . ” In addition , they were considering changing the line " one for the little boy who lives down the lane , " in case it could be deemed sexist . 
 = = Allusions = = 
 The phrase " yes sir , yes sir , three bags full sir " has been used to describe any obsequious or craven subordinate . It is attested from 1910 , and originally was common in the British Royal Navy . 
 The rhyme has often been raised in literature and popular culture . Rudyard Kipling used the rhyme as the title of a semi @-@ autobiographical short story he wrote in 1888 . The name Black Sheep Squadron was used for the Marine Attack Squadron 214 of the United States Marine Corps from 1942 and the title Baa Baa Black Sheep was used for a book by its leader Colonel Gregory " Pappy " Boyington and for a TV series ( later syndicated as Black Sheep Squadron ) that aired on NBC from 1976 until 1978 . In 1951 , together with " In the Mood " , " Baa Baa Black Sheep " was the first song ever to be digitally saved and played on a computer . 
 = 1946 Florida hurricane = 
 The 1946 Florida hurricane also known as the 1946 Tampa Bay hurricane was the last hurricane to make direct landfall in the Tampa Bay Area of the U.S. state of Florida to date . Forming on October 5 from the complex interactions of several weather systems over the southern Caribbean Sea , the storm rapidly strengthened before striking western Cuba . After entering the Gulf of Mexico , it peaked with winds corresponding to Category 2 status on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ; however , it quickly weakened before approaching Florida . It made landfall south of St. Petersburg and continued to weaken as it proceeded inland . Its remnants persisted for several days longer . 
 In advance of the storm , preparations were taken along threatened areas of coastal Florida ( mainly the Tampa Bay Area ) , including the evacuation of thousands of residents . Damage was extensive in Cuba , and five people were killed there . The cyclone 's effects in the United States were minor to moderate , and the most significant impact was to citrus crops . No deaths occurred in the country , although high tides caused some flooding of low @-@ lying terrain . The cyclone 's structure was extensively observed and investigated . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 At the end of September 1946 , the Intertropical Convergence Zone in the Eastern Pacific moved north of its typical position . An associated weather disturbance moved over Central America and interacted with a surface low @-@ pressure area over Guatemala . Meanwhile , a broad high @-@ pressure area moved over the United States behind an intense storm that moved eastward into the Atlantic Ocean . Connected to the cyclone was a shear line stretching from Bermuda to the Caribbean Sea , which spawned an upper @-@ level low over open waters . It moved westward on October 4 , and by the next day it was located over the Southeastern United States . The feature over Guatemala began moving toward the northeast as the upper @-@ level low approached and began deepening . Modern @-@ day analysis estimates that the system became a tropical storm early on October 5 , shortly after emerging into the Caribbean . 
 The storm moved slowly northeastward , steadily intensifying . On October 6 , it attained maximum sustained winds corresponding to Category 1 status on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . It began accelerating as it curved northward , and on October 7 , the hurricane crossed extreme western Cuba with sustained winds of 90 miles per hour ( 145 km / h ) and a central pressure of 977 millibars ( 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) . As it emerged into the Gulf of Mexico , the cyclone peaked with winds of 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) , equivalent to low @-@ end Category 2 status , on October 7 . It only held its peak intensity for six hours , after which a minimum barometric pressure of 979 mb ( 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) was recorded , the lowest known air pressure in relation to the storm . The rapid deepening of the storm was described as " difficult to account for , " and the conditions that caused it — as well as those that led to its dissipation — " may be regarded as extraordinary . " 
 Immediately after peaking in severity , the storm weakened quickly : after skirting the Dry Tortugas in the lower Florida Keys , it moved ashore early on October 8 near Cortez , near Bradenton — just south of St. Petersburg — with winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . Cortez measured a pressure of 980 mb ( 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) as the calm eye of the hurricane passed overhead . The storm deteriorated into a tropical storm as it proceeded inland , and further into an extratropical cyclone with gale @-@ force winds on October 9 . Its remnants emerged from the coast of North Carolina into the Atlantic and curved southeastward , then bending westward again before dissipating on October 14 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Hurricane warnings were issued for coastal areas of Florida , including the Florida Keys , the Tampa Bay area and the Panhandle . Storm advisories were also posted along the state 's Atlantic coast , and portions of the Eastern Seaboard . They were discontinued on October 8 , although small craft warnings remained in place along the Northeastern Coast . Pan American Airways canceled flights between Miami and Havana , Cuba , and also to Guatemala and Mérida , Yucatán . Small navy vessels were secured , while larger ships rode out the storm at sea . In the Key West neighborhood of <unk> Plaza , 2 @,@ 000 residents evacuated their homes . Emergency shelters in the area were opened , and local business slowed considerably with the exception of a few grocery stores selling emergency supplies . Schools closed as windows were boarded up on houses and businesses . Throughout its course , the hurricane was heavily observed and investigated , resulting in an abundance of information that provided a more comprehensive understanding of a tropical cyclone 's vertical structure . It was profiled in detail in a Monthly Weather Review article by R. H. Simpson , titled " A Note on the Movement and Structure of the Florida Hurricane of October 1946 " . 
 The hurricane 's passage across western Cuba was accompanied by wind gusts of 112 mph ( 180 km / h ) . Sugar cane crops there were destroyed , cutting supplies to the United States by several tons . Towns lost communication with outside areas due to the hurricane , and reports indicate that five people in the country were killed . 
 Prior to the storm 's arrival in Florida , its outer fringes caused gusty winds and torrential rainfall , causing some minor freshwater flooding of streets . The cyclone also spawned a tornado which struck the city of Tampa and inflicted minor damage . Sustained five @-@ minute winds reached 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) at the Dry Tortugas . Tides along the shore ran up to 9 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 @.@ 9 m ) above @-@ normal , and rainfall amounted to over 6 in ( 150 mm ) at Ocala . Winds in the United States were not extreme ; the storm 's impact was considered relatively minor . Properties incurred around $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage , primarily from high tides . Flooding up to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) deep occurred in Everglades , Punta Gorda , and Fort Myers , as well as other low @-@ lying locations . Wharves , piers and warehouses sustained some damage , while sporadic power outages were reported . Citrus farms suffered fairly severe damage , accounting for as much as 2 % of the total crop and $ 5 million in losses . No fatalities were reported in the state . Further north , in southeastern Georgia , gusty winds blew in relation to the storm . 
 = The Ultimate Fighter = 
 The Ultimate Fighter is an American reality television series and mixed martial arts ( MMA ) competition produced by Fox Sports 1 and the Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) . It previously aired for fourteen seasons on Spike TV . The show features professional MMA fighters living together in Las Vegas , Nevada , and follows them as they train and compete against each other for a prized contract with the UFC . The series debuted on January 17 , 2005 , with its first episode , " The Quest Begins " . To date , there have been twenty two seasons of the show , two per calendar year . Each season features either one or two weight classes in the tournament . 
 The historic Forrest Griffin vs. Stephan Bonnar fight in the first season drew millions of viewers to the show and launched the sport into the mainstream . Because of this success , The Ultimate Fighter was regarded as instrumental to the survival and expansion of the UFC and mixed martial arts into the mainstream . Many current and past UFC fighters are alumni of the show , with some competitors going on to become coaches in future seasons . The show has undergone multiple format changes since its inception , including the introduction of the wildcard bout . Many winners have gone on to compete for UFC championships with some becoming UFC champions . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ultimate Fighter was originally an experimental series financed by the owners of the Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) , Lorenzo and Frank Fertitta III . The series was aired on Spike TV as a last resort measure to gain mainstream exposure for mixed martial arts ( MMA ) . 
 During the early days of Spike TV , the channel wanted sports programming , but had no budget for sports licensing fees . Spike TV founder Albie Hecht began a search to find programming with broad appeal that the network could afford . In the end , Spike narrowed its choices down to the UFC and K @-@ 1 . Hecht flew to Japan to meet with the head of K @-@ 1 , but insulted his geisha , so the meeting did not go well . Weeks later , Hecht met with Lorenzo Fertitta in Las Vegas . Hecht was impressed by the UFC 's celebrity following , its plan to acquire and consolidate smaller promotions into the UFC , and with Dana White 's ability to be a " Vince McMahon " -like personality . 
 Hecht saw K @-@ 1 as a safer bet , given it had more international notoriety . He was also not a fan of the grappling aspects of MMA , but the UFC rebuffed his suggestion to change the rules of the sport to accommodate striking . Hecht credits Kevin Kay and his editorial collaboration with the UFC for highlighting the show 's story lines , which he believes helped drive its ratings success . 
 Airing after World Wrestling Entertainment 's flagship show WWE Raw , The Ultimate Fighter 's debut episode was able to garner a 57 % retention rate in viewers from RAW , which was double the usual rate for Spike TV . It is believed by some that WWE 's Vince McMahon had to approve The Ultimate Fighter following RAW , but this is incorrect . According to Hecht , McMahon did not have the final say , but given his stature and RAW 's ' importance to Spike TV at the time , the network wanted McMahon to " be on board " with the program lineup . At the time Hecht believes the WWE did not see the UFC as a challenge . 
 The live finale for the first season saw the historic bout of Forrest Griffin vs. Stephan Bonnar . Now widely regarded as the most influential fight in MMA history , the bout took place in what was the first ever MMA event on live and free television . The bout ended in a unanimous decision victory for Griffin and led to the show 's renewal on Spike TV . Regarding the success of the show , UFC president Dana White said , " It 's amazing to think .... how close we came to not being here today . If it weren 't for what these guys did , I don 't know if there would even be a UFC . I 'll never forget these guys . Ever . " 
 The renewal of the show saw UFC produce two more series , before subsequent renewals . In order to garner more attention for the sport , The Ultimate Fighter utilizes gimmicks : one notable example , in the ninth season , employed a country vs. country theme , with the United States competing against the United Kingdom . These gimmicks enabled the UFC to appeal to fans that had been recently introduced to the sport during <unk> penetration into the European market . The Ultimate Fighter also drew record viewing figures for Spike TV when YouTube sensation Kimbo Slice participated in the tenth season . Slice 's fight against veteran Roy Nelson attracted viewers to the sport , drawing an audience of 6 @.@ 1 million , making it one of the most viewed MMA fights in history . 
 As part of a new broadcasting relationship between the UFC and Fox Sports , The Ultimate Fighter moved to FX beginning in season 15 . Season 14 was the final season of the series to air on Spike , who considered the relationship to be " incredibly beneficial in building both our brands . ” In September 2013 , the series moved to Fox 's new mainstream sports network Fox Sports 1 . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 = = = Seasons 1 – 4 = = = 
 For the first four seasons , prospect UFC fighters from two different weight categories were selected to compete . The fighters are divided into two teams , irrespective of weight class , with each team coached by a current UFC headliner . The teams then compete ( in a manner which varies by season ) with the loser being eliminated from the competition . Often , incentives are provided for the team of a winning fighter . This can include the right for their team to select the next matchup , in order to pick off fighters from the opposing team by selecting favourable matchups . 
 At the end of a season , the two remaining fighters of each weight class are placed in a single @-@ elimination fight at Ultimate Fighter Finales , such as The Ultimate Fighter 1 Finale where the title of Ultimate Fighter is awarded to the winner . Seasons five to seven and ten to twelve have featured fighters from just one weight class each , with the other seasons focusing on two weight classes . 
 The show features the daily preparations each fighter makes to train for competition at the UFC training center , and the interactions they have with each other living under the same roof . Day @-@ to @-@ day events on the show are overseen by UFC president Dana White . 
 With the exception of the season finales , fights on The Ultimate Fighter are sanctioned by the Nevada Athletic Commission as exhibition matches and do not count for or against a fighter 's professional record . This is done to keep the results from going public before the air date . However , going into the semi @-@ final stage of each series , fights are scheduled for the full professional three rounds , as opposed to two rounds ( with the possibility of a sudden victory round ) for all stages prior . Though officially exhibition fights , the UFC chooses to record the results of semi @-@ final matchups . For example , the seventh season winner Amir Sadollah has one more win on his UFC record than on his official record due to his victory in his season 's semi @-@ final round . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 The first six seasons featured sixteen fighters , in either one or two weight categories . The first two seasons , however , were very different from each following season . The original format for The Ultimate Fighter saw each team compete in challenges , such as hoisting their respective coach up on their shoulders and sprinting down a beach , or a team tug @-@ of @-@ war . These challenges resulted in eliminations of fighters who hadn 't fought , until late in the season when the challenge incentive was to select the next fight where fighters would be eliminated , having lost the fight . In the first two seasons , fighters would also leave the house for good upon losing and this often resulted in odd numbers for teams , which forced the moving of fighters to opposing teams . 
 Beginning in season four , fighters were no longer removed from the house after losing their fights and did not switch teams except in extraordinary cases , such as being kicked off a team by the head coach . In the seventh season , instead of the usual sixteen fighters , thirty @-@ two fighters participated . This new rule introduced a preliminary fight , in order to get into the house , which gave the coaches an early evaluation . 
 The final change to date was the introduction of the " wild card " for seasons 11 @-@ 13 . In seasons 11 & 12 , 28 fighters competed in the preliminary round , with the winning fourteen entering the house . A " wild card " bout would take place at the end of the " round @-@ of @-@ fourteen " featuring two of the losing fighters . The winner of the wild card bout would then be included in the quarterfinal round of eight fighters . This format proved highly successful for middleweight fighter Kris McCray , who took part in season 11 's wild card bout . Having lost his opening match in the house , he won the wild card bout to reach the quarter finals and went on to win his next two bouts , reaching the tournament final . The wild card bout was instituted one last time in season 13 , which only featured 14 fighters in the house & no preliminary fights . 
 = = = Contract award = = = 
 The winners of the first three seasons of The Ultimate Fighter competition , and certain runners @-@ up depending on their performance in their competition finals , receive the touted " six @-@ figure " contract to fight in the UFC . These contracts are specifically three @-@ year contracts with a guaranteed first year . Each year consists of three fights , the first year 's purse per fight consists of $ 12 @,@ 000 guaranteed with a $ 12 @,@ 000 win bonus ( a maximum of $ 24 @,@ 000 per fight ) . The second year 's purse per fight is $ 16 @,@ 000 with a $ 16 @,@ 000 win bonus ( a maximum of $ 32 @,@ 000 per fight ) and the third year 's purse per fight is at $ 22 @,@ 000 with a $ 22 @,@ 000 win bonus ( a maximum of $ 44 @,@ 000 per fight ) . 
 A TUF winner who goes 9 – 0 can earn $ 300 @,@ 000 total on the contract , but only $ 150 @,@ 000 is guaranteed for all three years if nine fights are fought . Some TUF competitors who did not win the series were also offered UFC contracts , although not on as attractive terms . 
 = = Coaches involvement = = 
 With the exception of seasons two , four , eleven and thirteen , fifteen , sixteen and the first season of TUF : Brazil the coaches fought each other after the conclusion of the show . Season two featured Rich Franklin and Matt Hughes , who were in different weight categories , eliminating the possibility for a post @-@ season fight . The fourth season saw multiple guest coaches take the lead , differing from other seasons with two clearly designated coaches . As such , these seasons did not feature their respective coaches in competition . Season eleven coaches Tito Ortiz and Chuck Liddell 's fight was cancelled due to Ortiz 's need for neck fusion surgery . Season thirteen saw the fight between Brock Lesnar and Junior dos Santos cancelled after Lesnar was diagnosed with his second bout of diverticulitis . 2012 saw the cancellation of a bout between season 15 coaches Dominick Cruz and Urijah Faber , due to a torn ACL for Cruz . In addition , the expected match between the TUF : Brazil coaches Vitor Belfort and Wanderlei Silva did not occur after Belfort sustained a broken hand while preparing for the fight . Season 16 was supposed to feature a fight between coaches Roy Nelson and Shane Carwin , though this was also cancelled after Carwin suffered a knee injury . 
 In addition to the seasons which did not feature post @-@ season fights between the coaches , several seasons have been impacted , forcing postponements . Due to injuries to the season six coaches Matt Serra and Matt Hughes , their fight was postponed . Serra suffered a herniated disc in his lower back and Hughes later suffered a torn MCL before the fight finally took place at UFC 98 . The fight between season ten coaches Rashad Evans and Quinton Jackson took place at UFC 114 with Rashad Evans winning by unanimous decision . The fight was postponed by five months due to Jackson 's A @-@ Team filming commitments and his temporary decision to retire from fighting . 
 Though rarely taking place at the live finales , the coaches ' fights are an important part of each season of The Ultimate Fighter . With each season effectively hyping the fight and the individuals for multiple weeks , the fights are usually the focal point of the pay @-@ per @-@ view event in which they are featured . The coaches ' fights have resulted in the following matchups and results : 
 = = Season synopses = = 
 Season 1 – 3 
 The first season of The Ultimate Fighter was the last attempt by the UFC to capture public interest in the sport . The Stephan Bonnar and Forrest Griffin bout saved the sport according to many journalists and Dana White . Despite his loss , Bonnar was also awarded a coveted contract live on the air , after White declared that " There were no losers in this fight . " Griffin and Diego Sanchez are also regarded as the original Ultimate Fighters , after their wins at the finale . 
 The second season saw welterweights and heavyweights compete , featuring coaches Rich Franklin and Matt Hughes . The final saw Rashad Evans defeating Brad Imes and Joe Stevenson defeating Luke <unk> . 
 The third season highlighted the long @-@ standing rivalry between Tito Ortiz and Ken Shamrock . It was also the first season to feature competitors from outside of North America , after the addition of Michael Bisping and Ross Pointon . The season saw a format change , when the team @-@ games were eliminated in favour of a conventional knockout style tournament format . The final fights saw Michael Bisping become the first non @-@ American winner , defeating Josh Haynes and Kendall Grove defeat Ed Herman . 
 Season 4 – 7 
 The fourth season was different from others before it , as it was the " comeback " season . Past UFC fighters who hadn 't had the success they were expected to have , were invited back , to compete in the show , with the winner receiving a guaranteed title shot . This season was also the only one to date to not feature team coaches . Instead , the show had guest coaches each week . The final saw Matt Serra defeat Chris Lytle and Travis Lutter defeat Patrick Côté to receive their guaranteed title shots . 
 The fifth season was coached by Jens Pulver and B.J. Penn , as the company attempted to kickstart the lightweight division . The show featured many of the future stars of the lightweight division such as Nate Diaz , Joe Lauzon , Gray Maynard , Matt Wiman and Cole <unk> the fact that Team Pulver won 5 out of the first eight fights , the 3 fighters who made it through the quarterfinals on Team Penn are still in the UFC which are Gray Maynard , Matt Wiman and Joe Lauzon while Cole Miller , Manvel Gamburyan , and Nate Diaz from Team Pulver are still in the <unk> final was contested by Nate Diaz and Manvel Gamburyan , with Gamburyan falling to a shoulder injury early on . 
 Former winner Matt Serra returned to the show in the sixth season to coach alongside Matt Hughes and oversaw a group of welterweight fighters . The final saw veteran Mac Danzig defeat Tommy Speer to become The Ultimate Fighter , before he dropped to the lightweight division . Arguably , only George <unk> has gone on to have any success post @-@ TUF , having gone on a 7 fight win streak after The Ultimate Fighter , while season winner Danzig has hovered around the .500 mark since his season win . 
 The seventh season saw another format change , as fighters had to compete to be official castmembers . Instead of the usual 16 fighters , the season had 32 fighters after Dana White claimed that he was tired of fighters coming onto the show for airtime . This season was coached by UFC Light Heavyweight champion Quinton Jackson and challenger Forrest Griffin , the first season 's winner . The season 's final was due to be competed between Amir Sadollah , who hadn 't competed in a professional fight before the show , and Jesse Taylor . However , Taylor was kicked off the show after filming had completed , when he kicked the window out of a <unk> in Las Vegas . His slot was taken by C.B. <unk> who defeated Tim <unk> for the right , but Sadollah won in the final to become The Ultimate Fighter . 
 Season 8 – 12 
 The eighth season was coached by UFC Interim Heavyweight champion Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira and Frank Mir , with lightweights and light heavyweights being the focus for the season . The show was largely dominated by the actions of Junie Browning , who would regularly get drunk and act in an aggressive manner towards his fellow castmates . The two fights at the final saw Efrain Escudero defeat Phillipe <unk> and Ryan Bader defeat Vinny Magalhães . 
 The ninth season saw a United States vs. United Kingdom theme for the show , with Dan Henderson and Michael Bisping coaching the respective sides . The two sides contrasted , with the UK side showing close friendship ( with many coming from Team Rough House ) , whilst the US team appeared fractured . The lightweight final saw Team Rough House teammates Andre Winner and Ross Pearson face off for the contract , with Pearson coming out on top via decision . The welterweight final saw James Wilks defeat <unk> Johnson via submission in the opening round , handing the UK team a 2 @-@ 0 victory . 
 The tenth season was the first season to feature only heavyweights and was largely built around the internet sensation Kimbo Slice and former NFL players . The two coaches were former UFC Light Heavyweight champions Quinton Jackson and Rashad Evans who squabbled throughout the entire season , hyping their eventual fight further . However , midway through the airing of the season , it was announced that Jackson was filming The A @-@ Team , as its lead character B. A. <unk> , leading to the postponement of the coaches ' fight . The season also featured several former NFL players , with one - Brendan Schaub - making the final of the show . Additionally , the season was occasionally criticised after the cardio of the heavyweights came into question . The final saw MMA veteran Roy Nelson and Brendan Schaub , with Nelson winning via first round knockout . 
 The eleventh season saw former UFC Light Heavyweight champions Tito Ortiz and Chuck Liddell coach the two teams . Unlike previous seasons , the number of competitors in the house was reduced to 14 , with 7 progressing to the quarter @-@ finals . An eighth was added via a " wildcard " bout - a bout between two losers from the round of 14 . The slots went to <unk> <unk> and Kris McCray , which saw McCray win via submission . McCray would then go on to avenge his earlier defeat , in the semi @-@ finals , defeating Josh Bryant . The season was blighted by injuries to multiple competitors , such as the withdrawal of Nick Ring , after he required knee surgery . After Rich <unk> pulled out of the competition , his quarter final place was taken by Court McGee . Court McGee and Kris McCray met in the final , where McGee would win via submission to become The Ultimate Fighter . 
 The twelfth season saw the UFC Welterweight champion Georges St @-@ Pierre coach alongside former opponent and number one contender to the title , Josh Koscheck . The season saw the continuation of the wildcard format and 14 @-@ man tournament bracket . The show 's number one pick was Marc Stevens , who would go on to lose in one of the quickest submissions ( via guillotine choke ) in the show 's history . The wildcard slots went to Marc Stevens and Aaron Wilkinson , with Wilkinson handing Stevens his second successive guillotine choke loss . The show was dominated by Josh Koscheck 's attempts to annoy Georges St @-@ Pierre , with St @-@ Pierre 's paramedic getting involved in the arguments with Koscheck . The finale was a match between Jonathan Brookins and Michael Johnson on December 4 , 2010 which resulted in Brookins winning via unanimous decision . 
 Season 13 – 16 ( and regional versions ) 
 The thirteenth season was coached by former UFC Heavyweight champion Brock Lesnar and Junior dos Santos , who would later go on to win the same title . This season featured welterweights and removed the elimination bouts to get into the house , with 14 fighters immediately gaining entry into the house . The first day of training saw Myles Jury pull out of the competition with a knee injury . The wildcard made another appearance , with Javier Torres and Chuck O 'Neil getting the slots , leading to a submission victory for O 'Neil . The final of this season saw Tony Ferguson defeat Ramsey <unk> via KO in the first round . 
 The fourteenth season featured <unk> and featherweights for the first time , with Michael Bisping coaching for the second time , with Jason Miller opposing him . The cast was considered to be one of the most notable in several seasons of the Ultimate Fighter , perhaps owing to this season being the first for the weight classes . Fighters once again had to compete to get into the house , but during the preliminary round , Dana White announced end @-@ of @-@ season bonuses for the best knockout , submission and fight . The awards went to John Dodson , Dennis Bermudez and Dustin <unk> vs. Louis <unk> respectively . The eventual winners of the season were John Dodson ( who defeated T.J. <unk> at bantamweight ) and Diego Brandao ( who defeated Dennis Bermudez at featherweight ) . 
 The fifteenth season was the first season to air on FX and moved to a live format . The season was coached by UFC Bantamweight champion Dominick Cruz and Urijah Faber and featured the lightweight division . The entry fights consisted of just one round , as opposed to the usual two with the possibility of a sudden death victory . During the first week in the house , Michael Chiesa - one of the participants - was told that his father had died . Despite this , he was able to continue in the competition and ultimately won after defeating Al <unk> at the finale . The live season aired at the same time as TUF Brazil , which was the first regional version of the show . That season was coached by Vitor Belfort and Wanderlei Silva and featured featherweights and <unk> . This season featured a scrambling of the teams , as seven of the Team Vitor fighters had won for only one of the Team Wanderlei fighters . The finalists for the show were Rony " Jason " Mariano Bezerra and <unk> <unk> in the featherweight division and Cezar " <unk> " Ferreira and Daniel Sarafian in the middleweight division . However , Sarafian was forced to withdraw from the finale , making him the first and ( to @-@ date ) only finalist to ever withdraw through injury . He was replaced by Sergio " Serginho " Moraes , the man he had defeated via KO in the semi @-@ final round . The eventual winners were Bezerra and Ferreira , with both winning via decision . 
 = = Seasons = = 
 = = = Main seasons = = = 
 ^ A. For this season instead of coaches , prominent trainers and UFC fighters acted as advisors . ^ B. Tito Ortiz was replaced in the final episode by Rich Franklin . ^ C. This season is the first to feature a gym vs. gym format as each team is composed of fighters from the same gym and their head coaches are also the teams ' head coaches . ^ D. There was no individual tournament for the season . After a round of 12 fights , divided in points ( the first four fights were 25 points , the next 50 and the last were 100 points ) , American Top Team emerged victorious and won $ 200 @,@ 000 . Then , each team picked a representative to fight at the finale for $ 300 @,@ 000 and the tournament trophy . 
 = = = International seasons = = = 
 ^ E. Daniel Sarafian was scheduled to be part of the finale , but was injured and replaced by Sergio Moraes . ^ F. Santiago <unk> was scheduled to be part of the finale , but was injured and replaced by Leonardo Santos . ^ G. For this season Cung Le served as a mentor and chief coach . ^ H. <unk> Ao left the show after the 4th episode due to personal reasons . His staff took over his duties . ^ I. Anderson Silva was removed from the show on episode 3 due to his failed pre @-@ fight drug test for UFC 183 . He was replaced by Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Post @-@ show success = = = 
 The Ultimate Fighter has created many successful fighters . As of June 2016 , 4 men and 1 woman have won UFC titles , though only 1 of them has successfully defended his title . However , some fighters have also had success in the sister promotions World Extreme Cagefighting ( WEC ) or Strikeforce . The following fighters have competed for a UFC , Strikeforce or WEC championship : 
 Season 1 
 Season 2 
 Season 3 
 Season 4 
 As part of season four , Travis Lutter and Matt Serra received automatic and immediate title shots , though non @-@ winners can also compete for titles . Lutter was scheduled to compete for the UFC Middleweight Championship at UFC 67 : All Or Nothing , but weighed in over the limit . He still competed against the champion and lost a non @-@ title fight . 
 Season 5 
 Season 14 
 Season 18 
 Season 20 
 Season 20 was the first season of The Ultimate Fighter to crown a champion . All fighters of the season were competing to win the inaugural UFC Women 's <unk> Championship . Most of the competitors from the division came from TUF 20 . 
 = = <unk> Winners who have fought each other = = 
 Many of the TUF winners have gone on to fight each other . 
 Rashad Evans ( season 2 winner ) def . Michael Bisping ( season 3 winner ) - UFC 78 
 Rashad Evans ( season 2 winner ) def . Forrest Griffin ( season 1 winner ) - UFC 92 
 Diego Sanchez ( season 1 winner ) def . Joe Stevenson ( season 2 winner ) - UFC 95 
 Joe Stevenson ( season 2 winner ) def . Nate Diaz ( season 5 winner ) - TUF 9 Finale 
 Mac Danzig ( season 6 winner ) def . Joe Stevenson ( season 2 winner ) - UFC 124 
 Mac Danzig ( season 6 winner ) def . Efrain Escudero ( season 8 winner ) - UFC 145 
 Robert Whittaker ( Smashes winner ) def . Colton Smith ( season 16 winner ) - UFC 160 
 Court McGee ( season 11 winner ) def . Robert Whittaker ( Smashes winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Condit vs. Kampmann 2 
 Michael Chiesa ( season 15 winner ) def . Colton Smith ( season 16 winner ) - UFC : Fight for the Troops 3 
 Norman Parke ( Smashes winner ) drew . Leonardo Santos ( Brazil 2 winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Shogun vs. Henderson 2 
 Diego Sanchez ( season 1 winner ) def . Ross Pearson ( season 9 winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Henderson vs. <unk> 
 Leonardo Santos ( Brazil 2 winner ) def . Efrain Escudero ( season 8 winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Bigfoot vs. <unk> 
 Antônio Carlos Júnior ( Brazil 3 winner ) def . Eddie Gordon ( season 19 winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Machida vs. Romero 
 Ryan Bader ( season 8 winner ) def . Rashad Evans ( season 2 winner ) - UFC 192 
 Ross Pearson ( season 9 winner ) def . Chad <unk> ( Nations : Canada vs. Australia winner ) - UFC Fight Night : Hunt vs. Mir 
 = Feminism = 
 Feminism is a range of political movements , ideologies , and social movements that share a common goal : to define , establish , and achieve political , economic , personal , and social rights for women that are equal to those of men . This includes seeking to establish equal opportunities for women in education and employment . Feminists typically advocate or support the rights and equality of women . 
 Feminist movements have campaigned and continue to campaign for women 's rights , including the right to vote , to hold public office , to work , to earn fair wages or equal pay , to own property , to receive education , to enter contracts , to have equal rights within marriage , and to have maternity leave . Feminists have also worked to promote bodily autonomy and integrity , and to protect women and girls from rape , sexual harassment , and domestic violence . 
 Feminist campaigns are generally considered to be one of the main forces behind major historical societal changes for women 's rights , particularly in the West , where they are near @-@ universally credited with having achieved women 's suffrage , gender neutrality in English , reproductive rights for women ( including access to contraceptives and abortion ) , and the right to enter into contracts and own property . Although feminist advocacy is , and has been , mainly focused on women 's rights , some feminists , including bell hooks , argue for the inclusion of men 's liberation within its aims because men are also harmed by traditional gender roles . Feminist theory , which emerged from feminist movements , aims to understand the nature of gender inequality by examining women 's social roles and lived experience ; it has developed theories in a variety of disciplines in order to respond to issues such as the social construction of gender . 
 Some forms of feminism have been criticized for taking into account only white , middle class , and educated perspectives . This criticism led to the creation of ethnically specific or multicultural forms of feminism , including black feminism and intersectional feminism . 
 = = History = = 
 Charles Fourier , a Utopian Socialist and French philosopher , is credited with having coined the word " <unk> " in 1837 . The words " <unk> " ( " feminism " ) and " <unk> " ( " feminist " ) first appeared in France and the Netherlands in 1872 , Great Britain in the 1890s , and the United States in 1910 , and the Oxford English Dictionary lists 1852 as the year of the first appearance of " feminist " and 1895 for " feminism " . Depending on historical moment , culture and country , feminists around the world have had different causes and goals . Most western feminist historians assert that all movements working to obtain women 's rights should be considered feminist movements , even when they did not ( or do not ) apply the term to themselves . Other historians assert that the term should be limited to the modern feminist movement and its descendants . Those historians use the label " <unk> " to describe earlier movements . 
 The history of the modern western feminist movements is divided into three " waves " . Each wave dealt with different aspects of the same feminist issues . The first wave comprised women 's suffrage movements of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , promoting women 's right to vote . The second wave was associated with the ideas and actions of the women 's liberation movement beginning in the 1960s . The second wave campaigned for legal and social equality for women . The third wave is a continuation of , and a reaction to , the perceived failures of second @-@ wave feminism , beginning in the 1990s . 
 = = = Nineteenth and early twentieth centuries = = = 
 First @-@ wave feminism was a period of activity during the 19th century and early twentieth century . In the UK and US , it focused on the promotion of equal contract , marriage , parenting , and property rights for women . By the end of the 19th century , activism focused primarily on gaining political power , particularly the right of women 's suffrage , though some feminists were active in campaigning for women 's sexual , reproductive , and economic rights as well . 
 Women 's suffrage began in Britain 's Australasian colonies at the close of the 19th century , with the self @-@ governing colonies of New Zealand granting women the right to vote in 1893 and South Australia granting female suffrage ( the right to vote and stand for parliamentary office ) in 1895 . This was followed by Australia granting female suffrage in 1902 . 
 In Britain the Suffragettes and the Suffragists campaigned for the women 's vote , and in 1918 the Representation of the People Act was passed granting the vote to women over the age of 30 who owned property . In 1928 this was extended to all women over 21 . Emmeline Pankhurst was the most notable activist in England , with Time naming her one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century stating : " she shaped an idea of women for our time ; she shook society into a new pattern from which there could be no going back . " In the U.S. , notable leaders of this movement included Lucretia Mott , Elizabeth Cady Stanton , and Susan B. Anthony , who each campaigned for the abolition of slavery prior to championing women 's right to vote . These women were influenced by the Quaker theology of spiritual equality , which asserts that men and women are equal under God . In the United States , first @-@ wave feminism is considered to have ended with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution ( 1919 ) , granting women the right to vote in all states . The term first wave was coined retroactively to categorize these western movements after the term second @-@ wave feminism began to be used to describe a newer feminist movement that focused on fighting social and cultural inequalities , as well political inequalities . 
 During the late Qing period and reform movements such as the Hundred Days ' Reform , Chinese feminists called for women 's liberation from traditional roles and Neo @-@ Confucian gender segregation . Later , the Chinese Communist Party created projects aimed at integrating women into the workforce , and claimed that the revolution had successfully achieved women 's liberation . 
 According to Nawar al @-@ Hassan <unk> , Arab feminism was closely connected with Arab nationalism . In 1899 , Qasim Amin , considered the " father " of Arab feminism , wrote The Liberation of Women , which argued for legal and social reforms for women . He drew links between women 's position in Egyptian society and nationalism , leading to the development of Cairo University and the National Movement . In 1923 Hoda <unk> founded the Egyptian Feminist Union , became its president and a symbol of the Arab women 's rights movement . 
 The Iranian Constitutional Revolution in 1905 triggered the Iranian women 's movement , which aimed to achieve women 's equality in education , marriage , careers , and legal rights . However , during the Iranian revolution of 1979 , many of the rights that women had gained from the women 's movement were systematically abolished , such as the Family Protection Law . 
 In France , women obtained the right to vote only with the Provisional Government of the French Republic of 21 April 1944 . The Consultative Assembly of Algiers of 1944 proposed on 24 March 1944 to grant eligibility to women but following an amendment by Fernand Grenier , they were given full citizenship , including the right to vote . Grenier 's proposition was adopted 51 to 16 . In May 1947 , following the November 1946 elections , the sociologist Robert <unk> minimized the " gender gap " , stating in Le Populaire that women had not voted in a consistent way , dividing themselves , as men , according to social classes . During the baby boom period , feminism waned in importance . Wars ( both World War I and World War II ) had seen the provisional emancipation of some women , but post @-@ war periods signaled the return to conservative roles . 
 = = = Mid @-@ twentieth century = = = 
 By the mid 20th century , in some European countries , women still lacked some significant rights . Feminists in these countries continued to fight for voting rights . In Switzerland , women gained the right to vote in federal elections in 1971 ; but in the canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden women obtained the right to vote on local issues only in 1991 , when the canton was forced to do so by the Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland . In Liechtenstein , women were given the right to vote by the women 's suffrage referendum of 1984 . Three prior referendums held in 1968 , 1971 and 1973 had failed to secure women 's right to vote . 
 Feminists continued to campaign for the reform of family laws which gave husbands control over their wives . Although by the 20th century coverture had been abolished in the UK and the US , in many continental European countries married women still had very few rights . For instance , in France married women did not receive the right to work without their husband 's permission until 1965 . Feminists have also worked to abolish the " marital exemption " in rape laws which precluded the prosecution of husbands for the rape of their wives . Earlier efforts by first @-@ wave feminists such as Voltairine de Cleyre , Victoria Woodhull and Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme Elmy to criminalize marital rape in the late 19th century had failed ; this was only achieved a century later in most Western countries , but is still not achieved in many other parts of the world . 
 French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir provided a Marxist solution and an existentialist view on many of the questions of feminism with the publication of Le Deuxième <unk> ( The Second Sex ) in 1949 . The book expressed feminists ' sense of injustice . Second @-@ wave feminism is a feminist movement beginning in the early 1960s and continuing to the present ; as such , it coexists with third @-@ wave feminism . Second @-@ wave feminism is largely concerned with issues of equality beyond suffrage , such as ending gender discrimination . 
 Second @-@ wave feminists see women 's cultural and political inequalities as inextricably linked and encourage women to understand aspects of their personal lives as deeply politicized and as reflecting sexist power structures . The feminist activist and author Carol <unk> coined the slogan " The Personal is Political " , which became synonymous with the second wave . 
 <unk> and third @-@ wave feminism in China has been characterized by a reexamination of women 's roles during the communist revolution and other reform movements , and new discussions about whether women 's equality has actually been fully achieved . 
 In 1956 , President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt initiated " state feminism " , which outlawed discrimination based on gender and granted women 's suffrage , but also blocked political activism by feminist leaders . During Sadat 's presidency , his wife , Jehan Sadat , publicly advocated further women 's rights , though Egyptian policy and society began to move away from women 's equality with the new Islamist movement and growing conservatism . However , some activists proposed a new feminist movement , Islamic feminism , which argues for women 's equality within an Islamic framework . 
 In Latin America , revolutions brought changes in women 's status in countries such as Nicaragua , where feminist ideology during the Sandinista Revolution aided women 's quality of life but fell short of achieving a social and ideological change . 
 = = = Late twentieth and early twenty @-@ first centuries = = = 
 = = = = Third @-@ wave = = = = 
 In the early 1990s in the USA , third @-@ wave feminism began as a response to perceived failures of the second wave and to the backlash against initiatives and movements created by the second wave . Third @-@ wave feminism distinguished itself from the second wave around issues of sexuality , challenging female heterosexuality and celebrating sexuality as a means of female empowerment . Third @-@ wave feminism also seeks to challenge or avoid what it deems the second wave 's essentialist definitions of femininity , which , they argue , over @-@ emphasize the experiences of upper middle @-@ class white women . Third @-@ wave feminists often focus on " micro @-@ politics " and challenge the second wave 's paradigm as to what is , or is not , good for women , and tend to use a post @-@ structuralist interpretation of gender and sexuality . Feminist leaders rooted in the second wave , such as Gloria Anzaldúa , bell hooks , Chela Sandoval , <unk> Moraga , Audre Lorde , Maxine Hong Kingston , and many other non @-@ white feminists , sought to negotiate a space within feminist thought for consideration of race @-@ related <unk> . Third @-@ wave feminism also contains internal debates between difference feminists , who believe that there are important differences between the sexes , and those who believe that there are no inherent differences between the sexes and contend that gender roles are due to social conditioning . 
 = = = = Standpoint = = = = 
 Standpoint theory is a feminist theoretical point of view that believes a persons ' social position influences their knowledge . This perspective argues that research and theory treats women and the feminist movement as insignificant and refuses to see traditional science as unbiased . Since the 1980s , standpoint feminists have argued that the feminist movement should address global issues ( such as rape , incest , and prostitution ) and culturally specific issues ( such as female genital mutilation in some parts of Africa and the Middle East , as well as glass ceiling practices that impede women 's advancement in developed economies ) in order to understand how gender inequality interacts with racism , homophobia , classism and colonization in a " matrix of domination " . 
 = = = = Post @-@ feminism = = = = 
 The term post @-@ feminism is used to describe a range of viewpoints reacting to feminism since the 1980s . While not being " anti @-@ feminist " , post @-@ feminists believe that women have achieved second wave goals while being critical of third wave feminist goals . The term was first used to describe a backlash against second @-@ wave feminism , but it is now a label for a wide range of theories that take critical approaches to previous feminist discourses and includes challenges to the second wave 's ideas . Other post @-@ feminists say that feminism is no longer relevant to today 's society . Amelia Jones has written that the post @-@ feminist texts which emerged in the 1980s and 1990s portrayed second @-@ wave feminism as a monolithic entity . Dorothy Chunn notes a " blaming narrative " under the post @-@ feminist moniker , where feminists are undermined for continuing to make demands for gender equality in a " post @-@ feminist " society , where " gender equality has ( already ) been achieved . " According to Chunn , " many feminists have voiced disquiet about the ways in which rights and equality discourses are now used against them . " 
 = = Theory = = 
 Feminist theory is the extension of feminism into theoretical or philosophical fields . It encompasses work in a variety of disciplines , including anthropology , sociology , economics , women 's studies , literary criticism , art history , psychoanalysis and philosophy . Feminist theory aims to understand gender inequality and focuses on gender politics , power relations , and sexuality . While providing a critique of these social and political relations , much of feminist theory also focuses on the promotion of women 's rights and interests . Themes explored in feminist theory include discrimination , stereotyping , objectification ( especially sexual objectification ) , oppression , and patriarchy . In the field of literary criticism , Elaine Showalter describes the development of feminist theory as having three phases . The first she calls " feminist critique " , in which the feminist reader examines the ideologies behind literary phenomena . The second Showalter calls " <unk> " , in which the " woman is producer of textual meaning " . The last phase she calls " gender theory " , in which the " ideological inscription and the literary effects of the sex / gender system are explored " . 
 This was paralleled in the 1970s by French feminists , who developed the concept of écriture féminine ( which translates as ' female or feminine writing ' ) . Helene <unk> argues that writing and philosophy are phallocentric and along with other French feminists such as Luce <unk> emphasize " writing from the body " as a subversive exercise . The work of Julia <unk> , a feminist psychoanalyst and philosopher , and Bracha Ettinger , artist and psychoanalyst , has influenced feminist theory in general and feminist literary criticism in particular . However , as the scholar Elizabeth Wright points out , " none of these French feminists align themselves with the feminist movement as it appeared in the Anglophone world " . More recent feminist theory , such as that of Lisa Lucile Owens , has concentrated on characterizing feminism as a universal emancipatory movement . 
 = = Movements and ideologies = = 
 Many overlapping feminist movements and ideologies have developed over the years . 
 = = = Political movements = = = 
 Some branches of feminism closely track the political leanings of the larger society , such as liberalism and conservatism , or focus on the environment . Liberal feminism seeks individualistic equality of men and women through political and legal reform without altering the structure of society . Catherine Rottenberg has argued that the neoliberal shirt in Liberal feminism has led to that form of feminism being individualized rather than collectivized and becoming detached from social inequality . Due to this she argues that Liberal Feminism cannot offer any sustained analysis of the structures of male dominance , power , or privilege . 
 Radical feminism considers the male @-@ controlled capitalist hierarchy as the defining feature of women 's oppression and the total uprooting and reconstruction of society as necessary . Conservative feminism is conservative relative to the society in which it resides . Libertarian feminism conceives of people as self @-@ owners and therefore as entitled to freedom from coercive interference . Separatist feminism does not support heterosexual relationships . Lesbian feminism is thus closely related . Other feminists criticize separatist feminism as sexist . <unk> see men 's control of land as responsible for the oppression of women and destruction of the natural environment ; ecofeminism has been criticised for focusing too much on a mystical connection between women and nature . 
 = = = <unk> ideologies = = = 
 Rosemary Hennessy and <unk> Ingraham say that materialist forms of feminism grew out of Western Marxist thought and have inspired a number of different ( but overlapping ) movements , all of which are involved in a critique of capitalism and are focussed on ideology 's relationship to women . Marxist feminism argues that capitalism is the root cause of women 's oppression , and that discrimination against women in domestic life and employment is an effect of capitalist ideologies . Socialist feminism distinguishes itself from Marxist feminism by arguing that women 's liberation can only be achieved by working to end both the economic and cultural sources of women 's oppression . Anarcha @-@ feminists believe that class struggle and anarchy against the state require struggling against patriarchy , which comes from involuntary hierarchy . 
 = = = Black and postcolonial ideologies = = = 
 Sara Ahmed argues that Black and Postcolonial feminisms pose a challenge " to some of the organizing premises of Western feminist thought . " During much of its history , feminist movements and theoretical developments were led predominantly by middle @-@ class white women from Western Europe and North America . However women of other races have proposed alternative feminisms . This trend accelerated in the 1960s with the civil rights movement in the United States and the collapse of European colonialism in Africa , the Caribbean , parts of Latin America , and Southeast Asia . Since that time , women in developing nations and former colonies and who are of colour or various ethnicities or living in poverty have proposed additional feminisms . <unk> emerged after early feminist movements were largely white and middle @-@ class . Postcolonial feminists argue that colonial oppression and Western feminism marginalized postcolonial women but did not turn them passive or voiceless . Third @-@ world feminism and Indigenous feminism are closely related to postcolonial feminism . These ideas also correspond with ideas in African feminism , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , transnational feminism , and Africana <unk> . 
 = = = Social constructionist ideologies = = = 
 In the late twentieth century various feminists began to argue that gender roles are socially constructed , and that it is impossible to generalize women 's experiences across cultures and histories . Post @-@ structural feminism draws on the philosophies of post @-@ structuralism and deconstruction in order to argue that the concept of gender is created socially and culturally through discourse . Postmodern feminists also emphasize the social construction of gender and the discursive nature of reality ; however , as Pamela Abbott et al. note , a postmodern approach to feminism highlights " the existence of multiple truths ( rather than simply men and women 's standpoints ) " . 
 = = = Cultural movements = = = 
 Riot <unk> took an anti @-@ corporate stance of self @-@ sufficiency and self @-@ reliance . Riot grrrl 's emphasis on universal female identity and separatism often appears more closely allied with second @-@ wave feminism than with the third wave . The movement encouraged and made " adolescent girls ' standpoints central " , allowing them to express themselves fully . Lipstick feminism is a cultural feminist movement that attempts to respond to the backlash of second @-@ wave radical feminism of the 1960s and 1970s by reclaiming symbols of " feminine " identity such as make @-@ up , suggestive clothing and having a sexual allure as valid and empowering personal choices . 
 = = Sexuality = = 
 Feminist views on sexuality vary , and have differed by historical period and by cultural context . Feminist attitudes to female sexuality have taken a few different directions . Matters such as the sex industry , sexual representation in the media , and issues regarding consent to sex under conditions of male dominance have been particularly controversial among feminists . This debate has culminated in the late 1970s and the 1980s , in what came to be known as the feminist sex wars , which pitted anti @-@ pornography feminism against sex @-@ positive feminism , and parts of the feminist movement were deeply divided by these debates . Feminists have taken a variety of positions on different aspects of the sexual revolution from the 1960s and 70s . Over the course of the 1970s , a large number of influential women accepted lesbian and bisexual women as part of feminism . 
 = = = Sex industry = = = 
 Opinions on the sex industry are diverse . Feminists critical of the sex industry generally see it as the exploitative result of patriarchal social structures which reinforce sexual and cultural attitudes complicit in rape and sexual harassment . Alternately , feminists who support at least part of the sex industry argue that it can be a medium of feminist expression and a means for women to take control of their sexuality . 
 Feminist views of pornography range from condemnation of pornography as a form of violence against women , to an embracing of some forms of pornography as a medium of feminist expression . Feminists ' views on prostitution vary , but many of these perspectives can be loosely arranged into an overarching standpoint that is generally either critical or supportive of prostitution and sex work . 
 = = = <unk> female sexual autonomy = = = 
 For feminists , a woman 's right to control her own sexuality is a key issue . Feminists such as Catharine MacKinnon argue that women have very little control over their own bodies , with female sexuality being largely controlled and defined by men in patriarchal societies . Feminists argue that sexual violence committed by men is often rooted in ideologies of male sexual entitlement , and that these systems grant women very few legitimate options to refuse sexual advances . In many cultures , men do not believe that a woman has the right to reject a man 's sexual advances or to make an autonomous decision about participating in sex . Feminists argue that all cultures are , in one way or another , dominated by ideologies that largely deny women the right to decide how to express their sexuality , because men under patriarchy feel entitled to define sex on their own terms . This entitlement can take different forms , depending on the culture . In many parts of the world , especially in conservative and religious cultures , marriage is regarded as an institution which requires a wife to be sexually available at all times , virtually without limit ; thus , forcing or coercing sex on a wife is not considered a crime or even an abusive behavior . In more liberal cultures , this entitlement takes the form of a general sexualization of the whole culture . This is played out in the sexual objectification of women , with pornography and other forms of sexual entertainment creating the fantasy that all women exist solely for men 's sexual pleasure , and that women are readily available and desiring to engage in sex at any time , with any man , on a man 's terms . 
 = = Science = = 
 Sandra Harding says that the " moral and political insights of the women 's movement have inspired social scientists and biologists to raise critical questions about the ways traditional researchers have explained gender , sex and relations within and between the social and natural worlds . " Some feminists , such as Ruth Hubbard and Evelyn Fox Keller , criticize traditional scientific discourse as being historically biased towards a male perspective . A part of the feminist research agenda is the examination of the ways in which power inequities are created or reinforced in scientific and academic institutions . Physicist Lisa Randall , appointed to a task force at Harvard by then @-@ president Lawrence Summers after his controversial discussion of why women may be underrepresented in science and engineering , said , " I just want to see a whole bunch more women enter the field so these issues don 't have to come up anymore . " 
 Lynn Hankinson Nelson notes that feminist empiricists find fundamental differences between the experiences of men and women . Thus , they seek to obtain knowledge through the examination of the experiences of women , and to " uncover the consequences of omitting , <unk> , or devaluing them " to account for a range of human experience . Another part of the feminist research agenda is the uncovering of ways in which power inequities are created or reinforced in society and in scientific and academic institutions . Furthermore , despite calls for greater attention to be paid to structures of gender inequity in the academic literature , structural analyses of gender bias rarely appear in highly cited psychological journals , especially in the commonly studied areas of psychology and personality . 
 One criticism of feminist epistemology is that it allows social and political values to influence its findings . Susan Haack also points out that feminist epistemology reinforces traditional stereotypes about women 's thinking ( as intuitive and emotional , etc . ) , Meera Nanda further cautions that this may in fact trap women within " traditional gender roles and help justify patriarchy " . 
 = = = Biology and gender = = = 
 Modern feminism challenges the biological essentialist view of gender . For example , Anne Fausto @-@ Sterling 's book , Myths of Gender , explores the assumptions embodied in scientific research that support a biologically essentialist view of gender . In Delusions of Gender , Cordelia Fine disputes scientific evidence that suggests that there is an innate biological difference between men 's and women 's minds , asserting instead that cultural and societal beliefs are the reason for differences between individuals that are commonly perceived as sex differences . 
 = = = Feminist psychology = = = 
 Feminism in psychology emerged as a critique of the dominant male outlook on psychological research where only male perspectives were studied with all male subjects . As women earned doctorates in psychology , females and their issues were introduced as legitimate topics of study . Feminist psychology emphasizes social context , lived experience , and qualitative analysis . Projects such as Psychology 's Feminist Voices have emerged to catalogue the influence of feminist psychologists on the discipline . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Gender @-@ based inquiries into and conceptualization of architecture have also come about , leading to feminism in modern architecture . Piyush Mathur coined the term " <unk> " . Claiming that " architectural planning has an inextricable link with the defining and regulation of gender roles , responsibilities , rights , and limitations " , Mathur came up with that term " to explore ... the meaning of ' architecture ' in terms of gender " and " to explore the meaning of ' gender ' in terms of architecture " . 
 = = = Visual arts = = = 
 Corresponding with general developments within feminism , and often including such self @-@ organizing tactics as the consciousness @-@ raising group , the movement began in the 1960s and flourished throughout the 1970s . Jeremy Strick , director of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles , described the feminist art movement as " the most influential international movement of any during the postwar period " , and Peggy Phelan says that it " brought about the most far @-@ reaching transformations in both <unk> and art writing over the past four decades " . Feminist artist Judy Chicago , who created The Dinner Party , a set of vulva @-@ themed ceramic plates in the 1970s , said in 2009 to ARTnews , " There is still an institutional lag and an insistence on a male Eurocentric narrative . We are trying to change the future : to get girls and boys to realize that women 's art is not an exception — it 's a normal part of art history . " A feminist approach to the visual arts has most recently developed through <unk> and the posthuman turn , giving voice to the ways " contemporary female artists are dealing with gender , social media and the notion of embodiment " . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The feminist movement produced both feminist fiction and non @-@ fiction , and created new interest in women 's writing . It also prompted a general reevaluation of women 's historical and academic contributions in response to the belief that women 's lives and contributions have been underrepresented as areas of scholarly interest . Much of the early period of feminist literary scholarship was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women . Studies like Dale Spender 's Mothers of the Novel ( 1986 ) and Jane Spencer 's The Rise of the Woman Novelist ( 1986 ) were ground @-@ breaking in their insistence that women have always been writing . Commensurate with this growth in scholarly interest , various presses began the task of reissuing long @-@ out @-@ of @-@ print texts . Virago Press began to publish its large list of 19th and early @-@ 20th @-@ century novels in 1975 and became one of the first commercial presses to join in the project of reclamation . In the 1980s Pandora Press , responsible for publishing Spender 's study , issued a companion line of 18th @-@ century novels written by women . More recently , Broadview Press continues to issue 18th- and 19th @-@ century novels , many hitherto out of print , and the University of Kentucky has a series of <unk> of early women 's novels . A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) by Mary Wollstonecraft , is one of the earliest works of feminist philosophy . A Room of One 's Own ( 1929 ) by Virginia Woolf , is noted in its argument for both a literal and figural space for women writers within a literary tradition dominated by patriarchy . 
 The widespread interest in women 's writing is related to a general reassessment and expansion of the literary canon . Interest in post @-@ colonial literatures , gay and lesbian literature , writing by people of colour , working people 's writing , and the cultural productions of other historically marginalized groups has resulted in a whole scale expansion of what is considered " literature " , and genres hitherto not regarded as " literary " , such as children 's writing , journals , letters , travel writing , and many others are now the subjects of scholarly interest . Most genres and subgenres have undergone a similar analysis , so that one now sees work on the " female gothic " or women 's science fiction . 
 According to Elyce Rae Helford , " Science fiction and fantasy serve as important vehicles for feminist thought , particularly as bridges between theory and practice . " Feminist science fiction is sometimes taught at the university level to explore the role of social constructs in understanding gender . Notable texts of this kind are Ursula K. Le Guin 's The Left Hand of Darkness ( 1969 ) , Joanna Russ ' The Female Man ( 1970 ) , Octavia Butler 's Kindred ( 1979 ) and Margaret Atwood 's <unk> 's Tale ( 1985 ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Women 's music ( or womyn 's music or <unk> 's music ) is the music by women , for women , and about women . The genre emerged as a musical expression of the second @-@ wave feminist movement as well as the labor , civil rights , and peace movements . The movement was started by lesbians such as Cris Williamson , Meg Christian , and Margie Adam , African @-@ American women activists such as Bernice Johnson <unk> and her group Sweet Honey in the Rock , and peace activist Holly Near . Women 's music also refers to the wider industry of women 's music that goes beyond the performing artists to include studio musicians , producers , sound engineers , technicians , cover artists , distributors , promoters , and festival organizers who are also women . Riot grrrl is an underground feminist hardcore punk movement described in the cultural movements section of this article . 
 Feminism became a principal concern of musicologists in the 1980s as part of the New Musicology . Prior to this , in the 1970s , musicologists were beginning to discover women composers and performers , and had begun to review concepts of canon , genius , genre and periodization from a feminist perspective . In other words , the question of how women musicians fit into traditional music history was now being asked . Through the 1980s and 1990s , this trend continued as musicologists like Susan McClary , Marcia Citron and Ruth <unk> began to consider the cultural reasons for the marginalizing of women from the received body of work . Concepts such as music as gendered discourse ; professionalism ; reception of women 's music ; examination of the sites of music production ; relative wealth and education of women ; popular music studies in relation to women 's identity ; patriarchal ideas in music analysis ; and notions of gender and difference are among the themes examined during this time . 
 While the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles , women are much less likely to have positions of authority , such as being the leader of an orchestra . In popular music , while there are many women singers recording songs , there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers , the individuals who direct and manage the recording process . 
 = = = Cinema = = = 
 Feminist cinema , advocating or illustrating feminist perspectives , arose largely with the development of feminist film theory in the late ' 60s and early ' 70s . Women who were radicalized during the 1960s by political debate and sexual liberation ; but the failure of radicalism to produce substantive change for women galvanized them to form consciousness @-@ raising groups and set about analysing , from different perspectives , dominant cinema 's construction of women . Differences were particularly marked between feminists on either side of the Atlantic . 1972 saw the first feminist film festivals in the U.S. and U.K. as well as the first feminist film journal , Women and Film . <unk> from this period included Claire Johnston and Laura Mulvey , who also organised the Women 's Event at the Edinburgh Film Festival . Other theorists making a powerful impact on feminist film include Teresa de <unk> , Anneke <unk> and Kaja Silverman . Approaches in philosophy and psychoanalysis fuelled Feminist Film Criticism , Feminist Independent Film and Feminist Distribution . 
 It has been argued that there are two distinct approaches to independent , theoretically inspired feminist filmmaking . ' Deconstruction ' concerns itself with analysing and breaking down codes of mainstream cinema , aiming to create a different relationship between the spectator and dominant cinema . The second approach , a feminist counterculture , embodies feminine writing to investigate a specifically feminine cinematic language . Some recent criticism of ' feminist film ' approaches has centered around a Swedish rating system called the Bechdel test . 
 During the 1930s @-@ 1950s heyday of the big Hollywood studios , the status of women in the industry was abysmal and , while much has improved , many would argue that there is still much to be done . From art films by Sally Potter , Catherine <unk> , Claire Denis and Jane Campion to action movies by Kathryn Bigelow , women now have a stronger voice , but are only too aware of the still lingering gender gap . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Feminism had complex interactions with the major political movements of the twentieth century . 
 = = = Socialism = = = 
 Since the late nineteenth century some feminists have allied with socialism , whereas others have criticized socialist ideology for being insufficiently concerned about women 's rights . August Bebel , an early activist of the German Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) , published his work Die Frau und der <unk> , juxtaposing the struggle for equal rights between sexes with social equality in general . In 1907 there was an International Conference of Socialist Women in Stuttgart where suffrage was described as a tool of class struggle . Clara Zetkin of the SPD called for women 's suffrage to build a " socialist order , the only one that allows for a radical solution to the women 's question " . 
 In Britain , the women 's movement was allied with the Labour party . In the U.S. , Betty Friedan emerged from a radical background to take leadership . Radical Women is the oldest socialist feminist organization in the U.S. and is still active . During the Spanish Civil War , Dolores <unk> ( La <unk> ) led the Communist Party of Spain . Although she supported equal rights for women , she opposed women fighting on the front and clashed with the anarcha @-@ feminist Mujeres Libres . 
 = = = Fascism = = = 
 Fascism has been prescribed dubious stances on feminism by its practitioners and by women 's groups . Amongst other demands concerning social reform presented in the Fascist manifesto in 1919 was expanding the suffrage to all Italian citizens of age 18 and above , including women ( accomplished only in 1946 , after the defeat of fascism ) and eligibility for all to stand for office from age 25 . This demand was particularly championed by special Fascist women 's auxiliary groups such as the fasci <unk> and only partly realized in 1925 , under pressure from Prime Minister Benito Mussolini 's more conservative coalition partners . 
 Cyprian <unk> states that although feminists were among those who opposed the rise of Adolf Hitler , feminism has a complicated relationship with the Nazi movement as well . While Nazis glorified traditional notions of patriarchal society and its role for women , they claimed to recognize women 's equality in employment . However , Hitler and Mussolini declared themselves as opposed to feminism , and after the rise of Nazism in Germany in 1933 , there was a rapid dissolution of the political rights and economic opportunities that feminists had fought for during the pre @-@ war period and to some extent during the 1920s . Georges <unk> et al. note that in practice fascist society was hierarchical and emphasized male virility , with women maintaining a largely subordinate position . <unk> also notes that <unk> has since the 1960s been hostile towards feminism and advocates that women accept " their traditional roles " . 
 = = = Civil rights movement and anti @-@ racism = = = 
 The civil rights movement has influenced and informed the feminist movement and vice versa . Many Western feminists adapted the language and theories of black equality activism and drew parallels between women 's rights and the rights of non @-@ white people . Despite the connections between the women 's and civil rights movements , some tension arose during the late 1960s and early 1970s as non @-@ white women argued that feminism was predominantly white and middle class , and did not understand and was not concerned with race issues . Similarly , some women argued that the civil rights movement had sexist elements and did not adequately address minority women 's concerns . These criticisms created new feminist social theories about the intersections of racism , classism , and sexism , and new feminisms , such as black feminism and Chicana feminism . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Neo @-@ liberalism has been criticized by feminist theory for having a negative effect on the female workforce population across the globe <unk> in the global south . <unk> assumptions and objectives continue to dominate economic and geopolitical thinking . Women 's experiences in non @-@ industrialized countries reveal often deleterious effects of modernization policies and undercut orthodox claims that development benefits everyone . 
 Proponents of neoliberalism have theorized that by increasing women 's participation in the workforce , there will be heightened economic progress , but feminist critics have noted that this participation alone does not further equality in gender <unk> has failed to address significant problems such as the devaluation of feminized labour , the structural privileging of men and masculinity , and the politicization of women 's subordination in the family and the workplace . The ' feminization of employment ' refers to a conceptual characterization of deteriorated and <unk> labour conditions that are less desirable , meaningful , safe and secure . Employers in the global south have perceptions about feminine labour and seek workers who are perceived to be undemanding , docile and willing to accept low wages . Social constructs about feminized labour have played a big part in this , for instance , employers often perpetuate ideas about women as ' secondary income earners to justify their lower rates of pay and not deserving of training or promotion . 
 = = Societal impact = = 
 The feminist movement has effected change in Western society , including women 's suffrage ; greater access to education ; more nearly equitable pay with men ; the right to initiate divorce proceedings ; the right of women to make individual decisions regarding pregnancy ( including access to contraceptives and abortion ) ; and the right to own property . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 From the 1960s on , the campaign for women 's rights was met with mixed results in the U.S. and the U.K. Other countries of the EEC agreed to ensure that discriminatory laws would be phased out across the European Community . 
 Some feminist campaigning also helped reform attitudes to child sexual abuse . The view that young girls cause men to have sexual intercourse with them was replaced by that of men 's responsibility for their own conduct , the men being adults . 
 In the U.S. , the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) began in 1966 to seek women 's equality , including through the Equal Rights Amendment ( ERA ) , which did not pass , although some states enacted their own . Reproductive rights in the U.S. centered on the court decision in Roe v. Wade enunciating a woman 's right to choose whether to carry a pregnancy to term . Western women gained more reliable birth control , allowing family planning and careers . The movement started in the 1910s in the U.S. under Margaret Sanger and elsewhere under Marie Stopes . In the final three decades of the 20th century , Western women knew a new freedom through birth control , which enabled women to plan their adult lives , often making way for both career and family . 
 The division of labor within households was affected by the increased entry of women into workplaces in the 20th century . Sociologist Arlie Russell Hochschild found that , in two @-@ career couples , men and women , on average , spend about equal amounts of time working , but women still spend more time on housework , although Cathy Young responded by arguing that women may prevent equal participation by men in housework and parenting . Judith K. Brown writes , " Women are most likely to make a substantial contribution when subsistence activities have the following characteristics : the participant is not obliged to be far from home ; the tasks are relatively monotonous and do not require rapt concentration ; and the work is not dangerous , can be performed in spite of interruptions , and is easily resumed once interrupted . " 
 In international law , the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women ( CEDAW ) is an international convention adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and described as an international bill of rights for women . It came into force in those nations ratifying it . 
 = = = Jurisprudence = = = 
 Feminist jurisprudence is a branch of jurisprudence that examines the relationship between women and law . It addresses questions about the history of legal and social biases against women and about the enhancement of their legal rights . 
 Feminist jurisprudence signifies a reaction to the philosophical approach of modern legal scholars , who typically see law as a process for interpreting and perpetuating a society 's universal , gender @-@ neutral ideals . Feminist legal scholars claim that this fails to acknowledge women 's values or legal interests or the harms that they may anticipate or experience . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Proponents of gender @-@ neutral language argue that the use of gender @-@ specific language often implies male superiority or reflects an unequal state of society . According to The Handbook of English Linguistics , generic masculine pronouns and gender @-@ specific job titles are instances " where English linguistic convention has historically treated men as prototypical of the human species . " 
 = = = Theology = = = 
 Feminist theology is a movement that reconsiders the traditions , practices , scriptures , and theologies of religions from a feminist perspective . Some of the goals of feminist theology include increasing the role of women among the clergy and religious authorities , reinterpreting male @-@ dominated imagery and language about God , determining women 's place in relation to career and motherhood , and studying images of women in the religion 's sacred texts . 
 Christian feminism is a branch of feminist theology which seeks to interpret and understand Christianity in light of the equality of women and men , and that this interpretation is necessary for a complete understanding of Christianity . While there is no standard set of beliefs among Christian feminists , most agree that God does not discriminate on the basis of sex , and are involved in issues such as the ordination of women , male dominance and the balance of parenting in Christian marriage , claims of moral deficiency and inferiority of women compared to men , and the overall treatment of women in the church . The Christian Bible refers to women in positions of authority in Judges 4 : 4 and Kings 22 : 14 . 
 Islamic feminists advocate women 's rights , gender equality , and social justice grounded within an Islamic framework . Advocates seek to highlight the deeply rooted teachings of equality in the Quran and encourage a questioning of the patriarchal interpretation of Islamic teaching through the Quran , hadith ( sayings of Muhammad ) , and sharia ( law ) towards the creation of a more equal and just society . Although rooted in Islam , the movement 's pioneers have also utilized secular and Western feminist discourses and recognize the role of Islamic feminism as part of an integrated global feminist movement . 
 Buddhist feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious , legal , and social status of women within Buddhism . It is an aspect of feminist theology which seeks to advance and understand the equality of men and women morally , socially , spiritually , and in leadership from a Buddhist perspective . The Buddhist feminist Rita Gross describes Buddhist feminism as " the radical practice of the co @-@ humanity of women and men . " 
 Jewish feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious , legal , and social status of women within Judaism and to open up new opportunities for religious experience and leadership for Jewish women . The main issues for early Jewish feminists in these movements were the exclusion from the all @-@ male prayer group or minyan , the exemption from positive time @-@ bound mitzvot , and women 's inability to function as witnesses and to initiate divorce . Many Jewish women have become leaders of feminist movements throughout their history . 
 Dianic Wicca is a feminist @-@ centered <unk> . 
 Secular or atheist feminists have engaged in feminist criticism of religion , arguing that many religions have oppressive rules towards women and misogynistic themes and elements in religious texts . 
 = = = Patriarchy = = = 
 Patriarchy is a social system in which society is organized around male authority figures . In this system fathers have authority over women , children , and property . It implies the institutions of male rule and privilege , and is dependent on female subordination . Most forms of feminism characterize patriarchy as an unjust social system that is oppressive to women . Carole Pateman argues that the patriarchal distinction " between masculinity and femininity is the political difference between freedom and subjection . " In feminist theory the concept of patriarchy often includes all the social mechanisms that reproduce and exert male dominance over women . Feminist theory typically characterizes patriarchy as a social construction , which can be overcome by revealing and critically analyzing its manifestations . Some radical feminists have proposed that because patriarchy is too deeply rooted in society , separatism is the only viable solution . Other feminists have criticized these views as being anti @-@ men . 
 = = = Men and masculinity = = = 
 Feminist theory has explored the social construction of masculinity and its implications for the goal of gender equality . The social construct of masculinity is seen by feminism as problematic because it associates males with aggression and competition , and reinforces patriarchal and unequal gender relations . Patriarchal cultures are criticized for " limiting forms of masculinity " available to men and thus narrowing their life choices . Some feminists are engaged with men 's issues activism , such as bringing attention to male rape and spousal battery and addressing negative social expectations for men . 
 Male participation in feminism is encouraged by feminists and is seen as an important strategy for achieving full societal commitment to gender equality . Many male feminists and pro @-@ feminists are active in both women 's rights activism , feminist theory , and masculinity studies . However , some argue that while male engagement with feminism is necessary , it is problematic because of the ingrained social influences of patriarchy in gender relations . The consensus today in feminist and masculinity theories is that both genders can and should cooperate to achieve the larger goals of feminism . It has been proposed that , in large part , this can be achieved through considerations of women 's agency . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Different groups of people have responded to feminism , and both men and women have been among its supporters and critics . Among American university students , for both men and women , support for feminist ideas is more common than self @-@ identification as a feminist . The US media tends to portray feminism negatively and feminists " are less often associated with day @-@ to @-@ day work / leisure activities of regular women . " However , as recent research has demonstrated , as people are exposed to self @-@ identified feminists and to discussions relating to various forms of feminism , their own self @-@ identification with feminism increases . Roy Baumeister has criticized feminists who " look only at the top of society and draw conclusions about society as a whole . Yes , there are mostly men at the top . But if you look at the bottom , really at the bottom , you 'll find mostly men there , too . " 
 = = = Pro @-@ feminism = = = 
 Pro @-@ feminism is the support of feminism without implying that the supporter is a member of the feminist movement . The term is most often used in reference to men who are actively supportive of feminism . The activities of pro @-@ feminist men 's groups include anti @-@ violence work with boys and young men in schools , offering sexual harassment workshops in workplaces , running community education campaigns , and counseling male perpetrators of violence . Pro @-@ feminist men also may be involved in men 's health , activism against pornography including anti @-@ pornography legislation , men 's studies , and the development of gender equity curricula in schools . This work is sometimes in collaboration with feminists and women 's services , such as domestic violence and rape crisis centers . 
 = = = Anti @-@ feminism and criticism of feminism = = = 
