 Anti @-@ feminism is opposition to feminism in some or all of its forms . 
 In the nineteenth century , anti @-@ feminism was mainly focused on opposition to women 's suffrage . Later , opponents of women 's entry into institutions of higher learning argued that education was too great a physical burden on women . Other anti @-@ feminists opposed women 's entry into the labor force , or their right to join unions , to sit on juries , or to obtain birth control and control of their sexuality . 
 Some people have opposed feminism on the grounds that they believe it is contrary to traditional values or religious beliefs . These anti @-@ feminists argue , for example , that social acceptance of divorce and non @-@ married women is wrong and harmful , and that men and women are fundamentally different and thus their different traditional roles in society should be maintained . Other anti @-@ feminists oppose women 's entry into the workforce , political office , and the voting process , as well as the lessening of male authority in families . 
 Writers such as Camille Paglia , Christina Hoff Sommers , Jean Bethke <unk> , Elizabeth Fox @-@ Genovese , Lisa Lucile Owens and Daphne Patai oppose some forms of feminism , though they identify as feminists . They argue , for example , that feminism often promotes <unk> and the elevation of women 's interests above men 's , and criticize radical feminist positions as harmful to both men and women . Daphne Patai and <unk> <unk> argue that the term " anti @-@ feminist " is used to silence academic debate about feminism . Lisa Lucile Owens argues that certain rights extended exclusively to women are patriarchal because they relieve women from exercising a crucial aspect of their moral agency . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 " Feminism " . Collier 's New Encyclopedia . 1921 . 
 " Feminism " . Encyclopedia Americana . 1920 . 
 = = = Listings = = = 
 <unk> directory 
 Psychology 's Feminist Voices 
 Topics in Feminism , at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
 = = = Tools = = = 
 Feminist Perspectives Scale from Henley , Meng , O 'Brien , McCarthy , and <unk> ( 1998 ) . 
 = = = Multimedia and documents = = = 
 Feminism on In Our Time at the BBC . ( listen now ) 
 Early Video on the Emancipation of Women , documentary filmed ca . 1930 , which includes footage from the 1890s 
 Documents from the Women 's Liberation Movement , Special Collections Library , Duke University 
 = Andrew Sledd = 
 Andrew Warren Sledd ( November 7 , 1870 – March 16 , 1939 ) was an American theologian , university professor and university president . A native of Virginia , he was the son of a prominent Methodist minister , and was himself ordained as a minister after earning his bachelor 's degree and master 's degree . He later earned a second master 's degree and his doctorate . 
 After teaching for several years , Sledd was chosen to be the last president of the University of Florida at Lake City , from 1904 to 1905 , and the first president of the modern University of Florida ( first known as the " University of the State of Florida " ) , from 1905 to 1909 . He was also president of Southern University from 1910 to 1914 , and later became a professor and an influential biblical scholar at Emory University 's Candler School of Theology from 1914 to 1939 . 
 Sledd first gained national recognition after he wrote a 1902 magazine article advocating better legal and social treatment of African @-@ Americans . He is also prominently remembered for his role in founding the modern University of Florida , his scholarly analysis of biblical texts as literature , his call for an end to racial violence , and his influence on a generation of Methodist seminary students , scholars and ministers . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Sledd was born November 7 , 1870 , in Lynchburg , Virginia , the son of a Methodist Episcopal minister , Robert Newton Sledd , and his wife , Frances Carey Greene Sledd . The elder Sledd was an influential minister within the Virginia Methodist Conference , and at various times while Andrew was growing up , his father held prominent pastorates of large Methodist congregations in four different Virginia cities — Danville , Norfolk , Petersburg and Richmond . Andrew received his early education in the Petersburg school of W. Gordon McCabe , a former Confederate captain and veteran of the U.S. Civil War . 
 In 1888 , Sledd entered Methodist @-@ affiliated Randolph – Macon College in Ashland , Virginia . While at Randolph – Macon , he was a member of Phi Delta Theta Fraternity ( Virginia Gamma chapter ) ; he was also the college 's outstanding student @-@ athlete and was particularly known as the college baseball team 's first baseman and star hitter . Sledd left the college without finishing his undergraduate degree requirements , first accepting a position as a teacher in Durant , Mississippi , and then as the principal of a high school in Arkadelphia , Arkansas . After teaching in Arkansas for two years , he returned to Randolph – Macon and completed his Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees in 1894 . Sledd graduated in mathematics , was recognized for completing the best work in the mathematics and Greek departments during his senior year , and was honored as a member of Phi Beta Kappa . 
 Sledd taught at the Randolph @-@ Macon Academy in Front Royal , Virginia , from 1894 to 1895 , before returning to graduate school . He earned a second master of arts degree in Greek from Harvard University in Cambridge , Massachusetts , in 1896 , and completed one year 's additional graduate work toward a doctoral degree . While he was at Harvard , he played for the Harvard Crimson baseball team , and he is remembered as one of Harvard 's greatest athletes of the era ; he was offered a professional baseball contract but turned it down . Several years later , during a break in his teaching career , Sledd completed his doctorate . 
 = = Scholar and educator = = 
 = = = Emory College and the " Sledd Affair " = = = 
 After completing his graduate studies at Harvard , Sledd briefly served as a Latin instructor at Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee . He was ordained as a Methodist minister and licensed to preach in 1898 . At the suggestion of his father , he contacted Methodist minister Warren Akin Candler , who was the president of Emory College in Oxford , Georgia , a prominent leader of the Georgia Methodist Conference , and a few months from being elevated as a Methodist bishop . Candler was impressed with the character and academic credentials of the young scholar , and assisted him in becoming a professor of Latin language and literature at Emory College , a position Sledd held from 1898 to 1902 . While living in the Candler family home , Sledd fell in love with the bishop 's only daughter , Annie Florence Candler , and he married her on March 22 , 1899 ; his father conducted the wedding ceremony . 
 Later in 1899 , while traveling by train between Atlanta and Covington , Georgia , Sledd witnessed the aftermath of the lynching of an African @-@ American man named Sam Hose . The idealistic young minister was outraged . In reaction , he wrote an essay entitled " The Negro : Another View , " which was published as an article in the July 1902 issue of The Atlantic Monthly . In the article , Sledd denounced the lynchings of black men in the South in graphic terms : " lynching is not ' justice , ' however rude ; it is a wild and diabolic carnival of blood . " While he flatly asserted that the " negro race " was not the equal of the " white race , " he nevertheless demanded equal justice for blacks and whites alike , writing " There is nothing in a white skin or a black to nullify the essential rights of man as man . " Even though Sledd 's essay condoned the continued racial segregation of white and black Southerners as a necessary social expedient , a public firestorm ensued in Georgia over Sledd 's criticism of the South 's treatment of its black citizens , with the controversy stoked by the vitriolic letters and editorial attacks of agrarian populist Rebecca Felton in the Atlanta Constitution newspaper . As the controversy grew , the Atlanta Journal and Atlanta News quickly joined the anti @-@ Sledd chorus . When a majority of the members of Emory 's board of trustees threatened to withdraw their support of the college because of the negative publicity , the newly installed college president , James E. Dickey , demanded Sledd 's resignation from the faculty , and Sledd resigned on August 9 , 1902 . The Sledd Affair subsequently attracted attention throughout the United States as a matter of academic freedom and freedom of speech . 
 After resigning from the Emory College faculty , Sledd entered the graduate school of Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut , where he began work in the advanced classics doctoral program , specializing in Latin . Sledd received $ 1 @,@ 000 in severance pay from Emory pursuant to an agreement with Dickey and unanimously approved by the Emory faculty , and his father @-@ in @-@ law contributed $ 900 to help cover his tuition and living expenses while he attended Yale . He received a scholarship from the university , and earned his doctor of philosophy degree in Latin from Yale in 1903 , after only nine months . Stanford University and Syracuse University offered him professorships in Latin ; Antioch College offered him its presidency . Sledd declined all offers from Northern and Western institutions , and was determined to return to his native South . 
 = = = University of Florida at Lake City = = = 
 After completing his doctorate , Sledd obtained an appointment as a professor of Greek at Methodist @-@ affiliated Southern University ( now known as Birmingham – Southern College ) in Greensboro , Alabama . Several months later , on July 6 , 1904 , he was unanimously selected to be the president of the University of Florida at Lake City by its board of trustees . At the time of his appointment , the University of Florida at Lake City was experiencing a controversy of its own : its administration and faculty were hopelessly fractured by personality conflicts and its unpopular president 's failed attempts at improving the small school 's instruction and academic standing . The university 's board of trustees had removed the ineffectual president , and dismissed seven members of its small faculty . The university , such as it was , had been known as " Florida Agricultural College " until 1903 . When Sledd arrived in Lake City , it was a school with a new name , a faculty fractured by contentious personalities , an unknown number of returning students and an uncertain future . Sledd required all previous faculty members to re @-@ apply if they desired to keep their jobs , hired replacement instructors , most of whom had earned doctoral degrees in their respective fields ( in contrast to the previous faculty ) , and set about devising rigorous academic standards for the school 's new students . Although the university was a designated land @-@ grant college under the federal government 's Morrill Act , it received insufficient annual financial assistance from the state government , and its finances remained tenuous . 
 = = = University of the State of Florida = = = 
 Sledd and members of the faculty were actively involved in urging Florida 's state government to combine the state 's several small institutions of higher education . The university consolidation movement gained the political backing of newly elected Florida Governor Napoleon B. Broward , and , in 1905 , the Florida Legislature passed the Buckman Act , which abolished the hodge @-@ podge of state @-@ supported colleges and consolidated their assets and programs into a new comprehensive university and land @-@ grant college for white men , and a liberal arts college and normal school for white women . The Act mandated the merger of four separate institutions , including the existing University of Florida at Lake City , into the consolidated men 's university — the new University of the State of Florida . By a vote of six to four , the new Board of Control charged with the governance of the consolidated institutions , selected Gainesville as the location for the new men 's state university . 
 Sledd had not anticipated that the Lake City campus would be abandoned , and had assumed that it would be selected as the location of the newly consolidated men 's university , placing him in a strong position to become the first president of the new institution . The selection of Gainesville for the campus of the new men 's university put Sledd 's future as its first president in question . The University of Florida in Lake City was just one of the four existing institutions that were to be merged to form the new university , and there were other possible candidates for the presidency . Albert A. Murphree , president of Florida State College in Tallahassee , was the favorite of several prominent members of the legislature . But Sledd had Governor Broward 's backing , and the Board of Control ultimately selected him to be the first president on June 7 , 1905 ; Sledd 's appointment was for a single year , but renewable on an annual basis , as was typical in the university 's early years when the Board of Control appointed or re @-@ appointed the presidents of the state 's public colleges for each academic year . Murphree remained the president of the newly consolidated women 's college in Tallahassee until 1909 . 
 Sledd nominated all of the original faculty members , a majority of whom he had previously selected to be professors at the University of Florida at Lake City . The new University of the State of Florida operated in Lake City during the first academic year of its existence ( 1905 – 06 ) , while the buildings of the new Gainesville campus were being erected . Sledd managed the move of the school 's assets from Lake City to Gainesville during the late summer of 1906 , and participated in the official dedication of the campus on September 27 , 1906 . When registration for classes was held in Gainesville on September 24 , 1906 , there were 102 students and fewer than a dozen faculty members . Sledd received a $ 2 @,@ 250 annual salary in his first year as the head of the new state university , and , together with his wife and their young children , moved into the still incomplete Buckman Hall dormitory on the Gainesville campus . 
 Sledd played a key role in the formation and ultimate success of the new university , but his time as its president was a relatively short four years . His political backing ended with the retirement of Governor Broward , and the inauguration of the new governor , Albert Gilchrist , in January 1909 . The Florida Board of Education , which then consisted of the governor and the state 's elected cabinet members , oversaw the Board of Control and made no secret of its desire to remove Sledd , in part because members of the Board of Education believed Sledd 's admissions standards were too high and that the university was not growing quickly enough . Nevertheless , the Board of Control continued to back Sledd , and its members threatened to resign in protest . Seeking to avoid an unwinnable political controversy , Sledd resigned , and the Board of Control replaced him with Albert Murphree , the political favorite of several legislative leaders and the Board of Education . 
 = = = Methodist ministry and Southern University = = = 
 Following Sledd 's resignation , he and his family returned to Atlanta and stayed in the home of his wife 's parents . Within a few weeks , he was appointed minister of the First Methodist Church in Jacksonville , Florida , a position he held for the remainder of 1909 and the first half of 1910 . Sledd was subsequently invited to return to Southern University as its president , serving from 1910 to 1914 . While president of Southern University , he implemented a new pre @-@ college preparatory school and a four @-@ year course of Bible study , and focused his personal efforts on restoring the school 's finances and improving the quality of its instruction . 
 = = = Candler School of Theology = = = 
 In the fall of 1914 , Sledd resigned the presidency of Southern University and returned to Emory College , by then renamed Emory University and relocated to its new main campus in northeast Atlanta , as the first Professor of Greek and New Testament Literature at the Candler School of Theology , the newly established seminary of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Sledd became well known as a professor of Greek , Latin and New Testament studies at Candler , and was the author of several scholarly books on New Testament subjects , including Saint Mark 's Life of Jesus ( 1927 ) , The Bibles of the Churches ( 1930 ) and His Witnesses : A Study of the Book of Acts ( 1935 ) . He was selected to be a member of the American Standard Bible Committee , which was preparing a new American Standard Version of the Bible . He continued to advocate internal Methodist reform and an end to racial violence , and his teaching inspired a generation of his Candler theology students to act as change agents within the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Many of his former students became Methodist ministers who returned to their congregations and annual conferences to work for better treatment of African @-@ Americans , helping the Southern Methodist church to evolve from a mainstay of theological and racial intransigence to an agent for social change and doctrinal reform . 
 Sledd 's interest in education was not limited to the higher education of colleges and universities . While holding his Candler professorship , he served as a member of the Board of Public Instruction of DeKalb County , Georgia , and volunteered to serve as the board 's treasurer . 
 Sledd and his wife Annie also suffered a personal tragedy during his time as a Candler professor , when their first @-@ born son and his namesake , Andrew Sledd , Jr . , died after an extended illness in 1919 . Andrew , Jr . , was 16 years old , and had graduated from Decatur High School only weeks earlier . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Sledd became a recognized New Testament scholar and a significant voice of educational , social and ecclesiastical reform within the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . For nearly twenty @-@ five years , he remained a professor at Emory University 's Candler School of Theology , until his death from a heart attack on March 16 , 1939 . Following Sledd 's funeral , his body was buried in the Decatur Cemetery . 
 In his 1960 History of Methodism in Alabama and West Florida , Marion Elias Lazenby remembered Sledd as " one of the [ Methodist ] Church 's most scholarly and reverent teachers . " Immediately after his death , Sledd was widely eulogized in Methodist churches across the country , and numerous obituaries appeared in regional and national newspapers across the country . The Atlanta Constitution , whose editorials had vilified Sledd in 1902 , paid tribute to him in its obituary as a " nationally known Bible authority " ; no mention was made of the " Sledd Affair . " 
 Sledd 's advocacy of social change and an evolving understanding of biblical texts came at a high personal price . Given his chosen career of minister and professor , he never accumulated much personal wealth . Sledd died deep in debt , having lost the family home to foreclosure after the salaries of Candler professors were cut when financial support of the school fell during the 1930s . His creditors obtained a deficiency judgment for the unpaid portion of his debt after the foreclosure , and , following his death , forced the sale of some of his furniture and parts of his personal library in partial satisfaction of his remaining debts . 
 The faculty of the University of Florida awarded Sledd the university 's first honorary degree , a doctor of divinity , at the spring 1909 commencement ceremonies . In 1933 , John J. Tigert , the university 's third president , invited Professor Sledd to be the university 's baccalaureate speaker . After his death , the university honored him again , renaming one of its early residence halls , Sledd Hall , in 1939 . The small state university , which Sledd had been instrumental in creating and organizing , is now one of the ten largest single @-@ campus universities in the United States , with a total enrollment of nearly 50 @,@ 000 undergraduate , graduate and professional students . 
 Sledd and his wife Annie had nine children . Eight of their children graduated from Emory , seven with Phi Beta Kappa honors , a fact newsworthy enough to be picked up by the Associated Press wire service when youngest daughter Antoinette graduated from Emory the year following Sledd 's death . Two of their sons followed in their father 's footsteps , earned doctorates and became university professors : James H. Sledd became a Rhodes Scholar and noted professor of English literature at the University of Chicago and the University of Texas ; Marvin B. Sledd was a professor of mathematics at Georgia Tech . 
 In 2002 , after almost a century of ignoring its role in the " Sledd Affair , " Emory University sponsored a presentation entitled " Professing Justice : A Symposium on the Civil Rights Legacy of Professor Andrew Sledd . " In holding the inter @-@ disciplinary symposium , Emory University acted to " right a wrong committed a century ago by revisiting the ' Sledd affair ' and reflecting on its meaning for Emory today . " 
 = The Boat Race 2011 = 
 The 157th Boat Race took place on 26 March 2011 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was won by Oxford . Of the eighteen competitors in the race , thirteen were British . The race was sponsored for the second time by Xchanging . 
 Oxford won the Women 's Boat Race by four lengths while Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis in the reserve race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along The Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2010 race by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ third lengths , and led overall with 80 victories to Oxford 's 75 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Xchanging for the seventh consecutive year , and it was the second time that the title had been given over to sponsorship ; as such it was referred to as the " Xchanging Boat Race " . The BBC broadcast the event in the United Kingdom , in high @-@ definition for the first time . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew was " slightly heavier " than their opponents , weighing in at a ceremony at City Hall overseen by Boris Johnson at 3 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 6 kg ) more per rower than Oxford . Thirteen of the eighteen competitors were British , the highest proportion for a decade . Of the two crews , Cambridge featured three returning Blues to Oxford 's one . Oxford University Boat Club 's president Ben Myers suggested " we 're home @-@ grown guys , we know about the Boat Race and we 're keen " . Oxford were coached once again by Sean Bowden , who set their boat up as " tandem rigged " ( where two consecutive crew row on the same side of the boat ) , the first time such a configuration had been used in the Boat Race since 1975 . Steve Trapmore was making his debut as Cambridge 's coach . Oxford 's stroke , Simon Hislop , had recovered from testicular cancer in time to participate in the race . 
 = = Races = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Despite falling slightly behind early on in the race , Cambridge rowed their way back into contention and umpire Rob Clegg was forced to warn both crews as the coxes steered towards one another . Following a brief clash of oars , Oxford started to pull away again at Harrods Furniture Depository . At Hammersmith Bridge , the Oxford cox called for push , shouting " 2003 " to invoke memories of the narrowest margin of victory in the history of the event in the 2003 race . Passing St Paul 's School , Oxford took the lead and steered across and in front of the Cambridge boat . Despite attempts to keep in touch with Oxford , Cambridge fell farther and farther behind , and Oxford passed the finishing post four lengths clear in a time of 17 minutes and 37 seconds . 
 Oxford won the 66th Women 's Boat Race by four lengths , their third consecutive victory . Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis in the reserve race by two lengths , their first win for three years . ( No , they did not . Isis won in 2011 after being defeated in 2010 , having won 2008 and 2009 ) 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Cambridge number four Henry <unk> remarked " They had the strength , character and went for it ; we just let them slip . " Oxford 's Constantine Louloudis said " We held Cambridge in high regard . But I certainly didn 't predict a margin like that . " Cambridge president <unk> called it a " stinging defeat " . 
 = Last Clear Chance = 
 Last Clear Chance is a 1959 American short film produced and directed by Robert Carlisle . Sponsored by Union Pacific Railroad , Last Clear Chance is a safety film intended to warn young drivers to be careful at railroad crossings . The film 's cast consists of William Boyett , Harold Agee , Mrs. Harold Agee , Tim Bosworth , William Agee , Christine Lynch , and Lou <unk> . Written by Leland Baxter , the film was shot in parts of Idaho . <unk> , Carlisle & Dunphy Inc , based in New York City , served as the film 's production company . 
 The film centers on the Dixon family , in particular Alan Dixon , who has recently received his driver 's license and is eager to begin driving a car . When local police officer Hal Jackson visits the Dixons and learns that Alan 's license has arrived , he sits down and tells Alan ways to drive safely and avoid getting into accidents . Although the film is fictional , a real family served as the inspiration for the film 's scenario . During production , assistance was provided by staff of the National Safety Council , along with the Idaho State Police and the Colorado State Patrol . 
 Last Clear Chance was distributed by Union Pacific in 1959 , and was circulated widely in the years that followed . Met with warm reception from safety workers , the film was featured in an episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 that originally aired in 1993 , and clips from the film were used in the 2004 film Panorama Ephemera . The film 's copyright was never registered , and it is in the public domain . A copy of the film is preserved in the Prelinger Archives , where it is able to be downloaded or streamed online free of charge . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Idaho police officer Hal Jackson ( William Boyett ) arrives at the funeral for young Frank Dixon , Jr . ( Bill Agee ) , who has died in a car accident . Hal , a friend of the Dixon family , does not go inside , feeling it would be too difficult to take . Hal finds it hard to believe that , only a few days ago , the Dixons were a relatively regular family . In flashback , he recounts what led to Frank Jr . ' s death . Frank Jr. has returned home for the summer to aid his father , Frank Sr. ( Harold Agee ) , on the family farm . He also visits his girlfriend Betty Hutchins ( Christine Lynch ) . When Frank Sr. ' s new tractor arrives at the local train station , Frank Jr . ' s brother Alan ( Tim Bosworth ) wishes to drive it , having recently taken a driver 's test . His father disallows it , so Frank Jr. drives it home . 
 The next day , Alan discovers that his license has arrived in the mail . Ecstatic , he wishes to drive immediately , asking his family members if they need help with any errands . Later , Hal shows up at the Dixon home . Knowing that Alan 's license had been scheduled to arrive , he begins to talk to Alan , telling him about things he should know in order to be able to drive safely . As he finishes giving the advice , Frank Jr. and Betty return home . Alan asks his father if he can drive the car into town . His father lets him , and Frank Jr. and Betty agree to go with him to make sure he arrives safely . 
 Alan begins driving the car down the road , and sees Frank Jr. and Betty in front of him . They look behind to wave to Alan , and he waves back . However , the pair keep driving while looking backwards . Observing that a railroad with an oncoming train is near , Alan desperately tries to signal to them to stop waving and look ahead . When they do not pay attention to him and continue waving , Alan shields his eyes as the two drive right into the path of the train and are killed . Back in the present , at the funeral , Hal enters his police car , and decides to go back on the road in order to prevent more traffic accidents from occurring . 
 = = Production = = 
 Last Clear Chance was produced and directed by Robert Carlisle . The production was supervised by Francis B. Lewis , who was the Union Pacific Railroad 's Director of Safety and Courtesy . Assistance on research for the film was provided by staff of the National Safety Council . A note at the end of the film gives thanks to the Idaho State Police , the Colorado State Patrol , and their respective staffs for " their unstinted cooperation and assistance in making this film . " 
 The film features William Boyett as police officer Hal Jackson . Frank Dixon , Sr. is played by Harold Agee , while the role of Mrs. Dixon is credited to " Mrs. Harold Agee . " Future corporate executive William Agee plays Frank Dixon , Jr. with Christine Lynch appearing as his girlfriend , Betty Hutchins . Tim Bosworth was cast as Alan Dixon , and Lou <unk> plays the grandfather . The film , written by Leland Baxter , features a scenario that was inspired by a real @-@ life family . Bert <unk> served as the cinematographer for Last Clear Chance , with Peter Norman working as assistant cameraman . Shot in Kodachrome . 
 Filming locations include : 
 ≈ 0 : 40 - 1 : 57 and 23 : 25 - 23 : 47 <unk> Cemetery 300 6th St. N Nampa , Idaho ( 43 ° 35 ' 30 @.@ 29 " N 116 ° 33 ' 48 @.@ 16 " W ) 
 ≈ 2 : 29 - 3 : 12 ex @-@ Union Pacific depot , Meridian , Idaho ; [ demolished ] ( 43 ° 36 ' 31 @.@ 67 " N 116 ° 23 ' 26 @.@ 10 " W ) 
 ≈ 3 : 13 - 3 : 33 Crossing at Main ( First ) St and Boise Valley RR MP 457 @.@ 53 Meridian , ID ( 43 ° 36 ' 30 @.@ 95 " N 116 ° 23 ' 29 @.@ 44 " W ) 
 ≈ 19 : 18 - 19 : 31 Bridge ( Avalon ) St Kuna , ID at UP crossing MP 447 @.@ 23 ( 43 ° 29 ' 20 @.@ 82 " N 116 ° 25 ' 15 @.@ 11 " W ) 
 Main character Hal wears an Idaho State Police uniform . Mort <unk> was the film 's editor . 
 Made five years after The Days of Our Years , another Union Pacific Railroad @-@ sponsored safety film , Last Clear Chance was produced by <unk> , Carlisle and Dunphy , Inc. in order to inform young drivers how to make sure to avoid accidents . Archivist , author , and filmmaker Rick Prelinger notes that the film also includes other themes , such as " a teen ’ s feeling of invulnerability , the police officer as authority figure , and the train ’ s dual role as economic partner and potential killer . " Prelinger believes that " longer films aspire to higher goals , and one way to achieve these goals is to pack them with hints of meaning in many directions . " 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 Last Clear Chance was distributed only in western states that were served by its sponsor . It was released in 16 mm film , and by 1960 was described as being " shown widely in all sections of the country . " A copyright on the film was not registered , and it is in the public domain under Public Domain Mark 1 @.@ 0 . A copy of the film is in the Prelinger Archives , and as such it is available to be freely downloaded or streamed from the Internet Archive . 
 The film was received positively by many people who worked in the safety industry , with it being reported that many of them considered it to be " the most moving and hard @-@ hitting educational film on highway grade crossing accident prevention and traffic safety in recent years . " It received an award at a national safety film contest . Rick Prelinger described the film as being " engaging " and opined that it was a " skillful drama . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict branded the film as " hyper somber " and wrote that " we learn , finally , why reckless driving , trains , and painful automotive accidents don 't mix . The question everyone keeps asking is ' Why don 't they look ? ' The answer is simple . They 're dopes ! " 
 Last Clear Chance was featured in an episode of the comedy television series Mystery Science Theater 3000 . Last Clear Chance appeared in the twentieth episode of the fifth season , which was originally broadcast on December 18 , 1993 . Last Clear Chance became a " huge hit " thanks to its appearance on the show , and it has been described as one of the " Mystery Science Theater 3000 favorites . " Actor and writer Kevin Murphy , who plays Tom Servo on the show , opined that Last Clear Chance " is right up there with my all @-@ time favorite shorts . " Rhino Entertainment has released the segment featuring Last Clear Chance on VHS , as part of Mystery Science Theater 3000 - Shorts Volume 2 . Shorts Volume 2 was later re @-@ released on DVD in 2003 , as part of Mystery Science Theater 3000 Collection , Volume 3 . 
 Clips from Last Clear Chance are featured in 2004 's Panorama Ephemera , a film created by Rick Prelinger which compiles clips from 64 short films in order to form a cohesive narrative . The clip used from Last Clear Chance is the scene where Frank Jr. and Betty drive into the path of an oncoming train . Panorama Ephemera can be downloaded or streamed for free at the Internet Archive . 
 = Brothers and Sisters ( album ) = 
 Brothers and Sisters is the fourth studio album by American rock band the Allman Brothers Band . Produced by Johnny Sandlin and the band themselves , the album was released in August 1973 in the United States by Capricorn Records . Following the death of group leader Duane Allman in 1971 , the Allman Brothers Band released Eat a Peach ( 1972 ) , a hybrid studio / live album that became their biggest yet . Afterwards , the group purchased a farm in Juliette , Georgia to become a " group hangout . " However , bassist Berry Oakley was visibly suffering from the death of Duane : he excessively drank and consumed drugs . After nearly a year of severe depression , Oakley was killed in a motorcycle accident not dissimilar from his friend 's in November 1972 . 
 The band carried on , adding new members Chuck Leavell on piano and Lamar Williams on bass . Brothers and Sisters was largely recorded over a period of three months at Capricorn Sound Studios in Macon , Georgia . Lead guitarist Dickey Betts assumed the role of band leader , and many of his compositions reflected a more country @-@ inspired sound . Session musicians Les Dudek and Tommy Talton sat in to play guitar on several songs . The album was being produced at the same time as vocalist / organist Gregg Allman 's solo debut , Laid Back , and features many of the same musicians and engineers . The front album cover features a photograph of Vaylor Trucks , the son of drummer Butch Trucks and his wife Linda . The back cover features a photograph of Oakley 's daughter Brittany and his wife Linda . 
 The album represented the Allmans ' commercial peak : it has sold over seven million copies worldwide , landing it at the time atop of the Top 200 Pop Albums for five weeks . " Ramblin ' Man " became the band 's first and only hit single , peaking at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1973 . The album was followed by a tour of arenas and stadiums , but marred by drug problems , strained friendships and miscommunication between the group members . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shortly following their leader Duane Allman 's death in 1971 , the Allman Brothers Band released Eat a Peach , a hybrid studio / live album that became their biggest release yet ; it peaked at number four on the Billboard charts . The band performed nearly 90 shows in the following year , touring as a five @-@ piece . The band also purchased 432 acres of land in Juliette , Georgia for $ 160 @,@ 000 and nicknamed it " the Farm " ; it soon became a " group hangout " and fulfilled bassist Berry Oakley 's communal dreams . Oakley , however , was visibly suffering from the death of Duane : he excessively drank and consumed drugs , and was losing weight quickly . According to friends and family , he appeared to have lost " all hope , his heart , his drive , his ambition , [ and ] his direction " following Duane 's death . " Everything Berry had envisioned for everybody — including the crew , the women and children — was shattered on the day Duane died , and he didn 't care after that , " said roadie Kim Payne . 
 During recording sessions for their upcoming album , vocalist Gregg Allman was also working on his solo album , Laid Back , and the sessions occasionally overlapped . Chuck Leavell was asked to play piano for Allman 's solo album , and gradually found himself contributing to the Allman Brothers as well . Allman and Betts took turns caring for Oakley , taking him outdoors to places like the zoo to keep him from drinking as much . " Time and time again , I have sat and wondered , ' God , what in the hell could I have done , what could have anybody have done , to help him ? ' " said Allman . Upon Leavell 's entry into the group , Oakley went out of his way to make the new member comfortable . On November 11 , 1972 , overjoyed at the prospect of leading a jam session later that night , Oakley crashed his motorcycle into the side of a bus , just three blocks from where Duane had been killed in a bike accident . He declined hospital treatment and went home , but gradually grew delirious . He was taken to the hospital shortly thereafter and died of cerebral swelling caused by a fractured skull . Oakley was buried directly beside Duane at Rose Hill Cemetery in Macon , Georgia . 
 The band unanimously decided to carry on and arrange auditions for new bassists , with a renewed fervor and determination . Several bassists auditioned , but the band picked Lamar Williams , an old friend of drummer Jai Johanny Johanson 's from Gulfport , Mississippi . The band immediately recognized that Williams represented the best of both Oakley 's style and his own style , and they were pleased with his easygoing demeanor . The addition of Leavell and Williams to the band brought about renewed passion and uplifted spirits within the group . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band began recording Brothers and Sisters in the autumn of 1972 at Capricorn Studios in Macon , Georgia , prior to Oakley 's death . The band had previously started rehearsals for the album in the summer . Allman brought a song he had worked on for a year , titled " Queen of Hearts " , but he was drunk and none of the members of the band would listen to him . This was the catalyst that led to Allman beginning work on Laid Back , his debut solo album . After Williams helped record the album 's third track , " Come and Go Blues " , the rest of the recording process was smooth . 
 Betts became the group 's de facto leader during the recording process . " It 's not like Dickey came in and said , ' I 'm taking over . I 'm the boss . Do this and that . ' It wasn 't overt ; it was still supposedly a democracy but Dickey started doing more and more of the songwriting , " said road manager Willie Perkins . The band first recorded " Wasted Words " and " Ramblin ' Man , " the latter showcasing a more country @-@ infused sound . The entire group were initially reluctant to record " Ramblin ' Man " — " We knew it was a good song but it didn 't sound like us , " said drummer Butch Trucks — but the band gradually headed in a more country direction , as that was Betts ' background . Betts was very serious about his songwriting , sitting down each afternoon to write . 
 The band were adamant about not replacing Duane 's position in the band . Les Dudek , the guitarist who would eventually record " Jessica " and " Ramblin ' Man , " had entered the sessions when he was asked to jam with Betts through mutual friends . The band enjoyed how Dudek played and Phil Walden , the band 's manager , seemed set on Dudek being in the band . Word of mouth , propagated by Dudek himself , was that he " got the gig " and had become the Allman Brothers ' new co @-@ lead guitarist . " We went looking for this dude to kick his ass . Nobody was going to replace Duane and the very thought of it was infuriating to us , " said Trucks . After recording completed , Dudek went on the road with Boz Scaggs and the Steve Miller Band . He wanted to end his contract with Phil Walden at Capricorn , and part of his release granted him no part of the publishing deal for Brothers and Sisters , including a songwriting credit for " Jessica " , as he had no written contract . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ramblin ' Man " pre @-@ dates the album considerably , and was first created during songwriting sessions for Eat a Peach . An embryonic version , referring to a " <unk> ' country man , " can be heard on the bootleg The Gatlinburg Tapes , featuring the band jamming on an off @-@ day in April 1971 in Gatlinburg , Tennessee . 
 " Jessica " was co @-@ written by Betts and Dudek , although only Betts receives credit . Betts first created the song as an experiment , to test whether or not he could write a song that could be played with just two fingers , in honor of Gypsy jazz guitar virtuoso Django Reinhardt , who played with two left fingers due to severe burns . When his baby daughter Jessica entered the room and began bouncing around to the melody , Betts attempted to capture her mood with the song . Dudek created the song 's bridge when Betts became frustrated with the piece . Dudek was disappointed when he was told he would only be recording the acoustic guitar opening , as Betts felt Dudek performing the harmonies to both " Ramblin ' Man " and " Jessica " would lead critics to assume he was a member of the band . Leavell also contributed heavily to " Jessica " , mostly on the arrangement . 
 " Jelly Jelly " was the final song recorded for Brothers and Sisters , credited to Gregg Allman . The song actually contained lyrics from Bobby Bland 's song of the same name , albeit with a very different melody and arrangement . Brothers and Sisters concludes with another country @-@ inspired track , " Pony Boy , " which showcases Betts ' acoustic slide playing . The song was heavily inspired by Robert Johnson in its building rhythm , and Blind Willie McTell influenced its humor . The song was based on a true story involving his uncle , who would take his horse out to avoid driving under the influence ( DUI ) charges , as the horse knew the direction home . Williams played upright bass on the track to keep it an all @-@ acoustic affair , and Trucks played percussion by banging a piece of plywood on the floor . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The album 's artwork was taken at " the Farm " in Juliette , Georgia . The cover art features Trucks ' son Vaylor , while the back cover featured Oakley 's daughter Brittany . The gatefold spread reveals a photo of the band and their extended families . " " I have an almost dreamlike memory of the way things were — parties , people giving the horses beer , various people in and out , " said Brittany Oakley in 1996 . She noted that despite the good memories , " it was painful " following her father 's death , which is when the photo was taken . Vaylor Trucks later went on to study at Florida State University , where he formed a band . To promote a concert , they printed covers of the Brothers and Sisters album cover with the caption " Have you seen me lately ? " , which led to a sold @-@ out crowd . 
 A description from " Red Dog ” Campbell ~ ABB “ Roadie -- " Somebody asked me to name the people on the inside of Brothers and Sisters . I will give it a go . Everybody knows I cannot spell good so you will have to do the best you can in picking up on the names , plus there are a couple that I cannot remember . I should but thirty years is a long time . Standing left to right ( back row ) : First is a friend of Jaimoe ’ s , you will have to get him to tell you the name . I know he is a friend of Ella May Avery who is standing next to him ( Ella is the wife of Jackie Avery , a song writer and very good friend of Jaimoe ’ s ) . Next to her is Brother Lamar Williams , then Mike Arts ( Butch ’ s brother @-@ in @-@ law at that time ) , Joan Calahan with Rachel , Mike Calahan , Mike ’ s dog , Jaimoe and Charles <unk> ( not sure of the spelling ) . Next row : Brother Butch with Valor , Scott Boyer , Linda Trucks with Melody , I can 't remember the next lady ’ s name , but Butch can tell you . Brother Chuck <unk> , My god child Brittany Oakley , standing between Chuck and Linda Oakley , Linda is sitting next to Chuck , between her and brother Twiggs is Judy Petty , she was going with brother Twiggs at that time . Candy Oakley , Brother Kim Payne , in front of Kim is Kay Phillips holding <unk> daughter , sitting next to Brother Tuffy Phillips , behind Tuffy and next to Kim is Buffalo Evans lady at that time ( I should remember her name but it just will not come to me ) . Next to her is The Buffalo , sitting next to Tuffy is Brother Gregg , then my wife <unk> , Brother Willy Perkins is next to Buffalo , I am next with Sandra Perkins between me and Brother Dickie , then Brother Joe Dan Petty . In front of Gregg is Janis Allman with her daughter . Sitting dead center is Deering Howe . Deering is a good friend of Gregg ’ s . Dickies dog is in front of <unk> . Hope this helps . " 
 “ Red Dog ” Campbell ~ ABB “ Roadie ” 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Brothers and Sisters was an enormous success with near @-@ immediacy ; the record went gold in retail sales within 48 hours after shipping began . Capricorn estimated that these early sales were due to hardcore fans of the group . The album sold 760 @,@ 000 copies in its first three weeks , making it one of the fastest @-@ starting albums in Warner / Elektra / Atlantic Records ' history . Billboard called it the " success story of the summer , " noting that there was no " sustained merchandising promotion effort needed " on the LP . Record stores credited the album with bringing business back to their stores in a lagging season . Brothers and Sisters was the band 's best @-@ performing album on the charts : it logged five weeks as the number one album in the country on the Billboard Top LP 's & Tape chart . 
 Capricorn executives were split between issuing " Wasted Words " or " Ramblin ' Man " as the lead single . National promotion director Dick Wooley sent advance tapes of " Ramblin ' Man " to Atlanta and Boston radio stations and " listener phone @-@ in reaction was near @-@ phenomenal . " " Ramblin ' Man " became a rare rock hit on AM stations nationwide , and it rose to number two on the Billboard Hot 100 . Although " Jessica " rose no higher than number 65 on the Hot 100 , it later became a staple of classic rock radio . It was later employed as the theme song to the television program Top Gear in the UK . 
 Brothers and Sisters has since sold over seven million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reviews of Brothers and Sisters in 1973 were mostly positive . Bud Scoppa of Rolling Stone deemed the album " no masterpiece , but the new band has shown that it can carry on the work of the old , and add the appropriate new twists when necessary . They 've finally discovered a form that feels as natural in the studio as it does in front of their people . It 's heartening to see a group of this commercial and critical stature still working so hard at getting even better . " Janis Schacht of Circus was very positive , writing , " Never , even in the face of adversity , do the Allman Brothers quit making strong , hard @-@ driving rock / blues albums . ... This is another in the continuing line of quality products from The Allman Brothers Band . " Billboard called it " A fine blues / rock set from this fine band , featuring top lead vocals from Gregg Allman and Dickey Betts , and the excellent instrumental fusion for which they are particularly well known . " 
 Subsequent reviews have remained positive . Bruce Eder of Allmusic called Brothers and Sisters " not quite a classic album , especially in the wake of the four that had appeared previously , but it served as a template for some killer stage performances , and it proved that the band could survive the deaths of two key members . " Andrew Mueller of Uncut deemed it their " indisputable commercial peak and arguable creative apogee . " Robert Christgau , in Christgau 's Record Guide , wrote that " Gregg Allman is a predictable singer who never has an unpredictable lyric to work with anyway , and the jams do roll on , but at their best — " Ramblin ' Man , " a miraculous revitalization of rock 's earliest conceit — they just may be the best , and on this album Dickey Betts 's melodious spirituality provides unity and renewal . " 
 A 2013 four @-@ disc reissue of the album received very positive reviews as well . David Fricke of Rolling Stone gave it four stars , writing , " The road to that symmetry is caught in this four @-@ CD set by a disc of rehearsals and outtakes that sounds like the work of a more brawny , Southern Grateful Dead . " Walter Tunis of the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader wrote that " The larger set is costlier , about $ 65 , but the edition 's two live discs chronicle the Chuck Leavell / Lamar Williams @-@ era Allmans as exquisitely as Fillmore East did the groundbreaking Duane Allman / Berry Oakley lineup . " 
 = = Touring = = 
 After completing Brothers and Sisters , the Allman Brothers Band returned to touring , playing larger venues , receiving more profit and dealing with less friendship , miscommunication and spiraling drug problems . This culminated in a backstage brawl when the band played with the Grateful Dead at Washington 's RFK Stadium in June 1973 . The roadies of the Dead dosed the food and drinks of as many people as possible with LSD , holding no compunction about the practice as they felt " evangelical " about the substance . The stage was very crowded with the Dead 's entourage , and roadie Kim Payne instructed driver Tuffy Phillips to let no one onstage . When Capricorn promotional chief Dick Wooley attempted to get onstage , Phillips punched Wooley in the nose . Wooley competed in martial arts and began punching back . When all three roadies engaged in the fight , the Dead 's security ( the Hell 's Angels ) assumed Wooley a " bad guy " and they joined . Soon , the Grateful Dead 's roadies realized the situation at hand and they pulled Wooley from the pile . 
 Walden demanded that whoever was responsible be terminated ; as a result , Kim Payne , Mike Callahan , and Tuffy Phillips all were fired . " That was a culmination of everything falling apart . ... They were a symptom of the problem — not the problem itself , " said Perkins . The band again joined the Grateful Dead and the Band in July at Watkins Glen Speedway in New York 's Finger Lakes region , for what was then deemed the largest rock concert ever . 150 @,@ 000 tickets were sold , but the crowd expanded to nearly 600 @,@ 000 , causing it to be declared a disaster area . People abandoned their cars and walked up to ten miles to attend the concert . The jam between the three bands was later called " garbage " by Trucks , as all involved were under the influence of various substances , including alcohol , cocaine , and LSD . To promote the release of the album , Don Kirshner 's Rock Concert program staged an episode set in Macon , taping performances from the Allman Brothers Band and the Marshall Tucker Band . Betts walked offstage midway through the performance , with Walden chasing him down the street and urging him to return . " Walking off the stage was a first for me . It was like , ' Dude , what are you doing ? We 're all brothers here . If there 's a problem , let 's talk about it , ' " said Leavell . 
 The band concentrated on playing arenas and stadiums as their drug use escalated . In 1974 , the band were regularly making $ 100 @,@ 000 per show , and were renting the Starship , a customized Boeing 720B used by Led Zeppelin and the Rolling Stones . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side one 
 " Wasted Words " ( Gregg Allman ) - 4 : 20 
 Gregg Allman - lead vocals , rhythm guitar 
 Dickie Betts - slide guitar 
 Chuck Leavell - piano 
 Berry Oakley - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums 
 Jaimoe - drums 
 " Ramblin ' Man " ( Dickey Betts ) - 4 : 48 
 Dickie Betts - lead guitar , lead vocals 
 Les Dudek - lead guitar 
 Gregg Allman - organ , backing vocals 
 Chuck Leavell - piano , backing vocals 
 Berry Oakley - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums , percussion 
 Jaimoe - drums , congas 
 " Come and Go Blues " ( Allman ) - 4 : 54 
 Dickie Betts - lead guitar 
 Gregg Allman - organ , lead vocals 
 Chuck Leavell - electric and acoustic pianos 
 Lamar Williams - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums , congas , percussion 
 Jaimoe - drums 
 " Jelly Jelly " ( Billy Eckstine , Earl Hines ) - 5 : 46 
 Dickie Betts - lead guitar 
 Gregg Allman - organ , lead vocals 
 Chuck Leavell - piano 
 Lamar Williams - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums , congas , percussion 
 Jaimoe - drums 
 Side two 
 " Southbound " ( Betts ) - 5 : 11 
 Dickie Betts - lead guitar 
 Gregg Allman - organ , lead vocals 
 Chuck Leavell - piano 
 Lamar Williams - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums , percussion 
 Jaimoe - drums 
 " Jessica " ( Betts ) - 7 : 31 
 Dickie Betts - lead guitar 
 Les Dudek - acoustic guitar 
 Gregg Allman - organ 
 Chuck Leavell - electric and acoustic pianos 
 Lamar Williams - bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums , timpani , percussion 
 Jaimoe - drums , congas 
 " Pony Boy " ( Betts ) - 5 : 51 
 Dickie Betts - Dobro , lead vocals 
 Tommy Talton - acoustic guitar 
 Chuck Leavell - piano 
 Lamar Williams - acoustic bass 
 Butch Trucks - drums 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial = 
 The Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial is a memorial site in France dedicated to the commemoration of Dominion of Newfoundland forces members who were killed during World War I. The 74 @-@ acre ( 300 @,@ 000 m2 ) preserved battlefield park encompasses the grounds over which the Newfoundland Regiment made their unsuccessful attack on 1 July 1916 during the first day of the Battle of the Somme . 
 The Battle of the Somme was the regiment 's first major engagement , and during an assault that lasted approximately 30 minutes the regiment was all but wiped out . Purchased in 1921 by the people of Newfoundland , the memorial site is the largest battalion memorial on the Western Front , and the largest area of the Somme battlefield that has been preserved . Along with preserved trench lines , there are a number of memorials and cemeteries contained within the site . 
 Officially opened by British Field Marshal Earl Haig in 1925 , the memorial site is one of only two National Historic Sites of Canada located outside of Canada . ( The other is the Canadian National Vimy Memorial ) . The memorial site and experience of the Newfoundland Regiment at Beaumont @-@ Hamel has come to represent the Newfoundland First World War experience . As a result , it has become a Newfoundland symbol of sacrifice and a source of identity . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the First World War , Newfoundland was a largely rural Dominion of the British Empire with a population of 240 @,@ 000 , and not yet part of Canada . The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 led the Government of Newfoundland to recruit a force for service with the British Army . Even though the island had not possessed any formal military organization since 1870 , enough men soon volunteered that an entire battalion was formed , and later maintained throughout the war . The regiment trained at various locations in the United Kingdom and increased from an initial contingent of 500 men to full battalion strength of 1 @,@ 000 men , before being deployed . After a period of acclimatization in Egypt , the regiment was deployed at Suvla Bay on the Gallipoli peninsula with the 29th British Division in support of the Gallipoli Campaign . With the close of the Gallipoli Campaign the regiment spent a short period recuperating before being transferred to the Western Front in March 1916 . 
 = = = Battle of the Somme = = = 
 In France , the regiment regained battalion strength in preparation for the Battle of the Somme . The regiment , still with the 29th British Division , went into the line in April 1916 at Beaumont @-@ Hamel . Beaumont @-@ Hamel was situated near the northern end of the 45 @-@ kilometre front being assaulted by the joint French and British force . The attack , originally scheduled for 29 June 1916 was postponed by two days to July 1 , 1916 , partly on account of inclement weather , partly to allow more time for the artillery preparation . The 29th British Division , with its three infantry brigades faced defences manned by experienced troops of the 119th ( Reserve ) Infantry Regiment of the 26th ( Wurttemberg ) Reserve Division . The 119th ( Reserve ) Infantry Regiment had been involved in the invasion of France in August 1914 and had been manning the Beaumont @-@ Hamel section of the line for nearly 20 months prior to the battle . The German troops were spending a great deal of their time not only training but fortifying their position , including the construction of numerous deep dugouts and at least two tunnels . 
 The infantry assault by the 29th British Division on 1 July 1916 was to be preceded ten minutes earlier by a mine explosion under the heavily fortified Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt . The explosion of the 18 @,@ 000 kilogram ( 40 @,@ 000 lb ) Hawthorn Mine underneath the German lines successfully destroyed a major enemy strong point but also served to alert the German forces to the imminent attack . Following the explosion , troops of the 119th ( Reserve ) Infantry Regiment immediately deployed from their dugouts into the firing line , even preventing the British from taking control of the resulting crater as they had planned . When the assault finally began , the troops from the 86th and 87th Brigade of the 29th British Division were quickly stopped . With the exception of the 1st Battalion of the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers on the right flank , the initial assault foundered in No Man 's Land at , or short of , the German barbed wire . At divisional headquarters , Major @-@ General Beauvoir De Lisle and his staff were trying to unravel the numerous and confusing messages coming back from observation posts , contact aircraft and the two leading brigades . There were indications that some troops had broken into and gone beyond the German first line . In an effort to exploit the perceived break in the German line he ordered the 88th Brigade , which was in reserve , to send forward two battalions to support attack . 
 At 8 : 45 a.m. the Newfoundland Regiment and 1st Battalion of the Essex Regiment received orders to move forward . The Newfoundland Regiment was situated at St. John 's Road , a support trench 250 yards ( 230 m ) behind the British forward line and out of sight of the enemy . Movement forward through the communication trenches was not possible because they were congested with dead and wounded men and under shell fire . Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Lovell Hadow , the battalion commander , decided to move immediately into attack formation and advance across the surface , which involved first navigating through the British barbed wire defences . As they breasted the skyline behind the British first line , they were effectively the only troops moving on the battlefield and clearly visible to the German defenders . Subjected to the full force of the 119th ( Reserve ) Infantry Regiment , most of the Newfoundland Regiment who had started forward were dead , dying or wounded within 15 to 20 minutes of leaving St. John 's Road trench . Most reached no further than the Danger Tree , a skeleton of a tree that lay in No Man 's Land that was being utilized as a landmark . So far as can be ascertained , 22 officers and 758 other ranks were directly involved in the advance . Of these , all the officers and slightly under 658 other ranks became casualties . Of the 780 men who went forward only about 110 survived unscathed , of whom only 68 were available for roll call the following day . For all intents and purposes the Newfoundland Regiment had been wiped out , the unit as a whole having suffered a casualty rate of approximately 80 % . The only unit to suffer greater casualties during the attack was the 10th Battalion of the West Yorkshire Regiment , attacking west of Fricourt village . 
 = = = The rest of the war = = = 
 After July 1916 , the Beaumont @-@ Hamel front remained relatively quiet while the Battle of the Somme continued to the south . In the final act in the Somme Offensive , Beaumont @-@ Hamel was assaulted by the 51st ( Highland ) Division on 13 November 1916 on the opening of the Battle of the Ancre . Within two days , all the 29th Division objectives of 1 July had been taken along with a great many German prisoners . The area of the memorial site then became a rear area with troops lodged in the former German dugouts and a camp was established in the vicinity of the present Y Ravine Cemetery . With the German withdrawal in March 1917 to the Hindenburg Line , about 30 kilometres from Beaumont @-@ Hamel , the battlefield salvage parties moved in , many dugouts were closed off and initial efforts were probably made to restore some of the land to agriculture . However , in March 1918 , the German Spring Offensive was here checked on exactly the same battle lines as before . Until the Battle of Amiens and the German withdrawal in late August 1918 , the protagonists confronted each other over the same ground , although the only actions were those of routine front line trench raids , patrols and artillery harassment . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1921 , Newfoundland purchased the ground over which the Newfoundland Regiment made its unsuccessful attack during the first day of the Battle of the Somme . Much of the credit for the establishment of the 74 @-@ acre ( 300 @,@ 000 m2 ) memorial site is given to Lieutenant Colonel Tom Nangle , the former Roman Catholic Priest of the regiment . As Director of Graves Registration and Enquiry and Newfoundland 's representative on the Imperial War Graves Commission he negotiated with some 250 French landowners for the purchase of the site . He also played a leading role in selecting and developing the sites where the Newfoundland memorials currently stand , as well as supervising the construction of each memorial . The memorials , including that at the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site , were constructed for the Government of Newfoundland between 1924 and 1925 . 
 The Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site was officially opened , and the memorial unveiled , by Field Marshal Earl Haig on 7 June 1925 . Since Newfoundland 's confederation with Canada in 1949 , the Canadian Government , through the Department of Veterans Affairs , has been responsible for the site 's maintenance and care . The site had fallen into some disrepair during the German occupation of France in the Second World War and following confederation the replacement of the original site cabin with a modern building as well as some trench restoration work was undertaken in time for the 45th anniversary of the battle . The memorial site was established as one of only two National Historic Sites of Canada located outside of Canada by the then Minister of Canadian Heritage Sheila Copps on 10 April 1997 . 
 = = The Site = = 
 The Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site is situated 9 kilometres north of Albert , France near the village of Beaumont @-@ Hamel in an area containing numerous cemeteries and memorials related to the Battle of the Somme . The site is one of the few places on the former Western Front where a visitor can see the trench lines of the First World War and the related terrain in a preserved natural state . It is the largest site dedicated to the memory of the Newfoundland Regiment , the largest battalion memorial on the Western Front , and the largest area of the Somme battlefield that has been preserved . 
 Although the site was founded to honour the memory of the Newfoundland Regiment , it also contains a number of memorials as well as four cemeteries maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission ; that of Y Ravine Cemetery , Hawthorn Ridge Cemeteries No. 1 and No. 2 and the unusual mass burial site of Hunter 's Cemetery . Beyond being a popular location for battlefield tours the site is also an important location in the burgeoning field of First World War battlefield archaeology , because of its preserved and largely undisturbed state . The ever increasing number of visitors to the Memorial has resulted in the authorities taking measures to control access by fencing off certain areas of the former battlefield . 
 = = = 29th Division Memorial = = = 
 Near the entrance to site is situated a memorial to the 29th British Division , the division of which the Newfoundland Regiment was a part . Lieutenant @-@ General Beauvoir De Lisle , wartime commander of the 29th British Division , unveiled the monument the morning of the official opening of the site on 7 June 1925 . Each wartime unit of the 29th British Division sent a representative to form a guard of honour for the occasion . Afterwards , this detachment , joined by French infantry from Arras formed the honour guard for the unveiling of the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial . 
 = = = Newfoundland Regiment Memorial = = = 
 The memorial is one of six memorials erected by the Government of Newfoundland following the First World War . Five were erected in France and Belgium and the sixth at Bowring Park in St. John 's , Newfoundland , Canada . The memorial is a bronze caribou , the emblem of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment , standing atop a cairn of Newfoundland granite facing the former foe with head thrown high in defiance . At the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site the mound rises approximately 50 feet ( 15 m ) from ground level . The mounds are also surrounded by native Newfoundland plants . At the base of the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial mound , three bronze tablets carry the names of 820 members of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment , the Newfoundland Royal Naval Reserve , and the Mercantile Marines who gave their lives in the First World War and have no known grave . The memorial is situated close to the headquarters dugout of the 88th Brigade , the brigade of which the Newfoundland Regiment was a part . Sixteen memorial designs were submitted to Nangle for review . He recommended that the government accept British sculptor Basil <unk> ’ s plan to erect five identical caribou statues in memory of the regiment . <unk> was already well known in Newfoundland as he had been previously commissioned to execute the statue of the Fighting Newfoundlander located in Bowring Park . The landscape architect who designed the sites and supervised their construction , was Rudolph <unk> , a native of the Netherlands living in St. John 's . It was decided to plant many of Newfoundland ’ s native tree species , such as spruce , <unk> and juniper , along the boundaries of the site . In total , over 5 @,@ 000 trees were transplanted before the project was completed in 1925 . The memorial was unveiled at the official opening of the site by Field Marshal Earl Haig on 7 June 1925 . Those that participated or were present included Chief of the French General Staff , Marshal of France Marie Émile <unk> , Newfoundland Colonial Secretary John Bennett , Lieutenant Generals Aylmer Hunter @-@ Weston and Beauvoir De Lisle , Major @-@ General D. E. Cayley and former regimental commanding officers Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Arthur Lovell and Adolph Ernest Bernard . 
 = = = 51st Division Monument = = = 
 Overlooking Y Ravine is the memorial to 51st ( Highland ) Division . The ground originally donated by the commune of Beaumont @-@ Hamel to the Veterans of the 51st Division was found to be unstable because of the many dugouts beneath it . Lieutenant Colonel Nangle offered a location overlooking Y Ravine within the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site . The Y ravine had been the scene of fierce fighting for the division on 13 November 1916 . The selected sculptor for the 51st Division Monument was George Henry Paulin . The base of the monument consists of rough blocks of <unk> granite which were produced by Garden & Co. in Aberdeen , Scotland , and are assembled in a pyramid form . Company Sergeant Major Bob Rowan of the Glasgow Highlanders was used as the model for the kilted figure atop the memorial . The figure faces east towards the village of Beaumont @-@ Hamel . On the front is a plaque inscribed in Gaelic : La a <unk> s <unk> n <unk> which in English translates as " Friends are good on the day of battle " . The 51st Division Monument was unveiled on 28 September 1924 by Marshal of France Ferdinand Foch , the former Allied Supreme Commander . The memorial was rededicated on 13 July 1958 , the front panel now referring to not only those who died during the First World War but the Second as well . A wooden Celtic cross directly across the track from the memorial was originally sited at High Wood and subsequently moved to the Newfoundland site . The cross commemorates the men of the 51st Highland Division who fell at High Wood in July 1916 . 
 = = = Danger Tree = = = 
 The Danger Tree had been part of a clump of trees located about halfway into No Man 's Land and had originally been used as a landmark by a Newfoundland Regiment trench raiding party in the days before the Battle of the Somme . British and German artillery bombardments eventually stripped the tree of leaves and left nothing more than a shattered tree trunk . During the Newfoundland Regiment 's infantry assault , the tree was once again used as a landmark , where the troops were ordered to gather . The tree was however a highly visible landmark for the German artillery and the site proved to be a location where the German shrapnel was particularly deadly . As a result , the regiment suffered a large concentration of casualties around the tree . A replica representation of the twisted tree now stands at the spot . 
 = = = Visitors Centre = = = 
 There is a Visitors ' Centre which exhibits the historical and social circumstances of Newfoundland at the beginning of the 20th century and traces the history of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment and some of its personalities . A Memorial room within the Centre houses a copy of the Newfoundland Book of Remembrance , along with a bronze plaque listing the Battle Honours won by the Royal Newfoundland Regiment . The centre also incorporates the administrative offices and site archive . Canadian student guides based at the site are available to provide guided tours or explain particular facets of the battlefield and the Newfoundland involvement . 
 = = Influence on Newfoundland = = 
 The significance of the events at Beaumont @-@ Hamel on the first day of the Battle of the Somme was perhaps most strongly felt by the Dominion of Newfoundland , as it was the first great conflict experienced by that dominion . Newfoundland was left with a sense of loss that marked an entire generation . The effects on the post @-@ war generation were compounded by chronic financial problems caused both by Newfoundland 's large debt from the war , and a prolonged post @-@ war economic recession due to a decline in the fisheries . 
 Lasting impressions of the war experience are ever @-@ prevalent on the island . In Canada , 1 July is celebrated as Canada Day , in recognition of Canadian confederation . In the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador the date is Memorial Day , in remembrance of the Newfoundland Regiment 's losses at Beaumont @-@ Hamel . Memorial University College , now Memorial University of Newfoundland , was originally established as a memorial to Newfoundlanders who had lost their lives in active service during the First World War . Lastly , the six caribou memorials and the National War Memorial erected following the First World War , and the establishment of the preserved battlefield park at Beaumont @-@ Hamel which is visited by thousands of tourists a year . The Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site also serves an informal ambassadorial function , educating visitors not only about the experience of the Newfoundland Regiment but also regarding the history of the island . 
 = David I of Scotland = 
 David I or <unk> mac Maíl Choluim ( Modern : <unk> I mac [ <unk> ] <unk> ; 1083 x 1085 – 24 May 1153 ) was a 12th @-@ century ruler who was Prince of the Cumbrians ( 1113 – 1124 ) and later King of the Scots ( 1124 – 1153 ) . The youngest son of Máel Coluim III ( Malcolm III ) and Margaret of Wessex , David spent most of his childhood in Scotland , but was exiled to England temporarily in 1093 . Perhaps after 1100 , he became a dependent at the court of King Henry I. There he was influenced by the Norman and Anglo @-@ French culture of the court . 
 When David 's brother Alexander I of Scotland died in 1124 , David chose , with the backing of Henry I , to take the Kingdom of Scotland ( Alba ) for himself . He was forced to engage in warfare against his rival and nephew , Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair . <unk> the latter seems to have taken David ten years , a struggle that involved the destruction of Óengus , Mormaer of Moray . David 's victory allowed expansion of control over more distant regions theoretically part of his Kingdom . After the death of his former patron Henry I , David supported the claims of Henry 's daughter and his own niece , the former Empress @-@ consort , Matilda , to the throne of England . In the process , he came into conflict with King Stephen and was able to expand his power in northern England , despite his defeat at the Battle of the Standard in 1138 . 
 The term " Davidian Revolution " is used by many scholars to summarise the changes which took place in Scotland during his reign . These included his foundation of burghs and regional markets , implementation of the ideals of Gregorian Reform , foundation of monasteries , Normanisation of the Scottish government , and the introduction of feudalism through immigrant French and Anglo @-@ French knights . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The early years of David I are the most obscure of his life . Because there is little documented evidence , historians can only guess at most of David 's activities in this period . 
 = = = Childhood and flight to England = = = 
 David was born on a date unknown in 1084 in Scotland . He was probably the eighth son of King Máel Coluim mac Donnchada , and certainly the sixth and youngest produced by Máel Coluim 's second marriage to Queen Margaret . He was the grandson of the ill fated King Duncan I. 
 In 1093 King Máel Coluim and David 's brother Edward were killed at the River <unk> during an invasion of Northumberland . David and his two brothers Alexander and Edgar , both future kings of Scotland , were probably present when their mother died shortly afterwards . According to later medieval tradition , the three brothers were in Edinburgh when they were besieged by their uncle , Domnall Bán . 
 Domnall became King of Scotland . It is not certain what happened next , but an insertion in the Chronicle of Melrose states that Domnall forced his three nephews into exile , although he was allied with another of his nephews , Edmund . John of Fordun wrote , centuries later , that an escort into England was arranged for them by their maternal uncle Edgar Ætheling . 
 = = = Intervention of William Rufus and English exile = = = 
 William Rufus , King of England , opposed Domnall 's accession to the northerly kingdom . He sent the eldest son of Máel Coluim , David 's half @-@ brother Donnchad , into Scotland with an army . Donnchad was killed within the year , and so in 1097 William sent Donnchad 's half @-@ brother Edgar into Scotland . The latter was more successful , and was crowned King by the end of 1097 . 
 During the power struggle of 1093 – 97 , David was in England . In 1093 , he may have been about nine years old . From 1093 until 1103 David 's presence cannot be accounted for in detail , but he appears to have been in Scotland for the remainder of the 1090s . When William Rufus was killed , his brother Henry Beauclerc seized power and married David 's sister , Matilda . The marriage made David the brother @-@ in @-@ law of the ruler of England . From that point onwards , David was probably an important figure at the English court . Despite his Gaelic background , by the end of his stay in England , David had become a full @-@ fledged Normanised prince . William of Malmesbury wrote that it was in this period that David " rubbed off all tarnish of Scottish barbarity through being polished by intercourse and friendship with us " . 
 = = Prince of the Cumbrians , 1113 – 1124 = = 
 David 's time as Prince of the Cumbrians and Earl marks the beginning of his life as a great territorial lord . His earldom probably began in 1113 , when Henry I arranged David 's marriage to Maud , 2nd Countess of Huntingdon , who was the heiress to the Huntingdon – Northampton lordship . As her husband , David used the title of Earl , and there was the prospect that David 's children by her would inherit all the honours borne by Matilda 's father Waltheof . 1113 is the year when David , for the first time , can be found in possession of territory in what is now Scotland . 
 = = = Obtaining the inheritance = = = 
 David 's brother , King Edgar , had visited William Rufus in May 1099 and bequeathed to David extensive territory to the south of the river Forth . On 8 January 1107 , Edgar died . His younger brother Alexander I of Scotland took the throne . It has been assumed that David took control of his inheritance – the southern lands bequeathed by Edgar – soon after the latter 's death . However , it cannot be shown that he possessed his inheritance until his foundation of Selkirk Abbey late in 1113 . According to Richard Oram , it was only in 1113 , when Henry returned to England from Normandy , that David was at last in a position to claim his inheritance in southern " Scotland " . 
 King Henry 's backing seems to have been enough to force King Alexander to recognise his younger brother 's claims . This probably occurred without bloodshed , but through threat of force nonetheless . David 's aggression seems to have inspired resentment amongst some native Scots . A Gaelic quatrain from this period complains that : 
 If " divided from " is anything to go by , this quatrain may have been written in David 's new territories in southern Scotland . 
 The lands in question consisted of the pre @-@ 1975 counties of Roxburghshire , <unk> , Berwickshire , <unk> and Lanarkshire . David , moreover , gained the title princeps <unk> , " Prince of the Cumbrians " , as attested in David 's charters from this era . Although this was a large slice of Scotland south of the river Forth , the region of Galloway @-@ proper was entirely outside David 's control . 
 David may perhaps have had varying degrees of overlordship in parts of Dumfriesshire , Ayrshire , Dunbartonshire and Renfrewshire . In the lands between Galloway and the Principality of Cumbria , David eventually set up large @-@ scale marcher lordships , such as Annandale for Robert de Brus , Cunningham for Hugh de Morville , and possibly Strathgryfe for Walter Fitzalan . 
 = = = In England = = = 
 In the later part of 1113 , King Henry gave David the hand of Matilda of Huntingdon , daughter and heiress of Waltheof , Earl of Northumberland . The marriage brought with it the " Honour of Huntingdon " , a lordship scattered through the shires of Northampton , Huntingdon , and Bedford ; within a few years , Matilda bore a son , whom David named Henry after his patron . 
 The new territories which David controlled were a valuable supplement to his income and manpower , increasing his status as one of the most powerful magnates in the Kingdom of the English . Moreover , Matilda 's father Waltheof had been Earl of Northumberland , a defunct lordship which had covered the far north of England and included Cumberland and Westmorland , Northumberland @-@ proper , as well as overlordship of the bishopric of Durham . After King Henry 's death , David would revive the claim to this earldom for his son Henry . 
 David 's activities and whereabouts after 1114 are not always easy to trace . He spent much of his time outside his principality , in England and in Normandy . Despite the death of his sister on 1 May 1118 , David still possessed the favour of King Henry when his brother Alexander died in 1124 , leaving Scotland without a king . 
 = = Political and military events in Scotland during David 's kingship = = 
 Michael Lynch and Richard Oram portray David as having little initial connection with the culture and society of the Scots ; but both likewise argue that David became increasingly re @-@ Gaelicised in the later stages of his reign . Whatever the case , David 's claim to be heir to the Scottish kingdom was doubtful . David was the youngest of eight sons of the fifth from last king . Two more recent kings had produced sons . William fitz Duncan , son of King Donnchad II , and Máel Coluim , son of the last king Alexander , both preceded David in terms of the slowly emerging principles of primogeniture . However , unlike David , neither William nor Máel Coluim had the support of Henry . So when Alexander died in 1124 , the aristocracy of Scotland could either accept David as King , or face war with both David and Henry I. 
 = = = Coronation and struggle for the kingdom = = = 
 Alexander 's son Máel Coluim chose war . Orderic Vitalis reported that Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair " affected to snatch the kingdom from [ David ] , and fought against him two sufficiently fierce battles ; but David , who was loftier in understanding and in power and wealth , conquered him and his followers " . Máel Coluim escaped unharmed into areas of Scotland not yet under David 's control , and in those areas gained shelter and aid . 
 In either April or May of the same year , David was crowned King of Scotland ( Gaelic : rí ( gh ) Alban ; Latin : rex Scottorum ) at Scone . If later Scottish and Irish evidence can be taken as evidence , the ceremony of coronation was a series of elaborate traditional rituals , of the kind infamous in the Anglo @-@ French world of the 12th century for their " unchristian " elements . Ailred of Rievaulx , friend and one @-@ time member of David 's court , reported that David " so abhorred those acts of homage which are offered by the Scottish nation in the manner of their fathers upon the recent promotion of their kings , that he was with difficulty compelled by the bishops to receive them " . 
 Outside his Cumbrian principality and the southern fringe of Scotland @-@ proper , David exercised little power in the 1120s , and in the words of Richard Oram , was " king of Scots in little more than name " . He was probably in that part of Scotland he did rule for most of the time between late 1127 and 1130 . However , he was at the court of Henry in 1126 and in early 1127 , and returned to Henry 's court in 1130 , serving as a judge at Woodstock for the treason trial of Geoffrey de Clinton . It was in this year that David 's wife , Matilda of Huntingdon , died . Possibly as a result of this , and while David was still in southern England , Scotland @-@ proper rose up in arms against him . 
 The instigator was , again , his nephew Máel Coluim , who now had the support of Óengus of Moray . King Óengus was David 's most powerful vassal , a man who , as grandson of King Lulach of Scotland , even had his own claim to the kingdom . The rebel Scots had advanced into Angus , where they were met by David 's Mercian constable , Edward ; a battle took place at <unk> near Brechin . According to the Annals of Ulster , 1000 of Edward 's army , and 4000 of Óengus ' army – including Óengus himself – died . 
 According to Orderic Vitalis , Edward followed up the killing of Óengus by marching north into Moray itself , which , in Orderic 's words , " lacked a defender and lord " ; and so Edward , " with God 's help obtained the entire duchy of that extensive district " . However , this was far from the end of it . Máel Coluim escaped , and four years of continuing civil war followed ; for David this period was quite simply a " struggle for survival " . 
 It appears that David asked for and obtained extensive military aid from King Henry . Ailred of Rievaulx related that at this point a large fleet and a large army of Norman knights , including Walter l <unk> , were sent by Henry to Carlisle in order to assist David 's attempt to root out his Scottish enemies . The fleet seems to have been used in the Irish Sea , the Firth of Clyde and the entire Argyll coast , where Máel Coluim was probably at large among supporters . In 1134 Máel Coluim was captured and imprisoned in Roxburgh Castle . Since modern historians no longer confuse him with " Malcolm <unk> " , it is clear that nothing more is ever heard of Máel Coluim mac <unk> , except perhaps that his sons were later allied with Somerled . 
 = = = Pacification of the west and north = = = 
 Richard Oram puts forward the suggestion that it was during this period that David granted Walter fitz Alan the <unk> of Strathgryfe , with northern Kyle and the area around Renfrew , forming what would become the " Stewart " lordship of Strathgryfe ; he also suggests that Hugh de Morville may have gained the <unk> of Cunningham and the settlement of " <unk> " ( i.e. Irvine ) . This would indicate that the 1130 – 34 campaign had resulted in the acquisition of these territories . 
 How long it took to pacify Moray is not known , but in this period David appointed his nephew William fitz Duncan to succeed Óengus , perhaps in compensation for the exclusion from the succession to the Scottish throne caused by the coming of age of David 's son Henry . William may have been given the daughter of Óengus in marriage , cementing his authority in the region . The burghs of Elgin and Forres may have been founded at this point , consolidating royal authority in Moray . David also founded Urquhart Priory , possibly as a " victory monastery " , and assigned to it a percentage of his cain ( tribute ) from Argyll . 
 During this period too , a marriage was arranged between the son of Matad , Mormaer of Atholl , and the daughter of Haakon Paulsson , Earl of Orkney . The marriage temporarily secured the northern frontier of the Kingdom , and held out the prospect that a son of one of David 's Mormaers could gain Orkney and Caithness for the Kingdom of Scotland . Thus , by the time Henry I died on 1 December 1135 , David had more of Scotland under his control than ever before . 
 = = = Dominating the north = = = 
 While fighting King Stephen and attempting to dominate northern England in the years following 1136 , David was continuing his drive for control of the far north of Scotland . In 1139 , his cousin , the five @-@ year @-@ old Harald Maddadsson , was given the title of " Earl " and half the lands of the earldom of Orkney , in addition to Scottish Caithness . Throughout the 1140s Caithness and Sutherland were brought back under the Scottish zone of control . Sometime before 1146 David appointed a native Scot called <unk> to be the first Bishop of Caithness , a bishopric which was based at Halkirk , near Thurso , in an area which was ethnically Scandinavian . 
 In 1150 , it looked like Caithness and the whole earldom of Orkney were going to come under permanent Scottish control . However , David 's plans for the north soon began to encounter problems . In 1151 , King Eystein II of Norway put a spanner in the works by sailing through the waterways of Orkney with a large fleet and catching the young Harald unaware in his residence at Thurso . Eystein forced Harald to pay fealty as a condition of his release . Later in the year David hastily responded by supporting the claims to the Orkney earldom of Harald 's rival Erlend Haraldsson , granting him half of Caithness in opposition to Harald . King Eystein responded in turn by making a similar grant to this same Erlend , cancelling the effect of David 's grant . David 's weakness in Orkney was that the Norwegian kings were not prepared to stand back and let him reduce their power . 
 = = England = = 
 David 's relationship with England and the English crown in these years is usually interpreted in two ways . Firstly , his actions are understood in relation to his connections with the King of England . No historian is likely to deny that David 's early career was largely manufactured by King Henry I of England . David was the latter 's " greatest protégé " , one of Henry 's " new men " . His hostility to Stephen can be interpreted as an effort to uphold the intended inheritance of Henry I , the succession of his daughter , Matilda , the former Empress of the Holy Roman Empire . David carried out his wars in her name , joined her when she arrived in England , and later knighted her son , the future Henry II . 
 However , David 's policy towards England can be interpreted in an additional way . David was the independence @-@ loving king trying to build a " Scoto @-@ Northumbrian " realm by seizing the most northerly parts of the English kingdom . In this perspective , David 's support for Matilda is used as a pretext for land @-@ grabbing . David 's maternal descent from the House of Wessex and his son Henry 's maternal descent from the English Earls of Northumberland is thought to have further encouraged such a project , a project which came to an end only after Henry II ordered David 's child successor Máel Coluim IV to hand over the most important of David 's gains . It is clear that neither one of these interpretations can be taken without some weight being given to the other . 
 = = = <unk> of Stephen and First Treaty of Durham = = = 
 Henry I had arranged his inheritance to pass to his daughter Empress Matilda . Instead , Stephen , younger brother of Theobald II , Count of Blois , seized the throne . David had been the first lay person to take the oath to uphold the succession of Matilda in 1127 , and when Stephen was crowned on 22 December 1135 , David decided to make war . 
 Before December was over , David marched into northern England , and by the end of January he had occupied the castles of Carlisle , Wark , Alnwick , Norham and Newcastle . By February David was at Durham , but an army led by King Stephen met him there . Rather than fight a pitched battle , a treaty was agreed whereby David would retain Carlisle , while David 's son Henry was re @-@ granted the title and half the lands of the earldom of Huntingdon , territory which had been confiscated during David 's revolt . On Stephen 's side he received back the other castles ; and while David would do no homage , Stephen was to receive the homage of Henry for both Carlisle and the other English territories . Stephen also gave the rather worthless but for David face @-@ saving promise that if he ever chose to resurrect the defunct earldom of Northumberland , Henry would be given first consideration . Importantly , the issue of Matilda was not mentioned . However , the first Durham treaty quickly broke down after David took insult at the treatment of his son Henry at Stephen 's court . 
 = = = Renewal of war and Clitheroe = = = 
 When the winter of 1136 – 37 was over , David prepared again to invade England . The King of the Scots massed an army on the Northumberland 's border , to which the English responded by gathering an army at Newcastle . Once more pitched battle was avoided , and instead a truce was agreed until December . When December fell , David demanded that Stephen hand over the whole of the old earldom of Northumberland . Stephen 's refusal led to David 's third invasion , this time in January 1138 . 
 The army which invaded England in January and February 1138 shocked the English chroniclers . Richard of Hexham called it " an execrable army , <unk> than any race of heathen yielding honour to neither God nor man " and that it " harried the whole province and slaughtered everywhere folk of either sex , of every age and condition , destroying , pillaging and burning the vills , churches and houses " . Several doubtful stories of cannibalism were recorded by chroniclers , and these same chroniclers paint a picture of routine <unk> , as well as killings of churchmen , women and infants . 
 By February King Stephen marched north to deal with David . The two armies avoided each other , and Stephen was soon on the road south . In the summer David split his army into two forces , sending William fitz Duncan to march into Lancashire , where he harried Furness and Craven . On 10 June , William fitz Duncan met a force of knights and men @-@ at @-@ arms . A pitched battle took place , the battle of Clitheroe , and the English army was routed . 
 = = = Battle of the Standard and Second Treaty of Durham = = = 
 By later July , 1138 , the two Scottish armies had reunited in " St Cuthbert 's land " , that is , in the lands controlled by the Bishop of Durham , on the far side of the river Tyne . Another English army had mustered to meet the Scots , this time led by William , Earl of Aumale . The victory at Clitheroe was probably what inspired David to risk battle . David 's force , apparently 26 @,@ 000 strong and several times larger than the English army , met the English on 22 August at <unk> Moor near Northallerton , North Yorkshire . 
 The Battle of the Standard , as the encounter came to be called , was a defeat for the Scots . Afterwards , David and his surviving notables retired to Carlisle . Although the result was a defeat , it was not by any means decisive . David retained the bulk of his army and thus the power to go on the offensive again . The siege of Wark , for instance , which had been going on since January , continued until it was captured in November . David continued to occupy Cumberland as well as much of Northumberland . 
 On 26 September Cardinal Alberic , Bishop of Ostia , arrived at Carlisle where David had called together his kingdom 's nobles , abbots and bishops . Alberic was there to investigate the controversy over the issue of the Bishop of Glasgow 's allegiance or non @-@ allegiance to the Archbishop of York . Alberic played the role of peace @-@ broker , and David agreed to a six @-@ week truce which excluded the siege of Wark . On 9 April David and Stephen 's wife Matilda of Boulogne met each other at Durham and agreed a settlement . David 's son Henry was given the earldom of Northumberland and was restored to the earldom of Huntingdon and lordship of Doncaster ; David himself was allowed to keep Carlisle and Cumberland . King Stephen was to retain possession of the strategically vital castles of Bamburgh and Newcastle . This effectively fulfilled all of David 's war aims . 
 = = = Arrival of Matilda and the renewal of conflict = = = 
 The settlement with Stephen was not set to last long . The arrival in England of the Empress Matilda gave David an opportunity to renew the conflict with Stephen . In either May or June , David travelled to the south of England and entered Matilda 's company ; he was present for her expected coronation at Westminster Abbey , though this never took place . David was there until September , when the Empress found herself surrounded at Winchester . 
 This civil war , or " the Anarchy " as it was later called , enabled David to strengthen his own position in northern England . While David consolidated his hold on his own and his son 's newly acquired lands , he also sought to expand his influence . The castles at Newcastle and Bamburgh were again brought under his control , and he attained dominion over all of England north @-@ west of the river Ribble and Pennines , while holding the north @-@ east as far south as the river Tyne , on the borders of the core territory of the bishopric of Durham . While his son brought all the senior barons of Northumberland into his entourage , David rebuilt the fortress of Carlisle . Carlisle quickly replaced Roxburgh as his favoured residence . David 's acquisition of the mines at Alston on the South Tyne enabled him to begin minting the Kingdom of Scotland 's first silver coinage . David , meanwhile , issued charters to Shrewsbury Abbey in respect to their lands in Lancashire . 
 = = = Bishopric of Durham and the Archbishopric of York = = = 
 However , David 's successes were in many ways balanced by his failures . David 's greatest disappointment during this time was his inability to ensure control of the bishopric of Durham and the archbishopric of York . David had attempted to appoint his chancellor , William Comyn , to the bishopric of Durham , which had been vacant since the death of Bishop Geoffrey Rufus in 1140 . Between 1141 and 1143 , Comyn was the de facto bishop , and had control of the bishop 's castle ; but he was resented by the chapter . Despite controlling the town of Durham , David 's only hope of ensuring his election and consecration was gaining the support of the Papal legate , Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester and brother of King Stephen . Despite obtaining the support of the Empress Matilda , David was unsuccessful and had given up by the time William de St Barbara was elected to the see in 1143 . 
 David also attempted to interfere in the succession to the archbishopric of York . William FitzHerbert , nephew of King Stephen , found his position undermined by the collapsing political fortune of Stephen in the north of England , and was deposed by the Pope . David used his Cistercian connections to build a bond with Henry Murdac , the new archbishop . Despite the support of Pope Eugenius III , supporters of King Stephen and William FitzHerbert managed to prevent Henry taking up his post at York . In 1149 , Henry had sought the support of David . David seized on the opportunity to bring the archdiocese under his control , and marched on the city . However , Stephen 's supporters became aware of David 's intentions , and informed King Stephen . Stephen therefore marched to the city and installed a new garrison . David decided not to risk such an engagement and withdrew . Richard Oram has conjectured that David 's ultimate aim was to bring the whole of the ancient kingdom of Northumbria into his dominion . For Oram , this event was the turning point , " the chance to radically redraw the political map of the British Isles lost forever " . 
 = = Scottish Church = = 
 Historical treatment of David I and the Scottish church usually emphasises David 's pioneering role as the instrument of diocesan reorganisation and Norman penetration , beginning with the bishopric of Glasgow while David was Prince of the Cumbrians , and continuing further north after David acceded to the throne of Scotland . Focus too is usually given to his role as the defender of the Scottish church 's independence from claims of overlordship by the Archbishop of York and the Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 = = = Innovations in the church system = = = 
 It was once held that Scotland 's episcopal sees and entire parochial system owed its origins to the innovations of David I. Today , scholars have moderated this view . Ailred of Rievaulx wrote in David 's eulogy that when David came to power , " he found three or four bishops in the whole Scottish kingdom [ north of the Forth ] , and the others wavering without a pastor to the loss of both morals and property ; when he died , he left nine , both of ancient bishoprics which he himself restored , and new ones which he erected " . Although David moved the bishopric of Mortlach east to his new burgh of Aberdeen , and arranged the creation of the diocese of Caithness , no other bishoprics can be safely called David 's creation . 
 The bishopric of Glasgow was restored rather than resurrected . David appointed his reform @-@ minded French chaplain John to the bishopric and carried out an inquest , afterwards assigning to the bishopric all the lands of his principality , except those in the east which were already governed by the Bishop of St Andrews . David was at least partly responsible for forcing semi @-@ monastic " bishoprics " like Brechin , Dunkeld , Mortlach ( Aberdeen ) and Dunblane to become fully episcopal and firmly integrated into a national diocesan system . 
 As for the development of the parochial system , David 's traditional role as its creator can not be sustained . Scotland already had an ancient system of parish churches dating to the Early Middle Ages , and the kind of system introduced by David 's <unk> tendencies can more accurately be seen as mild <unk> , rather than creation ; he made the Scottish system as a whole more like that of France and England , but he did not create it . 
 = = = Ecclesiastical disputes = = = 
 One of the first problems David had to deal with as king was an ecclesiastical dispute with the English church . The problem with the English church concerned the subordination of Scottish sees to the archbishops of York and / or Canterbury , an issue which since his election in 1124 had prevented Robert of Scone from being consecrated to the see of St Andrews ( Cell <unk> ) . It is likely that since the 11th century the bishopric of St Andrews functioned as a de facto archbishopric . The title of " Archbishop " is accorded in Scottish and Irish sources to Bishop Giric and Bishop <unk> II . 
 The problem was that this archiepiscopal status had not been cleared with the papacy , opening the way for English archbishops to claim overlordship of the whole Scottish church . The man responsible was the new aggressively assertive Archbishop of York , Thurstan . His easiest target was the bishopric of Glasgow , which being south of the river Forth was not regarded as part of Scotland nor the jurisdiction of St Andrews . In 1125 , Pope Honorius II wrote to John , Bishop of Glasgow ordering him to submit to the archbishopric of York . David ordered Bishop John of Glasgow to travel to the Apostolic See in order to secure a pallium which would elevate the bishopric of St Andrews to an archbishopric with jurisdiction over Glasgow . 
 Thurstan travelled to Rome , as did the Archbishop of Canterbury , William de Corbeil , and both presumably opposed David 's request . David however gained the support of King Henry , and the Archbishop of York agreed to a year 's postponement of the issue and to consecrate Robert of Scone without making an issue of subordination . York 's claim over bishops north of the Forth were in practice abandoned for the rest of David 's reign , although York maintained her more credible claims over Glasgow . 
 In 1151 , David again requested a pallium for the Archbishop of St Andrews . Cardinal John <unk> met David at his residence of Carlisle in September 1151 . <unk> for David , the Cardinal was on his way to Ireland with four <unk> to create four new Irish archbishoprics . When the Cardinal returned to Carlisle , David made the request . In David 's plan , the new archdiocese would include all the bishoprics in David 's Scottish territory , as well as bishopric of Orkney and the bishopric of the Isles . Unfortunately for David , the Cardinal does not appear to have brought the issue up with the papacy . In the following year the papacy dealt David another blow by creating the archbishopric of Trondheim , a new Norwegian archbishopric embracing the bishoprics of the Isles and Orkney . 
 = = Succession and death = = 
 Perhaps the greatest blow to David 's plans came on 12 July 1152 when Henry , Earl of Northumberland , David 's only son and successor , died . He had probably been suffering from some kind of illness for a long time . David had under a year to live , and he may have known that he was not going to be alive much longer . David quickly arranged for his grandson Máel Coluim IV to be made his successor , and for his younger grandson William to be made Earl of Northumberland . Donnchad I , Mormaer of Fife , the senior magnate in Scotland @-@ proper , was appointed as rector , or regent , and took the 11 year @-@ old Máel Coluim around Scotland @-@ proper on a tour to meet and gain the homage of his future Gaelic subjects . David 's health began to fail seriously in the Spring of 1153 , and on 24 May 1153 , David died . In his obituary in the Annals of Tigernach , he is called <unk> mac Mail <unk> , rí Alban & <unk> , " David , son of Máel Coluim , King of Scotland and England " , a title which acknowledged the importance of the new English part of David 's realm . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 = = = Medieval reputation = = = 
 The earliest assessments of David I portray him as a pious king , a reformer and a civilising agent in a barbarian nation . For William of Newburgh , David was a " King not barbarous of a barbarous nation " , who " wisely tempered the fierceness of his barbarous nation " . William praises David for his piety , noting that , among other saintly activities , " he was frequent in washing the feet of the poor " . Another of David 's <unk> , his former courtier Ailred of Rievaulx , echoes Newburgh 's assertions and praises David for his justice as well as his piety , commenting that David 's rule of the Scots meant that " the whole barbarity of that nation was softened ... as if forgetting their natural fierceness they submitted their necks to the laws which the royal gentleness dictated " . 
 Although avoiding stress on 12th century Scottish " barbarity " , the Lowland Scottish historians of the later Middle Ages tend to repeat the accounts of earlier chronicle tradition . Much that was written was either directly transcribed from the earlier medieval chronicles themselves or was modelled closely upon them , even in the significant works of John of Fordun , Andrew Wyntoun and Walter Bower . For example , Bower includes in his text the eulogy written for David by Ailred of Rievaulx . This quotation extends to over twenty pages in the modern edition , and exerted a great deal of influence over what became the traditional view of David in later works about Scottish history . Historical treatment of David developed in the writings of later Scottish historians , and the writings of men like John Mair , George Buchanan , Hector Boece , and Bishop John Leslie ensured that by the 18th century a picture of David as a pious , justice @-@ loving state @-@ builder and vigorous maintainer of Scottish independence had emerged . 
 = = = Modern treatment = = = 
 In the modern period there has been more of an emphasis on David 's <unk> and on the effects of his changes on Scottish cultural development . Lowland Scots tended to trace the origins of their culture to the marriage of David 's father Máel Coluim III to Saint Margaret , a myth which had its origins in the medieval period . With the development of modern historical techniques in the mid @-@ 19th century , responsibility for these developments appeared to lie more with David than his father . David assumed a principal place in the alleged destruction of the Celtic Kingdom of Scotland . Andrew Lang , in 1900 , wrote that " with Alexander [ I ] , Celtic domination ends ; with David , Norman and English dominance is established " . 
 The ages of Enlightenment and Romanticism had elevated the role of races and " ethnic packages " into mainstream history , and in this context David was portrayed as hostile to the native Scots , and his reforms were seen in the light of natural , perhaps even justified , civilised Teutonic aggression towards the backward Celts . 
 In the 20th century , several studies were devoted to Normanisation in 12th century Scotland , focusing upon and hence emphasising the changes brought about by the reign of David I. <unk> Ritchie 's The Normans in Scotland ( 1954 ) , Archie Duncan 's Scotland : The Making of the Kingdom ( 1974 ) and the many articles of G. W. S. Barrow all formed part of this historiographical trend . 
 In the 1980s , Barrow sought a compromise between change and continuity , and argued that the reign of King David was in fact a " Balance of New and Old " . Such a conclusion was a natural incorporation of an underlying current in Scottish historiography which , since William F. Skene 's monumental and revolutionary three @-@ volume Celtic Scotland : A History of Ancient Alban ( 1876 – 80 ) , had been forced to acknowledge that " Celtic Scotland " was alive and healthy for a long time after the reign of David I. Michael Lynch followed and built upon Barrow 's compromise solution , arguing that as David 's reign progressed , his kingship became more Celtic . Despite its subtitle , in 2004 in the only full volume study of David I 's reign yet produced , David I : The King Who Made Scotland , its author Richard Oram further builds upon Lynch 's picture , stressing continuity while placing the changes of David 's reign in their context . 
 = = Davidian Revolution = = 
 However , while there may be debate about the importance or extent of the historical change in David I 's era , no historian doubts that it was taking place . The reason is what Barrow and Lynch both call the " Davidian Revolution " . David 's " revolution " is held to underpin the development of later medieval Scotland , whereby the changes he inaugurated grew into most of the central institutions of the later medieval kingdom . 
 Since Robert Bartlett 's pioneering work , The Making of Europe : Conquest , Colonization and Cultural Change , 950 – 1350 ( 1993 ) , reinforced by Moore 's The First European Revolution , <unk> – 1215 ( 2000 ) , it has become increasingly apparent that better understanding of David 's " revolution " can be achieved by recognising the wider " European revolution " taking place during this period . The central idea is that from the late 10th century onwards the culture and institutions of the old Carolingian heartlands in northern France and western Germany were spreading to outlying areas , creating a more recognisable " Europe " . Scotland was just one of many " outlying " areas . 
 = = = Government and feudalism = = = 
 The widespread enfeoffment of foreign knights and the processes by which land ownership was converted from customary tenures into feudal , or otherwise legally @-@ defined relationships , would revolutionise the way the Kingdom of Scotland was governed , as did the dispersal and installation of royal agents in the new mottes that were proliferating throughout the realm to staff newly created sheriffdoms and <unk> for the twin purposes of law enforcement and taxation , bringing Scotland further into the " continental " model . 
 Scotland in this period experienced innovations in governmental practices and the importation of foreign , mostly French , knights . It is to David 's reign that the beginnings of feudalism are generally assigned . This is defined as " castle @-@ building , the regular use of professional cavalry , the knight 's fee " as well as " homage and fealty " . David established large scale feudal lordships in the west of his Cumbrian principality for the leading members of the French military entourage who kept him in power . Additionally , many smaller scale feudal lordships were created . 
 Steps were taken during David 's reign to make the government of that part of Scotland he administered more like the government of Anglo @-@ Norman England . New sheriffdoms enabled the King to effectively administer royal demesne land . During his reign , royal sheriffs were established in the king 's core personal territories ; namely , in rough chronological order , at Roxburgh , Scone , Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , Stirling and Perth . The <unk> too was created in David 's reign . Although this institution had Anglo @-@ Norman origins , in Scotland north of the Forth at least , it represented some form of continuity with an older office . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 The revenue of his English earldom and the proceeds of the silver mines at Alston allowed David to produce Scotland 's first coinage . These altered the nature of trade and transformed his political image . 
 David was a great town builder . As Prince of the Cumbrians , David founded the first two burghs of " Scotland " , at Roxburgh and Berwick . Burghs were settlements with defined boundaries and guaranteed trading rights , locations where the king could collect and sell the products of his cain and <unk> ( a payment made in lieu of providing the king hospitality ) . David founded around 15 burghs . 
 Perhaps nothing in David 's reign compares in importance to burghs . While they could not , at first , have amounted to much more than the nucleus of an immigrant merchant class , nothing would do more to reshape the long @-@ term economic and ethnic shape of Scotland than the burgh . These planned towns were or became English in culture and language ; William of Newburgh wrote in the reign of King William the Lion , that " the towns and burghs of the Scottish realm are known to be inhabited by English " ; as well as transforming the economy , the failure of these towns to go native would in the long term undermine the position of the native Scottish language and give birth to the idea of the Scottish Lowlands . 
 = = = Monastic patronage = = = 
 David was one of medieval Scotland 's greatest monastic patrons . In 1113 , in perhaps David 's first act as Prince of the Cumbrians , he founded Selkirk Abbey for the Tironensians . David founded more than a dozen new monasteries in his reign , patronising various new monastic orders . 
 Not only were such monasteries an expression of David 's undoubted piety , but they also functioned to transform Scottish society . Monasteries became centres of foreign influence , and provided sources of literate men , able to serve the crown 's growing administrative needs . These new monasteries , and the Cistercian ones in particular , introduced new agricultural practices . Cistercian labour , for instance , transformed southern Scotland into one of northern Europe 's most important sources of sheep wool . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = New school hip hop = 
 The new school of hip hop was a movement in hip hop music starting 1983 – 84 with the early records of Run – D.M.C. and LL Cool J. Like the hip hop preceding it , it came predominantly from New York City . The new school was initially characterized in form by drum machine led minimalism , often tinged with elements of rock . It was notable for taunts and boasts about rapping , and socio @-@ political commentary , both delivered in an aggressive , self @-@ assertive style . In image as in song its artists projected a tough , cool , street b @-@ boy attitude . These elements contrasted sharply with the funk and disco influenced outfits , novelty hits , live bands , synthesizers and party rhymes of artists prevalent in 1984 , and rendered them old school . New school artists made shorter songs that could more easily gain radio play , and more cohesive LPs than their old school counterparts . By 1986 their releases began to establish the hip hop album as a fixture of the mainstream . 
 More inclusively , golden age hip hop is a phrase usually framing the late 1980s in mainstream hip hop , said to be characterized by its diversity , quality , innovation and influence , and associated with Public Enemy , KRS @-@ One and his Boogie Down Productions , Eric B. & Rakim , Ultramagnetic MCs , De La Soul , A Tribe Called Quest , and the Jungle Brothers due to their themes of Afrocentricity and political militancy , their experimental music , and their eclectic sampling . This same period is sometimes referred to as " mid @-@ school " or a " middle school " in hip hop , the phrase covering acts such as Gang Starr , The UMC 's , Main Source , Lord Finesse , EPMD , Just Ice , <unk> , True Mathematics , and Mantronix . 
 The innovations of Run @-@ D.M.C. , LL Cool J , and new school producers such as Larry Smith , and Rick Rubin of Def Jam , were quickly advanced on by the Beastie Boys , Marley Marl and his Juice Crew MCs , Boogie Down Productions , Public Enemy , and Eric B. & Rakim . Hip @-@ hop production became denser , rhymes and beats faster , as the drum machine was augmented with the sampler technology . Rakim took lyrics about the art of rapping to new heights , while KRS @-@ One and Chuck D pushed " message rap " towards black activism . Native Tongues artists ' inclusive , sample @-@ crowded music accompanied their positivity , Afrocentricity and playful energy . With the eventual commercial dominance of West Coast gangsta rap , particularly the emergence of the relaxed sounds of G @-@ funk by the early nineties , the East Coast new school / golden age can be said to have ended , with hardcore rappers such as the Wu @-@ Tang Clan and gangsta rappers such as Nas and The Notorious B.I.G. coming to dominate the East Coast scene . 
 The terms " old school " and " new school " have fallen more and more into the common vernacular as synonyms for " old " and " new " ( witness the 2003 Urban Dictionary entry for new school which reads , " Anything contemporary " ) and are often applied in this conversational way to hip hop , to the confusion and occasional exasperation of writers who use the terms historically . The phrase " leader of the new school " , coined in hip hop by Chuck D in 1988 , and presumably given further currency by the group with the exact name Leaders of the New School ( who were named by Chuck D prior to signing with Elektra in 1989 ) , remains popular . It has been applied to artists ranging from Jay @-@ Z to Lupe Fiasco . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 Elements of new school had existed in some form in the popular culture since hip @-@ hop 's birth . The first MCs rapped over DJs swapping back and forth between two copies of the same record playing the same drum break , or playing instrumental portions or versions of a broad range of records . This part of the culture was initiated by Kool DJ Herc in 1972 using breaks from James Brown , The Incredible Bongo Band and English rock group Babe Ruth in his block parties . Brown 's music — " extensive vamps " in which his voice was " a percussive instrument with frequent rhythmic grunts " , and " with rhythm @-@ section patterns ... [ resembling ] West African polyrhythms " — was a keynote of hip hop 's early days . By 1975 , Grandmaster Flash and Afrika Bambaataa had taken up Kool Herc 's breakbeat style of DJing , each with their own accompanying rappers . Flash was especially associated with an important break known as " The Bells " — a cut @-@ up of the intro to Bob James 's jazz cover of Paul Simon 's " Take Me To The Mardi Gras " — while Bambaataa delighted in springing occasional rock music breaks from records like " Mary , Mary " , " Honky Tonk Women " , " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " and Grand Funk Railroad 's " Inside Looking Out " on unsuspecting b @-@ boys . 
 The earliest hip @-@ hop records replaced the DJ with a live band playing funk and disco influenced tunes , or " interpolating " the tunes themselves , as in " Rapper 's Delight " ( Sugar Hill , 1979 ) and " King Tim III ( Personality Jock ) " ( Spring , 1979 ) . It was the soft , futuristic funk closely tied to disco that ruled hip hop 's early days on record , to the exclusion of the hard James Brown beats so beloved of the first b @-@ boys . Figures such as Flash and Bambaataa were involved in some early instances of moving the sound away from that of a live band , as in Flash 's DJ track " The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel " ( Sugar Hill , 1981 ) , and even innovating popular new sounds and subgenres , as in the synthesizer @-@ laden electro of Bambaataa 's ode to crack smoking : " Planet Rock " ( Tommy Boy , 1982 ) . Often though the rawer elements present in live shows did not make it past the recording studio . 
 Bambaataa 's first records , for instance , two versions of " Zulu Nation Throwdown " ( Winley , 1980 ) , were recorded with just drums and rhymes . When Bambaataa heard the released records , a complete live band had been added . Something closer to his intentions can be heard on a portion of Death Mix , a low @-@ quality bootleg of a Zulu Nation night at James Monroe High School in the Bronx , released without his permission on Winley Records in 1983 . Likewise on the bootleg Live Convention ' 82 ( Disco Wax , 1982 ) , Grand Wizard Theodore cuts the first six bars of Rufus Thomas 's " Do the Funky Penguin " together for five and a half minutes while an MC raps over the top . Grandmaster Flash 's " <unk> ' " ( Enjoy , 1979 ) had a pumping syncopated rhythm and The Furious Five emulating his <unk> and needle drops and chanting that " that Flash is on the beatbox going ... " The beatbox itself however , a drum machine which Flash had added to his turntable set @-@ up some time earlier , was absent on the record , the drums being produced by a live drummer . 
 Kool Moe Dee 's verbal personal attacks on Busy Bee <unk> live at Harlem World in 1982 caused a popular sensation in hip hop circles . In the same way , groups like the Cold Crush Brothers and The Force MCs were known for their routines , competitive attitude , and battle rhymes . Tapes of battles like these circulated widely , even without them becoming viable recordings . Apart from some social commentary like Melle Melle 's one verse on " <unk> ' " , Kurtis Blow 's ruefully comedic " The Breaks " ( Mercury , 1980 ) and a spurt of records following the success of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five 's " The Message " ( Sugar Hill , 1982 ) , the old school specialized lyrically in party rhymes . 
 = = Advent = = 
 One time , in probably 1983 , I was in the park in Brooklyn . I was getting beat up by about eight kids , I don 't even remember why . But as it was happening , this dude was walkin ' by with one of those big boom boxes . And as he 's walking by , we hear [ imitates the unmistakable intro drum pattern from Run @-@ D.M.C. ' s ' Sucker MCs ' , loudly ] . They all stopped beating me , and we all just stood there , listening to this phenomenon . I could have run , but I didn 't , I was just so entranced by what I heard . Then the dude with the box passed by and the kids continued to beat me up . But it didn 't matter . I felt good . I knew right then that I had to get into this hip hop shit . 
 David Toop writes of 1984 that " pundits were writing obituaries for hip hop , a passing fad " which " Hollywood had mutated into an all @-@ singing , all @-@ dancing romance " in movies like Flashdance and Breakin ' . Against this , Run @-@ D.M.C. , The Beastie Boys and the label Def Jam were " consciously hardcore " , " a reaction against the populist trend in hip hop at the time " , and " an explosive emergence of an underground alternative " . For Peter Shapiro , Run @-@ D.M.C. ' s 1983 two @-@ song release " It 's like That " / " Sucker MCs " " completely changed hip @-@ hop " " rendering everything that preceded it distinctly old school with one fell swoop . " In a 47 @-@ point timeline of hip hop and its antecedents spanning 64 years , Shapiro lists this release as his 43rd point . Reviewing Toop 's book in the LA Weekly , Oliver Wang of Soul Sides concurs , hailing Run @-@ D.M.C. as inaugurating the new school of rap . 
 = = = Run @-@ D.M.C. = = = 
 Run @-@ D.M.C. rapped over the most sparse of musical backing tracks . In the case of " Sucker MCs " , there was a loud , Oberheim DMX drum machine , a few scratches and nothing else , while the rhymes harangued weak rappers and contrasted them to the group 's success . " It 's like That " was an aggressively delivered message rap whose social commentary has been defined variously as " objective fatalism " , " frustrated and <unk> " , and just plain " reportage " . Run @-@ D.M.C. wore street clothes , tracksuits , sneakers , one even wore glasses . Their only possible concession to an image extraneous to that of kids on the street was the stylistic flourish of black fedoras atop their heads . This stood in sharp contrast to the popular artists of the time , who had variously bedecked themselves with feathers , suede boots , <unk> curls , and red or even pink leather suits . 
 The group 's early singles are collected on their eponymous debut ( Profile , 1984 ) , introducing rock references in " Rock Box " , and recognized then and now as the best album of hip hop 's early years . The next year , they appeared at Live Aid and released King of Rock ( Profile , 1985 ) , on which they asserted that they were " never ever old school " . Raising Hell ( Profile , 1986 ) was a landmark , containing quintessentially hip hop tracks like " Peter Piper " , " Perfection " and " It 's Tricky " , and going platinum in the year of its release on the back of the huge crossover hit " Walk This Way " . The group had rapped over the beat from the 1975 original in their early days , without so much as knowing the name of the band . When Raising Hell 's producer Rick Rubin heard them playing around with it in the studio , he suggested using the Aerosmith lyrics , and the collaboration between the two groups came about . The album 's last track was " Proud To Be Black " , written under the influence of Chuck D of the as @-@ yet unrecorded Public Enemy . On " My Adidas " the band rapped that they " took the beat from the street and put it on TV " . 
 Comments from Darryl McDaniels , AKA DMC of Run @-@ D.M.C. , make this connection to the underground explicit : " [ T ] hat 's exactly what we did . We didn 't really think it was pioneering , we just did what rappers did before us was doing on tapes . When a lot of the old guys , like Kool Moe Dee , The Treacherous Three , and Grandmaster Flash , got in the studio , they never put their greatness on records . Me and Run and Jay would listen ... and we 'd say , ' They didn 't do that shit last night in the Bronx ! ' ... So we said that we weren 't going to be fake . We ain 't gonna wear no costumes . We 're gonna keep it real . " 
 = = = Def Jam = = = 
 The other production credit on Raising Hell went to Run 's brother , Russell Simmons ; he ran Rush Artist Management , now Rush Communications , which as well as handling Run @-@ D.M.C. , managed the Beastie Boys , LL Cool J , Whodini and Public Enemy . Simmons also co @-@ owned Def Jam Recordings , an important new school label , with Rubin . Simmons rose with Def Jam to become one of the biggest moguls in rap , while Rubin claimed credit for introducing radio @-@ friendly brevity and song structure to hip hop . Def Jam 's first 12 @-@ inch release was the minimalist drum machine breakdown " I Need A Beat " by LL Cool J ( 1984 ) . This was followed by " I Can 't Live Without My Radio " ( Def Jam , 1985 ) , a loud , defiant declaration of public loyalty to his boom box which the New York Times in 1987 called " quintessential rap in its directness , immediacy and assertion of self " . Both were on his debut album for Def Jam , 1985 's Radio ( " Reduced by Rick Rubin " , read the liner notes ) , which contained another minimalist b @-@ boy classic with shards of rock guitar , " Rock the Bells " . Perhaps rock fan Rubin 's natural protégés were the Beastie Boys , sampling AC / DC on their Rock Hard EP on Def Jam in 1984 , and recording a Run @-@ D.M.C. outtake and a heavy metal parody on their hugely commercially successful debut album Licensed To Ill ( Def Jam , 1986 ) . In 1987 , Raising Hell surpassed three million units sold , and Licensed to Ill five million . Faced with figures like these , major labels finally began buying into independent New York hip hop imprints . 
 = = Further development = = 
 = = = The Juice Crew = = = 
 One of hip hop 's most important producers and innovators , Marley Marl found Cold Chillin ' Records and assembled various hip hop acts , including MC Shan , Big Daddy Kane , Biz Markie , Roxanne Shanté , Kool G Rap & DJ Polo , and Masta Ace . His Juice Crew collective was an important force in ushering the " golden age " era of hip hop , with advances in lyrical technique , distinctive personalities of emerging stars like Biz Markie and Big Daddy Kane , and attaining crossover commercial success for hip hop music . 
 Marley Marl 's first production was an " answer record " to " Sucker MCs " in 1983 entitled " Sucker DJs " by Dimples D. Soon after came 14 @-@ year @-@ old Roxanne Shanté 's answer to <unk> 's " Roxanne Roxanne " , " Roxanne 's Revenge " ( 1985 ) , sparking off the huge wave of answer records known as the Roxanne Wars . More disses ( insults intended to show disrespect ) from Shanté followed : " Bite This " ( 1985 ) , " Queen of Rox " ( 1985 ) , introducing Biz Markie on " Def Fresh Crew " ( 1986 ) , " Payback " ( 1987 ) , and perhaps her greatest record , " Have a Nice Day " ( 1987 ) . 
 = = = Boogie Down Productions = = = 
 <unk> 's " Have a Nice Day " had aimed some barbs at the principal two members of a new group from the Bronx called Boogie Down Productions ( BDP ) : " Now KRS @-@ ONE you should go on vacation with that name <unk> ' like a wack radio station , and as for Scott La Rock , you should be ashamed , when T La Rock said " It 's Yours " , he didn 't mean his name " . Boogie Down Productions had manufactured a disagreement with the Juice Crew 's MC Shan , releasing " South Bronx " and " The Bridge is Over " in reply to his " The Bridge " and " Kill That Noise " respectively . KRS @-@ One considered Run @-@ D.M.C. the epitome of rap music in 1984 and had begun to rap following their lead . But he has also said that BDP 's approach reflected a feeling that the early innovators like Run @-@ D.M.C. and LL Cool J were by 1986 tainted by commercial success and out of touch with the streets . 
 Boogie Down 's first album Criminal Minded ( B @-@ Boy , 1987 ) admitted a reggae influence and had KRS @-@ One <unk> the Beatles ' " Hey Jude " on the title track . It also contained two tales of grim street life , yet played for callous laughs : " The P Is Free " , in which KRS <unk> of throwing out his girl who wants crack cocaine in exchange for sex , and " 9mm Goes Bang " , in which he shoots a drug dealer then cheerfully sings " la la la la la la " . Songs like these presaged the rise of an underground that matched violent lyrics to the hardcore drum machine tracks of the new school . The cover of Criminal Minded was a further reflection of a move towards this sort of radical image , depicting the group in a half @-@ light , holding firearms . The next album By All Means Necessary ( B @-@ Boy , 1988 ) left that element behind for political radicalism following the murder of Scott La Rock , with the title and cover alluding to Malcolm X. KRS @-@ One became involved with the Stop the Violence Movement at this time . Boogie Down Productions , along with Run @-@ D.M.C. and Public Enemy , associated the new school as rap music with a strong message . 
 = = = Eric B. & Rakim = = = 
 Eric B. & Rakim appeared with the Marley Marl produced " Eric B. Is President " and " My Melody " on <unk> Records in 1986 . Both tracks appeared on Paid in Full ( 4th & Broadway , 1987 ) . Just as <unk> had , the pair reflected changes in street life on their debut 's cover , which depicted the two wearing huge gold chains and surrounded by money . Like Criminal Minded , the sampling prevalent in the album cemented James Brown 's status as a hip hop source , while Rakim 's allusions showed the growing influence of mystic Islam @-@ offshoot The Nation of Gods and Earths in hip @-@ hop . The music was minimalist , austerely so , with many writers noting that coupled with Rakim 's precise , logical style , the effect was almost one of scientific rigour . The group followed Paid in Full with Follow The Leader ( Uni , 1988 ) ( on which they were open @-@ minded enough to sample The Eagles ) , Let The Rhythm Hit ' Em ( MCA , 1990 ) and Don 't Sweat The Technique ( MCA , 1992 ) . 
 Rakim is generally regarded as the most cutting @-@ edge of the MCs of the new school era . Jess Harvell in Pitchfork in 2005 wrote that " Rakim 's innovation was applying a patina of intellectual detachment to rap 's most sacred cause : talking shit about how you 're a better rapper than everyone else . " Christgau in the Village Voice in 1990 wrote of Rakim 's style as " calm , confident , clear . On their third album , as on their phase @-@ shifting 1986 debut , " he continues , " Eric B. ' s samples truly are beats , designed to accentuate the natural music of an idealized black man 's voice . " Looking back at the late eighties in Rolling Stone in 1997 , Ed <unk> describes Rakim as " the new @-@ school MC of the moment , using a smooth baritone to become the jazz soloist of mystic Afrocentric rap . " 
 = = = Public Enemy = = = 
 Public Enemy , having been reluctantly convinced to sign to a record label , released Yo ! Bumrush the Show on Def Jam in 1987 . It debuted the Public Enemy logo , a circle of hatted b @-@ boy in a sniper 's cross @-@ hairs , was <unk> with battle rhymes ( " <unk> <unk> a Ton " , " Public Enemy # 1 " ) , social @-@ political fare ( " <unk> ( Message to a Black Man ) " and anti @-@ crack messages ( " <unk> " ) . 
 The album was a critical and commercial success , particularly in Europe , unusually so for a hip hop album at that time . Bumrush the Show had been recorded on the heels of Run @-@ D.M.C. ' s Raising Hell , but was held back by Def Jam in order for them to concentrate on releasing and promoting the Beastie Boys ' License to Ill . Chuck D of Public Enemy felt that by the time their first record was released , BDP and Rakim had already changed the landscape for how an MC could rap . Public Enemy were already recording their second album It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back ( Def Jam , 1988 ) when Bumrush hit stores . 
 = = = Gangsta rap = = = 
 The underground sound centered on urban violence that was to become gangsta rap existed on the East Coast from soon after Run – D.M.C. had inaugurated the new school of hip hop . Philadelphia 's Schoolly D self @-@ released " Gangsta Boogie " in 1984 , and " <unk> What Does It Mean ? " / " Gucci Time " in 1985 , leading to Saturday Night ( Schoolly D , 1986 , Jive , 1987 ) . The West Coast , which became the home of gangsta rap , had Toddy Tee 's influential <unk> mixtape in 1985 , and Ice @-@ T 's " Six in the Morning " in 1986 before N.W.A 's first records , leading to the hugely successful Straight Outta Compton in 1988 . 
 = = = Native Tongues = = = 
 Developments in the New York new school continuum in this climate were represented by the Native Tongues groups — The Jungle Brothers , De La Soul , A Tribe Called Quest , Queen Latifah and Monie Love — along with fellow travellers like Leaders of the New School , <unk> and Brand Nubian . They moved away from aggressive , macho posturing , towards ambiguity , fun and Afrocentricity . Their music was sample @-@ crowded , more open and accessible than their new school predecessors . De La Soul 's debut sampled everyone from The Turtles to Steely Dan , while A Tribe Called Quest matched tough beats to mellow jazz samples and playful , thoughtful raps . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Battle of Bennington = 
 The Battle of Bennington was a battle of the American Revolutionary War , part of the Saratoga campaign , that took place on August 16 , 1777 , in Walloomsac , New York , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) from its namesake Bennington , Vermont . A rebel force of 2 @,@ 000 men , primarily composed of New Hampshire and Massachusetts militiamen , led by General John Stark , and reinforced by Vermont militiamen led by Colonel Seth Warner and members of the Green Mountain Boys , decisively defeated a detachment of General John Burgoyne 's army led by Lieutenant Colonel Friedrich Baum , and supported by additional men under Lieutenant Colonel Heinrich von Breymann . 
 Baum 's detachment was a mixed force of 700 composed primarily of Hessians but also including small amounts of dismounted Brunswick dragoons , Canadians , Loyalists , and Indians . He was sent by Burgoyne to raid Bennington in the disputed New Hampshire Grants area for horses , draft animals , and other supplies . Believing the town to be only lightly defended , Burgoyne and Baum were unaware that Stark and 1 @,@ 500 militiamen were stationed there . After a rain @-@ caused standoff , Stark 's men enveloped Baum 's position , taking many prisoners , and killing Baum . Reinforcements for both sides arrived as Stark and his men were mopping up , and the battle restarted , with Warner and Stark driving away Breymann 's reinforcements with heavy casualties . 
 The battle was a decisive victory for the rebel cause , as it reduced Burgoyne 's army in size by almost 1 @,@ 000 men , led his Indian support to largely abandon him , and deprived him of needed supplies such as cavalry and draft horses and food , all factors that contributed to Burgoyne 's eventual surrender at Saratoga . The victory also galvanized colonial support for the independence movement , and played a key role in bringing France into the war on the rebel side . The battle anniversary is celebrated in the state of Vermont as Bennington Battle Day . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the American Revolutionary War two years old , the British changed their plans . Giving up on the rebellious New England colonies , they decided to split the Thirteen Colonies and isolate New England from what the British believed to be the more loyal southern colonies . The British command devised a grand plan to divide the colonies via a three @-@ way pincer movement . The western pincer , under the command of Barry St. Leger , was repulsed when the Siege of Fort Stanwix failed , and the southern pincer , which was to progress up the Hudson valley from New York City , never started since General William Howe decided instead to capture Philadelphia . 
 The northern pincer , proceeding southward from Montreal , enjoyed the most success . After the British victories at Hubbardton , Fort Ticonderoga , and Fort Anne , General John Burgoyne proceeded with the Saratoga campaign , with the goal of capturing Albany and gaining control of the Hudson River Valley , where Burgoyne 's force could ( as the plan went ) meet the other pincers , dividing the colonies in two . 
 = = = British forces = = = 
 Burgoyne 's progress towards Albany had initially met with great success , including the scattering of Seth Warner 's men in the Battle of Hubbardton . However , his advance had slowed to a crawl by late July , due to logistical difficulties , exacerbated by the American destruction of a key road , and the army 's supplies began to dwindle . Burgoyne 's concern over supplies was magnified in early August when he received word from Howe that he ( Howe ) was going to Philadelphia , and was not in fact going to advance up the Hudson River valley . In response to a proposal first made on July 22 by the commander of his German troops , Baron Riedesel , Burgoyne sent a detachment of about 800 troops under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Friedrich Baum from Fort Miller on a foraging mission to acquire horses for the German dragoons , draft animals to assist in moving the army , and to harass the enemy . Baum 's detachment was primarily made up of dismounted Brunswick dragoons of the Prinz Ludwig regiment . Along the way it was joined by local companies of Loyalists , some Canadians and about 100 Indians , and a company of British sharpshooters . Baum was originally ordered to proceed to the Connecticut River valley where they believed horses could be procured for the dragoons . However , as Baum was preparing to leave , Burgoyne verbally changed the goal to be a supply depot at Bennington , which was believed to be guarded by the remnants of Warner 's brigade , about 400 colonial militia . 
 = = = American forces = = = 
 Unknown to Burgoyne , the citizens of the New Hampshire Grants territory ( which was then disputed between New York and the Vermont Republic ) had appealed to the states of New Hampshire and Massachusetts for protection from the invading army following the British capture of Ticonderoga . New Hampshire responded on July 18 by authorizing John Stark to raise a militia for the defense of the people " or the annoyance of the enemy " . Using funds provided by John Langdon , Stark raised 1 @,@ 500 New Hampshire militiamen in the space of six days , more than ten percent of New Hampshire 's male population over the age of sixteen . They were first marched to the Fort at Number 4 ( modern Charlestown , New Hampshire ) , then crossed the river border into the Grants and stopped at Manchester , where Stark conferred with Warner . While in Manchester , General Benjamin Lincoln , whose promotion in preference to Stark had been the cause for Stark 's resignation from the Continental Army , attempted to assert Army authority over Stark and his men . Stark refused , stating that he was solely responsible to the New Hampshire authorities . Stark then went on to Bennington with Warner as a guide , while Warner 's men remained in Manchester . Lincoln returned to the American camp at Stillwater , where he and General Philip Schuyler hatched a plan for Lincoln , with 500 men , to join with Stark and Warner in actions to harass Burgoyne 's communications and supply lines at Skenesboro . Baum 's movements significantly altered these plans . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Baum 's Germans left Burgoyne 's camp at Fort Edward on August 9 and marched to Fort Miller , where they waited until they were joined by the Indians and a company of British marksmen . The company marched off toward Bennington on August 11 . In minor skirmishes along the way they learned from prisoners taken that a sizable force was in place at Bennington . On August 14 Baum 's men encountered a detachment of Stark 's men that had been sent out to investigate reports of Indians in the area . Stark 's men retreated , destroying a bridge to delay Baum 's advance . Stark , on receiving word of the approaching force , sent a request to Manchester for support , and then moved his troops out of Bennington toward Baum 's force , setting up a defensive line . Baum sent a message to Burgoyne following the first contact indicating that the American force was larger than expected , but that it was likely to retreat before him . He then advanced a few miles further until he neared Stark 's position . He then realized that at least part of his first message was incorrect , so he sent a second message to Burgoyne , requesting reinforcements . 
 It rained for the next day and a half , preventing battle . During this time , Baum 's men constructed a small redoubt at the crest of the hill and hoped that the weather would prevent the Americans from attacking before reinforcements arrived . Stark sent out skirmishers to probe the German lines , and managed to kill thirty Indians in spite of the difficulties of keeping their gunpowder dry . Reinforcements for both sides marched out on the 15th ; travel was quite difficult due to the heavy rains . Burgoyne sent 550 men under Heinrich von Breymann , while Warner 's company of about 350 Green Mountain Boys came south from Manchester under Lieutenant Samuel Safford 's command . 
 Late on the night of August 15 , Stark was awakened by the arrival of Parson Thomas Allen and a band of Massachusetts militiamen from nearby Berkshire County who insisted on joining his force . In response to the minister 's fiery threat that his men would never come out again if they were not allowed to participate , Stark is reported to have said , " Would you go now on this dark and rainy night ? Go back to your people and tell them to get some rest if they can , and if the Lord gives us sunshine to @-@ morrow and I do not give you fighting enough , I will never call on you to come again . " Stark 's forces again swelled the next day with the arrival of some Stockbridge Indians , bringing his force ( excluding Warner 's men ) to nearly 2 @,@ 000 men . 
 Stark was not the only beneficiary of unexpected reinforcements . Baum 's force grew by almost 100 when a group of local Loyalists arrived in his camp on the morning of August 16 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the afternoon of August 16 , the weather cleared , and Stark ordered his men to be ready to attack . Stark is reputed to have rallied his troops by saying they were here to fight for their " natural born rights as Englishmen " and he added " There are your enemies , the Red Coats and the Tories . They are ours , or this night Molly Stark sleeps a widow . " Upon hearing that the militia had melted away into the woods , Baum assumed that the Americans were retreating or redeploying . However , Stark had decided to capitalize on weaknesses in the German 's widely distributed position , and had sent sizable flanking parties to either side of his lines . These movements were assisted by a ruse employed by Stark 's men that enabled them to get closer safely without alarming the opposing forces . The Germans , most of whom spoke no English , had been told that soldiers with bits of white paper in their hat were Loyalists , and should not be fired on ; Stark 's men had also heard this and many of them had suitably adorned their hats . 
 When the fighting broke out around 3 : 00 PM the German position was immediately surrounded by gunfire , which Stark described as " the hottest engagement I have ever witnessed , resembling a continual clap of thunder . " The Loyalists and Indian positions were overrun , causing many of them to flee or surrender . This left Baum and his Brunswick dragoons trapped alone on the high ground . The Germans fought valiantly even after running low on powder and the destruction of their ammunition wagon . In desperation the dragoons led a sabre charge in an attempt to break through the enveloping forces . The charge failed horrendously , causing massive amounts of German casualties and gaining no ground on the rebels . Baum was mortally wounded in this final charge , and the remaining Germans surrendered . 
 After the battle ended , while Stark 's militiamen were busy disarming the prisoners and looting their supplies , Breymann arrived with his reinforcements . Seeing the Americans in disarray , they immediately pressed their attack . After hastily regrouping , Stark 's forces tried to hold their ground against the new German onslaught , but began to fall back . Before their lines collapsed , Warner 's men arrived on the scene to reinforce Stark 's troops . Pitched battle continued until dark , when both sides disengaged . Breymann began a hasty retreat ; he had lost one quarter of his force and all of his artillery pieces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Total German and British losses at Bennington were recorded at 207 dead and 700 captured ; American losses included 30 Americans dead and 40 wounded . The battle was at times particularly brutal when Loyalists met Patriots , as in some cases they came from the same communities . The prisoners , who were first kept in Bennington , were eventually marched to Boston . 
 Burgoyne 's army was readying to cross the Hudson at Fort Edward on August 17 when the first word of the battle arrived . Believing that reinforcements might be necessary , Burgoyne marched the army toward Bennington until further word arrived that Breymann and the remnants of his force were returning . Stragglers continued to arrive throughout the day and night , while word of the disaster spread within the camp . 
 The effect on Burgoyne 's campaign was significant . Not only had he lost nearly 1 @,@ 000 men , of which half were regulars , but he also lost the crucial Indian support . In a council following the battle , many of the Indians ( who had traveled with him from Quebec ) decided to go home . This loss severely hampered Burgoyne 's reconnaissance efforts in the days to come . The failure to bring in nearby supplies meant that he had to rely on supply lines that were already dangerously long , and that he eventually broke in September . The shortage of supplies was a significant factor in his decision to surrender at Saratoga , following which France entered the war . 
 American Patriots reacted to news of the battle with optimism . Especially after Burgoyne 's Indian screen left him , small groups of local Patriots began to emerge to harass the fringes of British positions . Interestingly , a significant portion of Stark 's force returned home and did not again become influential in the campaign until appearing at Saratoga on October 13 to complete the encirclement of Burgoyne 's army . 
 John Stark 's reward from the New Hampshire General Assembly for " the Memorable Battle of Bennington " was " a compleat suit of Clothes becoming his Rank " . A reward that Stark likely valued the highest was a message of thanks from John Hancock , president of the Continental Congress , which included a commission as " brigadier in the army of the United States " . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The battle forces are generally described as in Morrissey . His numbers are generally consistent with other sources on the British units , although there is disagreement across a wide array of sources on the number of troops under Breymann , which are generally listed at either approximately 550 or 650 . Morrissey is also incorrect in identifying some of the American units . He identifies William Gregg as having a separate command ; Gregg apparently led several companies in Nichols ' regiment . Morrissey also failed to include the Massachusetts militia , and misidentified Langdon 's company , erroneously believing they may have been from Worcester , Massachusetts . ( Militia companies from the Worcester area marched on Bennington , with some companies arriving the day after the battle . ) Langdon originally raised his company in 1776 , but it did not become a cavalry unit until 1778 . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 August 16 is a legal holiday in Vermont , known as Bennington Battle Day . The battlefield , now a New York state historic site , was designated a National Historic Landmark on January 20 , 1961 , and added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 15 , 1966 . In the 1870s , the local historic society in Bennington commissioned the design and construction of the Bennington Battle Monument , which was complete in 1889 and dedicated in 1891 with ceremonies attended by President Benjamin Harrison . The Monument , an obelisk 306 feet ( 93 m ) high , is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Although the monument was not ready in time to mark the centennial of the battle , the 100th anniversary of the battle was marked by speeches attended by President Rutherford B. Hayes . 
 = The Oceanides = 
 The Oceanides ( Finnish title : Aallottaret , translated to English as Nymphs of the Waves or Spirits of the Waves ; original working title Rondeau der Wellen ; in English , Rondo of the Waves ) , Op. 73 , is a single @-@ movement tone poem for orchestra written in 1913 – 14 by the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius . The piece , which refers to the nymphs in Greek mythology who inhabited the Mediterranean Sea , premiered on 4 June 1914 at the Norfolk Music Festival in Connecticut with Sibelius conducting . Praised upon its premiere as " the finest evocation of the sea ... ever ... produced in music " , the tone poem , in D major , consists of two subjects , said to represent the playful activity of the nymphs and the majesty of the ocean , respectively . Sibelius gradually develops this material over three informal stages : first , a placid ocean ; second , a gathering storm ; and third , a thunderous wave @-@ crash climax . As the tempest subsides , a final chord sounds , symbolizing the mighty power and limitless expanse of the sea . 
 Stylistically , many commentators have described The Oceanides as either an outright example of Impressionism or somehow derivative of that art movement . Others have countered that Sibelius 's active development of the two subjects , his sparing use of scales favored by Impressionists , and his prioritization of action and structure over ephemeral , atmospheric background distinguish the piece from quintessential examples , such as Debussy 's La mer . 
 Aside from the definitive D major tone poem , two intermediate versions of The Oceanides survive : the first , a three @-@ movement orchestral suite that dates to 1913 ( movement No. 1 lost ) ; and the second , the initial single @-@ movement " Yale " version of the tone poem , in D ♭ major , which Sibelius dispatched to America in advance of his journey but revised prior to the music festival . The Oceanides thus stands alongside En saga , the Lemminkäinen Suite , the Violin Concerto , and the Fifth Symphony as one of Sibelius 's most overhauled works . The suite and Yale version , never performed in the composer 's lifetime , received their world premieres by Osmo Vänskä and the Lahti Symphony Orchestra on 10 September and 24 October 2002 , respectively . A typical performance of the final version lasts about 10 minutes , some 3 minutes longer than its Yale predecessor . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 In August 1913 , Sibelius received a message from the American composer and Yale University professor Horatio Parker : a New England patron of the arts , Carl Stoeckel ( 1858 – 1925 ) , and his wife , Ellen Stoeckel née Battell ( 1851 – 1939 ) , had authorized $ 1 @,@ 000 for the commission of a new symphonic poem from Sibelius , per Parker 's recommendation . The piece , not to exceed fifteen minutes in length , was to be played at the 1914 Norfolk Music Festival in Connecticut , which the <unk> annually hosted ( and financed ) at their estate in a wooden performance hall dubbed " The Music Shed " . Despite his ongoing struggles with another commission , incidental music to Poul Knudsen 's tragic pantomime Scaramouche , Sibelius accepted the Stoeckel offer , writing in his diary , " A symphonic poem , ready by April " . 
 = = = = Initial and intermediate versions = = = = 
 In early September , another letter from Parker arrived saying that Stoeckel wished to provide the copyist 's fee for writing out the orchestral parts in Finland . As 1913 drew to a close , Sibelius had not made much progress on the American commission , having spent the entire autumn on other pieces and revisions . A trip to Berlin in January 1914 followed , and Sibelius 's diary and correspondence indicate the Stoeckel commission was at the forefront of his mind ; an initial plan to set Rydberg 's poem <unk> and <unk> subsequently was discarded . His stay in Berlin was not productive , and in mid @-@ February he returned to Helsinki ( " Uneasy because of the America thing [ Norfolk commission ] . Presumably have to go home to my cell in order to be able to concentrate " . ) 
 Today , three versions of the work survive . Initially in 1913 , Sibelius conceived of the commission as a three movement suite for orchestra in E ♭ major , of which only No. 2 ( Tempo moderato ) and No. 3 ( Allegro ) are extant . At some point in 1913 – 14 , Sibelius decided to rework the thematic material of the Allegro , very much a " work in progress " , into a single @-@ movement symphonic poem ; the musical content of the Tempo moderato would find its way into the piano piece Till trånaden ( To Longing ) , JS 202 . In making the transition from suite to tone poem , Sibelius transposed the material from E ♭ to D ♭ major ; in addition , he also introduced new musical ideas , such as the rocking wave @-@ like motif in the strings and woodwinds , and expanded the orchestration . 
 = = = = Final version = = = = 
 In April 1914 , Sibelius mailed the score and parts to the United States , calling the piece Rondeau der Wellen ( this intermediate version of the tone poem is commonly referred to as the " Yale " version ) . On 12 and 20 April 1914 , Parker wrote on behalf of Stoeckel , expanding upon the initial agreement : Sibelius 's American patron now wished him to travel to and conduct a program of his music at the Norfolk festival ; as compensation , Sibelius would receive $ 1 @,@ 200 , as well as an honorary doctorate of music from Yale University . Although he already had sent the manuscript to Norfolk , Sibelius was not satisfied with the score and immediately began to revise the piece , eventually opting for a complete overhaul ( " Isn 't it just like me to rework the tone poem — at the moment I am ablaze with it . " ) . Although Sibelius was prone to revising his compositions , such effort was usually undertaken when preparing a piece for publication or after having heard it first performed in concert . With respect to the Yale version , it is possible the invitation to attend the music festival in person prompted Sibelius to " reassess " the tone poem with a more critical eye . 
 The differences between the first and final versions of the tone poem are substantial ; not only did Sibelius again transpose the piece , into D major , but he also added the wave @-@ crash climax . Despite these changes , the orchestration is more or less the same , with the addition of one trumpet . As the trip to America approached , Sibelius raced to complete the revisions in time . Aino Sibelius , the composer 's wife , recounts the scenes at Ainola : 
 The trip to America is approaching . Rondeau der Wellen is not yet complete . Terrible haste ... the score is only half @-@ ready . The copyist , Mr. <unk> , is staying with us and writing night and day ... It is only because of Janne 's [ Sibelius ] energy that we are making progress ... We lit a lamp in the dining room , a chandelier in the living room , it was a festive moment . I didn 't dare say a word . I just checked that the environment was in order . Then I went to bed and Janne stayed up . All night long I could hear his footsteps , alternating with music played quietly . 
 Sibelius continued to make changes to the final version of the tone poem as he sailed across the Atlantic Ocean aboard the Kaiser Wilhelm II and even during rehearsals in Norfolk , but these last @-@ minute changes , Andrew Barnett argues , must have been relatively " minor " , as the orchestral parts had been copied before his departure from Finland . Sibelius was delighted with the new piece , writing to Aino , " It 's as though I have found myself , and more besides . The Fourth Symphony was the start . But in this piece there is so much more . There are passages in it that drive me crazy . Such poetry " . Neither the suite nor the Yale version of the tone poem was performed in Sibelius 's lifetime , receiving their world premieres by Osmo Vänskä and the Lahti Symphony Orchestra on 19 September and 24 October 2002 , respectively . 
 = = = = Naming the piece = = = = 
 Sibelius appears to have vacillated over a name for the new tone poem . By 3 April 1914 he had dropped Rondeau der Wellen in favor of Aallottaret . On 29 April he wrote to Parker in favor of the original title ( " Herr Doctor , now you must forgive me for performing the new tone poem in its final version with the original title Rondeau der Wellen . The version Aallottaret that I sent to you can stay with Mr. Stoeckel " . ) . This position , too , proved fleeting . By the end of May , Sibelius had settled on Aallottaret , and the tone poem appeared under this title , albeit misspelled , on the 4 June Norfolk Festival program : " <unk> [ sic ] — Tone Poem ( Nymphs of the Ocean ) " . In preparation for the publication of the tone poem by Breitkopf & Härtel in June 1915 , Sibelius included alongside the Finnish title , Aallottaret , an " explanatory " German translation , Die <unk> ( in English : The Oceanides ) . The piece was published as Op. 73 and dedicated to Mr. and Mrs. Carl Stoeckel . 
 = = = Performances = = = 
 = = = = American premiere = = = = 
 The tone poem premiered on 4 June 1914 at " The Shed " concert hall of the Norfolk Music Festival , Sibelius himself conducting at a podium decorated in the American and Finnish national colors . The orchestra , which Sibelius praised as " wonderful ... surpasses anything we have in Europe " , comprised musicians drawn from three of America 's best music societies : the New York Philharmonic , the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra , and the Boston Symphony Orchestra . The Oceanides was unlike anything the musicians had previously encountered . " I think they did not understand it all at first from what they said " , Stoeckel recalled . " The next morning , after having run it through three times , they were thoroughly delighted with it and remarked that the beauty of the music grew with each rehearsal " . The festival public sounded a similarly positive note about the new piece , which concluded a concert of Sibelius 's music that included Pohjola 's Daughter , the King Christian II Suite , The Swan of Tuonela , Finlandia , and Valse triste . Stoeckel recounts the events of 4 June : 
 Everyone who was fortunate enough to be in the audience agreed that it was the musical event of their lives , and after the performance of the last number there was an ovation to the composer which I have never seen equalled anywhere , the entire audience rose to their feet and shouted with enthusiasm , and probably the calmest man in the whole hall was the composer himself ; he bowed repeatedly with that distinction of manner which was so typical of him ... As calm as Sibelius had appeared on the stage , after his part was over he came up stairs and sank into a chair in one of the dressing rooms and was very much overcome . Some people declared that he wept . Personally I do not think that he did , but there were tears in his eyes as he shook our hands and thanked us for what he was pleased to call the " honor we had done him " . 
 Upon conclusion of the second half of the program ( which featured Dvořák 's Ninth Symphony , Coleridge @-@ Taylor 's rhapsody From the Prairie , and the overture to Wagner 's opera Die Feen ) , the orchestra performed the Finnish national anthem , <unk> Land . 
 = = = = European premiere = = = = 
 With the outbreak of World War I on 28 July 1914 , The Oceanides languished . Wartime politics being what they were , Sibelius 's music was seldom played outside the Nordic countries and the United States : in Germany , there was little demand for the music of an " enemy national " , while in Russia , Finns were viewed as being " less than loyal subjects of the Tsar " . In any case , many of Sibelius 's works had been printed by German publishing houses , a detail that harmed Sibelius 's reputation not only in Russia , but also Britain and the United States . According to Tawaststjerna , the war plunged Sibelius into a state of melancholy and creative struggle ( the Fifth and Sixth symphonies were in the process of simultaneous gestation at this time ) . His response was to retreat into near solitude : he abstained from attending and giving concerts and neglected his circle of friends , and he imagined himself " forgotten and ignored , a lonely beacon of light in a deepening winter darkness " . 
 Sibelius was not easily stirred from his exile ; friend and fellow composer Wilhelm Stenhammar , then Artistic Director and chief conductor of the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra , wrote to Sibelius repeatedly to persuade him to conduct a concert of his works in Gothenburg . Believing himself duty @-@ bound to premiere a " major work " in Sweden , such as a symphony , Sibelius — to Stenhammar 's chagrin — delayed each scheduled trip . He withdrew from planned concerts for March 1914 , writing to Stenhammar , " My conscience forces me to this . But when I have some new works ready next year , as I hope , it would give me great joy to perform them in Gothenburg " . New arrangements were made for February 1915 , but these , too , Sibelius canceled in December 1914 . In the end , the indefatigable Stenhammar prevailed and new concerts were set for March 1915 ( " I see yet again your great sympathy for my music . I shall come " . ) . 
 Stenhammar 's efforts were rewarded with the European premiere of The Oceanides . For Sibelius , it was an opportunity to once again be an " artist on tour " , feeding off the energy and " rapturous ovations " of an audience ( it had been nine months since the Norfolk concerts , which now seemed a distant memory ) . The first concert , on March 22 , featured the Second Symphony , Scènes historiques II , and two movements from <unk> before concluding with The Oceanides . According to Sibelius 's diary , the performance was a " great success " , with Stenhammar " captivated " particularly by the final number . The 24 March program retained The Oceanides , but paired it with Scènes historiques I , the Nocturne from the King Christian II Suite , a movement from <unk> , Lemminkäinen 's Return , and the Fourth Symphony . Sibelius was very pleased with the orchestra 's handling of The Oceanides , calling its performance " wonderful " . He goes on to note in his diary that , " After the final number [ The Oceanides ] there was a deafening torrent of applause , stamps , cries of bravo , a standing ovation and fanfares from the orchestra " . 
 = = = = Other notable performances = = = = 
 The Finnish premiere of The Oceanides occurred on the occasion of Sibelius 's fiftieth birthday celebration on 8 December 1915 at the Great Hall of the University of Helsinki , with Sibelius conducting the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra . The program , which The Oceanides opened , also included the two Serenades for violin and orchestra ( Richard <unk> was the soloist ) and , most importantly , the world premiere of the Fifth Symphony , at that time still in four movements . The birthday program was well received , and Sibelius twice repeated it , once at the Finnish National Theatre on 12 December and then again at the University of Helsinki on 18 December . The celebrations continued into the new year , with Sibelius conducting The Oceanides at a concert in Finland 's <unk> on 9 January 1916 . The tone poem was also taken up in the spring by Sibelius 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Armas Järnefelt , who led the Stockholm Opera Orchestra . Robert Kajanus later followed with a performance of The Oceanides in February 1917 . 
 = = Orchestration = = 
 Woodwind : piccolo , 2 flutes , 2 oboes , cor anglais , 2 clarinets ( in B ♭ ) , bass clarinet ( in B ♭ ) , 2 bassoons , contrabassoon 
 Brass : 4 horns ( in F ) , 3 trumpets ( in B ♭ ) , 3 trombones 
 Percussion : 2 timpani , triangle , glockenspiel ( " <unk> " ) 
 Strings : violins , violas , cellos , double basses , 2 harps 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Oceanides is a single @-@ movement tone poem that consists of two main subjects , A and B. The " lively " A section ( in duple meter ) , first introduced by the flutes at the beginning of the piece , can be said to represent the playful activity of the nymphs . Shortly after , solo oboe and clarinet — supported by harp glissandi and strings — introduce the " majestic " B section ( in triple meter ) , which brings to mind the ocean 's depth and expansiveness and perhaps , at least according to Tawaststjerna , " the God of the Sea himself " . Sibelius gradually expands and deepens the two subjects , building up to an enormous ( almost onomatopoeic ) wave @-@ crash climax that Daniel Grimley has characterized as a " point of textural , dynamic and chromatic saturation " . Formally stated by Tawaststjerna , the tone poem structurally proceeds as follows : 
 A ( D major ) 
 B ( modulating , ending in the area of D minor @-@ F major ) 
 A1 ( F major ; A returns , but " the winds begin to gather force " ) 
 B1 ( ending in E ♭ major @-@ G ♭ major ; B returns and " brings the storm nearer " ) 
 C ( modulating and ending on the pedal A , which becomes the dominant of D major ; serves as development by utilizing material from both A and B ; " the oceanides are swamped " by the storm and the swell of the sea 's waves ) 
 A2 ( intermediate D major ; the storm ends and the theme of the oceanides returns ) 
 Coda ( final chord demonstrates " the immutability and vastness of the ocean waters into which the oceanides themselves do not venture " ) 
 Grimley interprets the piece as progressing through " a series of three generative , wave @-@ like cycles " , perhaps best described as placid ocean ( A @-@ B ) , gathering storm ( A1 @-@ B1 ) , and wave @-@ crash climax ( C @-@ A ) . David Hurwitz views the structure of the piece similarly to Tawaststjerna , albeit as A @-@ B @-@ A @-@ B @-@ Coda ( B @-@ A ) , which he terms " sonata form without development " , while Robert Layton considers The Oceanides " something ... of a free rondo " , due to the continued reappearance of the opening flute theme ( A ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical opinion as to the merit of The Oceanides has been overwhelmingly positive , and today the piece is counted among Sibelius 's masterpieces . Following the 1914 premiere , Olin Downes , the American music critic and Sibelius devotee , described the new work as " the finest evocation of the sea which has ever been produced in music " , praising the composer for his " extraordinarily developed feeling for form , proportion and continuity " . Downes furthermore assessed Sibelius 's Norfolk concert as just the third time since 1900 that he had " felt himself in the presence of a genius of world class " ( the other two being Richard Strauss in 1904 and Arturo Toscanini in 1910 ) . An unsigned review in the New York Tribune ( almost certainly penned by critic Henry Krehbiel ) found the new work " fresh and vital , full of imagination and strong in climax " . He continues : 
 Extremists will probably deplore the fact that the composer is still a respecter of form , still a devotee of beauty , still a believer in the potency of melody ; but this is rather a matter for congratulation than regret ... Mr. Sibelius is a fine musical constructionist , an eloquent <unk> and a fine colorist despite his fondness for dark tints . 
 The influential Swedish critic Wilhelm Peterson @-@ Berger , always a thorn in Sibelius 's side and whom the composer had once mocked as " his lordship " , required some three encounters with The Oceanides before warming to the new symphonic poem : after hearing the Stockholm Concert Society under Sibelius in 1923 , Peterson @-@ Berger at last embraced the piece . " The Oceanides was totally and completely different from three years ago under Schnéevoigt " , he wrote . " In this beautiful poem one really heard something of the sound of the Aegean Sea and of Homer " . 
 The composer ( and former Sibelius pupil ) Leevi Madetoja further praised the score upon review , writing in Uusi <unk> in July 1914 that Sibelius , rather than " repeat [ ing ] endlessly " the style of his previous works , had yet again shown his penchant for " renewing himself musically ... always forward , striving for new aims " . The Finnish critic Karl Wasenius ( aka BIS ) , writing in <unk> after the birthday celebration performances of 1915 , wrote approvingly of Sibelius 's " refined mastery " of technique . " Not a single note is wasted on brash effects " , Wasenius continued . " Yet mighty things are still achieved . Sibelius gives us the expanse and magnitude of the ocean , its powerful wave @-@ song but without boastful gestures . He is too noble for that " . In <unk> för musik , Otto Anderssen interpreted Sibelius 's latest compositions ( among them The Oceanides ) as yet another indicator that he was among the most forward @-@ looking modernists : " Sibelius is , I believe , a man of the future ... constantly ahead of his time . Now he stands at the heights where the horizon stretches out over fields which the rest of us cannot yet see " . Cecil Gray , moreover , calls the piece " daring " and applauds the score 's " exceptional complexity and refinement " , challenging critics who see Sibelius as a " primitive artist " . 
 Later commentators also found much to praise in The Oceanides . Guy Rickards describes the tone poem as an " extraordinary score " , magnificent yet subtle in its depiction of the sea 's various moods , but nonetheless " music suffused by light " , while Robert Layton sees the piece as " far more ambitious and highly organized in design " than its immediate predecessor , The Bard . Tawaststjerna notes Sibelius 's success at characterizing the sea : the " playful flutes " that bring the oceanides to life but which feel " alien " in the landscape 's vastness ; the " powerful swell " of wind and water conveyed by oboe and clarinet over undulating strings and harp glissandi ; the sustained wind chord symbolizing the " limitless expanse of the sea " ; and , the " mighty climax " of the storm , the final wave crash which " always exceeds one 's expectations " . The Finnish composer Kalevi Aho has argued in favor of the D ♭ major Yale version , feeling as though the piece loses " something essential " in terms of orchestral color in D major : " The orchestral tone in D ♭ major is veiled , somehow mysterious and impressionistic . Compared with it D major sounds clearer , but also more matter @-@ of @-@ fact " . The conductor Osmo Vänskä also has noted the difference between the two keys , comparing the D ♭ major version to a " large lake " and the D major to a " mighty ocean " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Relation to Impressionism = = = 
 Stylistically , many commentators have described The Oceanides as broadly impressionistic , in particular drawing comparisons with Debussy 's La mer . Harold Johnson , for example , writes that the themes and orchestration of the piece , with muted string tremolos and harp glissandi , " bear more than a superficial resemblance " to Debussy 's style ( he further suggests that Sibelius may have feared his original title , Rondeau der Wellen , was " too close to Debussy " ) . Gray , who calls the orchestral technique in The Oceanides " strikingly different " from anything else in Sibelius 's oeuvre , stresses that the work is far from " derivative " . Rather , he argues that Sibelius builds upon and <unk> the French impressionist technique , making it " entirely his own , and not merely a reflection or distortion of Debussy " . Gray continues : 
 The French masters of the method and their imitators in other countries confined their attention for the most part to an exploitation of the possibilities afforded by the upper reaches of the orchestral register , and to the attainment , principally , of effects of brilliance and luminosity . Debussy 's writing for the lower instruments , and for the double @-@ bases in particular , is as a general rule timid and conventional in comparison with his treatment of the higher instruments , as a result , doubtless , of his exaggerated fear of thickness of texture . In The Oceanides Sibelius has explored the lower depths of the orchestra more thoroughly than any one had previously done , and applied the impressionist method of scoring to the bass instruments , thereby achieving effects of sonority hitherto unknown . 
 While conceding the impressionistic feel of The Oceanides , Nils @-@ Eric <unk> warns that the comparison with Debussy should not be taken too far . Whereas in Debussy 's works " there is seldom anything that grows thematically or undergoes development " ( instead , Debussy marvels the listener with " his mastery in rendering dreamy , passive moods and fleeting , restrained emotions " ) , Sibelius places " too much weight on the logical development of his musical ideas to let ... them flicker out in the empty nothingness of thematic instability " ; in other words , he insists that " atmospheric background swallow neither action nor structure " . Sibelius 's impressionism is thus " far more ... active " than Debussy 's . 
 Other commentators have cautioned against the conclusion that The Oceanides is either an example of impressionism or somehow stylistically indebted to Debussy . Tawaststjerna , for example , believes that the piece 's " anchorage in the major @-@ minor harmony and the relatively sparing use of modal and whole @-@ tone formulae " indicates that the tone poem " belongs to the world of late romanticism " , the impressionistic character of its texture , harmonic vocabulary , and rhythmic patterns notwithstanding . Hurwitz has likewise criticized the " roaring cataract of nonsense in the Sibelius literature " about the influence of the French impressionists on the composer . " Similar musical problems often produce similar solutions " , Hurwitz notes . " In this case , any symphonic portrait of the ocean is bound to rely more on texture and color than on vocal melody , for the simple reason that the ocean is not a person and does not sing ... nor does it lend itself to ... [ an ] anthropomorphic approach ... " . Layton detects the presence of " normal Sibelian procedures and techniques " in The Oceanides , dismissing any serious debt to Debussy . " Its growth from the opening bars onward is profoundly organic " , Layton writes . " And its apparent independence from the rest of Sibelius 's work is manifest only at a superficial level " . 
 = = = Relation to The Bard = = = 
 The Oceanides traces back to sketches for a three @-@ movement suite for orchestra in E ♭ major that Sibelius likely had begun in 1913 ; today , only No. 2 ( Tempo moderato ) and No. 3 ( Allegro ) survive . Andrew Barnett has speculated as to the whereabouts of the lost first movement from the pre @-@ Oceanides suite . Although it is likely the opening number was either misplaced or destroyed by the composer , Barnett argues that four pieces of " circumstantial evidence " indicate the movement has survived — albeit in different form — as the tone poem The Bard , written in 1913 and revised the following year : 
 The first 26 ( numbered ) pages of the manuscript paper for the pre @-@ Oceanides suite are missing ; assuming the first page would have been reserved for the title , this means that the missing first movement likely consisted of 25 pages . Importantly , the fair copy of the final version of The Bard is about the same length ( 26 pages ) . 
 The orchestration of The Bard and the suite 's surviving second and third movements are " virtually identical " to each other , employing a small orchestra " noticeably less extravagant " than either the D ♭ major or D major versions of The Oceanides . 
 Sibelius 's publishers , Breitkopf & Härtel , thought The Bard sounded like the first movement of a suite rather than a stand @-@ alone concert piece . Sibelius vacillated back and forth , at first agreeing to recast the piece as a " fantasy in two parts , or an Intrada and Allegro " , and then as a triptych in June 1913 , before deciding sometime around July or August that The Bard should remain as an independent composition . 
 The thematic material of the suite 's second movement ( which is not found in the final version of The Oceanides ) is closely related to a piece for solo piano called Till trånaden ( To Longing , JS 202 ) . Assuming The Bard was inspired by Finnish poet J. L. Runeberg 's poem of the same name ( toward the end of his life , Sibelius denied any Runeberg connection ) , in the first volume of the poet 's " Collected Works " the title Till trånaden appears a page or two after The Bard , supporting the idea of a link between The Bard and the suite . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Despite its " haunting beauty " , The Oceanides has received fewer recordings than more famous Sibelius tone poems such as En saga , The Swan of Tuonela , and Tapiola . The first recording of The Oceanides was made in 1936 with Sir Adrian Boult conducting the BBC Symphony Orchestra , a performance that is noticeably quicker than average . To date , the only recordings of the Yale version ( 7 : 25 ) and the pre @-@ Oceanides suite ( No. 2 Tempo moderato , 2 : 42 ; No. 3 Allegro , 4 : 35 ) are by Osmo Vänskä and the Lahti Symphony Orchestra under the BIS label ( BIS @-@ CD @-@ 1445 , Rondo of the Waves ) ; both were recorded in January 2003 . The album premiered to considerable acclaim . The Guardian 's Andrew Clements labeled the record the best of 2003 , noting that the early versions of The Oceanides permitted the listener to see " the mechanics of musical genius laid bare " . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 Barnett , Andrew ( 2007 ) . Sibelius . New Haven : Yale University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Gray , Cecil ( 1931 ) . Sibelius . London : Oxford University Press . 
 Griffiths , Paul ( 2005 ) . The Penguin Companion to Classical Music . Penguin Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 Grimley , Daniel ( 2004 ) . " The Tone Poems : Genre , Landscape and Structural Perspective " . In Grimley , Daniel . The Cambridge Companion to Sibelius . Cambridge Companions to Music . London : Cambridge University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Hurwitz , David ( 2007 ) . Sibelius : The Orchestral Works , an Owner 's Manual . Pompton Plains , New Jersey : Amadeus Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Johnson , Harold ( 1959 ) . Jean Sibelius . New York : Alfred A. Knopf . OCLC <unk> . 
 Kilpeläinen , Kari ( 2012 ) . " Introduction " ( pdf ) . In Sibelius , Jean . Aallottaret : eine Tondichtung für großes Orchester ( Early version ) [ op . 73 ] ; Die <unk> - Aallottaret : eine Tondichtung für großes Orchester op . 73 ; Tapiola : Tondichtung für großes Orchester op . 112 . <unk> <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Complete Works ( <unk> ) edited by the National Library of Finland and the Sibelius Society of Finland Series I ( Orchestral works ) Vol . 16 : The Oceanides Op. 73 / Tapiola Op. 112 edited by Kari Kilpeläinen . 
 Layton , Robert ( 1965 ) . Sibelius : The Masters Musicians Series . New York : Schirmer Books . ASIN <unk> . 
 Rickards , Guy ( 1997 ) . Jean Sibelius . London : Phaidon . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , Nils @-@ Eric ( 1954 ) . Jean Sibelius : A Master and His Work . Norman , Oklahoma : University of Oklahoma Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Tawaststjerna , Erik ( 1986 ) . Sibelius : Volume 2 , 1904 – 1914 . ( Robert Layton , English translation ) . London : Faber and Faber . ISBN <unk> . 
 Tawaststjerna , Erik ( 1997 ) . Sibelius : Volume 3 , 1914 – 1957 . ( Robert Layton , English translation ) . London : Faber and Faber . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = = Journal articles = = = = 
 Santos <unk> , Kirsten ( 2014 ) . " Jean Sibelius , Lemminkäinen , Op. 22 ( early versions ) , edited by <unk> Wickland . Jean Sibelius Works I / 12s ( Wiesbaden , Leipzig , Paris : Breitkopf & Härtel , 2013 ) , <unk> + <unk> . € 199 @,@ 50 " . Nineteenth @-@ Century Music Review ( Cambridge University Press ) 11 ( 2 ) : 389 – 393 . Retrieved July 16 , 2015 . ( subscription required ) 
 Stoeckel , Carl ( 1971 ) . " Some Recollections of the Visit of Sibelius to America in 1914 " . Scandinavian Studies ( University of Illinois Press ) 43 ( 1 ) : 53 – 88 . JSTOR <unk> . ( subscription required ) 
 = = = = Websites = = = = 
 Clements , Andrew ( 2003 ) . " Anyone Need a Tune @-@ up ? " . <unk> Retrieved July 15 , 2015 . 
 Crawford , John Martin ( 1888 ) . " The Kalevala " . sacred @-@ <unk> Retrieved July 15 , 2015 . 
 Hepokoski , James ; Dahlström , Fabian . " Sibelius , Jean " . Grove Music Online . Retrieved December 26 , 2015 . ( subscription required ) 
 Sirén , Vesa ( 2005 ) . " The Oceanides " . <unk> Retrieved June 7 , 2015 . 
 <unk> , Mike ( 2015 ) . " Conductor Susanna <unk> to Make Her Cleveland Orchestra Debut " . <unk> Retrieved July 16 , 2015 . 
 = USS North Dakota ( BB @-@ 29 ) = 
 USS North Dakota ( BB @-@ 29 ) was a dreadnought battleship of the United States Navy , the second member of the Delaware class , her only sister ship being Delaware . North Dakota was laid down at the Fore River Shipyard in December 1907 , was launched in November 1908 , and commissioned into the US Navy in April 1910 . She was armed with a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and was capable of a top speed of 21 kn ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) . North Dakota was the first vessel of the US Navy to be named after the 39th state . 
 North Dakota had a peaceful career ; she was present during the United States occupation of Veracruz in 1914 , but did not see action . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , North Dakota remained in the US , training crewmen for the rapidly expanding wartime Navy , and therefore did not see combat . She remained on active duty through the early 1920s , until she was decommissioned under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty in November 1923 , and subsequently converted into a radio @-@ controlled target ship . She served in that capacity until 1930 , when she was replaced in that role by Utah . In 1931 , she was sold for scrapping and thereafter dismantled . 
 = = Design = = 
 North Dakota was 518 ft 9 in ( 158 m ) long overall and had a beam of 85 ft 3 in ( 26 m ) and a draft of 27 ft 3 in ( 8 m ) . She displaced 20 @,@ 380 long tons ( 20 @,@ 707 t ) as designed and up to 22 @,@ 400 long tons ( 22 @,@ 759 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft Curtis steam turbines and fourteen coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 21 knots . The ship had a cruising range of 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) . She had a crew of 933 officers and men . Her bow had an early example of bulbous forefoot . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) / 45 Mark 5 guns in five twin Mark 7 gun turrets on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward . The other three turrets were placed aft of the superstructure . The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ one 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 50 Mark 6 guns mounted on Mark 9 and Mark 12 pedestal mounts in casemates along the side of the hull . As was standard for capital ships of the period , she carried a pair of 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . The main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick , while the armored deck was 2 in ( 51 mm ) thick . The gun turrets had 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick faces and the conning tower had 11 @.@ 5 in ( 292 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 North Dakota was laid down at the Fore River Shipyard in Quincy , Massachusetts on 16 December 1907 . She was launched on 10 November 1908 , and completed on 11 April 1910 . On 8 September 1910 , the ship suffered an oil @-@ tank explosion and fire while at sea . Six men — Chief <unk> August Holtz and Patrick Reid , Chief Machinist 's Mates Thomas Stanton and Karl Westa , Machinist 's Mate First Class Charles C. Roberts , and Watertender Harry Lipscomb — each received the Medal of Honor " for extraordinary heroism in the line of his profession " during the fire . 
 After her commissioning , North Dakota was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet ; she participated in the normal peacetime routine of training cruises , fleet maneuvers , and gunnery drills in the Atlantic and in the Caribbean Sea . On 2 November 1910 , she crossed the Atlantic for the first time , on a good @-@ will visit to Britain and France . Fleet maneuvers followed in the Caribbean the next spring . Midshipmen training cruises for cadets from the Naval Academy occupied North Dakota 's time in the summers of 1912 and 1913 . On 1 January 1913 , she joined the honor escort for the British armored cruiser HMS Natal , which was carrying the remains of Whitelaw Reid , the United States Ambassador to Great Britain . 
 The United States remained neutral when war in Europe broke out in August 1914 ; in the Americas , political disturbances in Mexico during that country 's revolution kept the US Navy occupied that year . North Dakota steamed off Veracruz , where she arrived on 26 April 1914 , five days after American sailors had occupied the city . She cruised the coast of Mexico to protect Americans in the country until October , when she returned to Norfolk , Virginia , arriving on 16 October . As war loomed , the Atlantic Fleet began intensive training to prepare for a possible American entrance into the conflict . North Dakota was conducting gunnery training in Chesapeake Bay when the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 . Unlike her sister Delaware , North Dakota remained in American waters for the duration of the war , and did not see action . She was based out of York River , Virginia and New York City , and was tasked with training gunners and engine room personnel for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . Admiral Hugh Rodman requested that North Dakota remain behind because he did not trust the reliability of her engines . In 1917 , her engines were replaced with new geared turbines , and new fire control equipment was installed . 
 On 13 November 1919 , North Dakota left Norfolk , carrying the remains of the Italian Ambassador to the United States , Vincenzo Macchi di <unk> , who had died 20 October in Washington , DC . The ship stopped in Athens , Constantinople , Valencia , and Gibraltar while cruising the Mediterranean Sea . She thereafter returned to the United States , and participated in fleet maneuvers in the Caribbean in the spring of 1920 . In July 1921 , she was present during the joint Army @-@ Navy bombing tests , where the ex @-@ German battleship SMS Ostfriesland and cruiser SMS Frankfurt were sunk in an air @-@ power demonstration . North Dakota returned to the normal peacetime routine of training exercises , including two midshipmen cruises in the summers of 1922 and 1923 ; the latter cruise went to European waters , where she visited Spain , Scotland , and Scandinavia . 
 In the years immediately following the end of the war , the United States , Britain , and Japan all launched huge naval construction programs . All three countries decided that a new naval arms race would be ill @-@ advised , and so convened the Washington Naval Conference to discuss arms limitations , which produced the Washington Naval Treaty , signed in February 1922 . Under the terms of Article II of the treaty , North Dakota and her sister Delaware were to be scrapped as soon as the new battleships Colorado and West Virginia , then under construction , were ready to join the fleet . North Dakota was decommissioned on 22 November 1923 in Norfolk in accordance with the terms of the treaty . She was disarmed and reclassified as an " unclassified " ship on 29 May 1924 , and thereafter converted into a radio @-@ controlled gunnery target ship . Her turbines were removed for later use aboard the battleship Nevada when she was modernized in the 1930s . She served in that capacity until 1930 , when she was replaced by the battleship Utah . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 7 January 1931 and subsequently sold to the Union Shipbuilding Co of Baltimore on 16 March 1931 for dismantling . 
 = Whatever It Takes ( Lifehouse song ) = 
 " Whatever It Takes " is a song by American alternative band Lifehouse . It is the second single released from their fourth studio album , Who We Are ( 2007 ) . The song was written by Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade and American record producer Jude Cole . When discussing the song , Wade felt that the message of the song dealt with how difficult it could be to be in a relationship . It was first released with the band 's fourth studio album Who We Are on June 18 , 2007 and was then solicited to mainstream radio on November 13 , 2007 . It is a moderately slow pop @-@ rock ballad that has influences of adult alternative . 
 " Whatever It Takes " received positive reviews from critics who commended the song 's chorus . It was a commercial success in the United States and charted in the top 40 on several charts in the country . The song 's music video premiered on Yahoo ! Music on November 15 , 2007 and solely features Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade and has the use of pyrotechnics throughout the video . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The song was written by Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade and American record producer Jude Cole and was produced by Lifehouse and Jude Cole at Ironworks Studio in Los Angeles . In an interview with The San Bernardino Sun , Wade talked about making songs on the album and said , " This time around it was not about having any preconceived notions . It was about letting the tape machine roll and getting the music down spontaneously . " When asked about the message of the song , Wade said , " I think the main message of this song , at least for me personally when I was writing the lyrics , is just how difficult it can be to be in a relationship . Sometimes , you do things to disappoint the other person . Letting someone down and trying to repair a relationship that you feel is kind of slipping through your hands a bit . " " Whatever It Takes " was originally released with the band 's fourth studio album , Who We Are , on June 18 , 2007 and was officially solicited as a single to mainstream radio on November 13 , 2007 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a " moderately slow " tempo of 76 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Wade 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of D4 to the high @-@ note of G5 . The song has a basic chord progression of C / F – C / G – C / F – C / G. 
 " Whatever It Takes " was described as an adult alternative / pop rock song . It was described as a " power ballad " by John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout , who also noted that there was " growth in songwriting and artistry to keep Lifehouse a band well worth following " . 
 Alex Lai of Contactmusic.com described the song as " brooding [ song ] " that features " a huge chorus " and noted how the ballads on the album , including " Whatever It Takes " , were " amongst the best the band has produced " . 
 Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today felt that the song was " commendable for showing the need to remain committed and open to sustain a relationship " . 
 Paul Schultz of The Trades described the song as having " some dandy harmony vocals " and noted how the lyrics of " She said like it or not it 's the way it 's gotta be / You gotta love yourself if you can ever love me " talked about how people try to work out relationships . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Whatever It Takes " debuted at number 97 on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week of February 2 , 2008 . It moved up the chart for several weeks , until peaking at number 33 . The song debuted at number 63 on the Billboard Digital Songs chart and eventually peaked at number 28 after being on the chart for 19 non @-@ consecutive weeks . On the Billboard Pop Songs chart , the song debuted at number 40 for the week of January 26 , 2008 . After moving up the chart for 20 consecutive weeks , the song eventually peaked at number 17 . The song debuted at number 74 on the Billboard Radio Songs chart for the week of March 8 , 2008 and moved around the chart for several weeks until peaking at number 36 . On the Adult Contemporary chart , the song debuted at number 30 for the week of April 26 , 2008 . After being on the chart for 33 consecutive weeks , the song peaked at number 10 for three weeks in a row . " Whatever It Takes " also debuted on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs at number 22 and eventually peaked at number three . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , directed by Frank Borin , premiered on Yahoo ! Music on November 15 , 2007 . Later that day , it was also released to iTunes for digital download . According to the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video , the song features the use of pyrotechnics all throughout the video . When asked about the idea behind the video , Wade said , " The whole concept of this video and just stuff exploding and breaking with my performance to the camera ; it 's almost like my performance is trying to salvage a relationship together . The imagery of stuff breaking and falling apart ; its almost like the whole world shattering around you , but you 're trying to keep it alive . " 
 The video focuses solely on lead singer , Jason Wade , as the rest of the band members do not appear in the video . The video begins by showing Wade sitting alone on a bed , with pictures of him and his girlfriend on the wall . He proceeds to walk around the house , while various things in the room he 's in begin to explode around him , such as the bed and pictures in the bedroom , and various food and drink items in the kitchen . Near the end things begin going in reverse , and everything that had exploded is put back together . The video ends with Wade sitting back on the bed with his girlfriend now lying next to him . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On October 15 , 2007 , Lifehouse performed an acoustic version of " Whatever It Takes " on VH1 . In January 2008 , the band performed the song as part of a set list on the PBS show Soundstage . To help promote Who We Are , Lifehouse also performed " Whatever It Takes " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on February 15 , 2008 , on Mas Vale Tarde on February 21 , 2008 , and on Live with Regis and Kelly on April 1 , 2008 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Jason Wade , Jude Cole 
 Production – Lifehouse , Jude Cole 
 Mixing – Thom Panunzio , Jack Joseph Puig , Florian Ammon , Keith Armstrong , Dean Nelson , Jeff Rothschild 
 Engineering – Florian Ammon , Scott Faircloff , Ross Hogarth , Will <unk> 
 Source : Allmusic 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Zubir Said = 
 Zubir Said <unk> ( 22 July 1907 – 16 November 1987 ) was a Singaporean composer originally from the Minangkabau highlands of Indonesia who composed the national anthem of Singapore , " Majulah Singapura " ( " Onward Singapore " ) . A self @-@ taught musician , Zubir also worked as a score arranger and songwriter for Cathay @-@ Keris Film Productions for 12 years , composing numerous songs for the company 's Malay films . He is believed to have written about 1 @,@ 500 songs , with less than 10 % of them ever recorded . 
 It has been said that Zubir was viewed by many as a composer with a " true Malay soul " , as his songs were interwoven with historical messages and Malay truisms , and that he and his Minangkabau contemporaries awoke a wave of national consciousness in the 1950s . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The eldest child in a family of three boys and five girls , Zubir Said was born on 22 July 1907 in Bukittinggi ( formerly known as Fort De Kock ) in the Minangkabau highlands of West Sumatra , Indonesia . His mother died when he was seven years old . He attended a Dutch school but had no interest in academic studies . His involvement with music started when he was introduced to the <unk> music system by a teacher . A primary @-@ school classmate subsequently taught him how to make and play a flute , and in middle school , he learned to play the guitar and drums from fellow students and the keroncong group he was involved in . 
 = = Move to Singapore = = 
 In 1928 at the age of 21 , Zubir went to Singapore to make a living as a musician , taking up the suggestion of a sailor friend who had described the island as a place of " glittering lights , <unk> <unk> [ coffee with milk ] and butter " . This was done in the face of objections from his village chieftain father , Mohamad Said bin <unk> , who believed music to be against religion . Zubir 's first job was as a musician with City Opera , a bangsawan or Malay opera troupe . He became the troupe 's bandleader . Thereafter , in 1936 , he joined the recording company His Master 's Voice . Zubir went to Java to marry <unk> <unk> <unk> , a keroncong singer , in 1938 ; they returned to Zubir 's home town of Bukittinggi in 1941 just before the outbreak of World War II . Coming back to Singapore in 1947 , Zubir worked as a part @-@ time photographer with the Utusan Melayu newspaper while composing and performing music and songs . In 1949 he took up the post of orchestra conductor at Shaw Brothers ' Malay Film Production , and in 1952 he joined Cathay @-@ Keris Film Productions as a score arranger and songwriter for the company 's Malay films , including <unk> Pontianak ( Blood of Pontianak , 1958 ) and <unk> Datuk Merah ( Grandchildren of Datuk Merah , 1963 ) . In 1957 , he received his first public recognition when his songs were performed at the Victoria Theatre . 
 = = " Majulah Singapura " = = 
 Singapore , then a British colony , had been conferred city status by a royal charter from King George VI in 1951 . In 1958 , the City Council of Singapore approached Zubir to compose a song for the city to be titled " Majulah Singapura " , which was a motto to be displayed in the Victoria Theatre after its renovation . Zubir 's song , " Majulah Singapura " ( " Onward Singapore " ) , was first performed by the Singapore Chamber Ensemble during the grand finale of a concert staged in the Victoria Theatre on 6 September 1958 to celebrate its official reopening . When Singapore attained self @-@ government in 1959 , the Government felt that a national anthem was needed to unite the different races in Singapore . It decided that the City Council 's song , which was already popular , would serve this purpose . After some revisions were made to the song , it was adopted by the Legislative Assembly on 11 November 1959 , and on 30 November the Singapore State Arms and Flag and National Anthem Ordinance 1959 was passed . This statute regulated the use and display of the State Arms and State Flag and the performance of the National Anthem . " Majulah Singapura " was presented to the nation on 3 December at the launch of " Loyalty Week " , replacing the colonial anthem " God Save the Queen " . After Singapore 's full independence from Malaysia on 9 August 1965 , " Majulah Singapura " was formally adopted as the Republic 's national anthem . In a 1984 oral history interview , to sum up his philosophy when composing the anthem , Zubir cited the Malay proverb " Di mana <unk> <unk> , di situ <unk> <unk> " ( " You should hold up the sky of the land where you live " ) . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1962 , Zubir 's songs for the movie Dang <unk> won an award at the Ninth Asian Film Festival in Seoul , South Korea . He continued working for Cathay @-@ Keris Film Productions until he retired in 1964 , composing numerous songs for Malay films . 
 He also gave music lessons , and often had other music artists visiting him to talk about music and asking for advice . His third and youngest daughter <unk> Sri Dr. Rohana Zubir , a retired lecturer with the University of Malaya , recalled how the family home in Singapore was always filled with music . He was the heart of the conversation , very enthused and willing to share pearls of wisdom so that others could benefit from his work . This generosity extended to other areas of his life . He helped his own family in Sumatra and families in Singapore he had " adopted " , sending them medicine and other items with what little he could afford , even though his own family was not well off at the time . 
 Zubir said he was never driven by money . He believed that money was essential for his survival and to look after the family , and that the money he earned from giving music lessons and his compositions for the film world sufficed . He valued honesty and sincerity in his work and placed importance on purity and originality , whether in his music , lyrics or style of singing . He stopped composing songs for the film company when he was upset about the management 's decision to cut production costs by borrowing existing music to be used for dubbing on to the background music of some films . 
 Zubir died at the age of 80 on 16 November 1987 at Joo Chiat Place in Singapore , survived by four daughters and a son . Despite his legacy , Zubir left only S $ 20 @,@ 000 to his name and the family had no home to call its own . In 1990 Zubir 's life and passion as a musician were documented in a book titled Zubir Said : His Songs , and in 2004 a S $ 20 @,@ 000 bronze bust of a bespectacled Zubir was installed in Gallery 6 of the Malay Heritage Centre which pays tribute to icons in Malay arts and culture . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 In recognition of his contributions to the State , Zubir was conferred the Sijil <unk> ( Certificate of Honour ) on 16 March 1963 and the Bintang Bakti Masyarakat ( Public Service Star ) in the same year . In 1971 , he received the <unk> Seni ( cultural medallion ) award from eight Malay cultural organisations , and the Asean Cultural and Communications Award in 1987 . He also received a Certificate of Commendation from the Amalgamated Union of Public Employees ( <unk> ) for composing the <unk> song . In 1995 , Zubir was posthumously given a Lifetime Achievement Award by the Composers and Authors Society of Singapore ( COMPASS ) . 
 On 8 May 2009 the Acting Minister for Information , Communications and the Arts , Rear Admiral ( NS ) Lui Tuck Yew , announced that the address of the permanent campus for the School of the Arts ( Sota ) near The Cathay will be 1 Zubir Said Drive , in honour of the late composer . 
 = = Music = = 
 Zubir is primarily remembered for composing Singapore 's national anthem , " Majulah Singapura " ( " Onward Singapore " ) . The Malay lyrics exhort Singaporeans to " progress towards happiness together " ( " Sama @-@ sama <unk> <unk> " ) so that their " noble aspiration [ s ] bring Singapore success " ( " Cita @-@ <unk> <unk> yang <unk> / Berjaya Singapura " ) , and to " unite in a new spirit " ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> / Dengan <unk> yang baru " ) . 
 In 1956 , he also submitted three song compositions to the Malayan – later Malaysian – Government for consideration for their national anthem . However , a different song , " Negaraku " , was selected in the end . 
 Zubir is also remembered for his composition " <unk> <unk> " ( " May You Achieve Happiness " ) which was aimed at primary @-@ school students , advising them to work hard for their future . It has become a Children 's Day song for Singaporean children , and is thus often sung in schools on 1 October . It is also performed during the Singapore Youth Festival . 
 Zubir is estimated to have written about 1 @,@ 500 songs , including those written for Cathay @-@ Keris Film Productions ' Malay films in the 1950s and 1960s . Less than 10 % of these songs were recorded . On 22 August 2007 , Zubir 's family signed an agreement with Universal Music in Malaysia for the latter to manage his works . The copyright in the songs remains with his family . The idea to do so came after his daughter Dr. Rohana met Sandy Monteiro , senior vice @-@ president ( Asean ) of the Universal Music Publishing Group in 2005 through Monteiro 's wife , who was a good friend of hers . Dr. Rohana was reported as saying : " It is time to hand over the songs in order to revive them two decades after my father 's passing . I hope to ensure that his songs continue to live in the hearts of young artists in Malaysia . " 
 It is said that Zubir was viewed by many as a composer with a " true Malay soul " , as his songs , traditional but yet modern and patriotic , were interwoven with historical messages and Malay truisms . Journalist A. Samad Ismail commented that Zubir and his Minangkabau contemporaries awoke a wave of national consciousness in the 1950s . 
 = = Works = = 
 Zubir Said ( 1965 ) , <unk> Musik [ Reading Music Scores ] , Singapore : Zubir Said ( in Malay ) . 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 " The quiet man who makes lasting music " , The Straits Times ( Bilingual ) , p. iv , 18 October 1983 . 
 Lim , K.K. ( 17 November 1987 ) , " Composer of our National Anthem dies " , The Straits Times , p . 1 . 
 " Mr <unk> : Shy , humble and well @-@ loved " , The Straits Times , p . 1 , 17 November 1987 . 
 S. Rajaratnam ( 9 March 1990 ) , " Majulah Singapura has been sung patriotically for 32 years " , The Straits Times ( republished on Headlines , Lifelines ) . 
 " Audience turns misty @-@ eyed at tribute to Zubir " , The Straits Times , p . 24 , 10 March 1990 . 
 Tan , <unk> Yun ( 26 July 1991 ) , " Few understand lyrics of National Anthem " , The Straits Times ( republished on Headlines , Lifelines ) . 
 Kor , Kian Beng ; Ching , Leong ( 4 December 2006 ) , " HIS @-@ <unk> : SM Goh suggests naming streets and buildings after pioneers , philanthropists , and social leaders of modern Singapore " , The New Paper . 
 Narayanan , Sheela ( 22 August 2007 ) , " Universal Music to publish Zubir Said 's works : ' Majulah ' with his unrecorded music " , The New Paper . 
 " Imagine singing <unk> instead of Negaraku " , New Straits Times , 22 August 2007 , archived from the original on 24 August 2007 . 
 " <unk> Zubir Said <unk> " [ Universal acts as agent for all of Zubir Said 's copyrights ] , Sin Chew Jit Poh ( in Chinese ) , 22 August 2007 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Sulaiman <unk> ; Abdul Ghani Hamid ( 1988 ) , <unk> Pak Zubir [ Remembering " Father " Zubir ] , Singapore : Pustaka Melayu , ISBN 981 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 ( in Malay ) . 
 = Free Free = 
 " Free Free " is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Ami Suzuki for her sixth studio album , Dolce ( 2008 ) . Featuring Japanese record producer and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata , the track was released through Avex Trax as a double a @-@ side single with her fellow recording , " Super Music Maker " , on 22 August 2007 . " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " were both written and produced by Nakata . Backed by synthesizers and keyboards , " Free Free " incorporates a new genre called " <unk> " which Nakata created when producing the song by combining 1980s pop music , house music , disco and electronic dance music within its sound . The lyrical interpretation of the track was based on themes of erotica and freedom . 
 " Free Free " was received well by music critics , with some of them praising the song 's instrumentation and highlighting it as a stand @-@ out track of Suzuki 's career . Charting together with " Super Music Maker " , the physical single reached number 32 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , where it has spent two weeks . " Free Free " sold over 10 @,@ 000 units in Japan ; this marks her highest @-@ selling recording since 2006 and her last single to date to reach this limit . An accompanying music video for " Free Free " was shot by Takashiro Akihisa and features Suzuki lying on the floor of an empty room full of LED lamps and flickering television . 
 To promote " Free Free " , Suzuki hosted a release party event at Tower Records in Shibuya . She also performed the single on her 2007 A @-@ Nation concert . Furthermore , Suzuki went on singing other songs from her discography at various other venues and gigs . Both the audio and the music video of " Free Free " have been included on Suzuki 's greatest hits compilation , Ami Selection ( 2011 ) , and on her greatest hits extended play , Ami Suzuki Best Selection ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 After the release of her album , <unk> ( 2007 ) , Suzuki performed in various Japanese night clubs and her staff that were present at the time of her performances noticed her engagement to club music and tried to find a producer who had a background in electronic dance music and eventually contacted Nakata . He accepted an offer to produce two tracks for Dolce . Concerning the production , Suzuki commented that " [ she ] [ wants ] to put out a whole new view of the world " . 
 " Free Free " was written , produced , composed and arranged by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . It is his first single in collaboration with Suzuki under the alias " Ami Suzuki joins Yasutaka Nakata " ; " Free Free " is Suzuki 's first single to be handled by Nataka . The track was recorded in early 2007 at Avex Studio in Tokyo , Japan , and was co @-@ distributed by Nakata 's label , Contemode , owned by Avex and Yamaha . For the song , Suzuki 's vocals have been processed with autotune and vocoder . " Free Free " is influenced by 1980s pop music , house music , disco and electronic dance music . While producing the track , Nakata created a new genre called " <unk> " . " Free Free " features lyrics written in both English and Japanese , making the track Suzuki 's first English @-@ language release . The lyrical interpretation of the song was based on themes of erotica and freedom , where Suzuki commented that " the theme [ of the track ] is to sound erotic " 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 " Free Free " was released as a double a @-@ side single with " Super Music Maker " for digital download and physical release on 22 August 2007 by Avex as the lead single for Suzuki 's sixth studio album , Dolce ( 2008 ) . It was released in three different formats : stand @-@ alone CD single , CD / DVD bundle and digital download . The CD and digital release features an extended edit of " Free Free " and the radio edit of " Super Music Maker " . The DVD release is registered under NTSC Region 2 and contains the official music video for the single . An exclusive vinyl was made available for purchase in Japan through Rhythm Republic on 29 August 2007 ; it features an extended version of " Free Free " and the original mix of " Super Music Maker " . Both songs were co @-@ copyrighted and published through the Japanese Society for Rights of Authors , Composers and Publishers . 
 The cover sleeve for " Free Free " was photographed by Takashiro Akihisa , who also directed the accompanying music video for the song . The DVD and CD releases of " Free Free " feature two separate cover artworks ; the first portrays Suzuki bending over and the latter one Suzuki kneeling down . Both artworks were shot in an empty room full of LED lamps . An editor for the website <unk> has compared the cover sleeve for " Free Free " to the artworks of Japanese recording artist Koda Kumi . He additionally described the shoot for the cover art of " Free Free " as " sexy " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Free Free " was met with positive reviews from selected music critics and reviewers . CD Journal was positive towards the track , labelling its sound as " 80s nostalgic " , " ultra @-@ pop super cool " and erotic . On Suzuki 's artist page at the Japanese HMV website , both " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " were listed as " masterpiece " formats from Suzuki 's musical discography . An editorial review on the website labelled Nakata 's <unk> with Suzuki as " <unk> " . They went on to praise the cover sleeve for Suzuki 's " great sense of fashion " . Japanese online retail store Technique gave the song a positive review , labelling it catchy and dreamy . 
 Charting together as one single , " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " entered and peaked at number 32 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart on 3 September 2007 with over 5 @,@ 900 units sold , this being Suzuki 's highest entry since her single , " Like a Love ? " ( 2006 ) . Falling outside the top fifty in its second week , " Free Free / Super Music Maker " stayed in the top 100 for four weeks , this marking her longest charting single since " Like a Love ? " which only lasted for five weeks . Her following singles , " One " and " Can 't Stop the Disco " , later tied with " Free Free / Super Music Maker " for the lasted weeks on the chart . " Free Free / Super Music Maker " was Suzuki 's first top forty hit inside the 2007 era and sold over 10 @,@ 000 units , her highest @-@ selling single since " Like a Love ? " which sold 16 @,@ 000 units . To date , it is Suzuki 's final recording to reach the 10 @,@ 000 sale limit . The double @-@ single " Free Free / Super Music Maker " is ranked at number 21 on Suzuki 's sales profile on Oricon . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Free Free " took one day to shoot from the morning until 3am the following day . Particularly , Suzuki felt that the video was cute and sexy . The making of the video has been included on the DVD edition of Dolce . The clip premiered on Japan 's Yahoo ! Music , while a short edit of the music video was uploaded on 2 September 2010 onto Avex 's YouTube channel . For further promotion , a DVD featuring the music video for " Free Free " has been made available for purchase in Japan . 
 The music video opens with Suzuki 's , Nakata 's and the song 's name being zoomed out onto Suzuki . The next scene shows her sitting down on a multi @-@ coloured chair , being surrounded by LED lights and flickering television ; some cut scenes feature Nakata . Subsequently , Suzuki starts singing the song while lying on top of a neon surface . Next , the chorus start with all the LED lights changing colors . Throughout the video , there are several mirrored shots of Suzuki lying down , for which green screening has been used to clone her five times and dance to the song . During the shoot , Suzuki commented that the music video portrayed a more sexy and erotic image in <unk> with Nakata 's previous works ; she felt that the image suited the song and its composition . 
 = = Live performances and other usage = = 
 Suzuki performed " Free Free " alongside her fellow single , " Delightful " ( 2005 ) , at her 2007 A @-@ Nation Concert and went on to sing at the 2009 A @-@ Nation Concert , for which she included " Free Free " , " Kiss Kiss Kiss " , " Be Together " and " Delightful " . Suzuki has performed " Free Free " on several other occasions and events ; she sung it at the Countdown Birthday Live in 2008 , at a launch party at Tower Records , at Shinjuku on 26 August 2007 , at a launch for " One " at Club Asia on 15 July 2008 , at the 2007 Kyoto Summer <unk> at the Passage Summer Festival 2007 . The music video for " Free Free " and its official audio were featured on Suzuki 's greatest hits compilation album , Ami Selection ( 2011 ) . The song was also used for Suzuki 's greatest hits extended play , Ami Suzuki Best Selection ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the promotional CD single . 
 Management 
 Recorded by Nakata at Avex Studio , Tokyo , Japan . 
 Mixed by Nakata at Avex Studio , Tokyo , Japan . 
 Avex Trax management for Suzuki ; Contemode management for Nakata . 
 Personnel 
 Ami Suzuki – vocals , background vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – songwriting , composition , production , arrangement , management 
 Takashiro Akihisa – music video director 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Capesthorne Hall = 
 Capesthorne Hall is a country house near the village of <unk> , Cheshire , England . The house and its private chapel were built in the early 18th century , replacing an earlier hall and chapel nearby . They were built to Neoclassical designs by William Smith and ( probably ) his son Francis . Later in the 18th century , the house was extended by the addition of an orangery and a drawing room . In the 1830s the house was remodelled by Edward Blore ; the work included the addition of an extension and a frontage in Jacobean style , and joining the central block to the service wings . In about 1837 the orangery was replaced by a large conservatory designed by Joseph Paxton . In 1861 the main part of the house was virtually destroyed by fire . It was rebuilt by Anthony Salvin , who generally followed Blore 's designs but made modifications to the front , rebuilt the back of the house in Jacobean style , and altered the interior . There were further alterations later in the 19th century , including remodelling of the Saloon . During the Second World War the hall was used by the Red Cross , but subsequent deterioration prompted a restoration . 
 The hall is built in brick with ashlar dressings and slate roofs , and is a Grade II * listed building . It has a long entrance front consisting of a three @-@ storey central block with lateral wings , each of which has two four @-@ storey turrets . Outside this on each side are two @-@ storey service blocks that project forward , forming a three @-@ sided entrance forecourt . The ground @-@ floor public rooms include a drawing room , a dining room , and a sculpture gallery . The bedrooms , dressing rooms and another gallery are on the first floor . The hall stands in grounds containing gardens and parkland that includes a lake . A particularly notable listed structure in the grounds is the Grade II * listed private chapel , also designed by William Smith , that is contemporaneous with the hall , together with its elaborate Grade II listed gates and gate piers . The bridge over the lake , an icehouse and a lodge are also listed . The earthworks of the previous hall and chapel and a deserted medieval village in the grounds are together designated as a scheduled ancient monument . 
 Today the hall , chapel and grounds are privately owned by the Bromley @-@ Davenport family . They are open to the public at advertised times , and are used for special events . They are also available to be hired for purposes such as weddings and corporate events . 
 = = History = = 
 The manor of Capesthorne was held by the Capesthorne family until 1386 , when it passed to the Ward family . The house previously on the site was 290 metres ( 317 yd ) to the west , with a chapel 25 metres ( 27 yd ) to its north , its site being marked by a brick column in the grounds . In 1719 John Ward engaged William Smith to design a new house and chapel on a different site . The first parts of the new house to be built were two lateral detached wings , one for domestic offices , and the other for stables and a coach house . The main block of the house followed later . William Smith died in 1724 and it is thought that the main block was designed by his younger brother , Francis Smith . The house was in Neoclassical style , with a front of seven bays , the middle three bays breaking forward under a pediment , and was built in brick with stone dressings . The house was two rooms deep , with a central entrance hall , and a corridor leading from each side . 
 John Ward died in 1748 and as he had no male heir the manor passed to the Davenport family by the marriage of his daughter Penelope to Davies Davenport . Davies Davenport 's grandson ( also called Davies Davenport ) improved and extended the house , with the addition of a single @-@ storey orangery to the southwest , and a drawing room to the northwest . When he died , his son , Edward Davies Davenport commissioned Edward Blore to remodel the house . Between 1837 and 1839 Blore joined the lateral wings to the main part of the house by adding new rooms at the sides . He also widened the wings , and built new stables and service courts to the north and south , creating a symmetrical structure . The main part of the house was recessed and , together with the wings , a large forecourt was created . The front of the house itself was refronted in Jacobean style . <unk> windows replaced sash windows , and a ground floor loggia , and turrets with ogee caps and shaped gables were added . In the centre of the house was a raised attic with a clock and a bellcote . The rest of the building retained its Neoclassical features . The orangery was replaced with a large conservatory designed by Joseph Paxton , and this led directly to the family pew in the chapel . Blore also designed entrance lodges . 
 In 1861 , when the house was owned by Edward 's son Arthur Henry Davenport , most of the central part of the house was destroyed by fire , leaving only the wings , the loggia , and part of the front wall . Blore had by then retired and Anthony Salvin was commissioned to rebuild the house . He kept generally to Blore 's plans , but gave the entrance front three shaped gables rather than the central attic . At the rear of the house the garden front was rebuilt in Jacobean rather than Neoclassical style . Internally , Salvin changed the proportions of the storeys , making the ground floor ceilings higher . Arthur Henry Davenport died in 1867 before the rebuilding had been completed , and the house passed to William Bromley @-@ Davenport . During his ownership the saloon was remodelled in 1879 as was the chapel in 1884 . In the Second World War the house was used by the Red Cross . By this time the fabric of the house had deteriorated , but it has since been restored . The house continues to be owned by the Bromley @-@ Davenport family . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 Capesthorne Hall is constructed in red brick with ashlar dressings and has a slate roof . Its plan is symmetrical and consists of a central block in three storeys with cellars , and two @-@ storey lateral blocks protruding forward to form three sides of a forecourt . The middle part of the central block is in seven bays , with a colonnade consisting of segmental arches . These are carried on Tuscan columns with circular panels in the spandrels , and keystones decorated with diamond rustication . Behind this are seven mullioned and transomed windows , and there are similar windows in the middle storey . Above these is a cornice and three shaped gables containing mullioned windows . The gables have stone copings and finials , and contain heraldic panels . Flanking the middle part of the central block are three @-@ storey slightly projecting wings . They have one central bay and lateral four @-@ storey turrets . The central bays contain two @-@ storey canted bay windows , above which are pierced stone parapets , three @-@ light mullioned windows , and shaped gables with pierced ogee finials . The turrets have bands between the stages , single @-@ light windows and ogee caps with finials . 
 Projecting forward on each side of the central block are two @-@ storey service blocks . The façades facing the forecourt are similar , with semicircular arches in front of them , that on the left side being blocked , and the arch on the right side forming a porte @-@ cochère . Behind the arches are seven @-@ bay fronts , the central bay projecting slightly and containing a door with a fanlight . Above this is an oriel window on consoles over which is a shaped gable . The other windows in both storeys are sashes . The outward facing fronts are similar to the forecourt fronts , except that the end and centre bays protrude and are gabled . Between the gables are balustraded parapets . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 In rebuilding the interior of the house after the fire of 1861 , Salvin followed Blore 's design in some of the rooms , and in others he used his own designs . The Entrance Hall very much follows Blore 's design . It has a panelled ceiling with pendants , and the windows contain 19th @-@ century stained glass arranged by <unk> , featuring the arms of the Davenport and Ward families . The chimney piece was added by Salvin , and contains the figures of a <unk> and an Atlas that were formerly part of the reading desk of the two @-@ decker pulpit in the chapel . The Sculpture Gallery , also by Blore , also has a panelled ceiling , and consists of a corridor along the sides of which are arched niches . Most of the sculptures in the gallery were collected by Edward Davies Davenport , and consist of ancient copies of famous Greek sculptures . There is also the face of Charles James Fox by Joseph <unk> , and a pair of Dancing Girls by Antonio Canova . The Saloon is by Salvin , and again has a panelled ceiling . The room features a large fireplace with an overmantel in the early Renaissance style , numerous family portraits , and vases collected on the overseas trips . The Drawing Room , designed by Salvin , is on the garden front , and features a panelled ceiling with pendants , and a floral frieze . In the room are twin fireplaces made from Coade stone , dated to 1789 , which originally belonged to the family 's house in Belgravia , London . Both are carved , one depicting Faith , Hope and Charity , and the other the Aldobrandini Marriage . 
 The State Dining Room is very much as Blore designed it , and has a panelled ceiling with pendants , and wooden panelling up to the line of the dado . The room contains a large fireplace in early Renaissance style , made from white and variegated marble , and containing the family arms . Also in the room are sculptures by Joseph Wilton . The Staircase Hall is by Salvin , and is divided from the Sculpture Gallery by three semicircular archways . On the walls are portraits of the Bromley family . The staircase has a wrought iron balustrade decorated with acanthus and roundels with the crests of the <unk> and the Davenports . The Davenport crest consists of a felon with a rope around his neck ; in these roundels the felon has the face of William Gladstone , a political opponent of the Davenports . There are four further ground floor rooms , all by Salvin . 
 The Library has a panelled ceiling with diamond motifs . It contains imitation Jacobean panelling and a Jacobean fireplace from the now @-@ demolished Marton Hall . The Study also has a panelled ceiling , and in this case includes a circular central motif . The Private Dining Room contains a 19th @-@ century marble fireplace , and the Ground Floor Bedroom has a coffered ceiling and a Victorian @-@ baroque fireplace . 
 The first floor landing has archways similar to those on the ground floor . Leading from this is the Upper Gallery , which contains documents relating to the genealogy of the Bromley @-@ Davenports . Beyond this is the Dorothy Davenport Room and its dressing room . The room gets its name from Dorothy Davenport ( 1562 – 1639 ) . She spent 26 years in creating the needlework that is mounted on the Jacobean bed in the room . The work includes the dates of its progress , and depicts , among other subjects , the Garden of Eden and Man 's Fall from Paradise . The other rooms on the first floor include the State Bedroom , which contains valuable items of furniture , such as a commode by Boulle , and a pair of <unk> , the State Dressing Room , the American Room , which is decorated with items from Philadelphia , and the Yellow Room , which was the bedroom of Sir William Bromley @-@ Davenport who died in 1949 . In the passage outside the American Room is a portrait of the philosopher Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau by Allan Ramsay . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The hall is surrounded by a landscaped park that includes woodland , parkland , lawns , lakes with a boat house , and an arboretum containing 18th @-@ century maple trees . In the grounds are a number of structures of notability and interest . 
 = = = Chapel and chapel gates = = = 
 The chapel was designed by William Smith , and was remodelled in 1887 . It is dedicated to the Holy Trinity . The chapel is built in brick on a stone plinth with stone dressings and a slate roof , and consists of a three @-@ bay nave and an apsidal chancel , with a bell turret . The doorway and the windows are round @-@ headed , and around the top of the chapel is a cornice and a balustrade with square piers capped by <unk> ball finials . Inside the chapel the original box pews were replaced by facing pews in college style . At the west end is a raised family pew . On the walls are terracotta panels by George <unk> . The reredos is in mosaic with an alabaster surround , it was made by Salviati and is loosely based on Giotto 's Dormition . To the southwest of the chapel are gates and gate piers . The gate piers date from the 20th century , and the gates from about 1750 . The piers are in brick on stone plinths and have stepped stone caps with ball finials . The gates are in wrought iron and were made in Milan . They are wide with arched centres and contain Rococo panels depicting Saint Andrew with his cross . 
 = = = Other structures = = = 
 The bridge crossing the lake dates from about 1843 , and is constructed in brick with stone dressings . It consists of five segmental arches , with abutments running down to the banks . The arches have rusticated voussoirs and keystones , and above the voussoirs are hood moulds . Between the arches are brick pilasters . Along the top of the bridge is a stone balustrade with square piers . Also in the grounds is an icehouse dating from the 18th or early 19th century . It is built in brick and consists of a circular domed chamber . From the arched entrance a barrel vaulted passage leads through a rectangular opening into the chamber . Also in the grounds is a summer house that was formerly the bell turret of the chapel . It carries a gold flag with the date 1722 . The lodge at the north entrance to the grounds was designed by Blore and dates from about 1843 . It is built in brick with ashlar dressings and has a felt roof . The lodge consists of a three @-@ storey square tower containing two @-@ light mullioned windows . At the top of the tower is an entablature with a panelled parapet and pierced ogee finials on the corners . The roof is ogee @-@ shaped with a ball finial and a flagpole . 
 = = = Earthworks = = = 
 Although the earlier hall and chapel have long been demolished , earthworks remaining from them are still present , as are those of a nearby deserted medieval village . The platform for the chapel , which measures about 20 metres ( 65 @.@ 6 ft ) by 6 metres ( 19 @.@ 7 ft ) , is still present . There are extensive earthworks on the site of the hall . To the east of these are the platforms and enclosures of about seven medieval houses , and associated with these is evidence of a medieval field system . All these earthworks are designated together as a scheduled ancient monument . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 The hall , together with the wall surrounding the entrance court , and the chapel are recorded in the National Heritage List for England as designated Grade II * listed buildings . Grade II * is the middle of the three grades of listed buildings and is applied to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . The gate and gate piers associated with the chapel are listed at Grade II , as are the bridge crossing the lake , the ice house , and the north lodge . Grade II is applied to " buildings of national importance and special interest " . 
 De Figueiredo and Treuherz note that when Salvin restored the two wings that each contain two turrets on the front of the hall , he left their tops open on two sides , so that they appear solid from the front but not from the back . Hartwell et al in the Buildings of England series , commenting on the appearance of the hall , say " but it is all front " . They note " the thinness of the end parts and the hollowness of the sham towers " and state that the " back is without drama " , and conclude that " it is a grand concept executed lamely " . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Capesthorne Hall is a member of the Historic Houses Association , and the hall , chapel and gardens are open to the general public on advertised times between March and October , for which there is an admission charge , and refreshments are available for visitors . The hall and gardens are available to hire for weddings and for corporate events . A programme of events is organised in the hall and in the grounds , where there is a caravan park . 
 = Golding Bird = 
 Golding Bird ( 9 December 1814 – 27 October 1854 ) was a British medical doctor and a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians . He became a great authority on kidney diseases and published a comprehensive paper on urinary deposits in 1844 . He was also notable for his work in related sciences , especially the medical uses of electricity and electrochemistry . From 1836 , he lectured at Guy 's Hospital , a well @-@ known teaching hospital in London and now part of King 's College London , and published a popular textbook on science for medical students called : Elements of Natural Philosophy . 
 Having developed an interest in chemistry while still a child , largely through self @-@ study , Bird was far enough advanced to deliver lectures to his fellow pupils at school . He later applied this knowledge to medicine and did much research on the chemistry of urine and of kidney stones . In 1842 , he was the first to describe <unk> , a condition which leads to the formation of a particular kind of stone . 
 Bird was innovative in the field of the medical use of electricity , designing much of his own equipment . In his time , electrical treatment had acquired a bad name in the medical profession through its widespread use by quack practitioners . Bird made efforts to oppose this quackery , and was instrumental in bringing medical electrotherapy into the mainstream . He was quick to adopt new instruments of all kinds ; he invented a new variant of the Daniell cell in 1837 and made important discoveries in electrometallurgy with it . He was not only innovative in the electrical field , but he also designed a flexible stethoscope , and in 1840 published the first description of such an instrument . 
 A devout Christian , Bird believed Bible study and prayer were just as important to medical students as their academic studies . He endeavoured to promote Christianity among medical students and encouraged other professionals to do likewise . To this end , Bird was responsible for the founding of the Christian Medical Association , although it did not become active until after his death . Bird had lifelong poor health and died at the age of 39 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Bird was born in Downham , Norfolk , England , on 9 December 1814 . His father ( also named Golding Bird ) had been an officer in the Inland Revenue in Ireland , and his mother , <unk> , was Irish . He was precocious and ambitious , but childhood rheumatic fever and endocarditis left him with poor posture and lifelong frail health . He received a classical education when he was sent with his brother Frederic to stay with a clergyman in Wallingford , where he developed a lifelong habit of self @-@ study . From the age of 12 , he was educated in London , at a private school that did not promote science and provided only a classical education . Bird , who seems to have been far ahead of his teachers in science , gave lectures in chemistry and botany to his fellow pupils . He had four younger siblings , of whom his brother Frederic also became a physician and published on botany . 
 In 1829 , when he was 14 , Bird left school to serve an apprenticeship with the apothecary William Pretty in Burton Crescent , London . He completed it in 1833 and was licensed to practise by the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries at Apothecaries ' Hall in 1836 . He received this licence without examination because of the reputation he had gained as a student at Guy 's , the London teaching hospital where he had become a medical student in 1832 while still working at his apprenticeship . At Guy 's he was influenced by Thomas Addison , who recognised his talents early on . Bird was an ambitious and very capable student . Early in his career he became a Fellow of the Senior Physical Society , for which a thesis was required . He received prizes for medicine , obstetrics , and ophthalmic surgery at Guy 's and the silver medal for botany at Apothecaries ' Hall . Around 1839 to 1840 , he worked on breast disease at Guy 's as an assistant to Sir Astley Cooper . 
 Bird graduated from the University of St Andrews with an MD in 1838 and an MA in 1840 while continuing to work in London . St Andrews required no residence or examination for the MD . Bird obtained his degree by submitting testimonials from qualified colleagues , which was common practice at the time . Once qualified in 1838 , at the age of 23 , he entered general practice with a surgery at 44 Seymour Street , Euston Square , London , but was unsuccessful at first because of his youth . In the same year , however , he became physician to the Finsbury Dispensary , a post he held for five years . By 1842 , he had an income of £ 1000 a year from his private practice . Adjusted for inflation , this amounts to a spending power of about £ 85 @,@ 000 now . At the end of his career , his income was just under £ 6000 . He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1840 , and a fellow in 1845 . 
 Bird lectured on natural philosophy , medical botany and urinary pathology from 1836 to 1853 at Guy 's . He lectured on materia medica at Guy 's from 1843 to 1853 and at the Royal College of Physicians from 1847 to 1849 . He also lectured at the Aldersgate School of Medicine . Throughout his career , he published extensively , not only on medical matters , but also on electrical science and chemistry . 
 Bird became the first head of the electricity and galvanism department at Guy 's in 1836 , under the supervision of Addison , since Bird did not graduate until 1838 . In 1843 , he was appointed assistant physician at Guy 's , a position for which he had lobbied hard , and in October that year he was put in charge of the children 's outpatients ward . Like his electrotherapy patients , the children were largely poor relief cases who could not afford to pay for medical treatment and were much used for the training of medical students . It was generally accepted at this time that poor relief cases could be used for experimental treatment , and their permission was not required . Bird published in the hospital journal a series of reports on childhood diseases , based on case studies from this work . 
 Marrying Mary Ann Brett in 1842 , Bird moved from his family home at Wilmington Square , Clerkenwell , to 19 <unk> Square . They had two daughters and three sons , the second of whom , Cuthbert Hilton Golding @-@ Bird ( 1848 – 1939 ) , became a notable surgeon . 
 Bird was a Fellow of the Linnaean Society ( elected 1836 ) , the Geological Society ( elected 1836 ) and the Royal Society ( elected 1846 ) . He joined the Pathological Society of London ( which eventually merged into the Royal Society of Medicine ) when it was formed in 1846 . He also belonged to the London Electrical Society founded by William Sturgeon and others . This body was very unlike the elite scholarly institutions ; it was more like a craft guild with a penchant for spectacular demonstrations . Nevertheless , it had some notable members , and new machines and apparatus were regularly discussed and demonstrated . Bird was also a Freemason from 1841 and was the Worshipful Master of the St Paul 's lodge in 1850 . He left the Freemasons in 1853 . 
 Bird was vain , with a tendency to self @-@ promotion , and his driving ambition occasionally led him into conflict with others . He was involved in a number of very public disputes in contemporary medical journals , including the dispute with the Pulvermacher Company and a dispute over the development of the stethoscope . However , he was said to give his patients his undivided attention and a complete commitment to their welfare . He was a fine speaker , a good lecturer and an eloquent debater . 
 Diagnosed with heart disease by his brother in 1848 or 1849 , Bird was forced to stop work . By 1850 , however , he was again working as hard as ever and had extended his practice so much that he needed to move to a larger house in Russell Square . But in 1851 , acute rheumatism led Bird to take an extended holiday with his wife in Tenby , where he pursued investigations in botany , marine fauna and cave life as pastimes . These long summer breaks were repeated in 1852 and 1853 at Torquay and Tenby . Even on holiday , his fame caused him to receive many requests for consultations . In 1853 , he purchased an estate , St Cuthbert , for his retirement in Tunbridge Wells , but it needed some work , and he could not leave London until June 1854 . Meanwhile , he continued to see patients , but only in his house , despite seriously deteriorating health . He died on 27 October 1854 at St Cuthbert from a urinary tract infection and suffering from kidney stones . His early death at 39 may have been due to a combination of lifelong frail health and overwork , which Bird himself knew to be destroying him . He is buried in Woodbury Park Cemetery , Tunbridge Wells . 
 After his death , Mary instituted the Golding Bird Gold Medal and Scholarship for sanitary science , later named the Golding Bird Gold Medal and Scholarship for bacteriology , which was awarded annually at Guy 's teaching hospital . The prize was instituted in 1887 and was still being awarded in 1983 , although it is no longer a current prize . From 1934 onwards , a Golding Bird Gold Medal and Scholarship was also awarded for obstetrics and gynaecology . Among the notable recipients of the medal were Nathaniel Ham ( 1896 ) , Alfred Salter ( 1897 ) , Russell Brock ( 1926 ) , John Beale ( 1945 ) , and D. Bernard Amos ( circa 1947 – 1951 ) . 
 = = Collateral sciences = = 
 The collateral sciences are those sciences that have an important role in medicine but do not form part of medicine themselves , especially physics , chemistry , and botany ( because botany is a rich source of drugs and poisons ) . Until the end of the first half of the 19th century , chemical analysis was rarely used in medical diagnosis – there was even hostility to the idea in some quarters . Most of the work in this area at that time was carried out by researchers associated with Guy 's . 
 By the time Golding Bird was a medical student at Guy 's , the hospital already had a tradition of studying physics and chemistry as they related to medicine . Bird followed this tradition and was particularly influenced by the work of William Prout , an expert in chemical physiology . Bird became well known for his knowledge of chemistry . An early example dates from 1832 , when he commented on a paper on the copper sulphate test for arsenic poisoning , delivered by his future brother @-@ in @-@ law R. H. Brett to the Pupils ' Physical Society . Bird criticised the test 's positive result when a green precipitate is formed , claiming the test was inconclusive because precipitates other than copper arsenite can produce the same green colour . 
 Bird did not limit himself to challenging his future brother @-@ in @-@ law . In 1834 , Bird and Brett published a paper on the analysis of blood serum and urine , in which they argued against some work by Prout . Prout had said ( in 1819 ) that the pink sediment in urine was due to the presence of ammonium <unk> , but Bird 's tests failed to verify this . Though Bird was still only a student and Prout held great authority , Prout felt it necessary to reply to the challenge . In 1843 , Bird tried to identify the pink compound ; he failed , but was convinced it was a new chemical and gave it the name <unk> . This name did not stick , however , and the compound became known as <unk> from the work of Franz Simon . Its structure was finally identified only in 1975 . 
 Around 1839 , recognising Bird 's abilities in chemistry , Astley Cooper asked him to contribute to his book on breast disease . Bird wrote a piece on the chemistry of milk , and the book was published in 1840 . Although the book is primarily about human anatomy , it includes a chapter on comparative anatomy covering several species , for which Bird carried out an analysis of dog and porpoise milk . Also in 1839 , Bird published his own Elements of Natural Philosophy , a textbook on physics for medical students . Taking the view that existing texts were too mathematical for medical students , Bird avoided such material in favour of clear explanations . The book proved popular and remained in print for 30 years , although some of its mathematical shortcomings were made good in the fourth edition by Charles Brooke . 
 = = = Electricity = = = 
 In 1836 , Bird was put in charge of the newly formed department of electricity and galvanism under the supervision of Addison . While this was not the first hospital to employ electrotherapy , it was still considered very experimental . Previous hospital uses had either been short @-@ lived or based on the whim of a single surgeon , such as John Birch at St Thomas ' Hospital . At Guy 's , the treatment was part of the hospital system and became well @-@ known to the public , so much so that Guy 's was parodied for its use of electricity in the New Frankenstein satirical magazine . 
 In his electrotherapy , Bird used both electrochemical and electrostatic machines ( and later also electromagnetic induction machines ) to treat a very wide range of conditions , such as some forms of chorea . Treatments included peripheral nerve stimulation , electrical muscle stimulation and electric shock therapy . Bird also used his invention , the electric moxa , to heal skin ulcers . 
 = = = = Electrical equipment = = = = 
 It was already clear from the work of Michael Faraday that electricity and galvanism were essentially the same . Bird realised this , but continued to divide his apparatus into electrical machines , which ( according to him ) delivered a high voltage at low current , and galvanic apparatus , which delivered a high current at low voltage . The galvanic equipment available to Bird included electrochemical cells such as the voltaic pile and the Daniell cell , a variant of which Bird devised himself . Also part of the standard equipment were induction coils which , together with an interrupter circuit , were used with one of the electrochemical cells to deliver an electric shock . The electrical ( as opposed to galvanic ) machines then available were friction @-@ operated electrostatic generators consisting of a rotating glass disc or cylinder on which silk flaps were allowed to drag as the glass rotated . These machines had to be hand @-@ turned during treatment , but it was possible to store small amounts of static electricity in Leyden jars for later use . 
 By 1849 , generators based on Faraday 's law of induction had become advanced enough to replace both types of machines , and Bird was recommending them in his lectures . Galvanic cells suffered from the inconvenience of having to deal with the electrolyte acids in the surgery and the possibility of <unk> ; electrostatic generators required a great deal of skill and attention to keep them working successfully . Electromagnetic machines , on the other hand , have neither of these drawbacks ; the only criticism levelled by Bird was that the cheaper machines could only deliver an alternating current . For medical use , particularly when treating a problem with nerves , a unidirectional current of a particular polarity was often needed , requiring the machine to have split rings or similar mechanisms . However , Bird considered alternating current machines suitable for cases of <unk> . 
 The required direction of current depended on the direction in which electric current was thought to flow in nerves in the human or animal body . For motor functions , for instance , the flow was taken to be from the centre towards the muscles at the extremities , so artificial electrical stimulation needed to be in the same direction . For sensory nerves , the opposite applied : flow was from the extremity to the centre , and the positive electrode would be applied to the extremity . This principle was demonstrated by Bird in an experiment with a living frog . A supply of frogs was usually on hand , as they were used in the frog galvanoscope . The electromagnetic <unk> was available at the time , but frogs ' legs were still used by Bird because of their much greater sensitivity to small currents . In the experiment , the frog 's leg was almost completely severed from its body , leaving only the sciatic nerve connected , and electric current was then applied from the body to the leg . <unk> of the leg were seen when the muscle was stimulated . Reversing the current , however , produced no movement of the muscle , merely croaks of pain from the frog . In his lectures , Bird describes many experiments with a similar aim on human sensory organs . In one experiment by <unk> , for instance , electric current is passed through the subject 's head from ear to ear , causing a sound to be hallucinated . The ear connected to the positive terminal hears a louder sound than that connected to the negative . 
 Bird designed his own interrupter circuit for delivering shocks to patients from a voltaic cell through an induction coil . Previously , the interrupter had been a mechanical device requiring the physician to turn a cog wheel or employ an assistant to do so . Bird wished to free his hands to apply the electricity more exactly to the required part of the patient . His interrupter worked automatically by magnetic induction at a reasonably fast rate . The faster the interrupter switches , the more frequently an electric shock is delivered to the patient ; the aim is to make the frequency as high as possible . 
 Bird 's interrupter had the medically disadvantageous feature that current was supplied in opposite directions during the make and break operations . Treatment often required the current to be supplied in one specified direction only . Bird produced a unidirectional interrupter using a mechanism now called split rings . This design suffered from the disadvantage that automatic operation was lost and the interrupter had once again to be hand @-@ cranked . Nevertheless , this arrangement remained a cheaper option than electromagnetic generators for some time . 
 = = = = Treatments = = = = 
 Three classes of electrotherapy were in use . One was the electric bath , which consisted of sitting the patient on an insulated stool with glass legs and connecting the patient to one electrode , usually the positive one , of an electrostatic machine . The patient 's skin became charged as if he or she were in a " bath of electricity " . The second class of treatment could be performed while the patient was in the electric bath . This consisted of bringing a negative electrode close to the patient , usually near the spine , causing sparks to be produced between the electrode and the patient . Electrodes of various shapes were available for different medical purposes and places of application on the body . Treatment was applied in several sessions of around five minutes , often blistering the skin . The third class of treatment was electric shock therapy , in which an electric shock was delivered from a galvanic battery ( later electromagnetic generators ) via an induction coil to greatly increase the voltage . It was also possible to deliver electric shocks from the charge stored in a Leyden jar , but this was a much weaker shock . 
 Electric stimulation treatment was used to treat nervous disorders where the nervous system was unable to stimulate a required glandular secretion or muscle activity . It had previously been successfully used to treat some forms of asthma . Bird used his apparatus to treat Sydenham 's chorea ( St Vitus 's dance ) and other forms of spasm , some forms of paralysis ( although the treatment was of no use where nerves had been physically damaged ) , opiate overdose ( since it kept the patient awake ) , bringing on menstruation where this had failed ( amenorrhoea ) , and hysteria , a supposed disease of women . <unk> bladder function in young girls was attributed to the now archaic condition of hysteria . It was treated with the application of a strong electric current between the sacrum and the pubis . Although the treatment worked , in that it caused the bladder to empty , Bird suspected in many cases it did so more through fear and pain than any therapeutic property of electricity . 
 Electric shock treatment had become fashionable among the public , but often was not favoured by physicians except as a last resort . Its popularity led to many inappropriate treatments , and fraudulent practitioners were widespread . Quack practitioners claimed the treatment as a cure for almost anything , regardless of its effectiveness , and made large sums of money from it . Bird , however , continued to stand by the treatment when properly administered . He convinced an initially sceptical Addison of its merits , and the first publication ( in 1837 ) describing the work of the electrifying unit was authored by Addison , not Bird , although Bird is clearly , and rightly , credited by Addison . Having the paper authored by Addison did a great deal to gain acceptability in a still suspicious medical fraternity . Addison held great authority , whereas Bird at this stage was unknown . Bird 's 1841 paper in Guy 's Hospital Reports contained an impressively long list of successful case studies . In 1847 he brought the subject fully into the realm of materia medica when he delivered the annual lecture to the Royal College of Physicians on this subject . He spoke out tirelessly against the numerous quack practitioners , in one case exposing railway telegraph operators who were claiming to be medical electricians , although they had no medical training at all . In this way , Bird was largely responsible for the rehabilitation of electrical treatment among medical practitioners . His work , with Addison 's support , together with the increasing ease of using the machines as the technology progressed , brought the treatment into wider use in the medical profession . 
 = = = = Electric moxa = = = = 
 Bird invented the electric moxa in 1843 . The name is a reference to the acupuncture technique of moxibustion and was probably influenced by the introduction of <unk> , in which the needles are augmented by an electric current , two decades earlier in France . The electric moxa , however , was not intended for acupuncture . It was used to produce a suppurating sore on the skin of the patient to treat some conditions of inflammation and congestion by the technique of counter @-@ irritation . The sore had previously been created by much more painful means , such as <unk> or even burning charcoal . Bird 's design was based on a modification of an existing instrument for the local electrical treatment of hemiplegia , and consisted of a silver electrode and a zinc electrode connected by copper wire . Two small blisters were produced on the skin , to which the two electrodes were then connected and held in place for a few days . Electricity was generated by electrolytic action with body fluids . The blister under the silver electrode healed , but the one under the zinc electrode produced the required suppurating sore . 
 The healing of the blister under the silver electrode was of no importance for a counter @-@ irritation procedure , but it suggested to Bird that the electric moxa might be used for treating obstinate leg ulcers . This was a common complaint among the working classes in Bird 's time , and hospitals could not admit the majority of cases for treatment . The moxa improved the situation by enabling sufferers to be treated as outpatients . The silver electrode of the moxa was applied to the ulcer to be healed , while the zinc electrode was applied a few inches away to a place where the upper layer of skin had been cut away . The whole apparatus was then bandaged in place as before . The technique was successfully applied by others on Bird 's recommendation . Thomas Wells later discovered that it was unnecessary to damage the skin under the zinc plate . He merely moistened the skin with vinegar before applying the zinc electrode . 
 = = = = Pulvermacher controversy = = = = 
 There was some controversy over Bird 's endorsement of a machine invented by one I. L. Pulvermacher that became known as Pulvermacher 's chain . The main market for this device was the very quack practitioners that Bird so detested , but it did actually work as a generator . Bird was given a sample of this machine in 1851 and was impressed enough to give Pulvermacher a testimonial stating that the machine was a useful source of electricity . Bird thought that it could be used by physicians as a portable device . Electrically , the machine worked like a voltaic pile , but was constructed differently . It consisted of a number of wooden dowels , each with a <unk> winding of copper and zinc coils . Each winding was connected to the next dowel by means of metal hooks and eyes , which also provided the electrical connection . The electrolyte was provided by soaking the dowels in vinegar . 
 <unk> , Bird appears to have expected Pulvermacher not to use this testimonial in his advertising . When Pulvermacher 's company did so , Bird suffered some criticism for unprofessional behaviour , although it was never suggested that Bird benefited financially , and Bird stated in his defence that the testimonial was only ever intended as a letter of introduction to physicians in Edinburgh . Bird was particularly upset that Pulvermacher 's company had used quotations from Bird 's publications about the benefits of electrical treatment and misrepresented them as describing benefits of Pulvermacher 's product . Bird also criticised Pulvermacher 's claim that the chain could be wrapped around an affected limb for medical treatment . Although the flexible nature of its design lent itself to wrapping , Bird said that it would be next to useless in this configuration . According to Bird , the patient 's body would provide a conductive path across each cell , thus preventing the device from building up a medically useful voltage at its terminals . 
 = = = Electrochemistry = = = 
 Bird used his position as head of the department of electricity and galvanism to further his research efforts and to aid him in teaching his students . He was interested in electrolysis and repeated the experiments of Antoine César Becquerel , Edmund Davy and others to extract metals in this way . He was particularly interested in the possibility of detecting low levels of heavy metal poisons with this technique , pioneered by Davy . Bird also studied the properties of albumen under electrolysis , finding that the albumen coagulated at the anode because hydrochloric acid was produced there . He corrected an earlier erroneous conclusion by W. T. Brande that high electric current caused coagulation at the cathode also , showing that this was entirely due to fluid flows caused by the strong electric field . 
 The formation of copper plates on the cathode was noticed in the Daniell cell shortly after its invention in 1836 . Bird began a thorough investigation of this phenomenon in the following year . Using solutions of sodium chloride , potassium chloride and ammonium chloride , He succeeded in coating a mercury cathode with sodium , potassium and ammonium respectively , producing amalgams of each of these . Not only chlorides were used ; beryllium , aluminium and silicon were obtained from the salts and oxides of these elements . 
 In 1837 , Bird constructed his own version of the Daniell cell . The novel feature of Bird 's cell was that the two solutions of copper sulphate and zinc sulphate were in the same vessel , but kept separate by a barrier of Plaster of Paris , a common material used in hospitals for setting bone fractures . Being porous , Plaster of Paris allows ions to cross the barrier , while preventing the solutions from mixing . This arrangement is an example of a single @-@ cell Daniell cell , and Bird 's invention was the first of this kind . Bird 's cell was the basis for the later development of the porous pot cell , invented in 1839 by John Dancer . 
 Bird 's experiments with his cell were important for the new discipline of electrometallurgy . An unforeseen result was the deposition of copper on and within the plaster , without any contact with the metal electrodes . On breaking apart the plaster it was found that veins of copper were formed running right through it . So surprising was this result that it was at first disbelieved by electrochemical researchers , including Faraday . Deposition of copper and other metals had previously been noted , but only on metal electrodes . Bird 's experiments sometimes get him credit for being the founder of the industrial field of electrometallurgy . In particular , Bird 's discovery is the principle behind <unk> . However , Bird himself never made practical use of this discovery , nor did he carry out any work in metallurgy as such . Some of Bird 's contemporaries with interests in electrometallurgy wished to bestow the credit on Bird in order to discredit the commercial claims of their rivals . 
 Bird thought there was a connection between the functioning of the nervous system and the processes seen in electrolysis at very low , steady currents . He knew that the currents in both were of the same order . To Bird , if such a connection existed , it made electrochemistry an important subject to study for biological reasons . 
 = = = Chemistry = = = 
 = = = = Arsenic poisoning = = = = 
 In 1837 Bird took part in an investigation of the dangers posed by the arsenic content of cheap candles . These were <unk> candles with white arsenic added , which made them burn more brightly than ordinary candles . The combination of cheapness and brightness made them popular . The investigation was conducted by the Westminster Medical Society , a student society of Westminster Hospital , and was led by John Snow , later to become famous for his public health investigations . Snow had previously investigated arsenic poisoning when he and several fellow students were taken badly ill after he introduced a new process for preserving cadavers at the suggestion of lecturer Hunter Lane . The new process involved injecting arsenic into the blood vessels of the corpse . Snow found that the arsenic became airborne as a result of chemical reactions with the decomposing corpse , and this was how it was ingested . Bird 's part in the candle investigation was to analyse the arsenic content of the candles , which he found to have recently been greatly increased by the manufacturers . Bird also confirmed by experiment that the arsenic became airborne when the candles were burnt . The investigators exposed various species of animal and bird to the candles in controlled conditions . The animals all survived , but the birds died . Bird investigated the bird deaths and analysed the bodies , finding small amounts of arsenic . No arsenic was found on the feathers , however , indicating that poisoning was not caused by breathing airborne arsenic , since arsenic in the air would be expected to adhere to the feathers . However , Bird found that large amounts of arsenic were in the birds ' drinking water , indicating that this was the route taken by the poison . 
 = = = = Carbon monoxide poisoning = = = = 
 Although it had been known how to prepare carbon monoxide since 1776 , it was not at first recognised that carbon monoxide poisoning was the mechanism of death and injury from stoves burning carbonaceous fuels . A coroner 's inquest into the death in 1838 of James Trickey , a nightwatchman who had spent all night by a new type of charcoal burning stove in St Michael , Cornhill , concluded that the poison involved was carbonic acid ( that is , carbon dioxide ) rather than carbon monoxide . Both Bird and Snow gave evidence to the inquest supporting poisoning by carbonic acid . Bird himself started to suffer ill effects while collecting air samples from the floor near the stove . However , the makers of the stove , Harper and Joyce , produced a string of their own expert witnesses , who convinced the jury to decide that death was caused by apoplexy , and that " impure air " was only a contributing factor . Among the unscientific claims made at the inquest by Harper and Joyce were that carbonic gas would rise to the ceiling ( in fact it is heavier than air and , according to Bird , would lie in a layer close to the floor , just where the sleeping Trickey 's head would rest ) and that " deleterious vapour " from the coffins in the vaults had risen into the church . After the inquest Joyce threatened to sue a journal which continued to criticise the stove for its lack of ventilation . In a subsequent clarification , Bird made it clear that any stove burning carbonaceous fuel was dangerous if it did not have a chimney or other means of ventilation . In fact , Trickey had only been placed in the church in the first place at the suggestion of Harper , who was expecting him to give favourable reports of the new stove 's performance . 
 Bird read a paper to the Senior Physical Society in 1839 , reporting on tests he conducted of the effects on sparrows of poisoning by carbonaceous fumes . This paper was of some importance and resulted in Bird giving his views to the British Association in the same year . ( He acted as a secretary to the chemical section of the British Association in Birmingham . ) Bird also presented the paper at the Westminster Medical School , where Snow took a special interest in it . Until then , Snow and many others had believed that carbonic acid acted merely by excluding oxygen . The experiments of Bird and others convinced him that it was harmful in its own right , but he still did not subscribe to Bird 's view that it was an active poison . Also in 1839 , Bird published a comprehensive paper in Guy 's Hospital Reports , complete with many case histories , in which he documents the state of knowledge . He realised that at least some cases of poisoning from stoves were due not to carbonic acid , but to some other agent , although he still had not identified it as carbon monoxide . 
