 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Bird did a great deal of research in urology , including the chemistry of both urine and kidney stones , and soon became a recognised expert . This work occupied a large proportion of his effort , and his writings on urinary sediments and kidney stones were the most advanced at the time . His work followed on from , and was much influenced by , that of Alexander Marcet and William Prout . Marcet was also a physician at Guy 's ; Prout held no position at Guy 's , but was connected with the hospital and well known there . For instance , when Marcet discovered a new constituent of kidney stones , <unk> oxide , he sent it to Prout for analysis . Prout discovered a new substance himself in 1822 , a constituent of urine which he named <unk> acid , because it turned black on contact with air . 
 Bird studied and categorised the collection of stones at Guy 's , concentrating particularly on the crystal structures of the nuclei , since stone formation followed once there was a nucleus on which to form . He considered the chemistry of the nuclei to be the most important aspect of stone formation . Bird identified many species of stone , classified by the chemistry of the nucleus , but determined that they all fell within two overall groups : organic stones caused by a <unk> bodily process , and excessive inorganic salts causing sediment on which the stone could nucleate . In 1842 , Bird became the first to describe <unk> , sometimes called Bird 's disease , which is caused by an excess of oxalate of lime in the urine . This is the second most common cause of kidney stones , the first being uric acid and its ammonium salt . There are several others , such as ammonium oxalate . In his great work Urinary Deposits , Bird devotes much space to the identification of chemicals in urine by microscopic examination of the appearance of crystals in it . He shows how the appearance of crystals of the same chemical can vary greatly under differing conditions , and especially how the appearance changes with disease . Urinary Deposits became a standard text on the subject ; there were five editions between 1844 and 1857 . In the fourth edition Bird added a recommendation to wash out the bladder in cases of alkaline urine , after an experiment by Snow showed that stale urine became alkaline when fresh urine was slowly dripped into it . Bird knew that alkaline urine encouraged phosphate precipitation and the consequent encrustation and stone formation . The last edition of Urinary Deposits was updated after Bird 's death by Edmund Lloyd Birkett . 
 Bird was the first to recognise that urinary casts are an indication of Bright 's disease . Casts were first discovered by Henry Bence Jones . They are microscopic cylinders of Tamm @-@ Horsfall protein that have been precipitated in the kidneys and then released into the urine . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A prevalent idea in the 18th and early 19th centuries was that illness was a result of the condition of the whole body . The environment and the activity of the patient thus played a large part in any treatment . The epitome of this kind of thinking was the concept of the vital force , which was supposed to govern the chemical processes within the body . This theory held that organic compounds could only be formed within living organisms , where the vital force could come into play . This belief had been known to be false ever since Friedrich Wöhler succeeded in synthesising urea from inorganic precursors in 1828 . Nevertheless , the vital force continued to be invoked to explain organic chemistry in Bird 's time . Sometime in the middle of the 19th century , a new way of thinking started to take shape , especially among younger physicians , fuelled by rapid advances in the understanding of chemistry . For the first time , it became possible to identify specific chemical reactions with specific organs of the body , and to trace their effects through the various functional relations of the organs and the exchanges between them . 
 Among these younger radicals were Bird and Snow ; among the old school was William Addison ( a different person from Bird 's superior at Guy 's ) . Addison disliked the modern reliance on laboratory and theoretical results favoured by the new generation , and challenged Richard Bright ( who gave his name to Bright 's disease ) when Bright suggested that the source of the problem in oedema was the kidneys . Addison preferred to believe that the condition was caused by intemperance or some other external factor , and that since the whole body had been disrupted , it could not be localised to a specific organ . Addison further challenged Bright 's student , Snow , when in 1839 Snow suggested from case studies and laboratory analysis that oedema was associated with an increase in albumin in the blood . Addison dismissed this as a mere <unk> . Bird disagreed with Snow 's proposed treatment , but his arguments clearly show him to be on the radical side of the debate , and he completely avoided whole @-@ body arguments . Snow had found that the proportion of urea in the urine of his patients was low and concluded from this that urea was accumulating in the blood , and therefore proposed bloodletting to counter this . Bird disputed that increased urea in the blood was the cause of kidney disease and doubted the effectiveness of this treatment , citing the results of François <unk> , who had injected urea into the blood , apparently with no ill effects . It is not clear whether Bird accepted Snow 's reasoning that urea must be accumulating , or whether he merely adopted it for the sake of argument ; while a student in 1833 , he had disputed this very point with another of Bright 's students , George Rees . 
 Justus von Liebig is another important figure in the development of the new thinking , although his position is ambiguous . He explained chemical processes in the body in terms of addition and subtraction of simple molecules from a larger organic molecule , a concept that Bird followed in his own work . But even the materialistic Liebig continued to invoke the vital force for processes inside living animal bodies . This seems to have been based on a belief that the entire living animal is required for these chemical processes to take place . Bird helped to dispel this kind of thinking by showing that specific chemistry is related to specific organs in the body rather than to the whole animal . He challenged some of Liebig 's conclusions concerning animal chemistry . For example , Liebig had predicted that the ratio of uric acid to urea would depend on the level of activity of a species or individual ; Bird showed this to be false . Bird also felt that it was not enough simply to count atoms as Liebig did , but that an explanation was also required as to why the atoms recombined in one particular way rather than any other . He made some attempts to provide this explanation by invoking the electric force , rather than the vital force , based on his own experiments in electrolysis . 
 = = Flexible stethoscope = = 
 Bird designed and used a flexible tube stethoscope in June 1840 , and in the same year he published the first description of such an instrument . In his paper he mentions an instrument already in use by other physicians ( Drs. <unk> and Stroud ) , which he describes as the " snake ear trumpet " . He thought this instrument had some severe technical faults ; in particular , its great length led to poor performance . The form of Bird 's invention is similar to the modern stethoscope , except that it has only one earpiece . An ill @-@ tempered exchange of letters occurred in the London Medical Gazette between another physician , John Burne , and Bird . Burne claimed that he also used the same instrument as <unk> and Stroud and was offended that Bird had not mentioned him in his paper . Burne , who worked at the Westminster Hospital , pointed with suspicion to the fact that Bird 's brother Frederic also worked there . In a reply full of anger and sarcasm , Bird pointed out that in his original paper he had already made clear that he claimed no credit for the earlier instrument . Bird found the flexible stethoscope convenient as it avoided uncomfortably leaning over patients ( as would be required by a rigid stethoscope ) and the earpiece could be passed to other doctors and students to listen . It was particularly useful for Bird , with his severe rheumatism , as he could apply the stethoscope to the patient from a seated position . 
 = = Elements of Natural Philosophy = = 
 When Bird took up lecturing on science at Guy 's , he could not find a textbook suitable for his medical students . He needed a book that went into some detail of physics and chemistry , but which medical students would not find overwhelmingly mathematical . Bird reluctantly undertook to write such a book himself , based on his 1837 – 1838 lectures , and the result was Elements of Natural Philosophy , first published in 1839 . It proved to be spectacularly popular , even beyond its intended audience of medical students , and went through six editions . Reprints were still being produced more than 30 years later in 1868 . The fourth edition was edited by Charles Brooke , a friend of Bird 's , after the latter 's death . Brooke made good many of Bird 's mathematical omissions . Brooke edited further editions and , in the sixth edition of 1867 , thoroughly updated it . 
 The book was well received and was praised by reviewers for its clarity . The Literary Gazette , for instance , thought that it " teaches us the elements of the entire circle of natural philosophy in the clearest and most <unk> manner " . The reviewer recommended it as suitable not just for students and not just for the young , saying that it " ought to be in the hands of every individual who desires to taste the pleasures of divine philosophy , and obtain a competent knowledge of that creation in which they live " . 
 Medical journals , on the other hand , were more restrained in their praise . The Provincial Medical and Surgical , for instance , in its review of the second edition , thought that it was " a good and concise elementary treatise ... presenting in a readable and intelligible form , a great mass of information not to be found in any other single treatise " . But the Provincial had a few technical quibbles , among which was the complaint that there was no description of the construction of a stethoscope . The Provincial reviewer thought that the book was particularly suitable for students who had no previous instruction in physics . The sections on magnetism , electricity and light were particularly recommended . 
 In their review of the 6th edition , Popular Science Review noted that the author was now named as Brooke and observed that he had now made the book his own . The reviewers looked back with nostalgia to the book they knew as " the Golding Bird " when they were students . They note with approval the many newly included descriptions of the latest technology , such as the dynamos of Henry Wilde and Werner von Siemens , and the spectroscope of Browning . 
 The scope of the book was wide @-@ ranging , covering much of the physics then known . The 1839 first edition included statics , dynamics , gravitation , mechanics , hydrostatics , pneumatics , hydrodynamics , acoustics , magnetism , electricity , atmospheric electricity , electrodynamics , <unk> , bioelectricity , light , optics , and polarized light . In the 1843 second edition Bird expanded the material on electrolysis into its own chapter , reworked the polarized light material , added two chapters on " <unk> " ( thermodynamics – a major omission from the first edition ) , and a chapter on the new technology of photography . Later editions also included a chapter on electric telegraphy . Brooke was still expanding the book for the sixth and final edition . New material included the magnetic properties of iron in ships and spectrum analysis . 
 = = Christian works = = 
 Bird was a committed Christian throughout his life . Despite his extremely busy professional life , he meticulously observed the Sabbath and saw to the Christian education of his children . He showed generosity to the poor , offering them treatment at his house every morning before going about his professional schedule . After it became clear that the remainder of his life was going to be very limited , he devoted all his time to his religion . He had a great ambition to promote Christian teachings and Bible reading among medical students . From 1853 Bird organised a series of religious meetings of medical professionals in London , aiming to encourage physicians and surgeons to exert a religious influence over their students . 
 For several years prior to 1853 , student prayer meetings had been held in some of the London hospitals , particularly St Thomas ' . Bird aimed to mould this movement into a formal association , an ambition which was to crystallise as the Christian Medical Association . He was heavily influenced in this by the Medical Missionary Society of John Hutton Balfour at Edinburgh University . Bird aimed to form a national body with a chapter in each teaching hospital ; a prototype student group was already in existence at Guy 's . He was strongly opposed by some sections of the medical profession , who felt that students should concentrate on their studies . Among the insults levelled at Bird were " <unk> piety " and being a <unk> . This opposition continued after the formation of the Association . The constitution of the new Christian Medical Association was agreed at Bird 's home on 17 December 1853 in a meeting of medical and surgical teachers and others . It was based on a draft prepared by the Guy 's student group . Bird died before the inaugural public meeting of the Association in November 1854 at Exeter Hall . 
 Bird was quick to defend the <unk> of students . In November 1853 , in a reply to a letter from a student in the Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal complaining of a lack of moral care from his superiors , Bird attacked the prevalent public view that students were " guilty of every kind of open vice and moral depravity " . Bird laid much of the blame for this public opinion on the caricatures of students in the writings of Charles Dickens . He went on to say that the behaviour and character of students had greatly improved over the preceding ten years . He attributed this improvement in part to the greatly increased study requirements imposed on students , but also in part to Christian influences acting on them . He also commented that pious students had once been ridiculed , but were now respected . 
 = = Works = = 
 Elements of Natural Philosophy ; being an experimental introduction to the study of the physical sciences , London : John Churchill , 1839 OCLC <unk> . 
 Lectures on Electricity and <unk> , in their physiological and therapeutical relations , delivered at the Royal College of Physicians , in March 1847 , London : Wilson & Ogilvy , 1847 OCLC <unk> . 
 Lectures on the Influence of Researches in Organic Chemistry on Therapeutics , especially in relation to the <unk> of the blood , delivered at the Royal College of Physicians , London : Wilson & Ogilvy , 1848 OCLC <unk> . 
 Urinary Deposits , their diagnosis , pathology and therapeutical indications , London : John Churchill , 1844 OCLC <unk> . 
 = = Journal articles = = 
 Bird 's first publication of his modification of the Daniell cell , Report of the Seventh Meeting of the British Society for the Advancement of Science , vol . 6 ( 1837 ) , p . 45 , London : J. Murray , 1838 . 
 " Observations on induced electric currents , with a description of a magnetic contact @-@ breaker " , Philosophical Magazine , vol . 12 , no . 71 , pp. 18 – 22 , January 1838 . 
 " Observations on the existence of saline combinations in an organized state , in vegetable matter " , The Magazine of Natural History , vol . 2 , pp. 74 – 78 , February 1838 . 
 " Observations on indirect chemical analysis " , Philosophical Magazine , vol . 12 , no . 74 , pp. 229 – 232 , March 1838 . 
 " Experimental researches on the nature and properties of albumen " , Philosophical Magazine , vol . 12 , no . 79 , pp. 15 – 22 , July 1838 . 
 " Observations on some peculiar properties acquired by plates of platina , which have been used as electrodes of a voltaic battery " , Philosophical Magazine , vol . 12 , no . 83 , pp. 379 – 386 , November 1838 . 
 " <unk> and <unk> secretions " , Guy 's Hospital Reports , vol . 3 , pp. 35 – 59 , 1838 . 
 " Notice respecting the artificial formation of a basic chloride of copper by voltaic influence " , Report of the Eighth Meeting of the British Society for the Advancement of Science , vol . 7 ( 1838 ) , pp. 56 – 57 , London : J. Murray , 1839 . 
 " Notice respecting the deposition of metallic copper from is solutions by slow voltaic action at a point equidistant from the metallic surfaces " , Report of the Eighth Meeting of the British Society for the Advancement of Science , vol . 7 ( 1838 ) , pp. 57 – 59 , London : J. Murray , 1839 . 
 " Observations on some of the products of nitric acid on alcohol " , Philosophical Magazine , 1838 . 
 " Observation on poisoning by the vapours of burning charcoal and coals " , Guy 's Hospital Reports , vol . 4 , pp. 75 – 105 , 1839 . 
 " Advantages presented by the employment of a stethoscope with a flexible tube " , London Medical Gazette , vol . 1 , pp. 440 – 412 , 11 December 1840 . 
 " Report on the value of electricity , as a remedial agent in the treatment of diseases " , Guy 's Hospital Reports , vol . 6 , pp. 84 – 120 , 1841 . 
 " Fatty urine " , The Medical Times , vol . 9 , no . 223 , p . 175 , 30 December 1843 . 
 " Treatment of uric acid gravel by phosphate of soda " , Medical Gazette , p . 689 , 23 August 1844 . 
 " Infantile syphilis " , Guy 's Hospital Reports , p . 130 , April 1845 . 
 " Treatment of disease by moist air " , Medical Gazette , p . 999 , 3 October 1845 . 
 " The nature of the green <unk> evacuations of children " , The Medical Times , vol . 13 , no . 317 , pp. 74 – 75 , 18 October 1845 . 
 " Treatment of disease by moist air " , The Medical Times , vol . 13 , no . 325 , p . 228 , 13 December 1845 . 
 " Diseases of children " , Guy 's Hospital Reports , series 2 , vol . 3 , pp. 108 – 141 , 1845 . 
 " Acetate of lead in diarrhoea " , The Medical Times , vol . 13 , no . 337 , p . 465 , 14 March 1846 . 
 " Case of excessive secretion of the <unk> @-@ magnesium phosphate by the kidneys , with long continued vomiting " , The Medical Times , vol . 13 , no . 340 , pp. 522 – 523 , 4 April 1846 . 
 " Case of internal strangulation of intestine relieved by operation " , from Transactions of the Royal Medico @-@ Chirurgical Society , with John Hilton , London : Richard Kinder , 1847 . 
 Bird was frequently mentioned in the transactions of the Medical Society of London . Some examples are : 
 " Transactions of the Medical Society of London , Oct 16 " , The Medical Times , vol . 9 , no . 213 , pp. 39 – 40 , 21 October 1843 . Report on the poisoning of a watch <unk> by arsenic vapour . 
 " Transactions of the Medical Society of London , Jan 15 1844 " , The Medical Times , vol . 9 , no . 227 , pp. 271 – 274 , 27 January 1844 . Report on a case of a child with inflammatory croup . 
 = Klamath River = 
 The Klamath River ( Karuk : <unk> , Klamath : Koke , Yurok : <unk> ' We @-@ Roy ) flows 263 miles ( 423 km ) through Oregon and northern California in the United States , emptying into the Pacific Ocean . By average discharge , the Klamath is the second largest river in California after the Sacramento River . It drains an extensive watershed of almost 16 @,@ 000 square miles ( 41 @,@ 000 km2 ) that stretches from the arid country of south @-@ central Oregon to the temperate rainforest of the Pacific coast . Unlike most rivers , the Klamath begins in the plains and flows toward the mountains – carving its way through the rugged Cascade Range and Klamath Mountains before reaching the sea . The upper basin once contained vast freshwater marshes that provided habitat for abundant wildlife , including millions of migratory birds ; now it is largely agricultural due to European settling , while the mountainous lower basin remains wild . The watershed is known for this peculiar geography , and the Klamath has been called " a river upside down " by National Geographic magazine . 
 The Klamath is the most important coastal river south of the Columbia River for anadromous fish migration . Its salmon , steelhead and rainbow trout have adapted to unusually high water temperatures and acidity levels relative to other rivers in the Pacific Northwest . The numerous fish were a major source of food for Native Americans , who have inhabited the basin for at least 7 @,@ 000 years . The first Europeans to enter the Klamath River basin were fur trappers for the Hudson 's Bay Company in the 1820s ; they established the Siskiyou Trail along the Klamath and Trinity rivers into the Sacramento Valley . Within several decades of white settlement , native peoples were forced into reservations . 
 During the latter days of the California Gold Rush , increasing numbers of miners began working the Klamath River and its tributaries . Their impact on the surrounding environment was highly detrimental , as well as their impact Native American Klamath Tribes . The greed of the Gold Rush left most tribes with only 10 % of the indigenous population . Steamboats operated briefly on the large lakes in the upper basin before they were replaced by railroads in the late 19th century . In the 19th and 20th centuries , the upper basin became a rich agricultural region , and many dams were built to provide irrigation water and hydroelectric power . In the 1960s , the Klamath was targeted as part of a much larger scheme to augment water supplies in central and southern California ; however , these works never materialized . 
 Because the Klamath includes many of the longest free @-@ flowing stretches of river in California , along with excellent whitewater runs , it has become a popular recreational river . However , dams and diversions in the upper basin have caused water quality issues on the lower half of the Klamath . Environmental groups and native tribes have proposed broad changes to water use in the Klamath Basin , principally the removal of some dams on the river to expand fish habitat . They put forth their concerns in what is now the Klamath Basin Restoration Agreement , a water management plan signed by local communities , governments , tribal groups , environmentalists , and fishermen . The proposal has been endorsed by the U.S. Department of the Interior but has not been authorized by the United States Congress . 
 = = Course = = 
 Upper Klamath Lake , filling a broad valley at the foot of the eastern slope of the southern High Cascades , is the source of the Klamath River . Its headstreams , however , begin over 100 miles ( 160 km ) away — as far as Crater Lake and the Oregon – Nevada border . The first 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) stretch of the Klamath River is known as the Link River . Not long after , however , the river is impounded in an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) long reservoir near Klamath Falls , Lake <unk> , where it is connected by the B canal — which is capable of diverting water between the rivers in either direction as needed , to the Lost River and passes the nearly dry bed of Lower Klamath Lake . After it flows out of this reservoir , it passes through four more hydroelectric dams before it crosses the Oregon – California state border and turns south near the town of <unk> towards Mount Shasta . However , the river soon swings west to receive the Shasta River and the Scott River , cutting deep into the head of its canyon through the Klamath Mountains . 
 The route through the High and Western Cascades and the Klamath Mountains constitutes the majority of the river 's course and takes it from the arid high desert climate of its upper watershed into a temperate rainforest nourished by Pacific rains . From the Scott River confluence , the river generally runs west along the south side of the Siskiyou Mountains until it takes a sharp southward turn near the town of Happy Camp . From there , it flows southwest over whitewater rapids into the Klamath National Forest , receiving the Salmon River , and passes the unincorporated community of Orleans . At <unk> , the river reaches the southernmost point in its entire course and veers sharply northwards as it receives the Trinity River . The Trinity River confluence also marks the point where the Klamath 's current dramatically slows . For the remainder of its course , the Klamath flows generally northwest through the Hoopa Valley and Yurok Indian Reservations , passing the town of Klamath and flowing out to sea 16 miles ( 26 km ) south of Crescent City . The mouth of the Klamath River is at Requa , in an area shared by the Yurok Reservation and Redwood National Park . The Klamath River estuary is recognized for protection by the California Bays and Estuaries Policy . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Extending from arid eastern Oregon to the cold and rainy Northern California coast , the Klamath River watershed drains parts of three Oregon counties and five counties in California and includes a diversity of landscapes . The northernmost part of the watershed is high desert country drained by the Williamson River and the Sprague River , both which flow generally southwest into Upper Klamath Lake . The middle basin is characterized by extensive wetland , grassland , and agricultural areas , and is partially filled by two major bodies of water : Upper and Lower Klamath Lake . The extensive lower basin , which encompasses over one half of the 15 @,@ 751 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 40 @,@ 790 km2 ) watershed , is composed mainly of rugged mountains , forests and canyons . 
 Several other West Coast and interior drainage basins border on that of the Klamath River . On the northwest are the Rogue River and Umpqua River in Oregon and the Smith River in California . On the east there is the closed Harney Basin and a small portion of the Great Basin . The south side of the Klamath River watershed is bounded by the Sacramento River and its upper tributaries , including the Pit River , and on the southwest side are the Mad River and Redwood Creek . The western boundary of the upper Klamath Basin is formed by the High Cascades and the Klamath Mountains , one of the southernmost extents of the Cascade Range , and the California Coast Ranges cover the southwestern watershed . The Klamath is one of only three rivers that begins east of the Cascades and flows into the Pacific Ocean ; the other two are the Columbia and the Fraser . 
 Most human use of the watershed is limited to the upper basin . Despite the semiarid climate , dams have been built , irrigation water has been supplied from the Klamath and Lost rivers , and plentiful groundwater has been drawn to transform most of the upper Klamath Basin to farmland . At least 11 @,@ 000 years ago , Lower Klamath and Tule Lakes in the rainy season would combine into one giant freshwater marsh that was nearly 290 square miles ( 750 km2 ) large . This , combined with the over 100 square miles ( 260 km2 ) of Upper Klamath Lake , formed a temporary habitat for millions of migratory birds . These lakes are all remnants of a large Ice Age lake , Lake Modoc , that covered about 1 @,@ 100 square miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km2 ) . Although all of the marshlands have been developed with the exception of Upper Klamath Lake , about 3 @.@ 7 million migrating birds still pass through the watershed each year . 
 Despite its plentiful flow in California , the Klamath does not supply significant amounts of water to irrigators and municipal users in central and southern portions of the state . The Klamath Reclamation Project in the Klamath Falls area supplies water to local irrigators , and the Central Valley Project diverts water from the Trinity River to supply irrigation water to the Sacramento Valley . Other tributaries of the Klamath , including the Lost and Shasta rivers , are also diverted for irrigation . Water use of the lower Klamath — one of the last relatively free @-@ flowing rivers in the state of California — has been debated for decades among conservationists , tribes , irrigators , and government agencies , and its eventual fate is still unclear . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Tributaries of the Klamath River are listed below . Numbers ( RM / <unk> ) after the tributary names denote the river miles ( river kilometers ) where they enter the Klamath , or the specific tributary under which it is listed . 
 = = Flooding = = 
 The lower and middle sections of the Klamath River are vulnerable to flooding , and major floods have occurred in years where major flooding has taken place in Northern California , particularly in the wake of Pineapple Express storms that bring large amounts of warm rain to Northern California . Significant floods on the Klamath River have occurred in 1926 – 1927 , 1955 , 1964 , 1997 , and 2005 , in several cases changing the course of the river . The Christmas flood of 1964 was particularly devastating , with a high water reaching 55 feet ( 17 m ) , inundating the towns of Klamath and Klamath Glen and destroying most of the Highway 101 bridge crossing the river . The highway bridge was rebuilt in a different location , though entrances to the old bridge still stand . 
 The mouth of the Klamath and nearby sections of the river are susceptible to oceanic tsunami surges , and fatalities have occurred there during the 1964 and 2011 Pacific tsunamis . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Upper Klamath Basin , defined by the drainage area of the Klamath River above Iron Gate Dam , is a unique transitional area between the Cascade Range to the west and the Basin and Range Province of the northern Great Basin to the southeast . This region extends from the southern Lower Klamath Lake area into the Lost River and Upper Klamath Lake basins . Crustal stretching and block faulting created a topography with characteristics similar to both regions . Almost the entire basin is a graben region , bearing basin and range characteristics , formed by uplifting and subsidence along several north – south faults . 
 Pre @-@ Quaternary , igneous and sedimentary rock compose the <unk> Formation , which crosses much of the region and rises above the surface in large outcroppings of solid rock in many of the ridges . Underlying rocks are generally younger from east to west . The many ridges crossing the upper Klamath Basin divide it into valleys with up to 330 feet ( 100 m ) of vertical relief , and drainage patterns generally follow the topography . An extensive geothermal system occurs deep underground within the upper basin , creating hot springs and artesian springs , but is not well understood . Further south , in the Shasta River area in Siskiyou County , much of the underlying rock is composed of lava flows issuing from the Mount Shasta volcanic region . 
 The same age pattern is true in the Cascade Range and Klamath Mountains that cover the western half of the Klamath River watershed . As the North American Plate moved slowly southwestward over the past 10 million years , successive oceanic terranes dating from the Cambrian to the late Jurassic were added to the bulk of the North American continent . There are four distinct terranes from west to east . While the coastal mountains date to less than 3 million years ago , the farther inland High Cascades are as old as 7 @.@ 5 million years . Granite batholiths , overlying sedimentary rock , and volcanic rock were crumpled into the massif of southwestern Oregon and northwestern California . Instead of being diverted southwards , however , the Klamath continued to flow westward and created a steep @-@ walled gorge through the rising range . One of these terranes brought with it a long north – south running band of easily eroded mica that now lies about 30 miles ( 48 km ) inland from the Pacific coast of Northern California . When the Klamath encountered this layer , it began cutting its canyon along the mica instead of continuing southwest to the Pacific , resulting in the sharp northward bend where the Trinity River joins . The lower Trinity also follows portions of the mica and its south fork as well . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early inhabitants and settlers = = = 
 Human habitation on the Klamath dates to at least 7 @,@ 000 years ago . Many of the Native American groups along the river depended on the vast runs of Pacific salmon , second only to that of the Columbia River . These Tribes included the Shasta along the mid and upper river , the Yurok , Hupa , and Karuk along the canyons of the lower river and the Modoc , Klamath and <unk> in the arid valleys of the upper basin . The Shasta Tribe controlled 129 miles ( 208 km ) , over half of the middle and upper Klamath River flowing through the great Shasta Tribal lands . The Yurok were probably one of the more powerful Tribes on the Klamath River behind the Shasta Tribe , controlling about 30 miles ( 48 km ) of the lower Klamath River and a large section of the Northern California coast . Along with the Hupa and Karuk , the lower to mid @-@ upper Tribes caught salmon from the river with weirs , basket traps and even harpoons . One well @-@ known ancient fishing ground is Ishi <unk> Falls , a set of rapids on the river near the confluence with the Salmon River . Most of the upstream groups had a nomadic hunting @-@ gathering lifestyle and did not depend on salmon as much as downstream Tribes . The Klamath River 's name was recorded by Europeans in the 19th century derived from the word <unk> or the Klamath Tribe , but prior to white contact , many names were used to refer to the river , including <unk> and Koke . The Klamath Tribe 's name came from the Upper Chinookan word / <unk> / , literally " they of the river " . 
 In the late 1820s , fur trappers of the Hudson 's Bay Company traveling south from Fort Vancouver reached the Klamath River basin . The first party to see the Klamath River was led by Alexander McLeod in the winter of 1826 – 27 . In 1828 , the Jedediah Smith fur trapping expedition was helped across the Trinity River by the Yurok and camped on the east side of the Trinity River . His clerk , Harrison G. Rogers , wrote , " Mr. Smith purchases all the beaver furs he can from them , " suggesting that beaver were then plentiful on the Trinity . Joseph Grinnell , in Fur @-@ bearing Mammals of California , noted that beaver had been present on other Klamath River tributaries such as the Scott River and Shasta River , and further cited a Fish and Game report of beaver from 1915 – 1917 on High Prairie Creek at the mouth of the Klamath River near Requa , California . Within a matter of years , the plentiful beavers in the Klamath Basin had been mostly wiped out . Beaver dams had previously been an important factor in stream habitat in the Klamath River watershed , helping to moderate the power of floods and creating extensive wetlands . The loss of the beaver dams resulted in detrimental consequences for watercourses in the basin , exacerbating the power of winter floods , and causing severe erosion . Trapping parties eventually moved southwest into the Sacramento Valley and blazed an extension of the Siskiyou Trail , an early path between the Oregon Territory and San Francisco Bay . Despite the environmental implications , extensive and fertile meadows left behind by the draining of beaver ponds attracted many settlers to the region later on . 
 The 1850s saw discoveries of rich placer and lode gold deposits along the predominantly Shasta areas of the Klamath , Trinity , Shasta and other rivers in northwestern California . The 1850s also brought a greed @-@ fueled murderous rampage upon the indigenous people inhabiting the regions . Villages full of men , women , children , and infants were either hacked up or shot for the potential gold that would be <unk> extracted . The gold is thought to have originated from volcanic activity in the Klamath Mountains . Miners searching for gold in the Klamath Mountains and Trinity Alps in the aftermath of the California Gold Rush first discovered gold along Salmon Creek in the spring of 1850 , and additional deposits were found on the main stem by July . Gold was also discovered in great quantities in Shasta lands at French Gulch and Yreka . Several place names in the Klamath Basin originate from this era , including that of the Scott River , which is named for pioneer John Walter Scott . Gold deposits are still present in the Klamath River watershed even though it was mined far past the end of the gold rush . 
 In 1864 , the Native Americans of the Klamath Basin and surrounding area signed a treaty that had them cede 20 million acres ( 8 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 ha ) of land to the United States and forced them to move to the newly created Klamath Indian Reservation . This reservation clumped the Yurok , Karuk , and Hoopa tribes into one small area . Eventually , the tribes began to profit from the sale of timber produced on the reservation , although unfairly distributed because of the lack of consideration of the three differing tribes . In 1954 , however , Congress removed their federal recognition and the reservation was no longer economically successful . The tribes won back federal recognition in the 1970s , but by then poverty was widespread among tribal members . 
 = = = Early industry and development = = = 
 Beginning in the early 20th century , steamboats began operating on Lower Klamath Lake between Siskiyou County , California , and Klamath Falls , Oregon . The steamboats completed a link between Klamath Falls and a railroad branch line following the McCloud River — the final part of which was called the Bartle Fast Freight Road , after Bartle , California . The end of this line , Laird 's Landing , was the beginning of the Lower Klamath Lake steamboat line , which began operating with an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) screw steamer in 1905 . By 1909 , however , the railroad had circumnavigated Lower Klamath Lake directly to Klamath Falls . The steamboat line fell into disuse — and much of Lower Klamath Lake was later drained and filled in . 
 In the early 1910s and 1920s , logging was a growing industry on the west side of the upper Klamath River valley , especially around Upper Klamath Lake . The Great Northern Railway and Southern Pacific Railroad built a joint @-@ use line running along the eastern shore of the lake , delivering logs from the north side to a sawmill 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) downstream from the outlet of the lake . Many of the seasonal marshlands surrounding the lake and rivers were diked in this period to host lumber operations . In 1919 , the first Link River Dam , a timber crib dam , was constructed at the outlet of Upper Klamath Lake , raising it by about 16 feet ( 5 m ) . Steamboats continued mail , passenger and freight operations on Upper Klamath Lake until about 1928 , in a period when many of the lumber companies shut down due to drought . 
 With lumber a declining industry in the upper Klamath Basin , the economy slowly transitioned to agriculture . The Klamath Reclamation Project , established by the Bureau of Reclamation in the early 20th century , involved the construction of two dams on the river and additional dams on many of its tributaries , as well as the final draining of Lower Klamath and Tule Lakes . The Bureau of Reclamation was not the only user of the river during this period ; in the late 1950s PacifiCorp and California @-@ Oregon Power Company ( <unk> ) constructed three more dams on the river downstream . These dams , however , sparked a great controversy over water quality in the lower section of the river and the dependence of the river 's annual salmon runs on it . 
 = = = Natural history = = = 
 The river is considered a prime habitat for Chinook salmon , Coho salmon , and rainbow trout . Once the river was the third @-@ largest producer of salmon on the West Coast , but today , only a fraction of the river 's historic runs remain since the construction of six dams between 1908 and 1962 . Coho salmon in the Klamath River are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act . In 1963 , the upper Trinity River — the largest single tributary to the Klamath — was virtually removed from the Klamath drainage with the completion of the Lewiston and Trinity Dams , diverting 90 percent of the Trinity 's flow to the Sacramento Valley . From 1963 to 1991 , only 150 cubic feet per second ( 4 @.@ 2 m3 / s ) from the main stem above the dams was left to flow to the Klamath . In 1991 , a minimum annual Trinity flow of 340 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 420 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) was established , or about 470 cubic feet per second ( 13 m3 / s ) . 
 From the 1920s to the 1960s , four hydroelectric dams were built by the California @-@ Oregon Power Company ( <unk> ) and its successor PacifiCorp on the Klamath River main stem , blocking salmon migration and trapping sediment that formerly replenished downstream gravel bars used by spawning salmon . The possible removal of the dams has been a controversial issue in the region in recent years . Despite intense lobbying by local Native American tribes , conservationists , and fishermen , the 2004 renewal application by PacifiCorp for another 50 @-@ year federal operating license for the dams did not include any provisions for allowing salmon to return to more than 300 miles ( 483 km ) of former habitat above the dams . In January 2007 , however , the federal government ruled that PacifiCorp must equip four dams with fish ladders , a modification which would potentially cost more than $ 300 million . PacifiCorp has offered $ 300 million to upgrade the JC Boyle fish ladder and proposed trucking fish around the <unk> Number 1 and Iron Gate dams , after having had been denied a license to build a power generator in Utah . PacifiCorp President <unk> defended the company 's activities in the area , pointing to other benefits . 
 A separate controversy surrounds the use of water in the Upper Klamath Basin for irrigated agriculture , which was temporarily halted in 2001 to protect endangered salmon and lake fish during a severe drought . Vice President Dick Cheney personally intervened to ensure water to the agriculture industry rather than to environmental flow . In 2002 , the federal government , under Interior Secretary Gale Norton , provided full water deliveries to irrigators as the drought continued ; despite the fact that Klamath area tribes have treaty rights that predate the settlement of the farmers . Norton argued for a " free market " approach by allowing farmers to sell the water to the Native Americans downstream . That year , the Klamath River system had the largest fish die @-@ off ever recorded . The House Natural Resources Committee investigated Vice President Cheney for having released extra water to ranchers for possible political gain . 
 According to biologists from the State of California and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service , the atypical low flow in the river along with high fish return numbers and high water temperatures allowed for a gill rot disease to kill at least 33 @,@ 000 salmon in September 2002 , before they could reproduce . The die @-@ off was downstream of the Trinity inflow , and the salmon of the Trinity were impacted to a greater degree than the Klamath as the Trinity run was at its peak . The report does mention that the official fish die @-@ off estimate of 34 @,@ 056 is probably quite low and could be only half of the actual loss . Klamath River flows as measured at the river gauge in Keno show a low flow of 800 cubic feet per second ( 22 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) in September 1908 ( before irrigation began ) . During the 2002 fish kill , flows of 475 cubic feet per second ( 13 @.@ 5 m3 / s ) were recorded . During September of the 2001 irrigation shut @-@ off , an average of 688 cubic feet per second ( 19 @.@ 5 m3 / s ) was recorded . 
 In 2011 , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) approved a plan first introduced in 1992 by California 's state government . The plan called for major cleanup of the lower river in order to protect salmon from phosphorus , nitrogen , and carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand . It also expressed concern over high water temperatures , algal blooms , and low oxygen levels , although certain fish have adapted to some of these issues . Environmental groups , more than six government agencies , Native American tribes in the basin , and others have worked with the EPA to reduce pollution levels in the Klamath . 
 = = = = Salmon controversy = = = = 
 Historically , the Klamath River was once the " third most productive salmon river system in the United States " , after the Columbia and the Sacramento . Eutrophication and raised water temperatures induced by the construction of dams have created worsening conditions for migrating salmon , especially in years of drought . Irrigation along the upper Klamath and the Shasta and Scott rivers , along with the almost @-@ total diversion of the upper Trinity River , have all lowered the total river flow supporting out @-@ migrating young salmon in spring and in @-@ migrating adult salmon in the fall . In the 1960s , a project was proposed to divert the entire Klamath River to Central California and Southern California , an undertaking known as the Klamath Diversion , but this project was defeated . It would have limited salmon to the last 12 miles ( 19 km ) of the entire river . In 2002 , a major fish kill took its toll on the river and the Tribes that depend on it . More than 34 @,@ 000 <unk> died alone , due to the low waters and poor hindsight , as well as compassion , of those in charge ( PacifiCorp ) . In 2005 , PacifiCorp applied to the federal government to <unk> its four hydroelectric dams on the Klamath for up to 50 years . Environmentalists opposed the <unk> , arguing that the dams should be removed to reopen the upper Klamath to salmon . 
 An agreement was signed on February 18 , 2010 . 
 Two years of closed @-@ door negotiations among farmers , Indian tribes , fishermen , conservation groups and government agencies had resulted in a plan to work toward a detailed settlement of Klamath water usage . It also called for the removal of four hydroelectric dams — the Iron Gate Dam and <unk> dams 1 and 2 ( in California ) , and the John C. Boyle Dam ( in Oregon ) — now operating along 300 miles ( 483 km ) of the Klamath River , starting in the year 2020 , as well as for restoration projects . A non @-@ binding " Agreement in Principle " ( AIP ) among four parties — PacifiCorp , the federal government , California , and Oregon — to remove the four dams had been announced on November 13 , 2008 . PacifiCorp ratepayers would fund part of the plan and the State of California would fund much of the remaining projected cost . Total cost would be around $ 800 million . The agreement required the federal government to scientifically assess the costs and benefits of the dam removals , determine whether such action is in the public interest , and to make a final determination by March 31 , 2012 , as to whether the benefits of the project will justify the costs , although that deadline was missed . A local group , the Klamath County Tea Party Patriots , formed to oppose the agreement , and succeeded in unseating local elected officials who were supportive of the deal . On December 31 , 2012 , the parties renewed their agreement , providing more time for federal , Congressional , and California electorate approval to finalize dam removal . 
 On April 4 , 2013 , the U.S. Department of the Interior released its final environmental impact statement on the plan , recommending the removal of all four dams and $ 1 billion in other environmental restoration to aid native salmon runs on the Klamath . Ron Wyden , the senior U.S. senator from Oregon , introduced the Klamath Basin Water Recovery and Economic Restoration Act of 2014 , which was cosponsored by his fellow Oregon senator Jeff Merkley and by Nevada senator Dean Heller . 
 = = = = Water rights dispute = = = = 
 When the 1864 treaty was signed , the Klamath Tribes , with much less land , became short on the stream water needed for fishing . Although from the 1950s to the 1970s they were not federally recognized , the tribes never lost their water rights , and in 2001 , when Klamath Basin farmers twice sued the U.S. Department of the Interior for more access to irrigation water , their rights were upheld . The tribes ' water allotments for fishing continue to be a large factor in Klamath Basin water disputes in the 21st century . In 2013 , the Tribe 's water rights were enforced for the first time , in what is known as a ' Water Call ' . The Klamath Tribe called upon their in @-@ stream water right , which was enforced by the Water Master . This resulted in almost all upper @-@ basin irrigation being denied water , except for groundwater irrigators . The Klamath Project , however , was not called upon . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Whitewater rafting and kayaking are popular recreational activities along the upper Klamath River below the J.C. Boyle Dam , and also along the lower Klamath River downstream of the town of Happy Camp . There are long stretches — over 100 miles ( 160 km ) in one instance — of Class I – II whitewater rapids , while there are some Class III – IV rapids in some of the narrower stretches . Beyond <unk> , the river slows down into a wider , deeper channel . About 13 miles ( 21 km ) of the river is designated Wild , and 175 miles ( 282 km ) Recreational . 
 Sport fishing is also popular on the Klamath River , with steelhead trout being the most popular , though Chinook salmon are also highly sought after when low salmon returns do not prevent fishing . A fly fishing guide said that the Klamath was one of the most productive steelhead rivers on the West Coast of the United States . 
 Recreational gold mining is popular along the Klamath and some of its tributaries , including the Salmon and the Trinity . Although simple methods such as panning are still used , some methods use suction pumps — a practice involving turning over deposits of sediment and spreading them in order to find gold . Debates over the practice , which opponents contend damage water quality ( mercury ) and fish habitat , continue . Currently , suction dredge mining is banned in California until 2016 . 
 A variety of national forests and wildlife preserves — including the Klamath National Forest , Six Rivers National Forest , Klamath National Wildlife Refuges Complex , and Lower Klamath National Wildlife Refuge — are located in the Klamath River watershed . The Klamath National Forest is located in Siskiyou County with a small portion in Oregon , and Six Rivers National Forest is located in the southern Klamath watershed , mostly in the Trinity River watershed . The latter two are located in the Upper Klamath Lake @-@ Lower Klamath Lake area . Lava Beds National Monument , which contains a large array of lava tubes and formations , is also in the Lower Klamath Lake area , to the south of the remnants of the lake . 
 = = Klamath River Overlook = = 
 The Klamath River Overlook is a prime spot open to the public for watching the gray whale migration . Look for other marine mammals and a host of seabirds any time of year . Hike ¼ mile down a steep trail to the lower overlook and more dramatic views . 
 = = The Yurok Tribe 's Klamath Salmon Festival = = 
 A annual festival takes place along the Klamath River . 
 = Shetland = 
 Shetland ( / <unk> / ; Scottish Gaelic : <unk> [ <unk> ̪ ˠt ̪ <unk> ] ; Norn : <unk> ) , also called the Shetland Islands , is a subarctic archipelago of Scotland that lies northeast of the island of Great Britain and forms part of the United Kingdom . 
 The islands lie some 80 km ( 50 mi ) to the northeast of Orkney and 280 km ( 170 mi ) southeast of the Faroe Islands and form part of the division between the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the North Sea to the east . The total area is 1 @,@ 466 km2 ( 566 sq mi ) and the population totalled 23 @,@ 210 in 2012 . Comprising the Shetland constituency of the Scottish Parliament , Shetland is also one of the 32 council areas of Scotland ; the islands ' administrative centre and only burgh is Lerwick , which is also the capital of Shetland since taking over from Scalloway in 1708 . 
 The largest island , known simply as " Mainland " , has an area of 967 km2 ( 373 sq mi ) , making it the third @-@ largest Scottish island and the fifth @-@ largest of the British Isles . There are an additional 15 inhabited islands . The archipelago has an oceanic climate , a complex geology , a rugged coastline and many low , rolling hills . 
 Humans have lived there since the Mesolithic period , and the earliest written references to the islands date back to Roman times . The early historic period was dominated by Scandinavian influences , especially Norway , and the islands did not become part of Scotland until the 15th century . When Scotland became part of the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707 , trade with northern Europe decreased . Fishing has continued to be an important aspect of the economy up to the present day . The discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s significantly boosted Shetland incomes , employment and public sector revenues . 
 The local way of life reflects the joint Norse and Scottish heritage including the Up Helly Aa fire festival , and a strong musical tradition , especially the traditional fiddle style . The islands have produced a variety of writers of prose and poetry , often in Shetland Scots . There are numerous areas set aside to protect the local fauna and flora , including a number of important seabird nesting sites . The Shetland pony and Shetland Sheepdog are two well known Shetland animal breeds . Other distinguished local breeds include the Shetland sheep , cow , goose , and duck . The Shetland pig , or <unk> , has been extinct since approximately 1930 . 
 The islands ' motto , which appears on the Council 's coat of arms , is Með <unk> skal land <unk> . This Icelandic phrase is taken from the Danish 1241 Basic Law , Codex <unk> , and is also mentioned in Njáls saga , and means " By law shall land be built " . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name of Shetland is derived from the Old Norse words , <unk> ( hilt ) , and land ( land ) . 
 In AD 43 and 77 the Roman authors Pomponius Mela and Pliny the Elder referred to the seven islands they call <unk> and <unk> respectively , both of which are assumed to be Shetland . Another possible early written reference to the islands is Tacitus ' report in AD 98 , after describing the discovery and conquest of Orkney , that the Roman fleet had seen " Thule , too " . In early Irish literature , Shetland is referred to as <unk> Catt — " the Isles of Cats " , which may have been the pre @-@ Norse inhabitants ' name for the islands . The Cat tribe also occupied parts of the northern Scottish mainland and their name can be found in Caithness , and in the Gaelic name for Sutherland ( Cataibh , meaning " among the Cats " ) . 
 The oldest version of the modern name Shetland is <unk> , the Latinised adjectival form of the Old Norse name recorded in a letter from Harald count of Shetland in 1190 , becoming Hetland in 1431 after various intermediate transformations . It is possible that the Pictish " cat " sound forms part of this Norse name . It then became Hjaltland in the 16th century . 
 As Norn was gradually replaced by Scots , Hjaltland became <unk> . The initial letter is the Middle Scots letter , " yogh " , the pronunciation of which is almost identical to the original Norn sound , " / <unk> / " . When the use of the letter yogh was discontinued , it was often replaced by the similar @-@ looking letter z , hence Zetland , the misspelt form used to describe the pre @-@ 1975 county council . This is also the source of the ZE postcode used for the Shetlands . 
 Most of the individual islands have Norse names , although the derivations of some are obscure and may represent pre @-@ Norse , possibly Pictish or even pre @-@ Celtic names or elements . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Shetland is around 170 kilometres ( 110 mi ) north of mainland Scotland , covers an area of 1 @,@ 468 square kilometres ( 567 sq mi ) and has a coastline 2 @,@ 702 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 679 mi ) long . 
 Lerwick , the capital and largest settlement , has a population of 6 @,@ 958 and about half of the archipelago 's total population of 23 @,@ 167 people live within 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) of the town . 
 Scalloway on the west coast , which was the capital until 1708 , has a population of less than 1 @,@ 000 . 
 Only 16 of about 100 islands are inhabited . The main island of the group is known as Mainland , and of the next largest , Yell , Unst , and Fetlar lie to the north and Bressay and Whalsay lie to the east . East and West Burra , Muckle Roe , Papa Stour , <unk> and <unk> are smaller islands to the west of Mainland . The other inhabited islands are Foula 28 kilometres ( 17 mi ) west of Walls , Fair Isle 38 kilometres ( 24 mi ) south @-@ west of Sumburgh Head , and the Out Skerries to the east . 
 The uninhabited islands include Mousa , known for the Broch of Mousa , the finest preserved example in Scotland of these Iron Age round towers , St Ninian 's Isle connected to Mainland by the largest active tombolo in the UK , and Out Stack , the northernmost point of the British Isles . Shetland 's location means that it provides a number of such records : <unk> is the most northerly castle in the United Kingdom and <unk> the most northerly settlement . The geology of Shetland is complex , with numerous faults and fold axes . These islands are the northern outpost of the Caledonian orogeny , and there are outcrops of Lewisian , Dalradian and Moine metamorphic rocks with histories similar to their equivalents on the Scottish mainland . There are also Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions . The most distinctive features are the ultrabasic ophiolite , peridotite and gabbro on Unst and Fetlar , which are remnants of the Iapetus Ocean floor . Much of Shetland 's economy depends on the oil @-@ bearing sediments in the surrounding seas . Geological evidence shows that in around 6100 BC a tsunami caused by the Storegga Slides hit Shetland , as well as the rest of the east coast of Scotland , and may have created a wave of up to 25 metres ( 82 ft ) high in the voes where modern populations are highest . 
 The highest point of Shetland is <unk> Hill , which reaches only 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) . The Pleistocene glaciations entirely covered the islands . During this period , the Stanes of <unk> , a 2000 @-@ tonne glacial erratic , came to rest on a prominent hilltop in <unk> . 
 Shetland is a National Scenic Area which , unusually , is made up of a number of discrete locations : Fair Isle , Foula , South West Mainland ( including the Scalloway Islands ) , Muckle Roe , Esha Ness , <unk> and <unk> Ness . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Shetland has an oceanic , temperate maritime climate bordering on the subpolar variety , with long but cool winters and short mild summers . The climate all year round is moderate due to the influence of the surrounding seas , with average peak temperatures of 7 ° C ( 45 ° F ) in March and 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) in July and August . Temperatures over 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) are very rare . The highest temperature on record was 28 @.@ 4 ° C ( 83 @.@ 1 ° F ) in July 1991 and the coldest − 8 @.@ 9 ° C ( 16 @.@ 0 ° F ) in the <unk> of 1952 and 1959 . The frost @-@ free period may be as little as three months . In contrast , inland areas of nearby Scandinavia on similar latitudes experience significantly larger temperature differences between summer and winter , with the average highs of regular July days comparable to Lerwick 's all @-@ time record heat that is around 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) , further demonstrating the moderating effect of the Atlantic Ocean . In contrast , winters are considerably milder than those expected in nearby continental areas , even comparable to winter temperatures of many parts of England and Wales much further south . 
 The general character of the climate is windy and cloudy with at least 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) of rain falling on more than 250 days a year . Average yearly precipitation is 1 @,@ 003 mm ( 39 @.@ 5 in ) , with November and December the wettest months . Snowfall is usually confined to the period November to February , and snow seldom lies on the ground for more than a day . Less rain falls from April to August although no month receives less than 50 mm ( 2 in ) . Fog is common during summer due to the cooling effect of the sea on mild southerly <unk> . 
 Due to the islands ' latitude , on clear winter nights the " northern lights " can sometimes be seen in the sky , while in summer there is almost perpetual daylight , a state of affairs known locally as the " simmer dim " . Annual bright sunshine averages 1110 hours , rending overcast days common . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 Due to the practice , dating to at least the early Neolithic , of building in stone on virtually treeless islands , Shetland is extremely rich in physical remains of the prehistoric eras and there are over 5 @,@ 000 archaeological sites all told . A midden site at West Voe on the south coast of Mainland , dated to <unk> – 4030 BC , has provided the first evidence of Mesolithic human activity on Shetland . The same site provides dates for early Neolithic activity and finds at <unk> of <unk> in Walls have been dated to 3400 BC . " Shetland knives " are stone tools that date from this period made from <unk> from <unk> . 
 Pottery shards found at the important site of Jarlshof also indicate that there was Neolithic activity there although the main settlement dates from the Bronze Age . This includes a smithy , a cluster of wheelhouses and a later broch . The site has provided evidence of habitation during various phases right up until Viking times . Heel @-@ shaped cairns , are a style of chambered cairn unique to Shetland , with a particularly large example on <unk> . 
 Numerous brochs were erected during the Iron Age . In addition to Mousa there are significant ruins at <unk> , <unk> , Old Scatness and West <unk> , although their origin and purpose is a matter of some controversy . The later Iron Age inhabitants of the Northern Isles were probably Pictish , although the historical record is sparse . Hunter ( 2000 ) states in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD : " As for Shetland , Orkney , Skye and the Western Isles , their inhabitants , most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time , are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence . ” In 2011 , the collective site , " The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland " , including Broch of Mousa , Old Scatness and Jarlshof , joined the <unk> " Tentative List " of World Heritage Sites . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Scandinavian colonisation = = = 
 The expanding population of Scandinavia led to a shortage of available resources and arable land there and led to a period of Viking expansion , the Norse gradually shifting their attention from plundering to invasion . Shetland was colonised during the late 8th and 9th centuries , the fate of the existing indigenous population being uncertain . Modern Shetlanders have almost identical proportions of Scandinavian matrilineal and patrilineal genetic ancestry , suggesting that the islands were settled by both men and women in equal measure . 
 Vikings then made the islands the headquarters of pirate expeditions carried out against Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland . In response , Norwegian king Harald Hårfagre ( " Harald Fair Hair " ) annexed the Northern Isles ( comprising Orkney and Shetland ) in 875 . Rognvald Eysteinsson received Orkney and Shetland from Harald as an earldom as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland , and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty . 
 The islands were Christianised in the late 10th century . King Olav Tryggvasson summoned the jarl Sigurd the Stout during a visit to Orkney and said , " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel . " Unsurprisingly , Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke . Unusually , from c . 1100 onwards the Norse jarls owed allegiance both to Norway and to the Scottish crown through their holdings as Earls of Caithness . 
 In 1194 , when Harald Maddadsson was Earl of Orkney and Shetland , a rebellion broke out against King Sverre Sigurdsson of Norway . The Øyskjeggs ( " Island <unk> " ) sailed for Norway but were beaten in the Battle of Florvåg near Bergen . After his victory King Sverre placed Shetland under direct Norwegian rule , a state of affairs that continued for nearly two centuries . 
 = = = Increased Scottish interest = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 13th century onwards Scottish monarchs increasingly sought to take control of the islands surrounding the mainland . The process was begun in earnest by Alexander II and was continued by his successor Alexander III . This strategy eventually led to an invasion by Haakon Haakonsson , King of Norway . His fleet assembled in Bressay Sound before sailing for Scotland . After the stalemate of the Battle of Largs , Haakon retreated to Orkney , where he died in December 1263 , entertained on his death bed by recitations of the sagas . His death halted any further Norwegian expansion in Scotland and following this ill @-@ fated expedition , the Hebrides and Mann were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth , although the Scots recognised continuing Norwegian sovereignty over Orkney and Shetland . 
 = = = <unk> to Scotland = = = 
 In the 14th century , Orkney and Shetland remained a Norwegian province , but Scottish influence was growing . Jon Haraldsson , who was murdered in Thurso in 1231 , was the last of an unbroken line of Norse jarls , and thereafter the earls were Scots noblemen of the houses of Angus and St. Clair . On the death of Haakon VI in 1380 , Norway formed a political union with Denmark after which the interest of the royal house in the islands declined . In 1469 , Shetland was pledged by Christian I , in his capacity as King of Norway , as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret , betrothed to James III of Scotland . As the money was never paid , the connection with the crown of Scotland has become perpetual . In 1470 , William Sinclair , 1st Earl of Caithness ceded his title to James III and the following year the Northern Isles were directly annexed to the Crown of Scotland , a process confirmed by Parliament in 1472 . Nonetheless , Shetland 's connection with Norway has proven to be enduring . 
 From the early 15th century on the Shetlanders sold their goods through the Hanseatic League of German merchantmen . The Hansa would buy shiploads of salted fish , wool and butter and import salt , cloth , beer and other goods . The late 16th century and early 17th century was dominated by the influence of the despotic Robert Stewart , Earl of Orkney , who was granted the islands by his half @-@ sister Mary Queen of Scots , and his son Patrick . The latter commenced the building of Scalloway Castle , but after his imprisonment in 1609 the Crown annexed Orkney and Shetland again until 1643 when Charles I granted them to William Douglas , 7th Earl of Morton . These rights were held on and off by the <unk> until 1766 , when they were sold by James Douglas , 14th Earl of Morton to Laurence Dundas . 
 = = = Early British rule = = = 
 The trade with the North German towns lasted until the 1707 Act of Union when high salt duties prohibited the German merchants from trading with Shetland . Shetland then went into an economic depression as the Scottish and local traders were not as skilled in trading with salted fish . However , some local merchant @-@ lairds took up where the German merchants had left off , and fitted out their own ships to export fish from Shetland to the Continent . For the independent farmers of Shetland this had negative consequences , as they now had to fish for these merchant @-@ lairds . 
 Smallpox afflicted the islands in the 17th and 18th centuries , but as vaccines became common after 1760 the population increased to a maximum of 31 @,@ 670 in 1861 . However , British rule came at price for many ordinary people as well as traders . The Shetlanders ' nautical skills were sought by the Royal Navy . Some 3 @,@ 000 served during the Napoleonic wars from 1800 to 1815 and press gangs were rife . During this period 120 men were taken from Fetlar alone and only 20 of them returned home . By the late 19th century 90 % of all Shetland was owned by just 32 people , and between 1861 and 1881 more than 8 @,@ 000 Shetlanders emigrated . With the passing of the Crofters ' Act in 1886 the Liberal prime minister William Gladstone emancipated crofters from the rule of the landlords . The Act enabled those who had effectively been landowners ' serfs to become owner @-@ occupiers of their own small farms . By this time fishermen from Holland , who had traditionally gathered each year off the coast of Shetland to fish for herring , triggered an industry in the islands that boomed from around 1880 until the 1920s when stocks of the fish began to dwindle . The production peaked in 1905 at more than a million barrels , of which seven hundred and eight thousand were exported . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 During World War I many Shetlanders served in the Gordon Highlanders , a further 3 @,@ 000 served in the Merchant Navy and more than 1500 in a special local naval reserve . The 10th Cruiser Squadron was stationed at <unk> Minn and during a single year from March 1917 more than 4 @,@ 500 ships sailed from Lerwick as part of an escorted convoy system . In total , Shetland lost more than 500 men , a higher proportion than any other part of Britain , and there were further waves of emigration in the 1920s and 1930s . 
 During World War II a Norwegian naval unit nicknamed the " Shetland Bus " was established by the Special Operations Executive in the autumn of 1940 with a base first at Lunna and later in Scalloway to conduct operations around the coast of Norway . About 30 fishing vessels used by Norwegian refugees were gathered and the Shetland Bus conducted covert operations , carrying intelligence agents , refugees , instructors for the resistance , and military supplies . It made over 200 trips across the sea with Leif Larsen , the most highly decorated allied naval officer of the war , making 52 of them . Several RAF bases were also established at Sullom Voe and several lighthouses suffered enemy air attacks . 
 Oil reserves discovered in the later 20th century in the seas both east and west of Shetland have provided a much needed alternative source of income for the islands . The East Shetland Basin is one of Europe 's largest oil fields and as a result of the oil revenue and the cultural links with Norway , a small independence movement developed briefly to recast the constitutional position of Shetland . It saw as its model the Isle of Man , as well as Shetland 's closest neighbour , the Faroe Islands , an autonomous dependency of Denmark . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Today , the main revenue producers in Shetland are agriculture , aquaculture , fishing , renewable energy , the petroleum industry ( crude oil and natural gas production ) , the creative industries and tourism . 
 Fishing remains central to the islands ' economy today , with the total catch being 75 @,@ 767 tonnes ( 74 @,@ 570 long tons ; 83 @,@ 519 short tons ) in 2009 , valued at over £ 73 @.@ 2 million . Mackerel makes up more than half of the catch in Shetland by weight and value , and there are significant landings of haddock , cod , herring , whiting , monkfish and shellfish . Farming is mostly concerned with the raising of Shetland sheep , known for their unusually fine wool . Crops raised include oats and barley ; however , the cold , windswept islands make for a harsh environment for most plants . Crofting , the farming of small plots of land on a legally restricted tenancy basis , is still practised and is viewed as a key Shetland tradition as well as an important source of income . 
 Oil and gas were first landed in 1978 at Sullom Voe , which has subsequently become one of the largest terminals in Europe . Taxes from the oil have increased public sector spending on social welfare , art , sport , environmental measures and financial development . Three quarters of the islands ' workforce is employed in the service sector , and the Shetland Islands Council alone accounted for 27 @.@ 9 % of output in 2003 . Shetland 's access to oil revenues has funded the Shetland Charitable Trust , which in turn funds a wide variety of local programmes . The balance of the fund in 2011 was £ 217 million , i.e. , about £ 9 @,@ 500 per head . 
 In January 2007 , the Shetland Islands Council signed a partnership agreement with Scottish and Southern Energy for the Viking Wind Farm , a 200 @-@ turbine wind farm and subsea cable . This renewable energy project would produce about 600 megawatts and contribute about £ 20 million to the Shetland economy per year . The plan is meeting significant opposition within the islands , primarily resulting from the anticipated visual impact of the development . The <unk> project on Unst is a research centre which uses a combination of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind hydrogen system . The project is run by the Unst Partnership , the local community 's development trust . 
 <unk> is important both to the economy and culture of Shetland , and the Fair Isle design is well known . However , the industry faces challenges due to plagiarism of the word " Shetland " by manufacturers operating elsewhere , and a certification trademark , " The Shetland Lady " , has been registered . 
 Shetland is served by a weekly local newspaper , The Shetland Times and the online Shetland News http : / / <unk> / with radio service being provided by BBC Radio Shetland and the commercial radio station <unk> . 
 Shetland is a popular destination for cruise ships , and in 2010 the Lonely Planet guide named Shetland as the sixth best region in the world for tourists seeking unspoilt destinations . The islands were described as " beautiful and rewarding " and the Shetlanders as " a fiercely independent and self @-@ reliant bunch " . Overall visitor expenditure was worth £ 16 @.@ 4 million in 2006 , in which year just under 26 @,@ 000 cruise liner passengers arrived at Lerwick Harbour . In 2009 , the most popular visitor attractions were the Shetland Museum , the RSPB reserve at Sumburgh Head , <unk> Gallery at <unk> Mill and Jarlshof . 
 = = = Quarries = = = 
 <unk> : 60 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 60 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> 
 <unk> : 60 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 60 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> [ 1 ] 
 Sullom : 60 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 60 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> 
 <unk> : 60 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 60 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Transport between islands is primarily by ferry , and Shetland Islands Council operates various inter @-@ island services . Shetland is also served by a domestic connection from Lerwick to Aberdeen on mainland Scotland . This service , which takes about 12 hours , is operated by NorthLink Ferries . Some services also call at Kirkwall , Orkney , which increases the journey time between Aberdeen and Lerwick by 2 hours . There are plans of road tunnels to some of the islands , <unk> Bressay and Whalsay , however it is hard to convince the mainland government to finance them . 
 Sumburgh Airport , the main airport on Shetland , is located close to Sumburgh Head , 40 km ( 25 mi ) south of Lerwick . Loganair operates flights for <unk> to other parts of Scotland up to ten times a day , the destinations being Kirkwall , Aberdeen , Inverness , Glasgow and Edinburgh . Lerwick / Tingwall Airport is located 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) west of Lerwick . Operated by <unk> Ltd. in partnership with Shetland Islands Council , it is devoted to inter @-@ island flights from the Shetland Mainland to most of the inhabited islands . 
 <unk> Airport near Sullom Voe allows frequent charter flights from Aberdeen to transport oilfield workers and this small terminal has the fifth largest number of international passengers in Scotland . 
 Public bus services are operated on Mainland , Whalsay , Burra , Unst and Yell . 
 The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide , and there are numerous sites of wrecked ships . Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations . 
 = = Public services = = 
 The Shetland Islands Council is the Local Government authority for all the islands , based in Lerwick Town Hall . 
 Shetland is sub @-@ divided into 18 community council areas and into 12 civil parishes that are used for statistical purposes . 
 = = Education = = 
 In Shetland there are two High Schools — Anderson and Brae — five Junior High Schools , and 24 primary schools . 
 Shetland is also home to the North Atlantic Fisheries College , the Centre for Nordic Studies and Shetland College , which are all associated with the University of the Highlands and Islands . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The islands are represented by the Shetland football team who regularly compete in the Island Games . The islands ' senior football league is the G & S <unk> Premier League . 
 = = Churches and religion = = 
 The Reformation reached the archipelago in 1560 . This was an apparently peaceful transition and there is little evidence of religious intolerance in Shetland 's recorded history . 
 A variety of religious denominations are represented in the islands . 
 The Methodist Church has a relatively high membership in Shetland , which is a District of the Methodist Church ( with the rest of Scotland comprising a separate District ) . 
 The Church of Scotland has a Presbytery of Shetland that includes St. Columba 's Church in Lerwick . 
 The Catholic population is served by the church of St. Margaret and the Sacred Heart in Lerwick . The Parish is part of the Diocese of Aberdeen . 
 The Scottish Episcopal Church ( part of the Anglican Communion ) has regular worship at St Magnus ' Church , Lerwick , St Colman 's Church , <unk> , and the Chapel of Christ the <unk> , Fetlar , the last of which is maintained by the Society of Our Lady of the Isles , the most northerly and remote Anglican religious order of nuns . 
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints has a congregation in Lerwick . The former print works and offices of the local newspaper , The Shetland Times , has been converted into a chapel . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Shetland is represented in the House of Commons as part of the Orkney and Shetland constituency , which elects one Member of Parliament , the current incumbent being Alistair Carmichael . This seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats or their predecessors the Liberal Party since 1950 , longer than any other they represent in the UK . 
 In the Scottish Parliament the Shetland constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament ( MSP ) by the first past the post system . The current MSP is Tavish Scott of the Scottish Liberal Democrats . Shetland is within the Highlands and Islands electoral region . 
 The political composition of the Council is 22 Independents . Thus it is one of only three Councils in Scotland with a majority of elected members not representing a political party . 
 Roy <unk> , who founded the local chapter of the Scottish National Party in 1966 , designed the flag of Shetland in cooperation with Bill Adams to mark the 500th anniversary of the transfer of the islands from Norway to Scotland . The colours are identical to those of the flag of Scotland , but are shaped in the Nordic cross . After several unsuccessful attempts , including a plebiscite in 1985 , the Lord Lyon King of Arms approved it as the official flag of Shetland in 2005 . 
 = = Local culture and the arts = = 
 After the islands were transferred to Scotland , thousands of Scots families emigrated to Shetland in the 16th and 17th centuries but studies of the genetic makeup of the islands ' population indicate that Shetlanders are just under half Scandinavian in origin . A sizeable component of Scandinavian patrilineal ancestry has been reported in Orkney ( 55 % ) and Shetland ( 68 % ) . This combination is reflected in many aspects of local life . For example , almost every place name in use can be traced back to the Vikings . The Norn language was a form of Old Norse , which continued to be spoken until the 18th century when it was replaced by an insular dialect of Scots known as Shetlandic , which is in turn being replaced by Scottish English . Although Norn was spoken for hundreds of years it is now extinct and few written sources remain . Shetlandic is used both in local radio and dialect writing , and kept alive by the Shetland Folk Society . 
 The Lerwick Up Helly Aa is one of a variety of fire festivals held in Shetland annually in the middle of winter , it is always started on the last Tuesday of January . The festival is just over 100 years old in its present , highly organised form . Originally , a festival held to break up the long nights of winter and mark the end of Yule , the festival has become one celebrating the isles ' heritage and includes a procession of men dressed as Vikings and the burning of a replica longship . 
 The cuisine of Shetland is based on locally produced lamb , beef and seafood , much of it organic . Inevitably , the real ale @-@ producing Valhalla Brewery is the most northerly in Britain . The Shetland Black is a variety of blue potato with a dark skin and indigo coloured flesh markings . 
 Shetland competes in the biennial International Island Games , which it hosted in 2005 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Shetland 's culture and landscapes have inspired a variety of musicians , writers and film @-@ makers . The Forty Fiddlers was formed in the 1950s to promote the traditional fiddle style , which is a vibrant part of local culture today . Notable exponents of Shetland folk music include Aly Bain , Fiddlers ' Bid , and the late Tom Anderson and <unk> Willie Johnson . Thomas Fraser was a country musician who never released a commercial recording during his life , but whose work has become popular more than 20 years after his untimely death in 1978 . 
 = = = Writers = = = 
 Walter Scott 's 1822 novel The Pirate is set in " a remote part of Shetland " , and was inspired by his 1814 visit to the islands . The name Jarlshof meaning " Earl 's Mansion " is a coinage of his . Robert Cowie , a doctor born in Lerwick published the 1874 work Shetland : Descriptive and Historical ; Being a Graduation Thesis on the Inhabitants of the Shetland Islands ; and a Topographical Description of the Country . 
 Hugh MacDiarmid , the Scots poet and writer lived in Whalsay from the mid @-@ 1930s through 1942 , and wrote many poems there , including a number that directly address or reflect the Shetland environment such as " On A Raised Beach " , which was inspired by a visit to West Linga . The 1975 novel North Star by Hammond Innes is largely set in Shetland and Raman <unk> 's 2007 book of poetry A Choreographer 's Cartography offers a British Asian perspective on the landscape . The Shetland Quartet by Ann <unk> , who previously lived in Fair Isle , is a series of crime novels set around the islands . In 2013 her novel Red Bones became the basis of BBC crime drama television series Shetland . 
 <unk> , who grew up in Walls , was arguably Shetland 's finest poet of the 20th century . Haldane Burgess was a Shetland historian , poet , novelist , violinist , linguist and socialist and Rhoda Bulter ( 1929 – 94 ) is one of the best @-@ known Shetland poets of recent times . Other 20th and 21st century poets and novelists include Christine De Luca , Robert Alan Jamieson who grew up in <unk> , the late Lollie Graham of <unk> , Stella Sutherland of Bressay , the late William J Tait from Yell and Laureen Johnson . 
 There are two monthly magazines in production : Shetland Life and i 'i ' Shetland . The quarterly The New <unk> , founded in 1947 , is said to be Scotland 's longest @-@ running literary magazine . For much of the later 20th century it was the major vehicle for the work of local writers — and others , including early work by George Mackay Brown . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Michael Powell made The Edge of the World in 1937 , a dramatisation based on the true story of the evacuation of the last 36 inhabitants of the remote island of St Kilda on 29 August 1930 . St Kilda lies in the Atlantic Ocean , 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) west of the Outer Hebrides but Powell was unable to get permission to film there . Undaunted , he made the film over four months during the summer of 1936 on Foula and the film transposes these events to Shetland . Forty years later , the documentary Return to the Edge of the World was filmed , capturing a reunion of cast and crew of the film as they revisited the island in 1978 . 
 A number of other films have been made on or about Shetland including A <unk> 's Life in Shetland ( 1932 ) A Shetland Lyric ( 1934 ) , Devil 's Gate ( 2003 ) and It 's Nice Up North ( 2006 ) , a comedy documentary by Graham Fellows . An annual film festival takes place in the newly built <unk> , a cinema , music and education venue . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Shetland has three national nature reserves , at the seabird colonies of <unk> and Noss , and at Keen of Hamar to preserve the serpentine flora . There are a further 81 SSSIs , which cover 66 % or more of the land surfaces of Fair Isle , Papa Stour , Fetlar , Noss and Foula . Mainland has 45 separate sites . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The landscape in Shetland is marked by the grazing of sheep and the harsh conditions have limited the total number of plant species to about 400 . Native trees such as rowan and crab apple are only found in a few isolated places such as cliffs and loch islands . The flora is dominated by Arctic @-@ alpine plants , wild flowers , moss and lichen . Spring squill , buck 's @-@ horn plantain , Scots <unk> , <unk> and sea campion are abundant , especially in sheltered places . Shetland mouse @-@ ear ( Cerastium nigrescens ) is an endemic flowering plant found only in Shetland . It was first recorded in 1837 by botanist Thomas <unk> . Although reported from two other sites in the nineteenth century , it currently grows only on two serpentine hills on the island of Unst . The nationally scarce <unk> is found on several islands and the British Red Listed bryophyte <unk> <unk> has also been recorded . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Shetland has numerous seabird colonies . Birds found on the islands include Atlantic puffin , storm @-@ petrel , red @-@ throated diver , northern gannet and great skua ( locally called the " <unk> " ) . Numerous rarities have also been recorded including black @-@ browed albatross and snow goose , and a single pair of snowy owls bred on Fetlar from 1967 to 1975 . The Shetland wren , Fair Isle wren and Shetland starling are subspecies endemic to Shetland . There are also populations of various moorland birds such as curlew , snipe and golden plover . 
 The geographical isolation and recent glacial history of Shetland have resulted in a depleted mammalian fauna and the brown rat and house mouse are two of only three species of rodent present on the islands . The Shetland field mouse is the third and the archipelago 's fourth endemic subspecies , of which there are three varieties on Yell , Foula and Fair Isle . They are variants of Apodemus sylvaticus and archaeological evidence suggests that this species was present during the Middle Iron Age ( around 200 BC to AD 400 ) . It is possible that Apodemus was introduced from Orkney where a population has existed since at the least the Bronze Age . 
 = = = Domesticated animals = = = 
 There is a variety of indigenous breeds , of which the diminutive Shetland pony is probably the best known , as well as being an important part of the Shetland farming tradition . The first written record of the pony was in 1603 in the Court Books of Shetland and , for its size , it is the strongest of all the horse breeds . Others are the Shetland Sheepdog or " <unk> " , the endangered Shetland cattle and Shetland Goose and the Shetland sheep which is believed to have originated prior to 1000 AD . The Grice was a breed of semi @-@ domesticated pig that had a habit of attacking lambs , and that became extinct in 1930 . 
 = = = Lists = = = 
 List of counties of the United Kingdom 
 List of islands 
 = = = About Shetland = = = 
 Mavis Grind 
 Udal law 
 = = = Other = = = 
 <unk> 
 Battle of Florvåg 
 Rögnvald Kali Kolsson 
 Timeline of prehistoric Scotland 
 Prehistoric Scotland 
 Constitutional status of Orkney , Shetland and the Western Isles 
 = 1995 Sugar Bowl ( December ) = 
 The 1995 Sugar Bowl was the 62nd edition of the post @-@ season American college football Sugar Bowl bowl game . It featured the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Texas Longhorns and was held at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans , Louisiana on December 31 , 1995 . The game was the final contest of the 1995 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season for both teams , and ended in a 28 – 10 victory for Virginia Tech . 
 In 1995 , the Sugar Bowl was held under the rules of the Bowl Alliance . The Alliance , predecessor to the modern Bowl Championship Series , was intended to match the champions of the Southeastern Conference , Big East Conference , Atlantic Coast Conference , Big 12 , Southwest Conference , and one at @-@ large team against each other in the Sugar Bowl , Orange Bowl , and Fiesta Bowl . Each year , the two highest @-@ ranked teams would play in a National Championship Game held in place of one of the bowl games . The site of the national championship game rotated among the three bowl games , as did the date of each game . Following the 1995 college football season , the Sugar Bowl was designated for December 31 , marking the first time two Sugar Bowls would be held in the same calendar year . 
 Virginia Tech was selected to play in the 1995 Sugar Bowl by virtue of winning the Big East football championship . The Hokies , who finished 9 – 2 during the regular season , actually were co @-@ Big East champions . The University of Miami , which tied the Hokies , was ineligible for post @-@ season play due to sanctions imposed as a result of recruiting rules violations . The Hokies played the University of Texas , which finished 10 – 1 – 1 during the regular season en route to becoming Southwest Conference champions . The Southwest Conference was scheduled to disband after the football season , but its champion was guaranteed one of the at @-@ large spots in the Bowl Alliance . 
 The game was marred by the revelation that a Texas player had been competing under an assumed name . Other off @-@ the @-@ field incidents also took place prior to the game . Because the game was Virginia Tech 's first trip to a major bowl game , ticket sales were brisk . Texas took an early lead in the competition and led 10 – 7 at halftime , but Virginia Tech 's defense shut out Texas ' offense in the second half and Tech scored 21 unanswered points . In recognition of his achievements in the game , Virginia Tech wide receiver Bryan Still was named the game 's most valuable player . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 In the 1995 college football season , teams were selected for the Sugar Bowl under the new Bowl Alliance system . The Bowl Alliance matched up the conference champions of the Big East , Southeastern Conference , Big 12 Conference , Atlantic Coast Conference , and two at @-@ large teams in games to determine an official national champion . Prior to the introduction of the Bowl Alliance and its predecessor , the Bowl Coalition , national champions were determined by various college football polls that sometimes named different teams as champion . 
 Under the Alliance system , the two highest @-@ ranked members of Alliance conferences were matched up in a national championship game . The lower @-@ ranked conference champions and two @-@ at large teams would play each other in other bowl games . In 1995 , one of these at @-@ large spots was reserved for the champion of the Southwest Conference , which had been a member of the Bowl Coalition but was scheduled to dissolve after the 1995 season . Its members joined different conferences in an attempt to increase their revenue . 
 The Fiesta Bowl hosted the national championship game for the 1995 season , and thus had the first and second pick of eligible Bowl Alliance teams . The Orange Bowl had the third and fifth selections , while the Sugar Bowl had the fourth and sixth picks . The three Bowl Alliance games each were assigned a different date : December 31 , January 1 , or January 2 . The dates rotated among the three games , along with which game would host the national championship . The Sugar Bowl was assigned the December 31 date , marking the first time it had been held on that date instead of its traditional January 1 date since December 31 , 1975 . From December 31 , 1972 to December 31 , 1975 , the game was held on New Year 's Eve . Thus , there were two games held during the calendar year 1972 and none in calendar year 1976 . There were also two games in calendar year 1995 , but since then the game has been held on or after January 1 following the regular season . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 The University of Texas Longhorns began the 1995 college football season after winning eight games and losing four in 1994 , a year that culminated with the Longhorns in a five @-@ way tie for the Southwest Conference championship and with a 35 – 31 victory over the North Carolina Tar Heels in the 1994 Sun Bowl . Heading into the 1995 season , Texas was ranked 18th in both the coaches ' and Associated Press preseason polls . In the Southwest Conference , which was scheduled to dissolve after the season , Texas was picked to finish second in the annual preseason poll of media covering the Southwest Conference . Texas A & M was predicted to win the conference . Overall , most commentators predicted Texas to improve on its 8 – 4 performance in 1994 and have an outside chance to compete in the top ranks , nationally . 
 The Longhorns got the 1995 season off to a successful start with a 38 – 17 win against the Hawaii Rainbows in Honolulu . After a bye week , No. 15 Texas repeated that success in its home opener with a 38 – 27 win over the Pittsburgh Panthers . The consecutive wins raised Texas to No. 13 in the country , but the Longhorns fumbled away their third game of the season , a 55 – 27 defeat at the hands of Notre Dame that involved five turnovers by the Longhorns . 
 After the loss , the Longhorns fell to No. 21 in the country . They quickly recovered however , reeling off two wins in subsequent weeks : a 35 – 10 victory over Southern Methodist University and a 37 – 13 win against Rice . After the two wins , the Longhorns were 4 – 1 and No. 18 in the country heading into their traditional rivalry game against Oklahoma , the Red River Shootout . The 1995 edition of that competition ended in frustration , however , as the two teams battled to a 24 – 24 tie after Texas failed to convert a fourth down deep in Oklahoma territory late in the game . It was just the fifth tie in the 89 @-@ game history of the rivalry that started in 1900 . 
 Following the tie against Oklahoma , No. 16 Texas struggled against No. 14 Virginia in Austin . Not until the game 's final play did the Longhorns secure their 17 – 16 win over the favored Cavaliers . The game was the 700th victory in Texas football history and marked the only time in Texas ' first 103 years of football that a game ended with Texas kicking a winning field goal . Following the victory over Virginia , Texas began a winning streak that continued through the remainder of the regular season . Heading into the final game of the regular season , it appeared that the winner of the Texas / Texas A & M game would clinch the Southwest Conference championship and a bid to a Bowl Alliance game . In Texas ' final Southwestern Conference game , it secured the conference championship with a 16 – 6 win that guaranteed it a spot in a Bowl Alliance game . On the next day , the Sugar Bowl 's pick of Texas was made official . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies entered the 1995 season after having finished with an 8 – 4 overall record in 1994 . That season culminated with a 45 – 23 loss to Tennessee in the 1994 Gator Bowl . Heading into the 1995 season , fans and coaches expected Tech to improve on its previous performance . Most commentators , however , expected a season comparable to 1994 's : a second @-@ place finish in the Big East and a trip to the Gator Bowl . This was borne out by the preseason college football polls . The AP Poll put Tech 24th , while the coaches ' poll had Tech 26th . 
 Those who tempered their expectations of the Hokies appeared to be vindicated in Tech 's first game of the season , which took place on September 7 , a week later than most teams started regular @-@ season play . Tech rose to No. 20 in the country on the basis of other teams losing their season openers . A similar fate befell the Hokies , who lost to Boston College , 20 – 14 . The opening @-@ game loss was a " discouraging note " to begin the season in the eyes of at least one commentator . Because Tech 's opening game was on a Thursday night , the Hokies had an extra two days to prepare for their next opponent , Cincinnati . The extra time did not help , however , and the Hokies were shut out , 16 – 0 by underdog Cincinnati . The shutout was the first scoreless effort by the Hokies since 1981 and caused sportswriters to call the Hokies " the most overrated team in the country . " 
 Following the Cincinnati loss , the Hokies had one week to prepare for a matchup against No. 17 Miami , the team predicted to win the Big East in preseason polls . The Hokies had not beaten Miami in 12 previous matchups , but they managed an upset 13 – 7 victory on September 23 . At the time , the one @-@ week turnaround from embarrassing defeat to unexpected triumph caused some commentators to declare the win the biggest in Virginia Tech football history . Following the Miami win , Virginia Tech started a winning streak that continued for the remainder of the regular season . In total , Tech won its final nine regular @-@ season games , including two wins over ranked opponents : No. 20 Syracuse and at No. 13 Virginia . The 36 – 29 defeat of Virginia was Tech 's closest victory during the span and elevated Tech to No. 13 in the nation . 
 The Miami Hurricanes kept pace with the Hokies throughout the regular season , winning every conference game after their loss to Tech . After Miami won its final game of the season and tied the Hokies for the Big East football championship ( the Big East had no tiebreaker at the time ) , it appeared that Virginia Tech would be passed over for a Bowl Alliance game in favor of the Hurricanes . Miami traditionally had a stronger football team and a wider following on television , making it more attractive to bowl @-@ game officials . But Miami 's bowl hopes evaporated after the NCAA announced Miami would be put under sanctions for recruiting rules violations . One of the sanctions included a ban from bowl games , which Miami elected to take after the 1995 season instead of delaying until 1996 . After the sanctions were announced , the only question for the Hokies was whether they would be bound for the Orange Bowl in Miami or the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans . That question was resolved on December 3 , 1995 , when Bowl Alliance officials announced their selection of Virginia Tech and Texas for the Sugar Bowl . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 The game between the Hokies and the Longhorns was the first meeting of the two teams . The competition marked Virginia Tech 's first trip to the annual Sugar Bowl game , but it was the Hokies ' third consecutive bowl appearance . It was Texas ' third Sugar Bowl appearance and its first since 1958 . In exchange for playing in the game , each team received $ 8 @.@ 3 million . Thanks to revenue @-@ sharing agreements with Big East conference members , Virginia Tech received $ 3 @.@ 5 million , minus expenses , for playing in the Sugar Bowl . Pregame media coverage of the event focused on Virginia Tech making its first appearance in a major bowl game and Texas ' resurgence as a major college football power . On the field , attention was focused on Virginia Tech 's strong defense and Texas ' successful offense . 
 After the matchup was announced and betting on the game began , oddsmakers favored Texas to win the game , with spread bettors predicting Texas to win by one point . By December 21 , Texas ' margin had increased to 1 @.@ 5 points . By December 31 , the date of the game , oddsmakers predicted the Longhorns would win by two points . 
 = = = Ticket sales = = = 
 = = = = Virginia Tech = = = = 
 Because the 1995 Sugar Bowl was Virginia Tech 's first major bowl game in school history , tickets and travel packages were in high demand . Prior to the first day of ticket sales , the price of travel packages skyrocketed due to demand . In Virginia , travel agencies hired temporary workers to meet demand , and in New Orleans , the demand for hotel rooms was so great that many hotels instituted a three @-@ night minimum stay . 
 Tickets officially went on sale December 4 , and three days later , Virginia Tech had sold out its entire initial allotment of 15 @,@ 000 tickets . A second allotment of 2 @,@ 400 tickets was sold out in a few hours , leaving ticketless fans disgruntled . Many fans who were turned away at the Virginia Tech ticket office bought tickets from the secondary market or traveled to New Orleans in hopes of buying tickets at the game . So many Virginia Tech fans traveled to the game that the Montgomery County school district extended its winter break one day to avoid a shortage of teachers and students . The crowds also caused problems at Roanoke Regional Airport , the nearest airport to Virginia Tech . Forty @-@ three aircraft chartered by Virginia Tech fans arrived in New Orleans on a single day . 
 = = = = Texas = = = = 
 At the University of Texas , ticket sales likewise were rapid . On the first day of sales , Texas ' ticket office received 10 @,@ 500 orders . The demand was so great that some students camped overnight in front of the ticket office to ensure they would receive a ticket . Despite that initial surge in orders , as late as December 27 , four days before the game , tickets were still readily available . In terms of chartered flights and the number of fans spending money at New Orleans businesses , Texas also trailed Virginia Tech . 
 = = = Off @-@ field problems = = = 
 Three Virginia Tech players were charged with crimes before the Sugar Bowl . Linebacker Tony Morrison and receiver James Crawford were suspended indefinitely from the team and did not travel to the game . Morrison was arrested for public intoxication , petty larceny and destruction of property , while Crawford was charged with defrauding a garage keeper and felony hit and run . On December 12 , cornerback Antonio Banks was charged with misdemeanor assault and battery but was not suspended from the team and played in the Sugar Bowl . 
 On Virginia Tech 's first night in New Orleans , redshirt center Keith Short missed the team 's 2 a.m. curfew . In response , Tech head coach Frank Beamer ushered Short to the local Greyhound bus depot and put the player on a bus to his home in Richmond . The move was part of Beamer 's attempt to keep his players focused on the upcoming game and not be distracted by the attractions of New Orleans . 
 Beamer himself was the object of some off @-@ field controversy when Georgia considered offering him its head football coaching job during the days prior to the Sugar Bowl . Beamer denied any interest in the position , and the controversy abated when Georgia hired Glen Mason as its head coach on December 18 . Mason later changed his mind , and Georgia hired Jim Donnan instead . 
 The biggest off @-@ the @-@ field incident was revealed on the final weekend before the Sugar Bowl . Texas reserve defensive back Ron McKelvey was revealed to be using an assumed name . In reality , he was a 30 @-@ year @-@ old man named Ron Weaver who had played for a junior @-@ college team and a small @-@ college team under other assumed names . Weaver disappeared prior to the Sugar Bowl , but stated that he had used the assumed name in order to gather information for a book about the inner workings of Texas football . Weaver later pleaded guilty to a felony charge of misusing Social Security numbers , but he avoided jail and paid no fine . Texas was not sanctioned by the NCAA , but Longhorns players later said the event was a severe distraction from pre @-@ game preparations . 
 = = = Offensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Texas offense = = = = 
 In 1995 , the Texas Longhorns boasted a high @-@ powered offense that accumulated 5 @,@ 199 yards of total offense during the regular season . Texas ' offense was No. 17 in the country and averaged 31 @.@ 7 points per game and 6 @.@ 1 yards per play . 
 The Longhorns were led on offense by quarterback James Brown , who completed 163 of 322 passes ( 50 @.@ 6 % ) for 2 @,@ 447 yards , 19 touchdowns , and 12 interceptions . These figures were enough for him to set the Texas single @-@ season records for passing yards and passing touchdowns . Brown finished the season with a passer rating of 177 , No. 1 in the NCAA in 1995 . He was limited in practices prior to the Sugar Bowl because of a sprained ankle suffered in Texas ' final regular @-@ season game . Brown 's favorite receiver was Mike Adams , who led the Southwest Conference by catching 53 passes for 876 yards and three touchdowns during the regular season . Adams was assisted by Justin McLemore , a sixth @-@ year senior who caught 30 passes for 488 yards , including a 161 @-@ yard game against Houston . McLemore 's 30 receptions were tied by tight end Pat Fitzgerald , who had eight touchdowns , No. 2 in the country for tight ends . 
 On the ground , Texas ' rushing offense was led by two running backs : Ricky Williams and Shon Mitchell . Together , they averaged 207 yards per game , good enough for No. 22 nationally . Mitchell started at running back and gained 1 @,@ 099 rushing yards . Williams accumulated 990 rushing yards during the regular season . That figure was a record for Texas freshmen . Protecting Williams , Mitchell , and Brown was a successful offensive line led by All @-@ America guard Dan Neil . 
 = = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = = 
 The Virginia Tech offense progressed during the course of the regular season . In the Hokies ' first six games , they averaged just 13 @.@ 4 points . In their final six games , they averaged 42 @.@ 3 points per game . Averaged across the season , Tech scored 29 @.@ 2 points per game , good enough for No. 28 nationally . The Hokies also finished with 4 @,@ 233 net yards and 321 points ; both figures were in the top five for Virginia Tech season offenses to that point . 
 The Hokies were led on offense by quarterback Jim Druckenmiller , who completed 151 of his 294 pass attempts ( 51 @.@ 4 % ) for 2 @,@ 103 yards , 14 touchdowns , and 11 interceptions . Druckenmiller 's favorite receiver was Bryan Still , who caught 32 passes for 628 yards and three touchdowns despite missing 2 ½ games due to an injured shoulder . Two of Still 's receptions were for more than 80 yards apiece , making him the first Virginia Tech wide receiver to catch two passes of more than 80 yards in the same season . 
 On the ground , the Tech offense was led by two running backs : Ken Oxendine and Dwayne Thomas . Thomas was a fifth @-@ year senior who accumulated 673 rushing yards and seven touchdowns despite missing three games due to injury . Opening the field for the Tech rushing attack was the offensive line led by center Bill Conaty , who played in the Sugar Bowl despite a leg fracture suffered in Tech 's final regular @-@ season game . Conaty underwent surgery and played despite not being fully healed . 
 One weakness in Virginia Tech 's offense was in the kicking game , controlled by placekicker Atle Larsen . During the regular season , Larsen was successful on just 12 of 20 field goal attempts , and his longest successful kick was from just 44 yards away . 
 = = = Defensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense came into the 1995 Sugar Bowl ranked 10th in the country in total defense . This was due in large part to the Hokies ' success in rushing defense . Tech boasted the No. 1 rushing defense in the country , allowing an average of only 77 @.@ 4 yards per game on the ground . Tech also had the No. 5 scoring defense in the country , allowing just 14 points per game on average . Tech 's defense was No. 11 in total , allowing just 285 @.@ 9 yards per game . The Hokies also sacked opposing quarterbacks 44 times during the regular season and were ranked No. 23 in pass defense . 
 The Hokie defense was led by Cornell Brown , a first @-@ team All @-@ America selection who also won the Dudley Award , which is given to the top Division I college football player in Virginia . Brown finished the regular season with 103 tackles and 14 sacks during the regular season . Free safety William Yarborough led the Hokies ' pass defense . He was named to the first @-@ team All @-@ Big East team and finished the 1995 regular season with five interceptions and 11 pass breakups , the most on the team in each category . 
 The Hokies also had excellent special teams defense . During the regular season , the Hokies blocked eight kicks , including four punts . In total , Tech scored six defensive touchdowns , a school record . 
 = = = = Texas defense = = = = 
 On defense , the Longhorns were ranked No. 55 nationally in total defense and No. 5 in the Southwest Conference . This was despite a marked improvement as the regular season progressed . Through their first six games , the Longhorns allowed 146 points and sacked opposing quarterbacks nine times . In their final six games , Texas allowed 81 points and accumulated 17 sacks . Their 16 – 6 win over Texas A & M marked the first time that school had been held without a touchdown in a Southwest Conference game in more than a decade . 
 Texas ' defense was led by All @-@ American Tony Brackens , who led the Longhorns in sacks ( 7 ) and tackles for loss ( 16 ) despite not playing three games due to a broken tibia . Brackens also had a blocked kick , five forced fumbles , and five fumble recoveries . Defensive back Chris Carter led Texas in interceptions with six , which he returned a total of 146 yards . He also had the most pass break @-@ ups on the team with nine . In total tackles , the Longhorns were led by linebacker Tyson King , who had 137 — an average of 11 @.@ 4 tackles per game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 1995 Sugar Bowl kicked off at 7 : 30 p.m. EST on December 31 , 1995 at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans , Louisiana . The game 's officials were from the Atlantic Coast Conference . Michael Dover was the referee , William Wampler was the umpire , and Sam Stephenson was the linesman . A capacity crowd of 70 @,@ 283 people attended the game , which was televised by the American Broadcasting Company . The crowd was the smallest to attend a Sugar Bowl in the Superdome to that point . Mark Jones was the play @-@ by @-@ play announcer for the broadcast , Todd Blackledge was the analyst , and Dean Blevins was the sideline reporter . Approximately 6 @,@ 041 @,@ 700 American households watched the broadcast , giving it a television rating of 6 @.@ 3 . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech kicked off to Texas to begin the game , and the Longhorns returned the kick to the 35 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the game , Brown attempted to pass downfield , but Tech defended the Texas receivers and Brown scrambled for a four @-@ yard loss . Texas regained the yardage after Tech committed a five @-@ yard offsides penalty , then Longhorns running back Ricky Williams gained six yards on a run up the middle . A third @-@ down pass fell incomplete , and the Longhorns went three and out on the first possession of the game . Texas punted , and the Hokies returned the kick to their 26 @-@ yard line . 
 On Tech 's first offensive play of the game , a pass by Tech quarterback Jim Druckenmiller was dropped . During the next play , Tech picked up four yards on a running play . On third down , Druckenmiller completed a pass to wide receiver Bryan Still , but the play fell one foot short of a first down . Tech punted after three plays , just as Texas had done . Texas returned the kick to its 22 @-@ yard line , and with 11 : 49 remaining in the quarter , the Longhorns began their second possession of the game . 
 The first play of the possession resulted in a five @-@ yard penalty against Tech . The second play resulted in the initial first down of the game as Brown completed a 19 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Mike Adams . After the first down , Williams picked up two yards on a running play , but Texas lost that short gain when Brown fumbled the ball during the next play . Brown lost seven yards , but recovered the ball . On third down , Brown attempted to scramble for the first down , but was stopped short of the line of scrimmage . Texas ' punt was fair caught at the 29 @-@ yard line , and Virginia Tech began its second possession . 
 Tech running back Dwayne Thomas gained nine yards on the first Tech play , then the Hokies earned their initial first down on an option run that gained three yards . After the first down , Druckenmiller threw an incomplete pass , then Thomas ran for a six @-@ yard gain . On third down , a long pass downfield was knocked down by a Texas defender , and the Hokies punted back to Texas . The kick was fair caught at the 13 @-@ yard line , but Tech was penalized 15 yards for interfering with the catch . 
 Texas began its third possession with 7 : 58 remaining in the quarter . From the 28 @-@ yard line , running back Shon Mitchell gained 14 yards and a first down at the 42 @-@ yard line . Brown then completed a 26 @-@ yard pass to Adams , who earned a first down at the Tech 32 @-@ yard line . Now in Tech territory , Mitchell gained eight yards on a run to the left side of the field . On second down , Williams ran straight ahead for a first down at the Tech 17 @-@ yard line . Mitchell then advanced to the 12 @-@ yard line on a running play , but Brown threw an incomplete pass on second down . Facing a third down and needing five yards , Texas was stopped for a short gain , but Tech was called for an offsides penalty . The five yards negated the third @-@ down stop and gave Texas a first down at the six @-@ yard line of Virginia Tech . Two plays later , Brown completed a pass to tight end Pat Fitzgerald , who ran into the end zone for a touchdown . The subsequent extra point kick was good , and Texas took a 7 – 0 lead with 4 : 32 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Virginia Tech downed Texas ' subsequent kickoff in its end zone for a touchback , and the Hokies attempted to answer the Texas score starting at the Tech 20 @-@ yard line . During the first play after the kickoff , Texas and Tech both committed penalties . After the penalties , Tech had a first down at its 27 @-@ yard line . After the penalties , running back Ken Oxendine attempted to run up the middle of the field , but had the ball knocked loose by defender Tony Brackens . Texas recovered the fumble and the Longhorns ' offense returned to the field at the Tech 32 @-@ yard line . 
 After the turnover , Texas attempted a trick play , but the pass by a wide receiver was knocked down by the Virginia Tech defense . After an eight @-@ yard gain on a running play , Texas was penalized 10 yards for holding . The Longhorns were unable to regain the yardage lost to the penalty and punted to the Hokies . With 2 : 15 remaining in the opening quarter , Tech fair caught the punt at its 19 @-@ yard line . 
 After a short gain on first down , Druckenmiller completed a 13 @-@ yard pass to fullback Brian Edmonds . The play resulted in a first down at the Tech 34 @-@ yard line . Two short plays resulted in six yards , setting up a third down and four yards . Rather than attempt a conversion prior to the end of the quarter , the Hokies let the clock roll down with the Longhorns in the lead , 7 – 0 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Virginia Tech in possession of the ball at its 40 @-@ yard line and facing a third @-@ and @-@ four situation . On the first play of the quarter , Druckenmiller completed a pass to Holmes for 13 yards and a first down at the Texas 47 @-@ yard line . Once there , however , Druckenmiller threw a pass that bounced off a Tech receiver and was caught by Texas defender Jason Reeves , who returned it to the Tech 33 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the turnover , the Texas offense lost four yards on a rushing play that went out of bounds . Brown then completed a two @-@ yard pass to Fitzgerald , setting up a long third @-@ down play . The Longhorns were unable to earn a first down and sent in kicker Phil Dawson to attempt a 52 @-@ yard field goal . The kick attempt equaled his career long and grazed one of the uprights of the goal post , but the kick was successful and gave Texas a 10 – 0 lead with 13 : 19 remaining in the first half . 
 Texas ' post @-@ score kickoff was returned to the Tech four @-@ yard line . A two @-@ yard run was followed by an 11 @-@ yard carry by Ken Oxendine who earned a first down at the Tech 17 @-@ yard line . After the first down , Oxendine earned another six yards . Druckenmiller then completed a 13 @-@ yard pass to tight end Bryan Jennings for a first down at the Tech 35 @-@ yard line . Texas committed a five @-@ yard offsides penalty , then a long pass downfield fell incomplete . Two more plays failed to gain a first down , and the Hokies punted . 
 The Tech kick was returned to the 16 @-@ yard line of Texas , and with 9 : 15 remaining in the first half , the Longhorns began their first full possession of the quarter . On the first play of the possession , Brown completed a 15 @-@ yard pass to Adams . From the 31 @-@ yard line , Texas gained six yards on two plays , then the Longhorns were called for having an illegal player downfield during third down . Texas ' punt was returned to the 20 @-@ yard line , and Tech 's offense returned to the field . 
 Running back Dwayne Thomas gained six yards on the first play , then earned a first down at the 30 @-@ yard line on an option play . After an incomplete pass , Druckenmiller completed a nine @-@ yard throw to Still . Tech committed a false @-@ start penalty on third down , but the Hokies made up the penalty and earned a first down when Druckenmiller completed a pass to Jennings at the Texas 45 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the completion , Druckenmiller was sacked for a one @-@ yard loss . A second @-@ down pass was dropped , a third @-@ down pass was incomplete , and the Hokies punted again . 
 Texas fair caught the punt at their 14 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the kick , a run up the middle was stopped for the loss of a yard . Williams then gained two yards , and Brown threw an incomplete pass . Texas went three @-@ and @-@ out for the first time in the second quarter and prepared to punt . Bryan Still fielded the kick at the Tech 40 @-@ yard line and returned it 60 yards to the end zone for Virginia Tech 's first points of the game . The subsequent extra point was good , and with 2 : 34 remaining in the first half , Tech cut Texas ' lead to 10 – 7 . 
 Adams returned Tech 's kickoff to the Texas 21 @-@ yard line , and the Longhorns ' offense took the field . On the first play , Brown completed a 13 @-@ yard pass to Adams , who earned a first down at the 34 @-@ yard line . Mitchell gained four yards on a running play , then Texas was penalized for having an ineligible player downfield . On the play after the penalty , Texas was penalized for an illegal formation , negating a completed pass for a first down . The Longhorns then faced a third down and 11 , but Brown 's third @-@ down pass was knocked down and the Longhorns punted to end their final possession of the first half . 
 The ball bounced off a Virginia Tech player , causing a scramble for the loose ball . Virginia Tech recovered it at their 19 @-@ yard line , and Druckenmiller started a hurry @-@ up offensive drive for the Hokies , who had 56 seconds to move into scoring possession . On the first play , Druckenmiller completed an 18 @-@ yard play to move the ball to the Tech 38 @-@ yard line . Druckenmiller then completed a 16 @-@ yard pass to Holmes for a first down at the Texas 46 @-@ yard line . From there , however , Druckenmiller threw three incomplete passes and Tech punted with 15 seconds remaining in the first half . Texas ran out the remaining seconds on the clock and went into halftime with a 10 – 7 lead . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 The game 's halftime show featured both school marching bands and a musical ensemble featuring music by The Beatles . Various high school marching bands also participated in the show , which was produced by Bowl Games of America . 
 Following halftime , Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the second half . Texas ' kickoff was fielded by Antonio Banks , who returned it to the Tech 41 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the half , Thomas was tackled for a loss of two yards on a running play up the middle . After an incomplete pass , Druckenmiller completed a pass to Jennings , who fell down short of the first down marker . The Hokies punted , but Texas was called for a five @-@ yard running into the kicker penalty and Tech opted to re @-@ kick . After the second kick , Texas ' offense started at its 17 @-@ yard line . 
 Texas ' first possession of the second half began with a two @-@ yard run to the right . After that , Brown completed a first @-@ down pass to Adams at the Texas 28 @-@ yard line . Following an incomplete pass , Williams ran for a short gain and Texas was stopped short of the needed yardage on third down . After the punt , Tech 's offense started at their 11 @-@ yard line . Thomas gained six yards on a rushing play , then Druckenmiller completed a two @-@ yard pass to Edmonds . On third down , Texas ' Brackens moved offsides and Tech was given a first down at their 24 @-@ yard line . Thomas then broke free on a running play for an 11 @-@ yard gain and a first down at the Tech 35 @-@ yard line . After the first down , Druckenmiller scrambled for no gain , then Edmonds gained six yards on a running play . On third down , a Druckenmiller pass was knocked down at the line of scrimmage by a Texas defender and the Hokies had to punt . 
 Texas returned the kick to its 32 @-@ yard line , and on the first play from scrimmage , Tech sacked Brown for a loss of nine yards . Williams regained five of the lost yards , but on third down Brown threw an incomplete pass . Texas ' punt bounced out of bounds at the 33 @-@ yard line , and Virginia Tech 's offense returned to the field with 5 : 30 remaining in the quarter . 
 The Hokies began their drive with a seven @-@ yard pass from Druckenmiller to Marcus Parker . Oxendine then ran ahead and gained a first down at the 46 @-@ yard line . From there , Druckenmiller completed a 28 @-@ yard pass to Jennings at the Texas 26 @-@ yard line . Oxendine was tackled after a gain of two yards , then Tech was penalized five yards for an illegal shift . After being pushed back to the 30 @-@ yard line , Druckenmiller completed a 28 @-@ yard pass to Still , who picked up a first down at the Texas two @-@ yard line . On the next play , Parker rushed through the Texas defense for the Hokies ' first offensive touchdown of the game . The extra point kick was good , and with 2 : 32 remaining in the third quarter , Virginia Tech took its first lead of the game . 
 Virginia Tech 's kickoff was downed in the end zone for a touchback . Texas ' offense thus began its drive at its 20 @-@ yard line . The first play of the drive was an end @-@ around that gained 10 yards and a first down for Texas . After an incomplete pass , Mitchell gained five yards on a counter run . On third down , Williams caught a six @-@ yard pass for a first down at the Texas 41 @-@ yard line . Mitchell ran six yards on first down , but was stopped after a gain of just one yard on second down . The second @-@ down play caused the final seconds to tick off the clock in the third quarter , which ended with Virginia Tech leading , 14 – 10 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Texas in possession of the ball and facing a third down @-@ and @-@ three situation at its 47 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , Brown completed a first @-@ down pass to wide receiver Matt Davis at the Tech 47 @-@ yard line . After a Texas pass was batted down , Mitchell ran to the left for a gain of two yards . On third down , Brown was pressured by the Virginia Tech defense and threw an interception to Virginia Tech 's William Yarborough , who caught the ball at the Tech 31 @-@ yard line . 
 After the turnover , Druckenmiller got Virginia Tech 's drive started with a first @-@ down pass to the Tech 42 @-@ yard line . After a short run by Edmonds , Druckenmiller threw an incomplete pass , setting up a third @-@ and @-@ seven for Virginia Tech 's offense . During the third @-@ down play , wide receiver Bryan Still broke free of the Texas defense and caught a 55 @-@ yard pass from Druckenmiller for Tech 's second offensive touchdown of the game . The extra point kick was successful , and Tech took a 21 – 10 lead with 12 : 28 remaining in the game . 
 After Tech 's kickoff was downed in the end zone , the Longhorns ' offense began a new drive from their 20 @-@ yard line . Brown threw an incomplete pass , then completed a first @-@ down pass to Adams at the 32 @-@ yard line . From there , Brown threw an incomplete pass , then tossed a 15 @-@ yard screen pass to Fitzgerald , who gained a first down at the Texas 42 @-@ yard line . Williams crossed into Virginia Tech territory on the next play as he ran straight ahead for a 13 @-@ yard gain . A one @-@ yard run was followed by an incomplete pass , and on third down Brown threw an interception directly to Virginia Tech defender Torrian Gray , who returned the pass to the Tech 33 @-@ yard line . 
 On the first play after the turnover , Druckenmiller completed a 16 @-@ yard pass to Cornelius White , who picked up a first down at the Tech 49 @-@ yard line . Texas then committed a five @-@ yard offsides penalty before Oxendine ran forward for four yards . On the next play , Oxendine fumbled the ball after being hit by a Texas defender . The loose ball was picked up by a Texas defender , who returned it to the 50 @-@ yard line . Brown threw two incomplete passes , then Tech committed a five @-@ yard penalty . On third down , Brown completed a 21 @-@ yard pass to Davis , who gained a first down at the Tech 24 @-@ yard line . After the long gain , Brown threw two more incomplete passes . On third down , Brown threw another interception to Gray , who returned the ball to the Tech 31 @-@ yard line and allowed the Hokies ' offense to return to the field with 7 : 33 remaining in the game . 
 Tech 's Thomas gained six yards on a run up the middle , then Druckenmiller ran ahead for a one @-@ yard gain . On third down , Tech committed a 10 @-@ yard penalty , negating what would have been a first @-@ down run . A long pass on third down fell incomplete , and Tech punted for the first time in the quarter . The Longhorns fair caught the ball at their 30 @-@ yard line with 5 : 25 remaining in the game . 
 Trailing by 11 , and with time running down , Texas needed to score quickly . Brown threw an incomplete pass , then was sacked by the Virginia Tech defense . During the sack , Brown fumbled , and the ball was picked up by a Virginia Tech defender who returned it into the end zone for a Virginia Tech defensive touchdown . The extra point was good , and Tech expanded its lead to 28 – 10 with 5 : 06 remaining in the game . 
 After the score , Tech was penalized 15 yards for excessive celebration , allowing Texas a better chance to return the post @-@ score kickoff . Texas ' kick returner fumbled the return , however and the ball rolled out of bounds at the Texas 10 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the kickoff , Brown was sacked at the Texas two @-@ yard line . Williams regained some of the lost yardage with a five @-@ yard run , but on third down he was stopped after another five @-@ yard gain . Rather than attempt to convert the fourth down , Texas punted with 2 : 33 remaining in the game . 
 Virginia Tech returned the kick to their 43 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies proceeded to run out the clock by executing running plays — which do not stop the clock at their conclusion . Tempers ran high among Texas players , and Texas defender Stoney Clark was ejected from the game after throwing the football at a Virginia Tech player following the conclusion of a play . Texas was assessed two personal @-@ foul penalties , which advanced the ball to the Texas 31 @-@ yard line and gave Virginia Tech a first down . Tech continued to run down the clock with rushing plays , and the Hokies brought in freshman backup quarterback Al Clark to supervise the game 's final plays . The clock rolled to zero , and Virginia Tech secured a 28 – 10 victory . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Virginia Tech wide receiver Bryan Still was named the game 's most valuable player . He caught six passes for 119 yards and one touchdown . He also returned a punt for 60 yards and a touchdown , and his 27 @-@ yard reception in the third quarter set up Tech 's third touchdown two plays later . Still 's punt return was the longest in Virginia Tech bowl @-@ game history to that point and was surpassed in the 2008 Orange Bowl when Justin Harper returned a punt 84 yards for a touchdown . Tech tight end Bryan Jennings was the Hokies ' second @-@ leading receiver ; he finished the game with six catches for 77 yards . Four other players had two or fewer receptions . 
 On the opposite side of the ball , Texas ' receiving corps was led by Mike Adams , who had six grabs for 92 yards . Tight end Pat Fitzgerald had the Longhorns ' only receiving touchdown , and he finished the game with three catches for 21 yards . Three other players had two or fewer receptions . 
 Both teams ' quarterbacks benefited from the profusion of passing . Virginia Tech quarterback Jim Druckenmiller finished the game having completed 18 of his 34 pass attempts for 266 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . He also ran three times for a total gain of one yard . Texas quarterback James Brown completed 14 of his 36 pass attempts for 148 yards , three interceptions , and a touchdown . He rushed six times for <unk> yards because sacks are counted as runs for negative yardage . Texas also was hurt by penalty yardage . The Longhorns ' nine penalties for 91 yards are both Texas bowl @-@ game records . 
 On the ground , both teams ' running back tandems gained appreciable yardage . Texas ' Ricky Williams ran the ball 12 times for 62 yards , while Shon Mitchell had 15 carries for 59 yards . Virginia Tech 's Dwayne Thomas carried the ball 15 times for 62 yards , and Ken Oxendine had eight carries for 31 yards . Four other Hokies ( including Druckenmiller ) had at least one carry . 
 Defensively , both teams found success at times . In the first half , Texas ' defense held the Hokies to just one touchdown , and that was not recorded until the second quarter . Virginia Tech 's offense was extremely successful in shutting down the Longhorns ' offense in the second half of the game . The Hokies shut out the Longhorns in that half , setting a bowl @-@ game record for fewest points allowed in a half . Texas ' 10 points , 78 yards rushing and 226 yards total offense were all season lows . In total , Tech 's defense had nine tackles for loss , including five sacks of Brown . Linebacker Brandon <unk> was Tech 's leading tackler , and he had nine tackles , a sack , and a pass breakup . In pass defense , Torrian Gray had two interceptions , and William Yarborough had one . Gray 's interceptions tied a Virginia Tech bowl @-@ game record . Defensive tackle Jim Barron 's fumble return for a touchdown was the first such score in the Sugar Bowl since a rule change in 1990 . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's win lifted it to a final record of 10 – 2 , while Texas ' loss dropped it to a record of 10 – 2 – 1 . Tech improved to 3 – 6 in bowl games , while Texas fell to 17 – 17 – 2 . As a result of the win , Tech jumped to No. 10 in the final AP Poll of the year and No. 9 in the final coaches ' poll of the year . Texas fell to No. 14 in both final polls . A large portion of Virginia Tech 's bowl @-@ game proceeds were devoted toward improving athletic facilities at the school , and more money was generated by a boom in merchandise sales that followed the game . Texas saw a similar but smaller boom in merchandise sales . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 Several coaches from each team were fired or moved on to other jobs in the offseason following the 1995 Sugar Bowl . Virginia Tech co @-@ defensive coordinator Rod Sharpless resigned to become the defensive coordinator at Rutgers University . Tech defensive line coach Todd Grantham was replaced by Charley Wiles after Grantham resigned to take the same job at Michigan State . To prevent Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer from likewise seeking a different position , the school signed him to a new five @-@ year contract at a salary of more than $ 148 @,@ 000 per year . 
 Texas head coach John Mackovic likewise received a contract extension through 2000 . The new contract included an annual salary of $ 600 @,@ 000 , plus various other financial incentives . 
 = = = 1996 NFL Draft = = = 
 As the final game of the 1995 college football season for Texas and Virginia Tech , the 1995 Sugar Bowl provided a final opportunity for players to demonstrate their skills on the field prior to the next NFL Draft . Several players from both teams announced their intention to enter the draft and attempt to play in the National Football League . Star Virginia Tech defender Cornell Brown was not one of these players . Prior to the draft , he announced his intention to remain at Tech for his senior year . 
 The 1996 NFL Draft took place on April 20 – 21 , 1996 . Virginia Tech had two players selected : wide receiver Bryan Still ( 41st overall ) and J.C. Price ( 88th ) . Texas also had two players taken in the draft . Defensive end Tony Brackens was selected 33rd overall , and guard John Elmore was picked 139th . 
 = Siege of Boston = 
 The Siege of Boston ( April 19 , 1775 – March 17 , 1776 ) was the opening phase of the American Revolutionary War . New England militiamen prevented the movement by land of the British Army garrisoned in what was then the peninsular city of Boston , Massachusetts . Both sides had to deal with resource supply and personnel issues over the course of the siege . British resupply and reinforcement activities were limited to sea access . After eleven months of the siege , the British abandoned Boston by sailing to Nova Scotia . 
 The siege began on April 19 after the Battles of Lexington and Concord , when the militia from surrounding Massachusetts communities blocked land access to Boston . The Continental Congress formed the Continental Army from the militia , with George Washington as its Commander in Chief . In June 1775 , the British seized Bunker and Breed 's Hills , but their casualties were heavy and their gains were insufficient to break the Continental Army 's hold on land access to Boston . Military actions during the remainder of the siege were limited to occasional raids , minor skirmishes , and sniper fire . 
 In November 1775 , Washington sent the 25 @-@ year @-@ old bookseller @-@ turned @-@ soldier Henry Knox to bring to Boston the heavy artillery that had been captured at Fort Ticonderoga . In a technically complex and demanding operation , Knox brought many cannons to the Boston area by January 1776 . In March 1776 , these artillery fortified Dorchester Heights ( which overlooked Boston and its harbor ) , thereby threatening the British supply lifeline . The British commander William Howe saw the British position as indefensible and withdrew the British forces in Boston to the British stronghold at Halifax , Nova Scotia , on March 17 ( celebrated today as Evacuation Day ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to 1775 , the British had imposed taxes and import duties on the American colonies , to which the inhabitants objected since they lacked British Parliamentary representation . In response to the Boston Tea Party and other acts of protest , 4 @,@ 000 British troops under the command of General Thomas Gage were sent to occupy Boston and to pacify the restive Province of Massachusetts Bay . Parliament authorized Gage , among other actions , to disband the local provincial government ( led by John Hancock and Samuel Adams ) . It was reformed into the Provincial Congress , and continued to meet . The Provincial Congress called for the organization of local militias and coordinated the accumulation of weapons and other military supplies . Under the terms of the Boston Port Act , Gage closed the Boston port , which caused much unemployment and discontent . 
 When British forces were sent to seize military supplies from the town of Concord on April 19 , 1775 , militia companies from surrounding towns opposed them in the Battles of Lexington and Concord . At Concord , some of the British forces were routed in a confrontation at the North Bridge . The British troops , on their march back to Boston , were then engaged in a running battle , suffering heavy casualties . All of the New England colonies ( and later colonies further south ) raised militias in response to this alarm , and sent them to Boston . 
 = = Siege = = 
 = = = Digging in = = = 
 Immediately after the battles of April 19 , the Massachusetts militia , under the loose leadership of William Heath , who was superseded by General Artemas Ward late on the 20th , formed a siege line extending from Chelsea , around the peninsulas of Boston and Charlestown , to Roxbury , effectively surrounding Boston on three sides . They particularly blocked the Charlestown Neck ( the only land access to Charlestown ) , and the Boston Neck ( the only land access to Boston , which was then a peninsula ) , leaving only the harbor and sea access under British control . In the days immediately following the creation of the siege line , the size of the colonial forces grew , as militias from New Hampshire , Rhode Island , and Connecticut arrived on the scene . General Gage wrote of his surprise of the number of rebels surrounding the city : " The rebels are not the despicable rabble too many have supposed them to be .... In all their wars against the French they never showed such conduct , attention , and perseverance as they do now . " 
 General Gage turned his attention to fortifying easily defensible positions . In the south , at Roxbury , Gage ordered lines of defenses with 10 twenty @-@ four pound guns . In Boston proper , four hills were quickly fortified . They were to be the main defense of the city . Over time , each of these hills were strengthened . Gage also decided to abandon Charlestown , removing the beleaguered forces ( that had retreated from Concord ) to Boston . The town of Charlestown itself was entirely vacant , and the high lands of Charlestown ( Bunker Hill and Breed 's Hill ) were left undefended , as were the heights of Dorchester , which had a commanding view of the harbor and the city . 
 The British at first greatly restricted movement in and out of the city , fearing infiltration of weapons . Besieged and besiegers eventually reached an informal agreement allowing traffic on the Boston Neck , provided no firearms were carried . Residents of Boston turned in almost 2 @,@ 000 muskets , and most of the Patriot residents left the city . Many Loyalists who lived outside the city of Boston left their homes and fled into the city . Most of them felt that it was not safe to live outside of the city , because the Patriots were now in control of the countryside . Some of the men , after arriving in Boston , joined Loyalist regiments attached to the British army . 
 Because the siege did not blockade the harbor , the city remained open for the Royal Navy , under Vice Admiral Samuel Graves , to sail in supplies from Nova Scotia and other places . Colonial forces could do little to stop these shipments due to the naval supremacy of the British fleet . Nevertheless , American privateers were able to harass supply ships , and food prices rose quickly . Soon the shortages meant the British forces were on short rations . Generally , the American forces were able to gather information about what was happening in the city from people escaping the privations of Boston , but General Gage had no effective intelligence of rebel activities . 
 = = = Early skirmishes = = = 
 On May 3 , the Massachusetts Provincial Congress authorized Benedict Arnold to raise forces for taking Fort Ticonderoga near the southern end of Lake Champlain in the Province of New York , which was known to have heavy weapons , but to be only lightly defended . Arnold arrived in Castleton ( in what is now Vermont , but was then disputed territory between New York and New Hampshire ) on the 9th , where he joined with Ethan Allen and a militia company from Connecticut , all of whom had independently arrived at the idea of taking Ticonderoga . This company , under the joint leadership of Arnold and Allen , captured Fort Ticonderoga and Fort Crown Point . They also captured the one large military vessel on Lake Champlain in a raid on Fort Saint @-@ Jean . They recovered over 180 cannons , as well as other weaponry and supplies that the nascent Continental Army would find useful in tightening their grip on Boston . 
 Boston lacked a regular supply of fresh meat , and many horses needed hay . On May 21 , Gage ordered a party to go to Grape Island , in the outer harbor , and bring hay to Boston . When the Continentals on the mainland noticed this , they took alarm , and the militia were called out . As the British party arrived , they came under fire from the militia . The militia set fire to a barn on the island , destroying 80 tons of hay , and prevented the British from taking more than 3 tons . 
 Continental forces , partly in response to the Grape Island incident , worked to clear the harbor islands of livestock and supplies useful to the British . On May 27 , in the Battle of Chelsea Creek , the British Marines attempted to stop removal of livestock from some of the islands . The Americans resisted , and , in the course of the action , the British schooner Diana ran aground and was destroyed , but not before the Continentals recovered its weaponry . In an attempt to help quell the rebellion , Gage issued a proclamation on June 12 offering to pardon all of those who would lay down their arms , with the exception of John Hancock and Samuel Adams . Instead of quelling the rebellion , it ignited anger among the Patriots , and more people began to take up arms . 
 = = = Breed 's Hill = = = 
 Throughout May , the British had been receiving reinforcements , until they reached a strength of about 6 @,@ 000 men . On May 25 , three Generals arrived on HMS Cerberus : William Howe , John Burgoyne , and Henry Clinton . Gage began planning to break out of the city . 
 The plan decided on by the British command was to fortify both Bunker Hill and Dorchester Heights . They fixed the date for taking Dorchester Heights at June 18 . On June 15 , the colonists ' Committee of Safety learned of the British plans . In response , they sent instructions to General Ward to fortify Bunker Hill and the heights of Charlestown ; he ordered Colonel William Prescott to do so . On the night of June 16 , Prescott led 1 @,@ 200 men over the Charlestown Neck , and constructed fortifications on Bunker Hill and Breed 's Hill . 
 On June 17 , in the Battle of Bunker Hill , British forces under General Howe took the Charlestown peninsula . The British succeeded in their tactical objective of taking the high ground on the Charlestown peninsula , but they suffered significant losses . With some 1 @,@ 000 men killed or wounded , including 92 officers killed , the British losses were so heavy that there were no further direct attacks on American forces . The Americans , while losing the battle , had again stood against the British regulars with some success , as they had successfully repelled two assaults on Breed 's Hill during the engagement . From this point , the siege essentially became a stalemate . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 General George Washington arrived at Cambridge on July 2 . He set up his headquarters at the Benjamin Wadsworth House at Harvard College . He took command of the newly formed Continental Army the following day . By this time forces and supplies were arriving , including companies of riflemen from as far away as Maryland and Virginia . Washington began the work of molding the militias into something more closely resembling an army , appointing senior officers ( where the militias had typically elected their leaders ) , and introducing more organization and disciplinary measures to the encamped militias . He required officers of different ranks to wear differentiating apparel , so that they might be distinguished from their underlings and superiors . On July 16 , he moved his headquarters to the John Vassall House , also in Cambridge , that would later become well known as the home of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . Toward the end of July , about 2 @,@ 000 riflemen arrived in units raised in Pennsylvania , Maryland , and Virginia . The accuracy of the rifle was previously unknown in New England , and these forces were used to harass the besieged forces . 
 Washington also ordered the defenses to be improved . Trenches were dug on the Boston Neck , and then extended toward Boston . However , these activities had little effect on the British occupation . The working parties were fired on from time to time , as were sentries guarding the works . On July 30 , in retaliation for an American attack , the British pushed back an American advanced guard , and burned a few houses in Roxbury . Four days later , on August 2 , an American rifleman was killed , and his body hung up by the neck . In retaliation , other American riflemen marched to the lines and began to attack the British troops . They continued their sharp shooting all day , killing or wounding many of the British , and losing only one man . On August 30 , the British made a surprise breakout from the Boston Neck , set fire to a tavern , and withdrew to their defenses . On the same night , 300 Americans attacked Lighthouse Island and burned the lighthouse , killing several British soldiers and capturing 23 at the loss of one life . On another August night , Washington sent 1 @,@ 200 men to dig entrenchments on a hill near the Charlestown Neck . Despite a British bombardment , the Americans successfully dug the trenches . 
 In early September , Washington began drawing up plans for two moves : first , to dispatch 1 @,@ 000 men from Boston and invade Quebec , and second , to launch an attack on Boston . Washington felt that he could afford to send some troops to Quebec , as he had received intelligence from British deserters and American spies that the British had no intention of launching an attack from Boston until they were reinforced . On September 11 , about 1 @,@ 100 troops under the command of Benedict Arnold left for Quebec . Washington summoned a council of war , and made a case for an all out amphibious assault on Boston , by sending troops across Back Bay in flat @-@ bottomed boats which could hold 50 men each . Washington believed it would be extremely difficult to keep the men together when winter came . In a war council , the plan was unanimously rejected , and the decision was not to attack " for the present at least . " 
 In early September Washington authorized the appropriation and outfitting of local fishing vessels for intelligence @-@ gathering and interdiction of supplies to the British . This activity was a precursor to the Continental Navy , which was established in the aftermath of the British Burning of Falmouth ( present @-@ day Portland , Maine ) . The provincial assemblies of Connecticut and Rhode Island had by then also begun arming ships and authorized privateering . 
 In early November , 400 British soldiers went to Lechmere 's Point on a raiding expedition to acquire some livestock . They made off with 10 head of cattle , but lost two lives in the skirmish with colonial troops sent to defend the point . On November 29 , colonial Captain John Manley , commanding the schooner Lee , captured one of the most valuable prizes of the siege , the British brigantine Nancy , just outside Boston Harbor . She was carrying a large supply of ordnance and military stores intended for the British troops in Boston . 
 As winter approached , both sides faced their own problems . The Americans were so short on gunpowder that soldiers were given spears to fight with in the event of a British attack . Many of the American troops remained unpaid and many of their enlistments would be up at the end of the year . On the British side Howe , who had replaced Gage as commander in October , was faced with different problems . Wood was so scarce that they began cutting down trees and tearing down wooden buildings , including the Old North Meeting House . To add to this , supplying the city had become increasingly difficult because of winter storms and the rise in rebel privateers . The British troops were so hungry that many were ready to desert as soon as they could . Worse , scurvy and smallpox had broken out in the city . Washington 's army faced similar problems with smallpox , as soldiers from rural communities were exposed to the disease . Washington moved infected troops to a separate hospital , the only option then available given the public stigma against inoculation . 
 Washington again proposed to assault Boston in October , but his officers thought it best to wait until the harbor had frozen over . In February , when the water had frozen between Roxbury and Boston Common , Washington thought that in spite of his shortage in powder he would try an assault by rushing across the ice ; but his officers again advised against it . Washington 's desire to launch an attack on Boston arose from his fear that his army would desert in the winter , and how easily he knew that Howe could break the lines of his army in its present condition . He had not yet learned how completely he could trust in Howe 's inactivity ; he abandoned an attack across the ice with great reluctance in exchange for a more cautious plan , to fortify Dorchester Heights using cannon arrived from Fort Ticonderoga . 
 In mid @-@ January , on orders from London , British Major General Henry Clinton and a small fleet set sail for the Carolinas with 1 @,@ 500 men . Their objective was to join forces with additional troops arriving from Europe , and to take a port in the southern colonies for further military operations . In early February a British raiding party crossed the ice and burned several farmhouses in Dorchester . 
 = = End of the siege = = 
 Between November 1775 and February 1776 , Colonel Henry Knox and a team of engineers used sledges to retrieve 60 tons of heavy artillery that had been captured at Fort Ticonderoga . Bringing them across the frozen Hudson and Connecticut rivers in a technically challenging and complex operation , they arrived back at Cambridge on January 24 , 1776 . 
 = = = Fortification of Dorchester Heights = = = 
 Some of the Ticonderoga cannons , which were of a size and range not previously available to the Americans , were emplaced in fortifications around the city , and on the night of March 2 , the Americans began to bombard the city with those cannon , to which the British responded with cannonades of their own . The American guns , under the direction of Colonel Knox , continued to exchange fire with the British until March 4 . The exchange of fire did little damage to either side , although it did damage houses and kill some British soldiers in Boston . On March 5 , Washington moved more of the Ticonderoga cannon and several thousand men overnight to occupy Dorchester Heights , overlooking Boston . Since it was winter the ground was frozen , making the digging of trenches impractical . Washington 's men instead used logs , branches and anything else available to fortify the position overnight . General Howe is said to have exclaimed , " My God , these fellows have done more work in one night than I could make my army do in three months . " The British fleet was within range of the American guns on Dorchester Heights , putting it and the troops in the city at risk . 
 The immediate response of the British was a two @-@ hour cannon barrage at the heights , which had no effect because the British guns could not reach the American guns at such height . After the failure of the barrage , Howe and his officers agreed that the colonists must be removed from the heights if they were to hold Boston . They planned an assault on the heights ; however , due to a storm the attack never took place , and the British elected instead to withdraw . 
 On March 8 , some prominent Bostonians sent a letter to Washington , stating that the British would not destroy the town if they were allowed to depart unmolested . Washington was given the letter , but formally rejected it , as it was not addressed to him by either name or title . However , the letter had the intended effect : when the evacuation began , there was no American fire to hinder the British departure . On March 9 , after seeing movement on Nook 's Hill on Dorchester , the British opened a massive fire barrage that lasted all night . It killed four men with one cannonball , but that was all the damage that was done . The next day , the colonists went out and collected the 700 cannonballs that had been fired at them . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 On March 10 , General Howe issued a proclamation ordering the inhabitants to give up all linen and woolen goods that could be used by the colonists to continue the war . A Loyalist , Crean Brush , was authorized to receive these goods , in return for which he gave certificates that were effectively worthless . Over the next week , the British fleet sat in Boston harbor waiting for favorable winds , while Loyalists and British soldiers were loaded onto the ships . During this time , American naval activities outside the harbor successfully captured and diverted to ports under colonial control several British supply ships . On March 15 , the wind became favorable , but before they could leave , it turned against them . On March 17 the wind once again turned favorable . The troops , who were authorized to burn the town if there were any disturbances while they were marching to their ships , began to move out at 4 : 00 a.m. By 9 : 00 a.m. , all ships were underway . The fleet departing from Boston included 120 ships , with more than 11 @,@ 000 people aboard . Of those , 9 @,@ 906 were British troops , 667 were women , and 553 were children . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Americans clean up = = = 
 Once the British fleet sailed away , the Americans moved to reclaim Boston and Charlestown . At first , they thought that the British were still on Bunker Hill , but it turned out that the British had left dummies in place . Due to the risk of smallpox , at first only men picked for their prior exposure to the disease entered Boston under the command of Artemas Ward . More of the colonial army entered on March 20 , once the risk of disease was judged low . While Washington had essentially acceded to the British threat to burn Boston , and had not hindered their departure from the city , he did not make their escape from the outer harbor entirely easy . He directed Captain Manley to harass the departing British fleet , in which he had some success , capturing among other prizes the ship carrying Crean Brush and his plunder . 
 General Howe , when his fleet finally left the outer harbor , left in his wake a small contingent of vessels whose primary purpose was to intercept any arriving British vessels . While they successfully redirected to Halifax numerous ships carrying British troops originally destined for Boston , some unsuspecting British troop ships landed in Boston , only to fall into American hands . 
 The British departure ended major military activities in the New England colonies . Washington , fearing that the British were going to attack New York City , departed on April 4 with his army for Manhattan , beginning the New York and New Jersey campaign . 
 There are six units of the Army National Guard ( 101st Eng Bn , 125th MP Co , 181st Inf , 182nd Inf , 197th FA , and 201st FA ) derived from American units that participated in the Siege of Boston . There are thirty currently existing units in the U.S. Army with lineages that go back to the colonial era . 
 = = = Fate of the British generals = = = 
 General Howe would be severely criticized in the British press and Parliament for his failures in the Boston campaign . General Gage was never given another command . General Burgoyne would see action in the Saratoga Campaign , a disaster that saw his capture , as well as that of 7 @,@ 500 troops under his command . General Clinton would command the British forces in America for four years ( 1778 – 1782 ) . 
 = = = Fate of the Loyalists = = = 
 Many Massachusetts Loyalists left with the British when they evacuated Boston . Some went to England to rebuild lives there , and some returned to America after the war . Many stayed in Nova Scotia , settling in places like Saint John , and many became active in the future development of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . 
 = = = Fate of Boston = = = 
 Following the siege , Boston effectively ceased to be a military target , but continued to be a focal point for revolutionary activities , with its port acting as an important point for fitting ships of war and privateers . Its leading citizens would have important roles in the development of the future United States . Boston and other area communities mark the March 17 end of the siege as Evacuation Day . 
 = Hyderabad = 
 Hyderabad ( / <unk> / HY @-@ <unk> @-@ ə @-@ bad ; often / <unk> / ) is the capital of the southern Indian state of Telangana and de jure capital of Andhra Pradesh . Occupying 650 square kilometres ( 250 sq mi ) along the banks of the Musi River , it has a population of about 6 @.@ 7 million and a metropolitan population of about 7 @.@ 75 million , making it the fourth most populous city and sixth most populous urban agglomeration in India . At an average altitude of 542 metres ( 1 @,@ 778 ft ) , much of Hyderabad is situated on hilly terrain around artificial lakes , including Hussain Sagar — predating the city 's founding — north of the city centre . 
 Established in 1591 by Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah , Hyderabad remained under the rule of the Qutb Shahi dynasty for nearly a century before the Mughals captured the region . In 1724 , Mughal viceroy Asif Jah I declared his sovereignty and created his own dynasty , known as the Nizams of Hyderabad . The Nizam 's dominions became a princely state during the British Raj , and remained so for 150 years , with the city serving as its capital . The city continued as the capital of Hyderabad State after it was brought into the Indian Union in 1948 , and became the capital of Andhra Pradesh after the States Reorganisation Act , 1956 . Since 1956 , Rashtrapati Nilayam in the city has been the winter office of the President of India . In 2014 , the newly formed state of Telangana split from Andhra Pradesh and the city became joint capital of the two states , a transitional arrangement scheduled to end by 2025 . 
 Relics of Qutb Shahi and Nizam rule remain visible today , with the Charminar — commissioned by Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah — coming to symbolise Hyderabad . Golconda fort is another major landmark . The influence of Mughlai culture is also evident in the city 's distinctive cuisine , which includes Hyderabadi biryani and Hyderabadi <unk> . The Qutb <unk> and Nizams established Hyderabad as a cultural hub , attracting men of letters from different parts of the world . Hyderabad emerged as the foremost centre of culture in India with the decline of the Mughal Empire in the mid @-@ 19th century , with artists migrating to the city from the rest of the Indian subcontinent . While Hyderabad is losing its cultural pre @-@ eminence , it is today , due to the Telugu film industry , the country 's second @-@ largest producer of motion pictures . 
 Hyderabad was historically known as a pearl and diamond trading centre , and it continues to be known as the City of Pearls . Many of the city 's traditional bazaars , including Laad Bazaar , Begum Bazaar and Sultan Bazaar , have remained open for centuries . However , industrialisation throughout the 20th century attracted major Indian manufacturing , research and financial institutions , including Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited , the National Geophysical Research Institute and the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology . Special economic zones dedicated to information technology have encouraged companies from across India and around the world to set up operations and the emergence of pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in the 1990s led to the area 's naming as India 's " Genome Valley " . With an output of US $ 74 billion , Hyderabad is the fifth @-@ largest contributor to India 's overall gross domestic product . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 According to John Everett @-@ Heath , the author of Oxford Concise Dictionary of World Place Names , Hyderabad means " <unk> 's city " or " lion city " , from <unk> ( lion ) and <unk> ( city ) . It was named to honour the Caliph Ali Ibn Abi Talib , who was also known as <unk> because of his lion @-@ like valour in battles . Andrew Petersen , a scholar of Islamic architecture , says the city was originally called <unk> ( city of gardens ) . One popular theory suggests that Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah , the founder of the city , named it " <unk> " or " <unk> " after <unk> , a local nautch ( dancing ) girl with whom he had fallen in love . She converted to Islam and adopted the title Hyder Mahal . The city was renamed Hyderabad in her honour . According to another source , the city was named after Haidar , the son of Quli Qutb Shah . 
 = = = Early and medieval history = = = 
 Archaeologists excavating near the city have unearthed Iron Age sites that may date from 500 BCE . The region comprising modern Hyderabad and its surroundings was known as Golkonda ( Golla <unk> " shepherd 's hill " ) , and was ruled by the Chalukya dynasty from 624 CE to 1075 CE . Following the dissolution of the Chalukya empire into four parts in the 11th century , Golkonda came under the control of the Kakatiya dynasty from 1158 , whose seat of power was at Warangal , 148 km ( 92 mi ) northeast of modern Hyderabad . 
 The Kakatiya dynasty was reduced to a vassal of the Khilji dynasty in 1310 after its defeat by Sultan Alauddin Khilji of the Delhi Sultanate . This lasted until 1321 , when the Kakatiya dynasty was annexed by Malik Kafur , <unk> Khilji 's general . During this period , Alauddin Khilji took the Koh @-@ i @-@ Noor diamond , which is said to have been mined from the <unk> Mines of Golkonda , to Delhi . Muhammad bin Tughluq succeeded to the Delhi sultanate in 1325 , bringing Warangal under the rule of the Tughlaq dynasty until 1347 when Ala @-@ ud @-@ Din Bahman Shah , a governor under bin Tughluq , rebelled against Delhi and established the Bahmani Sultanate in the Deccan Plateau , with Gulbarga , 200 km ( 124 mi ) west of Hyderabad , as its capital . The Hyderabad area was under the control of the <unk> Nayaks at this time , who , however , were forced to cede it to the Bahmani Sultanate in 1364 . The Bahmani kings ruled the region until 1518 and were the first independent Muslim rulers of the Deccan . 
 Sultan Quli , a governor of Golkonda , revolted against the Bahmani Sultanate and established the Qutb Shahi dynasty in 1518 ; he rebuilt the mud @-@ fort of Golconda and named the city " Muhammad <unk> " . The fifth sultan , Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah , established Hyderabad on the banks of the Musi River in 1591 , to avoid the water shortages experienced at Golkonda . During his rule , he had the Charminar and Mecca Masjid built in the city . On 21 September 1687 , the Golkonda Sultanate came under the rule of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb after a year @-@ long siege of the Golkonda fort . The annexed area was renamed Deccan Suba ( Deccan province ) and the capital was moved from Golkonda to Aurangabad , about 550 km ( 342 mi ) northwest of Hyderabad . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 In 1714 <unk> , the Mughal emperor , appointed Asif Jah I to be Viceroy of the Deccan , with the title Nizam @-@ ul @-@ Mulk ( Administrator of the Realm ) . In 1724 , Asif Jah I defeated <unk> Khan to establish autonomy over the Deccan Suba , named the region Hyderabad Deccan , and started what came to be known as the Asif Jahi dynasty . Subsequent rulers retained the title Nizam ul @-@ Mulk and were referred to as Asif Jahi Nizams , or Nizams of Hyderabad . The death of Asif Jah I in 1748 resulted in a period of political unrest as his sons , backed by opportunistic neighbouring states and colonial foreign forces , contended for the throne . The accession of Asif Jah II , who reigned from 1762 to 1803 , ended the instability . In 1768 he signed the treaty of Masulipatnam , surrendering the coastal region to the East India Company in return for a fixed annual rent . 
 In 1769 Hyderabad city became the formal capital of the Nizams . In response to regular threats from Hyder Ali ( Dalwai of Mysore ) , Baji Rao I ( Peshwa of the Maratha Empire ) , and <unk> Jung ( Asif Jah II 's elder brother , who was supported by the Marquis de Bussy @-@ Castelnau ) , the Nizam signed a subsidiary alliance with the East India Company in 1798 , allowing the British Indian Army to occupy <unk> ( modern Secunderabad ) to protect the state 's capital , for which the Nizams paid an annual maintenance to the British . 
 Until 1874 there were no modern industries in Hyderabad . With the introduction of railways in the 1880s , four factories were built to the south and east of Hussain Sagar lake , and during the early 20th century , Hyderabad was transformed into a modern city with the establishment of transport services , underground drainage , running water , electricity , telecommunications , universities , industries , and Begumpet Airport . The Nizams ruled their princely state from Hyderabad during the British Raj . 
 After India gained independence , the Nizam declared his intention to remain independent rather than become part of the Indian Union . The Hyderabad State Congress , with the support of the Indian National Congress and the Communist Party of India , began agitating against Nizam VII in 1948 . On 17 September that year , the Indian Army took control of Hyderabad State after an invasion codenamed Operation Polo . With the defeat of his forces , Nizam VII capitulated to the Indian Union by signing an Instrument of Accession , which made him the Rajpramukh ( Princely Governor ) of the state until 31 October 1956 . Between 1946 and 1951 , the Communist Party of India fomented the Telangana uprising against the feudal lords of the Telangana region . The Constitution of India , which became effective on 26 January 1950 , made Hyderabad State one of the part B states of India , with Hyderabad city continuing to be the capital . In his 1955 report Thoughts on Linguistic States , B. R. Ambedkar , then chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution , proposed designating the city of Hyderabad as the second capital of India because of its amenities and strategic central location . Since 1956 , the Rashtrapati Nilayam in Hyderabad has been the second official residence and business office of the President of India ; the President stays once a year in winter and conducts official business particularly relating to Southern India . 
 On 1 November 1956 the states of India were reorganised by language . Hyderabad state was split into three parts , which were merged with neighbouring states to form the modern states of Maharashtra , Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh . The nine <unk> and Urdu @-@ speaking districts of Hyderabad State in the Telangana region were merged with the Telugu @-@ speaking Andhra State to create Andhra Pradesh , with Hyderabad as its capital . Several protests , known collectively as the Telangana movement , attempted to invalidate the merger and demanded the creation of a new Telangana state . Major actions took place in 1969 and 1972 , and a third began in 2010 . The city suffered several explosions : one at <unk> in 2002 claimed two lives ; terrorist bombs in May and August 2007 caused communal tension and riots ; and two bombs exploded in February 2013 . On 30 July 2013 the government of India declared that part of Andhra Pradesh would be split off to form a new Telangana state , and that Hyderabad city would be the capital city and part of Telangana , while the city would also remain the capital of Andhra Pradesh for no more than ten years . On 3 October 2013 the Union Cabinet approved the proposal , and in February 2014 both houses of Parliament passed the Telangana Bill . With the final assent of the President of India in June 2014 , Telangana state was formed . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Situated in the southern part of Telangana in southeastern India , Hyderabad is 1 @,@ 566 kilometres ( 973 mi ) south of Delhi , 699 kilometres ( 434 mi ) southeast of Mumbai , and 570 kilometres ( 350 mi ) north of Bangalore by road . It lies on the banks of the Musi River , in the northern part of the Deccan Plateau . Greater Hyderabad covers 650 km2 ( 250 sq mi ) , making it one of the largest metropolitan areas in India . With an average altitude of 542 metres ( 1 @,@ 778 ft ) , Hyderabad lies on predominantly sloping terrain of grey and pink granite , dotted with small hills , the highest being Banjara Hills at 672 metres ( 2 @,@ 205 ft ) . The city has numerous lakes referred to as <unk> , meaning " sea " . Examples include artificial lakes created by dams on the Musi , such as Hussain Sagar ( built in 1562 near the city centre ) , Osman Sagar and <unk> Sagar . As of 1996 , the city had 140 lakes and 834 water tanks ( ponds ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Hyderabad has a tropical wet and dry climate ( Köppen Aw ) bordering on a hot semi @-@ arid climate ( Köppen BSh ) . The annual mean temperature is 26 @.@ 6 ° C ( 79 @.@ 9 ° F ) ; monthly mean temperatures are 21 – 33 ° C ( 70 – 91 ° F ) . Summers ( March – June ) are hot and humid , with average highs in the mid @-@ to @-@ high 30s Celsius ; maximum temperatures often exceed 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) between April and June . The coolest temperatures occur in December and January , when the lowest temperature occasionally dips to 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) . May is the hottest month , when daily temperatures range from 26 to 39 ° C ( 79 – 102 ° F ) ; December , the coldest , has temperatures varying from 14 @.@ 5 to 28 ° C ( 57 – 82 ° F ) . 
 Heavy rain from the south @-@ west summer monsoon falls between June and September , supplying Hyderabad with most of its mean annual rainfall . Since records began in November 1891 , the heaviest rainfall recorded in a 24 @-@ hour period was 241 @.@ 5 mm ( 10 in ) on 24 August 2000 . The highest temperature ever recorded was 45 @.@ 5 ° C ( 114 ° F ) on 2 June 1966 , and the lowest was 6 @.@ 1 ° C ( 43 ° F ) on 8 January 1946 . The city receives 2 @,@ 731 hours of sunshine per year ; maximum daily sunlight exposure occurs in February . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Hyderabad 's lakes and the sloping terrain of its low @-@ lying hills provide habitat for an assortment of flora and fauna . The forest region in and around the city encompasses areas of ecological and biological importance , which are preserved in the form of national parks , zoos , mini @-@ zoos and a wildlife sanctuary . Nehru Zoological Park , the city 's one large zoo , is the first in India to have a lion and tiger safari park . Hyderabad has three national parks ( <unk> National Park , Mahavir Harina <unk> National Park and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park ) , and the <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary is about 50 km ( 31 mi ) from the city . Hyderabad 's other environmental reserves are : Kotla <unk> Reddy Botanical Gardens , <unk> Lake , Hussain Sagar , Fox Sagar Lake , Mir Alam Tank and <unk> Lake , which is home to regional birds and attracts seasonal migratory birds from different parts of the world . Organisations engaged in environmental and wildlife preservation include the Telangana Forest Department , Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education , the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi @-@ Arid Tropics ( ICRISAT ) , the Animal Welfare Board of India , the Blue Cross of Hyderabad and the University of Hyderabad . 
 = = Administration = = 
 = = = Common capital status = = = 
 According to the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act , 2014 part 2 Section 5 : " ( 1 ) On and from the appointed day , Hyderabad in the existing State of Andhra Pradesh , shall be the common capital of the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh for such period not exceeding ten years . ( 2 ) After expiry of the period referred to in sub @-@ section ( 1 ) , Hyderabad shall be the capital of the State of Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the State of Andhra Pradesh . " 
 The same sections also define that the common capital includes the existing area designated as the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation under the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act , 1955 . As stipulated in sections 3 and 18 ( 1 ) of the Reorganisation Act , city MLAs are members of Telangana state assembly . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation ( GHMC ) oversees the civic infrastructure of the city 's 18 " circles " , which together encompass 150 municipal wards . Each ward is represented by a corporator , elected by popular vote . The corporators elect the Mayor , who is the titular head of GHMC ; executive powers rest with the Municipal Commissioner , appointed by the state government . The GHMC carries out the city 's infrastructural work such as building and maintenance of roads and drains , town planning including construction regulation , maintenance of municipal markets and parks , solid waste management , the issuing of birth and death certificates , the issuing of trade licences , collection of property tax , and community welfare services such as mother and child healthcare , and pre @-@ school and non @-@ formal education . The GHMC was formed in April 2007 by merging the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad ( MCH ) with 12 municipalities of the Hyderabad , Ranga Reddy and Medak districts covering a total area of 650 km2 ( 250 sq mi ) . In the 2016 municipal election , the Telangana Rashtra <unk> formed the majority and the present Mayor is <unk> Ram Mohan . The Secunderabad Cantonment Board is a civic administration agency overseeing an area of 40 @.@ 1 km2 ( 15 @.@ 5 sq mi ) , where there are several military camps . The Osmania University campus is administered independently by the university authority . 
 Law and order in Hyderabad city is supervised by the governor of Telangana . The jurisdiction is divided into two police <unk> : Hyderabad and Cyberabad , which are again divided into four and five police zones respectively . Each zone is headed by a deputy commissioner . 
 The jurisdictions of the city 's administrative agencies are , in ascending order of size : the Hyderabad Police area , Hyderabad district , the GHMC area ( " Hyderabad city " ) and the area under the Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority ( <unk> ) . The <unk> is an apolitical urban planning agency that covers the GHMC and its suburbs , extending to 54 <unk> in five districts encircling the city . It coordinates the development activities of GHMC and suburban municipalities and manages the administration of bodies such as the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board ( HMWSSB ) . 
 As the seat of the government of Telangana , Hyderabad is home to the state 's legislature , secretariat and high court , as well as various local government agencies . The Lower City Civil Court and the Metropolitan Criminal Court are under the jurisdiction of the High Court . The GHMC area contains 24 State Legislative Assembly constituencies , which form five constituencies of the Lok Sabha ( the lower house of the Parliament of India ) . 
 = = = Utility services = = = 
 The HMWSSB regulates rainwater harvesting , sewerage services and water supply , which is sourced from several dams located in the suburbs . In 2005 , the HMWSSB started operating a 116 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 72 mi ) water supply pipeline from Nagarjuna Sagar Dam to meet increasing demand . The Telangana Southern Power Distribution Company Limited manages electricity supply . As of October 2014 , there were 15 fire stations in the city , operated by the Telangana State Disaster and Fire Response Department . The government @-@ owned India Post has five head post offices and many sub @-@ post offices in Hyderabad , which are complemented by private courier services . 
 = = = Pollution control = = = 
 Hyderabad produces around 4 @,@ 500 tonnes of solid waste daily , which is transported from collection units in <unk> , <unk> and Lower Tank Bund to the <unk> in <unk> . Disposal is managed by the Integrated Solid Waste Management project which was started by the GHMC in 2010 . Rapid urbanisation and increased economic activity has also led to increased industrial waste , air , noise and water pollution , which is regulated by the Telangana Pollution Control Board ( <unk> ) . The contribution of different sources to air pollution in 2006 was : 20 – 50 % from vehicles , 40 – 70 % from a combination of vehicle discharge and road dust , 10 – 30 % from industrial discharges and 3 – 10 % from the burning of household rubbish . Deaths resulting from atmospheric particulate matter are estimated at 1 @,@ 700 – 3 @,@ 000 each year . Ground water around Hyderabad , which has a hardness of up to 1000 ppm , around three times higher than is desirable , is the main source of drinking water but the increasing population and consequent increase in demand has led to a decline in not only ground water but also river and lake levels . This shortage is further exacerbated by inadequately treated effluent discharged from industrial treatment plants polluting the water sources of the city . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 The <unk> of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for planning , implementation and monitoring of all facilities related to health and preventive services . As of 2010 – 11 , the city had 50 government hospitals , 300 private and charity hospitals and 194 nursing homes providing around 12 @,@ 000 hospital beds , fewer than half the required 25 @,@ 000 . For every 10 @,@ 000 people in the city , there are 17 @.@ 6 hospital beds , 9 specialist doctors , 14 nurses and 6 physicians . The city also has about 4 @,@ 000 individual clinics and 500 medical diagnostic centres . Private clinics are preferred by many residents because of the distance to , poor quality of care at and long waiting times in government facilities , despite the high proportion of the city 's residents being covered by government health insurance : 24 % according to a National Family Health Survey in 2005 . As of 2012 , many new private hospitals of various sizes were opened or being built . Hyderabad also has outpatient and inpatient facilities that use Unani , homoeopathic and Ayurvedic treatments . 
 In the 2005 National Family Health Survey , it was reported that the city 's total fertility rate is 1 @.@ 8 , which is below the replacement rate . Only 61 % of children had been provided with all basic vaccines ( BCG , measles and full courses of polio and <unk> ) , fewer than in all other surveyed cities except Meerut . The infant mortality rate was 35 per 1 @,@ 000 live births , and the mortality rate for children under five was 41 per 1 @,@ 000 live births . The survey also reported that a third of women and a quarter of men are overweight or obese , 49 % of children below 5 years are anaemic , and up to 20 % of children are underweight , while more than 2 % of women and 3 % of men suffer from diabetes . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 When the GHMC was created in 2007 , the area occupied by the municipality increased from 175 km2 ( 68 sq mi ) to 650 km2 ( 250 sq mi ) . Consequently , the population increased by 87 % , from 3 @,@ 637 @,@ 483 in the 2001 census to 6 @,@ 809 @,@ 970 in the 2011 census , 24 % of which are migrants from elsewhere in India , making Hyderabad the nation 's fourth most populous city . As of 2011 , the population density is 18 @,@ 480 / km2 ( 47 @,@ 900 / sq mi ) . At the same 2011 census , the Hyderabad Urban Agglomeration had a population of 7 @,@ 749 @,@ 334 , making it the sixth most populous urban agglomeration in the country . The population of the Hyderabad urban agglomeration has since been estimated by electoral officials to be 9 @.@ 1 million as of early 2013 but is expected to exceed 10 million by the end of the year . There are 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 802 male and 3 @,@ 309 @,@ 168 female citizens — a sex ratio of 945 females per 1000 males , higher than the national average of 926 per 1000 . Among children aged 0 – 6 years , 373 @,@ 794 are boys and 352 @,@ 022 are girls — a ratio of 942 per 1000 . Literacy stands at 82 @.@ 96 % ( male 85 @.@ 96 % ; female 79 @.@ 79 % ) , higher than the national average of 74 @.@ 04 % . The socio @-@ economic strata consist of 20 % upper class , 50 % middle class and 30 % working class . 
 = = = Ethnic groups , language and religion = = = 
 Referred to as " Hyderabadi " , the residents of Hyderabad are predominantly Telugu and Urdu speaking people , with minority Bengali , Gujarati ( including <unk> ) , Kannada ( including <unk> ) , Malayalam , Marathi , Marwari , Odia , Punjabi , Tamil and Uttar Pradeshi communities . Hyderabad is home to a unique dialect of Urdu called Hyderabadi Urdu , which is a type of Dakhini , and is the mother tongue of most Hyderabadi Muslims , a unique community who owe much of their history , language , cuisine , and culture to Hyderabad , and the various dynasties who previously ruled . <unk> Arabs , African Arabs , Armenians , Abyssinians , Iranians , Pathans and Turkish people are also present ; these communities , of which the <unk> are the largest , declined after Hyderabad State became part of the Indian Union , as they lost the patronage of the Nizams . 
 Telugu and Urdu are both official languages of the city , and most <unk> are bilingual . The Telugu dialect spoken in Hyderabad is called Telangana <unk> , and the Urdu spoken is called Dakhini . English is also used . A significant minority speak other languages , including Hindi ( which can conflate with colloquial Urdu , see Hindi – Urdu controversy ) , Marathi , Odia , Tamil , Bengali and Kannada . 
 Hindus are in the majority . Muslims form a very large minority , and are present throughout the city and predominate in and around the Old City . There are also Christian , Sikh , Jain , Buddhist and Parsi communities and iconic temples , mosques and churches can be seen . According to the 2011 census , Hyderabad district 's religious make @-@ up was : Hindus ( 51 @.@ 89 % ) , Muslims ( 43 @.@ 45 % ) , Christians ( 2 @.@ 22 % ) , Jains ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) , Sikhs ( 0 @.@ 29 % ) and Buddhists ( 0 @.@ 03 % ) ; 1 @.@ 58 % did not state any religion . In Greater Hyderabad ( the extended city area governed by GHMC ) , religious make @-@ up was : Hindus ( 64 @.@ 93 % ) , Muslims ( 30 @.@ 13 % ) , Christians ( 2 @.@ 75 % ) , Jains ( 0 @.@ 29 % ) , Sikhs ( 0 @.@ 25 % ) and Buddhists ( 0 @.@ 04 % ) ; 1 @.@ 56 % did not state any religion . 
 = = = Slums = = = 
 In the greater metropolitan area , 13 % of the population live below the poverty line . According to a 2012 report submitted by GHMC to the World Bank , Hyderabad has 1 @,@ 476 slums with a total population of 1 @.@ 7 million , of whom 66 % live in 985 slums in the " core " of the city ( the part that formed Hyderabad before the April 2007 expansion ) and the remaining 34 % live in 491 suburban tenements . About 22 % of the slum @-@ dwelling households had migrated from different parts of India in the last decade of the 20th century , and 63 % claimed to have lived in the slums for more than 10 years . Overall literacy in the slums is 60 – 80 % and female literacy is 52 – 73 % . A third of the slums have basic service connections , and the remainder depend on general public services provided by the government . There are 405 government schools , 267 government aided schools , 175 private schools and 528 community halls in the slum areas . According to a 2008 survey by the Centre for Good Governance , 87 @.@ 6 % of the slum @-@ dwelling households are nuclear families , 18 % are very poor , with an income up to ₹ 20 @,@ 000 ( US $ 300 ) per annum , 73 % live below the poverty line ( a standard poverty line recognised by the Andhra Pradesh Government is ₹ 24 @,@ 000 ( US $ 360 ) per annum ) , 27 % of the chief wage earners ( <unk> ) are casual labour and 38 % of the <unk> are illiterate . About 3 @.@ 72 % of the slum children aged 5 – 14 do not go to school and 3 @.@ 17 % work as child labour , of whom 64 % are boys and 36 % are girls . The largest employers of child labour are street shops and construction sites . Among the working children , 35 % are engaged in hazardous jobs . 
 = = Cityscape = = 
 = = = Neighbourhoods = = = 
 The historic city established by Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah on the southern side of the Musi River forms the " Old City " , while the " New City " encompasses the urbanised area on the northern banks . The two are connected by many bridges across the river , the oldest of which is Purana Pul ( " old bridge " ) . Hyderabad is twinned with neighbouring Secunderabad , to which it is connected by Hussain Sagar . 
 Many historic and tourist sites lie in south central Hyderabad , such as the Charminar , the Mecca Masjid , the Salar Jung Museum , the Nizam 's Museum , the Falaknuma Palace , and the traditional retail corridor comprising the Pearl Market , Laad Bazaar and Madina Circle . North of the river are hospitals , colleges , major railway stations and business areas such as Begum Bazaar , Koti , <unk> , Sultan Bazaar and <unk> Jahi Market , along with administrative and recreational establishments such as the Reserve Bank of India , the Telangana Secretariat , the Hyderabad Mint , the Telangana Legislature , the Public Gardens , the Nizam Club , the Ravindra Bharathi , the State Museum , the Birla Temple and the Birla Planetarium . 
 North of central Hyderabad lie Hussain Sagar , Tank Bund Road , Rani <unk> and the Secunderabad Railway Station . Most of the city 's parks and recreational centres , such as <unk> Park , Indira Park , Lumbini Park , NTR Gardens , the Buddha statue and <unk> Park are located here . In the northwest part of the city there are upscale residential and commercial areas such as Banjara Hills , Jubilee Hills , Begumpet , <unk> and <unk> . The northern end contains industrial areas such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Chanda Nagar . The northeast end is dotted with residential areas . In the eastern part of the city lie many defence research centres and Ramoji Film City . The " Cyberabad " area in the southwest and west of the city has grown rapidly since the 1990s . It is home to information technology and bio @-@ pharmaceutical companies and to landmarks such as Hyderabad Airport , Osman Sagar , <unk> Sagar and Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park . 
 = = = Landmarks = = = 
 Heritage buildings constructed during the Qutb Shahi and Nizam eras showcase Indo @-@ Islamic architecture influenced by Medieval , Mughal and European styles . After the 1908 flooding of the Musi River , the city was expanded and civic monuments constructed , particularly during the rule of Mir Osman Ali Khan ( the <unk> Nizam ) , whose patronage of architecture led to him being referred to as the maker of modern Hyderabad . In 2012 , the government of India declared Hyderabad the first " Best heritage city of India " . 
 Qutb Shahi architecture of the 16th and early 17th centuries followed classical Persian architecture featuring domes and colossal arches . The oldest surviving Qutb Shahi structure in Hyderabad is the ruins of Golconda fort built in the 16th century . Most of the historical bazaars that still exist were constructed on the street north of Charminar towards the fort . The Charminar has become an icon of the city ; located in the centre of old Hyderabad , it is a square structure with sides 20 m ( 66 ft ) long and four grand arches each facing a road . At each corner stands a 56 m ( 184 ft ) -high minaret . The Charminar , Golconda fort and the Qutb Shahi tombs are considered to be monuments of national importance in India ; in 2010 the Indian government proposed that the sites be listed for UNESCO World Heritage status . 
 Among the oldest surviving examples of Nizam architecture in Hyderabad is the <unk> Palace , which was the seat of royal power . It showcases a diverse array of architectural styles , from the Baroque Harem to its Neoclassical royal court . The other palaces include Falaknuma Palace ( inspired by the style of Andrea Palladio ) , <unk> Haveli , King Kothi and Bella Vista Palace all of which were built at the peak of Nizam rule in the 19th century . During Mir Osman Ali Khan 's rule , European styles , along with Indo @-@ Islamic , became prominent . These styles are reflected in the Falaknuma Palace and many civic monuments such as the Hyderabad High Court , Osmania Hospital , Osmania University , the State Central Library , City College , the Telangana Legislature , the State Archaeology Museum , Jubilee Hall , and Hyderabad and <unk> railway stations . Other landmarks of note are <unk> Palace , <unk> <unk> Palace , Basheer Bagh Palace , <unk> Manzil and the Spanish Mosque , all constructed by the <unk> family . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Hyderabad is the largest contributor to the gross domestic product ( GDP ) , tax and other revenues , of Telangana , and the sixth largest deposit centre and fourth largest credit centre nationwide , as ranked by the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) in June 2012 . Its US $ 74 billion GDP made it the fifth @-@ largest contributor city to India 's overall GDP in 2011 – 12 . Its per capita annual income in 2011 was ₹ 44 @,@ 300 ( US $ 660 ) . As of 2006 , the largest employers in the city were the governments of Andhra Pradesh ( 113 @,@ 098 employees ) and India ( 85 @,@ 155 ) . According to a 2005 survey , 77 % of males and 19 % of females in the city were employed . The service industry remains dominant in the city , and 90 % of the employed workforce is engaged in this sector . 
 Hyderabad 's role in the pearl trade has given it the name " City of Pearls " and up until the 18th century , the city was also the only global trading centre for large diamonds . Industrialisation began under the Nizams in the late 19th century , helped by railway expansion that connected the city with major ports . From the 1950s to the 1970s , Indian enterprises , such as Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited ( BHEL ) , Nuclear Fuel Complex ( NFC ) , National Mineral Development Corporation ( <unk> ) , Bharat Electronics ( BEL ) , Electronics Corporation of India Limited ( <unk> ) , Defence Research and Development Organisation ( DRDO ) , Hindustan Aeronautics Limited ( HAL ) , Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology ( CCMB ) , Centre for DNA <unk> and Diagnostics ( <unk> ) , State Bank of Hyderabad ( <unk> ) and Andhra Bank ( AB ) were established in the city . The city is home to Hyderabad Securities formerly known as Hyderabad Stock Exchange ( HSE ) , and houses the regional office of the Securities and Exchange Board of India ( SEBI ) . In 2013 , the Bombay Stock Exchange ( BSE ) facility in Hyderabad was forecast to provide operations and transactions services to BSE @-@ Mumbai by the end of 2014 . The growth of the financial services sector has helped Hyderabad evolve from a traditional manufacturing city to a cosmopolitan industrial service centre . Since the 1990s , the growth of information technology ( IT ) , IT @-@ enabled services ( ITES ) , insurance and financial institutions has expanded the service sector , and these primary economic activities have boosted the ancillary sectors of trade and commerce , transport , storage , communication , real estate and retail . 
 Hyderabad 's commercial markets are divided into four sectors : central business districts , sub @-@ central business centres , neighbourhood business centres and local business centres . Many traditional and historic bazaars are located throughout the city , Laad Bazaar being the prominent among all is popular for selling a variety of traditional and cultural antique wares , along with gems and pearls . 
 The establishment of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited ( <unk> ) , a public sector undertaking , in 1961 was followed over the decades by many national and global companies opening manufacturing and research facilities in the city . As of 2010 , the city manufactured one third of India 's bulk drugs and 16 % of biotechnology products , contributing to its reputation as " India 's pharmaceutical capital " and the " Genome Valley of India " . Hyderabad is a global centre of information technology , for which it is known as Cyberabad ( Cyber City ) . As of 2013 , it contributed 15 % of India 's and 98 % of Andhra Pradesh 's exports in IT and ITES sectors and 22 % of NASSCOM 's total membership is from the city . The development of <unk> City , a township with extensive technological infrastructure , prompted multinational companies to establish facilities in Hyderabad . The city is home to more than 1300 IT and ITES firms , including global conglomerates such as Microsoft , Apple , Amazon , Google , IBM , Yahoo ! , Oracle Corporation , Dell , Facebook , and major Indian firms including Tech Mahindra , Infosys , Tata Consultancy Services ( TCS ) , Polaris and Wipro . In 2009 the World Bank Group ranked the city as the second best Indian city for doing business . The city and its suburbs contain the highest number of special economic zones of any Indian city . 
 Like the rest of India , Hyderabad has a large informal economy that employs 30 % of the labour force . According to a survey published in 2007 , it had 40 – 50 @,@ 000 street vendors , and their numbers were increasing . Among the street vendors , 84 % are male and 16 % female , and four fifths are " stationary vendors " operating from a fixed pitch , often with their own stall . Most are financed through personal savings ; only 8 % borrow from moneylenders . Vendor earnings vary from ₹ 50 ( 74 ¢ US ) to ₹ 800 ( US $ 12 ) per day . Other unorganised economic sectors include dairy , poultry farming , brick manufacturing , casual labour and domestic help . Those involved in the informal economy constitute a major portion of urban poor . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Hyderabad emerged as the foremost centre of culture in India with the decline of the Mughal Empire . After the fall of Delhi in 1857 , the migration of performing artists to the city particularly from the north and west of the Indian sub continent , under the patronage of the Nizam , enriched the cultural milieu . This migration resulted in a mingling of North and South Indian languages , cultures and religions , which has since led to a co @-@ existence of Hindu and Muslim traditions , for which the city has become noted . A further consequence of this north – south mix is that both Telugu and Urdu are official languages of Telangana . The mixing of religions has also resulted in many festivals being celebrated in Hyderabad such as Ganesh Chaturthi , Diwali and <unk> of Hindu tradition and Eid ul @-@ Fitr and Eid al @-@ Adha by Muslims . 
 Traditional Hyderabadi garb also reveals a mix of Muslim and South Asian influences with men wearing <unk> and kurta – <unk> and women wearing <unk> dupatta and salwar kameez . Most Muslim women wear burqa and hijab outdoors . In addition to the traditional Indian and Muslim garments , increasing exposure to western cultures has led to a rise in the wearing of western style clothing among youths . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 In the past , Qutb Shahi rulers and Nizams attracted artists , architects and men of letters from different parts of the world through patronage . The resulting ethnic mix popularised cultural events such as <unk> ( poetic symposia ) . The Qutb Shahi dynasty particularly encouraged the growth of Deccani Urdu literature leading to works such as the Deccani <unk> and Diwan poetry , which are among the earliest available manuscripts in Urdu . <unk> Un Nisa , a book compiled in the 15th century at Qutb Shahi courts , contains erotic paintings with diagrams for secret medicines and stimulants in the eastern form of ancient sexual arts . The reign of the Nizams saw many literary reforms and the introduction of Urdu as a language of court , administration and education . In 1824 , a collection of Urdu Ghazal poetry , named Gulzar @-@ e @-@ Mahlaqa , authored by Mah Laqa Bai — the first female Urdu poet to produce a Diwan — was published in Hyderabad . 
 Hyderabad has continued with these traditions in its annual Hyderabad Literary Festival , held since 2010 , showcasing the city 's literary and cultural creativity . Organisations engaged in the advancement of literature include the Sahitya Akademi , the Urdu Academy , the Telugu Academy , the National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language , the Comparative Literature Association of India , and the Andhra <unk> Parishad . Literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the State Central Library , the largest public library in the state which was established in 1891 , and other major libraries including the Sri Krishna Devaraya Andhra Bhasha Nilayam , the British Library and the Sundarayya <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Music and films = = = 
 South Indian music and dances such as the Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam styles are popular in the Deccan region . As a result of their culture policies , North Indian music and dance gained popularity during the rule of the Mughals and Nizams , and it was also during their reign that it became a tradition among the nobility to associate themselves with <unk> ( courtesans ) . These courtesans were revered as the epitome of etiquette and culture , and were appointed to teach singing , poetry and classical dance to many children of the aristocracy . This gave rise to certain styles of court music , dance and poetry . Besides western and Indian popular music genres such as filmi music , the residents of Hyderabad play city @-@ based <unk> music , dholak ke geet ( household songs based on local Folklore ) , and qawwali , especially at weddings , festivals and other celebratory events . The state government organises the Golconda Music and Dance Festival , the <unk> Music Festival and the <unk> Dance Festival to further encourage the development of music . 
 Although the city is not particularly noted for theatre and drama , the state government promotes theatre with multiple programmes and festivals in such venues as the Ravindra Bharati , Shilpakala Vedika and <unk> <unk> . Although not a purely music oriented event , <unk> , a popular annual exhibition of local and national consumer products , does feature some musical performances . The city is home to the Telugu film industry , popularly known as Tollywood and as of 2012 , produces the second largest number of films in India behind Bollywood . Films in the local Hyderabadi dialect are also produced and have been gaining popularity since 2005 . The city has also hosted international film festivals such as the International Children 's Film Festival and the Hyderabad International Film Festival . In 2005 , Guinness World Records declared Ramoji Film City to be the world 's largest film studio . 
 = = = Art and handicrafts = = = 
 The region is well known for its Golconda and Hyderabad painting styles which are branches of Deccani painting . Developed during the 16th century , the Golconda style is a native style blending foreign techniques and bears some similarity to the Vijayanagara paintings of neighbouring Mysore . A significant use of luminous gold and white colours is generally found in the Golconda style . The Hyderabad style originated in the 17th century under the Nizams . Highly influenced by Mughal painting , this style makes use of bright colours and mostly depicts regional landscape , culture , costumes and jewellery . 
 Although not a centre for handicrafts itself , the patronage of the arts by the Mughals and Nizams attracted artisans from the region to Hyderabad . Such crafts include : <unk> , a metalwork handicraft from neighbouring Karnataka , which was popularised during the 18th century and has since been granted a Geographical Indication ( GI ) tag under the auspices of the WTO act ; and <unk> and <unk> , embroidery works on textile that involve making elaborate designs using gold , silver and other metal threads . Another example of a handicraft drawn to Hyderabad is <unk> , a hand @-@ painted or block @-@ printed cotton textile that comes from cities in Andhra Pradesh . This craft is distinguished in having both a Hindu style , known as <unk> and entirely done by hand , and an Islamic style , known as Machilipatnam that uses both hand and block techniques . Examples of Hyderabad 's arts and crafts are housed in various museums including the Salar Jung Museum ( housing " one of the largest one @-@ man @-@ collections in the world " ) , the AP State Archaeology Museum , the Nizam Museum , the City Museum and the Birla Science Museum . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Hyderabadi cuisine comprises a broad repertoire of rice , wheat and meat dishes and the skilled use of various spices . Hyderabadi biryani and Hyderabadi <unk> , with their blend of Mughlai and Arab cuisines , have become iconic dishes of India . Hyderabadi cuisine is highly influenced by Mughlai and to some extent by French , Arabic , Turkish , Iranian and native Telugu and <unk> cuisines . Other popular native dishes include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> and the desserts <unk> ka <unk> , double ka <unk> and <unk> ki <unk> ( a sweet porridge made with sweet gourd ) . 
 = = Media = = 
 One of Hyderabad 's earliest newspapers , The Deccan Times , was established in the 1780s . In modern times , the major Telugu dailies published in Hyderabad are <unk> , Andhra <unk> , Sakshi and Namaste Telangana , while the major English papers are The Times of India , The Hindu and The Deccan Chronicle . The major Urdu papers include The Siasat Daily , The <unk> Daily and <unk> . Many coffee table magazines , professional magazines and research journals are also regularly published . The Secunderabad Cantonment Board established the first radio station in Hyderabad State around 1919 . Deccan Radio was the first radio public broadcast station in the city starting on 3 February 1935 , with FM broadcasting beginning in 2000 . The available channels in Hyderabad include All India Radio , Radio Mirchi , Radio City , Red FM , Big FM and Fever FM . 
 Television broadcasting in Hyderabad began in 1974 with the launch of Doordarshan , the Government of India 's public service broadcaster , which transmits two free @-@ to @-@ air terrestrial television channels and one satellite channel . Private satellite channels started in July 1992 with the launch of Star TV . Satellite TV channels are accessible via cable subscription , direct @-@ broadcast satellite services or internet @-@ based television . Hyderabad 's first dial @-@ up internet access became available in the early 1990s and was limited to software development companies . The first public internet access service began in 1995 , with the first private sector internet service provider ( ISP ) starting operations in 1998 . In 2015 , high @-@ speed public WiFi was introduced in parts of the city . 
 = = Education = = 
 Public and private schools in Hyderabad are governed by the Central Board of Secondary Education and follow a " 10 + 2 + 3 " plan . About two @-@ thirds of pupils attend privately run institutions . Languages of instruction include English , Hindi , Telugu and Urdu . Depending on the institution , students are required to sit the Secondary School Certificate or the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education . After completing secondary education , students enroll in schools or junior colleges with a higher secondary facility . Admission to professional graduation colleges in Hyderabad , many of which are affiliated with either Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Hyderabad ( <unk> ) or Osmania University ( OU ) , is through the Engineering Agricultural and Medical Common Entrance Test ( <unk> @-@ CET ) . 
 There are 13 universities in Hyderabad : two private universities , two deemed universities , six state universities and three central universities . The central universities are the University of Hyderabad , Maulana Azad National Urdu University and the English and Foreign Languages University . Osmania University , established in 1918 , was the first university in Hyderabad and as of 2012 is India 's second most popular institution for international students . The Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Open University , established in 1982 , is the first distance learning open university in India . 
 Hyderabad is also home to a number of centres specialising in particular fields such as biomedical sciences , biotechnology and pharmaceuticals , such as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research ( <unk> ) and National Institute of Nutrition ( NIN ) . Hyderabad has five major medical schools — Osmania Medical College , Gandhi Medical College , Nizam 's Institute of Medical Sciences , Deccan College of Medical Sciences and <unk> Institute of Medical Sciences — and many affiliated teaching hospitals . The Government <unk> <unk> College is a college of Unani medicine . Hyderabad is also the headquarters of the Indian Heart Association , a non @-@ profit foundation for cardiovascular education . 
 Institutes in Hyderabad include the National Institute of Rural Development , the Indian School of Business , the Institute of Public Enterprise , the Administrative Staff College of India and the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy . Technical and engineering schools include the International Institute of Information Technology , Hyderabad ( <unk> ) , Birla Institute of Technology and Science , <unk> – Hyderabad ( <unk> Hyderabad ) and Indian Institute of Technology , Hyderabad ( IIT @-@ H ) as well as agricultural engineering institutes such as the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi @-@ Arid Tropics ( ICRISAT ) and the Acharya N. G. Ranga Agricultural University . Hyderabad also has schools of fashion design including Raffles Millennium International , <unk> Hyderabad and Wigan and Leigh College . The National Institute of Design , Hyderabad ( NID @-@ H ) , will offer undergraduate and postgraduate courses from 2015 . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The most popular sports played in Hyderabad are cricket and association football . At the professional level , the city has hosted national and international sports events such as the 2002 National Games of India , the 2003 Afro @-@ Asian Games , the 2004 AP Tourism Hyderabad Open women 's tennis tournament , the 2007 Military World Games , the 2009 World Badminton Championships and the 2009 <unk> World Snooker Championship . The city hosts a number of venues suitable for professional competition such as the <unk> Pradesh Sports Complex for field hockey , the G. M. C. <unk> Stadium in Gachibowli for athletics and football , and for cricket , the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium and Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium , home ground of the Hyderabad Cricket Association . Hyderabad has hosted many international cricket matches , including matches in the 1987 and the 1996 ICC Cricket World Cups . The Hyderabad cricket team represents the city in the Ranji Trophy — a first @-@ class cricket tournament among India 's states and cities . Hyderabad is also home to the Indian Premier League franchise Sunrisers Hyderabad . A previous franchise was the Deccan Chargers , which won the 2009 Indian Premier League held in South Africa . 
 During British rule , Secunderabad became a well @-@ known sporting centre and many race courses , parade grounds and polo fields were built . Many elite clubs formed by the Nizams and the British such as the Secunderabad Club , the Nizam Club and the Hyderabad Race Club , which is known for its horse racing especially the annual Deccan derby , still exist . In more recent times , motorsports has become popular with the Andhra Pradesh Motor Sports Club organising popular events such as the Deccan ¼ Mile Drag , <unk> Rallies and 4x4 off @-@ road rallying . 
 International @-@ level sportspeople from Hyderabad include : cricketers Ghulam Ahmed , M. L. <unk> , Mohammed Azharuddin , V. V. S. Laxman , Venkatapathy Raju , <unk> Yadav , Arshad Ayub , Syed Abid Ali and Noel David ; football players Syed Abdul Rahim , Syed <unk> and Shabbir Ali ; tennis player Sania Mirza ; badminton players S. M. Arif , <unk> Gopichand , Saina Nehwal , P. V. Sindhu , <unk> <unk> and Chetan Anand ; hockey players Syed Mohammad Hadi and Mukesh Kumar ; rifle shooters <unk> <unk> and Asher <unk> and bodybuilder Mir <unk> Ali Khan . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The most commonly used forms of medium distance transport in Hyderabad include government owned services such as light railways and buses , as well as privately operated taxis and auto rickshaws . Bus services operate from the Mahatma Gandhi Bus Station in the city centre and carry over 130 million passengers daily across the entire network . Hyderabad 's light rail transportation system , the Multi @-@ Modal Transport System ( <unk> ) , is a three line suburban rail service used by over 160 @,@ 000 passengers daily . Complementing these government services are minibus routes operated by <unk> ( Society for Employment Promotion & Training in Twin Cities ) . Intercity rail services also operate from Hyderabad ; the main , and largest , station is Secunderabad Railway Station , which serves as Indian Railways ' South Central Railway zone headquarters and a hub for both buses and <unk> light rail services connecting Secunderabad and Hyderabad . Other major railway stations in Hyderabad are Hyderabad Deccan Station , <unk> Railway Station , Begumpet Railway Station , <unk> Railway Station and <unk> Railway Station . The Hyderabad Metro , a new rapid transit system , is to be added to the existing public transport infrastructure and is scheduled to operate three lines by 2015 . 
 As of 2012 , there are over 3 @.@ 5 million vehicles operating in the city , of which 74 % are two @-@ wheelers , 15 % cars and 3 % three @-@ wheelers . The remaining 8 % include buses , goods vehicles and taxis . The large number of vehicles coupled with relatively low road coverage — roads occupy only 9 @.@ 5 % of the total city area — has led to widespread traffic congestion especially since 80 % of passengers and 60 % of freight are transported by road . The Inner Ring Road , the Outer Ring Road , the Hyderabad Elevated Expressway , the longest flyover in India , and various interchanges , overpasses and underpasses were built to ease the congestion . Maximum speed limits within the city are 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) for two @-@ wheelers and cars , 35 km / h ( 22 mph ) for auto rickshaws and 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) for light commercial vehicles and buses . 
 Hyderabad sits at the junction of three National Highways linking it to six other states : NH @-@ 7 runs 2 @,@ 369 km ( 1 @,@ 472 mi ) from Varanasi , Uttar Pradesh , in the north to Kanyakumari , Tamil Nadu , in the south ; NH @-@ 9 , runs 841 km ( 523 mi ) east @-@ west between Machilipatnam , Andhra Pradesh , and Pune , Maharashtra ; and the 280 km ( 174 mi ) NH @-@ 163 links Hyderabad to <unk> , Chhattisgarh NH @-@ 765 links Hyderabad to Srisailam . Five state highways , SH @-@ 1 , SH @-@ 2 , SH @-@ 4 , SH @-@ 5 and SH @-@ 6 , either start from , or pass through , Hyderabad . 
 Air traffic was previously handled via Begumpet Airport , but this was replaced by Rajiv Gandhi International Airport ( RGIA ) ( IATA : HYD , ICAO : <unk> ) in 2008 , with the capacity of handling 12 million passengers and 100 @,@ 000 tonnes of cargo per annum . In 2011 , Airports Council International , an autonomous body representing the world 's airports , judged RGIA the world 's best airport in the 5 – 15 million passenger category and the world 's fifth best airport for service quality . 
 To reduce traffic and its emissions , the government has undertaken a metro rail project , Hyderabad metro rail which is under construction in different phases . 
 = Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church = 
 Brown Memorial Park Avenue Presbyterian Church of Baltimore , Maryland , U.S. , is a large , Gothic Revival @-@ style church built in 1870 and located at Park and Lafayette Avenues in the city 's Bolton Hill section . Named in memory of a 19th @-@ century Baltimore financier , the ornate church is noted for its exquisite stained glass windows by renowned artist Louis Comfort Tiffany , soaring vaulted ceiling , and the prominent persons associated with its history . Maltbie Babcock , who was the church 's pastor 1887 – 1900 , wrote the familiar hymn , This is My Father 's World . <unk> virtuoso concert performer Virgil Fox was organist at Brown Memorial early in his career ( 1936 – 1946 ) . 
 Called " one of the most significant buildings in this city , a treasure of art and architecture " by Baltimore Magazine , the church underwent a $ 1 @.@ 8 million restoration between 2001 – 2003 . It is part of the Presbyterian Church ( U.S.A. ) denomination . 
 = = History = = 
 The Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church building was dedicated on December 4 , 1870 , in memory of George Brown , chairman of the Baltimore @-@ based investment firm , Alex . Brown & Sons , and one of the founders of the pioneering Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in 1827 . Construction was funded by a gift of $ 150 @,@ 000 from his widow , Isabella McLanahan Brown , an amount equivalent to more than $ 4 million in 2009 . George Brown was described by a Baltimore historian as a successful businessman and civic leader who " regarded religion as preeminent above all other things and loved his church with all the ardor of his noble nature " . John Sparhawk Jones was the church 's first pastor , serving from 1870 to 1884 . Several of his collected sermons were later published in such books as Seeing Darkly , The Invisible Things , and Saved by Hope . 
 The church 's pastor between 1887 – 1900 was Maltbie Babcock , who was formally installed on September 28 , 1887 . His biography in a 1910 encyclopedia described him as " a fluent speaker , with a marvelous personal magnetism which appealed to all classes of people , and the influence of which became in a sense national . His theology was broad and deep ... he reached people in countless ways and exerted everywhere a remarkable personal magnetism ... [ having ] an unusually brilliant intellect and stirring oratorical powers that commanded admiration " . While at Brown , he led fund @-@ raising efforts to assist Jewish refugees from Russia who were victims of an anti @-@ Jewish pogrom . He was also a popular speaker with students at Johns Hopkins University . Under Babcock , the church acquired additional property at North and Madison Avenues for a chapel and Sunday School complex . 
 When Babcock was called to New York City 's Brick Presbyterian Church in 1900 , many prominent Baltimoreans , including the faculty of Johns Hopkins University , unsuccessfully implored Babcock to remain at Brown instead of accepting the call to Brick Church . Babcock resigned on January 17 , 1900 , to pastor the Manhattan church but died suddenly the following year at age 42 . At his New York funeral , the presiding clergyman eulogized him , " We do not need a candle to show a sunbeam ... The work our brother has done – the life he lived speaks for him . " A memorial service for the esteemed former pastor was held at Brown Memorial on May 22 , described as " impressive " by the New York Times . So inspired was former U.S. Postmaster General James Albert Gary , a member of Brown Memorial , that he chaired a committee to raise $ 50 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of $ 1 @.@ 4 million in 2009 ) for construction of a new church in memory of the beloved former pastor . More than half of that amount was raised the first day from the wealthy congregation , the New York Times reported , and the new Babcock Memorial Presbyterian Church was soon constructed on Brown Memorial Church 's North Avenue property . 
 Babcock 's successor as minister of Brown Memorial , John Timothy Stone , also presided over a large memorial gathering in Baltimore on June 2 , 1901 , choosing as the text for his address to the throng : " For where your treasure is , there will your heart be also " ( Matthew 6 : 21 ) . Babcock was eulogized at the Baltimore service by various prominent educators , including Daniel C. Gilman , the first president of Johns Hopkins University , John F. Goucher , the founder of Goucher College , and Francis L. Patton , president of Princeton University . A poem by Babcock was published posthumously the following year by his wife as the familiar hymn , This is My Father 's World . 
 The sanctuary was enlarged in 1905 with the addition of a transept and several Tiffany windows while Stone was minister . Further significant development occurred in 1931 under T. Guthrie Speers , with the addition of the current chancel designed by notable architect Ralph Adams Cram and the installation of the present 4 @-@ manual pipe organ by Ernest M. Skinner . Speers had a popular ministry at Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church from 1928 to 1957 . He began an outreach program to Baltimore 's Jewish community , occasionally exchanging pulpits with local rabbis . 
 After Speers ' retirement in 1957 , John Middaugh was minister from 1958 to 1968 . Middaugh was a regular panelist for ten years on the weekly television program To Promote Goodwill , an interfaith discussion of social and religious issues produced by WBAL @-@ TV and broadcast worldwide on the Voice of America . He was also in the forefront of the civil rights movement in the early 1960s . Along with William Sloan Coffin and dozens of other clergymen and civil rights activists , Middaugh was arrested in a clash with police at Baltimore 's Gwynn Oak Amusement Park in July 1963 over efforts to desegregate the popular attraction . 
 Membership peaked at 1 @,@ 336 in 1952 but subsequently declined in the late 1950s as much of the city 's population migrated to the suburbs . In response , a portion of the congregation decided in 1956 to build a church in the suburban <unk> area north of Baltimore . Other members wished to remain at the Bolton Hill location , prompting a decision to operate one church at two locations , with a shared ministerial staff . In the early 1970s , the church began a tutoring program for neighborhood children and a " Meals on Wheels " service under then @-@ ministers Iain Wilson , pastor , and Clinton C. Glenn Jr . , assistant minister . In 1980 , the congregations of the two churches voted for separation . The original Bolton Hill church was subsequently constituted as " Brown Memorial Park Avenue " , to distinguish it from " Brown Memorial <unk> " , when the separation was completed in October , 1980 . 
 The immediate past minister of the church is Roger J. <unk> , pastor from 1990 to 2002 , who is now pastor of historic New York Avenue Presbyterian Church in Washington , D.C. 
 The full list of senior ministers from 1870 to present is : 
 = = Current ministry = = 
 The current pastor of Brown Memorial Park Avenue Church since 2004 is Andrew Foster Connors . A native of Raleigh , North Carolina , he earned a Bachelor of Arts from Duke University and a Master of Divinity degree from Columbia Theological Seminary in 2001 . He is a recipient of the prestigious David H. C. Read Preaching Award , named for Presbyterian clergyman and author David H. C. Read of New York City 's Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church . 
 His wife , Kate Foster Connors , whom he met while both were student interns for U.S. Representative David Price , is also an ordained minister and serves as youth director at Brown Memorial . The Connors have two children . 
 Under the pastorate of Andrew Foster Connors , the church ’ s historic leadership continues in social justice issues including national peace efforts , a statewide campaign for marriage equality , local efforts to rebuild blighted neighborhoods , and advocacy of after @-@ school programs to invest in the youth of Baltimore . His views on current affairs are frequently reported in the Baltimore Sun daily newspaper . Connors has also taken an active role in dialogues between the Jewish and Christian faith communities . 
 = = = Music ministry = = = 
 The current minister of music and organist at Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church since June , 2012 , is Michael Britt , who studied music at the Peabody Conservatory and the Conservatoire de Paris . He succeeded Dr. John Walker , an internationally renowned concert organist and CD recording artist , who was minister of music between 2004 and December , 2011 . Formerly director of music and organist at Riverside Church in New York City ( 1983 – 1992 ) and Shadyside Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ( 1992 – 2005 ) , Walker has a Doctor of Musical Arts degree from Stanford University and is National Vice President of the American Guild of Organists . He was named Minister of Music Emeritus by Brown Memorial in 2012 and continues to perform there occasionally . 
 Other previous organists include the celebrated virtuoso Virgil Fox , who gained considerable fame as a concert performer and recording artist while at Brown Memorial early in his career , from 1936 to 1946 . Later , Richard Ross was also a significant music figure in the life of the congregation , succeeding Fox as choirmaster and organist , while also composing music . Francis Eugene Belt then served as organist for more than 50 years , spanning the 1950s to the late 1990s . 
 The 4 @-@ manual Ernest M. Skinner pipe organ has 2 @,@ 939 pipes and remains essentially the same today as when it was installed in 1931 and tonally finished by G. Donald Harrison , as Skinner 's opus 839 . The organ underwent a complete restoration between 2002 – 2005 , with all original 45 ranks of the instrument fully preserved . A 99 @-@ memory level Capture System was added to the organ in 2005 . 
 The choir sings a wide range of choral music at Sunday services , from works of classical composers , such as Mozart 's Ave verum corpus and choruses by Handel and Johannes Brahms , to spirituals and anthems by 20th @-@ century composers , such as Jane Marshall 's My Eternal King . Major choral works are also performed during the year , such as the oratorio Elijah by Felix Mendelssohn , conducted by Walker and accompanied by guest organist Frederick Swann , and Johann Sebastian Bach 's cantata , God 's time is always the very best time ( " Actus Tragicus " , <unk> ) , in the 2008 – 2009 season . The choir 's May , 2009 , performance of Elijah has since been released on CD . 
 = = = Programs and activities = = = 
 Along with regular worship services on Sundays and holy days , Brown Memorial Park Avenue Church offers various programs of enrichment and outreach , such as concerts , lectures , and study forums . The " Tiffany Series " presents high quality classical concerts as well as distinguished speakers at the church . Speakers have included Harry Belafonte and Marian Wright Edelman , founder of the Children 's Defense Fund , who spoke on Children in Peril : What Does Our Faith Require of Us ? on March 16 , 2008 . The series " Wednesday Nights at Brown " offers dinner speakers for adults , such as John Walker 's " Christian <unk> and the Theology Behind It , " and arts or music activities for children . 
 The church is active in numerous missions , both locally and on the national and world scenes . Its Urban Mission committee sponsors the Tutoring Program , the oldest volunteer school tutoring program in the nation , and partners with a local elementary school in a story @-@ reading program and yearly donation of books to all pupils . High school and college age youth participate in " Share , " an annual summer missions trip to El Salvador . The church also has a longstanding outreach program with the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota , where Brown Memorial youth and adults conduct summer learning camps for Lakota children . 
 = = Stained glass windows = = 
 Among the considerable number of stained glass windows , those crafted by Louis Comfort Tiffany in 1905 are especially prized for their vibrancy and exceptional depth . Baltimore City Paper called the church and its collection of a dozen Tiffany windows , " the most magnificent interior space in Baltimore City " . During the restoration survey in 2000 , various stained glass experts praised the extent and craftsmanship of the windows . As part of the church 's $ 1 @.@ 8 million restoration project between 2001 – 2003 , all of the stained glass windows were <unk> and restored to their original lustre . They are : 
 The Annunciation to the Shepherds – the birth of the infant Christ is announced by angels to shepherds tending their flocks . Tiffany employed a confetti glass technique for the flames of the shepherds ' bonfire as the star of Bethlehem gleams with etched glass . 
 The Baptism of Christ – portrays Jesus with John the Baptist at the River Jordan . <unk> glass is used for the area around the water , with a layer of wavy glass over Christ 's left foot to create the illusion of looking through water . 
 Christ Blessing the Children – the Lord holds a child in his lap , whose face is that of the boy for whom this window was donated as a memorial by his grieving parents . 
 I am the Way – Jesus walks on tempestuous seas surrounded by storm clouds . <unk> glass is used to create a glow of light around the figure of Jesus . 
 Christ in Gethsemane – portraying Christ praying in the Garden of Gethsemane , surrounded by trees made of stippled glass . 
 The young David – the future Israelite king is pictured . 
 If I Be Lifted Up – Christ is portrayed in the clouds , with light radiating from behind His head as the penetrating eyes seem to follow the viewer around the nave . An extra layer of mottled glass behind the clouds was used by Tiffany . 
 Lead , Kindly Light – the cross at its center is made of etched glass and glows brightly in the rays of the afternoon sun . 
 The Holy City – St. John 's vision on the isle of Patmos of the " New Jerusalem " , as described in Revelation 21 : 2 . Brilliant red , orange , and yellow glass is etched for the sunrise , with textured glass used to create the effect of moving water . Said to be one of the two largest windows ( along with The Annunciation to the Shepherds ) ever made by the Tiffany Studios , this 58 @-@ panel stained glass window honors the church 's beloved pastor of the 1880s – 1890s , Maltbie Babcock . 
 Gabriel – the archangel Gabriel in the clouds , with feathers individually made of opalescent glass by Tiffany . 
 John , the Visionary – Wearing a red cloak and having an intense expression , St. John is portrayed by Tiffany in the style of the 17th @-@ century Flemish painter Reubens . The window is made of drapery , opalescent , and mottled glass . 
 The New Creation – located at the rear of the church , it is based on the description in Revelation 22 : 1 @-@ 2 , with stained glass depictions of trees , mountains , and streams of Living Water . At the top is a star morphing into a cross , with rays made of nuggets . 
 Brown Memorial 's stained glass windows 
 = 1966 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final = 
 The 1966 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final was an association football match between Borussia Dortmund of Germany and Liverpool of England played on 5 May 1966 at Hampden Park , Glasgow , Scotland . It was the final match of the 1965 – 66 season of Europe 's secondary cup competition , the European Cup Winners ' Cup . Both sides were competing in their first European final . 
 Each club needed to progress through four rounds to reach the final . The rounds were contested over two legs , with a match at each team 's home ground . Borussia 's ties varied from close affairs to comfortable victories . They beat Atlético Madrid by a single goal over two legs , while they defeated Floriana 13 – 1 on aggregate in the first round . Liverpool 's ties were mainly close affairs . Only one of Liverpool 's ties was won by more than two goals . 
 Watched by a crowd of 41 @,@ 657 , the first half was goalless . Dortmund took the lead in the second half when Sigfried Held scored , Liverpool equalised seven minutes later through Roger Hunt . The scores remained the same to the end of the second half , which meant the match went into extra time . Reinhard Libuda scored in extra @-@ time for Dortmund , and with no further goals , Dortmund won the match 2 – 1 to win the Cup Winners ' Cup and become the first German team to win a European trophy . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Borussia Dortmund = = = 
 Borussia Dortmund gained entry to the competition by winning the 1964 – 65 DFB @-@ Pokal , Germany 's annual domestic cup competition . Their opponents in the first round were the Maltese cup winners Floriana . Dortmund won the first leg at Floriana 's home ground the Independence Ground 5 – 1 , and the second leg 8 – 0 at Dortmund 's home ground Stadion Rote Erde , thus winning the tie 13 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Their opponents in the second round were Bulgarian cup winners ' CSKA Sofia . The first leg was in Germany . Dortmund won 3 – 0 after goals from Wilhelm Sturm , Sigfried Held and Aki Schmidt . The second leg was played in Bulgaria at the Vasil Levski National Stadium . CSKA won the match 4 – 2 , but Dortmund progressed to the quarter @-@ finals after winning the tie 5 – 4 on aggregate . 
 Dortmund 's opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were Spanish cup winners ' Atlético Madrid . The first leg held at Atlético 's home ground the Vicente Calderón finished 1 – 1 . Dortmund won the second leg 1 – 0 in Germany and progressed to the semi @-@ finals courtesy of a 2 – 1 aggregate victory . Their opponents in the semi @-@ finals were the previous season 's champions West Ham United of England , who had England internationals Bobby Moore and Geoff Hurst in their side . The first leg at the Boleyn Ground , West Ham 's home ground was won 2 – 1 by Dortmund . Dortmund won the second leg in Germany 3 – 1 , to win the tie 5 – 2 on aggregate and progress to the first Cup Winners ' Cup final . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool qualified for the Cup Winners ' Cup by winning the 1964 – 65 FA Cup , England 's annual domestic cup competition . Their opponents in the first round were Italian cup winners Juventus . The first leg was held at Juventus ' home ground the Stadio Communale . With 81 minutes played and the score at 0 – 0 , Gianfranco <unk> scored for Juventus . The Italian side subsequently won the first leg 1 – 0 . The second leg was held at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield , and they won the match 2 – 0 with two first half goals from Chris Lawler and Geoff Strong . Thus they won the tie 2 – 1 on aggregate . 
 Their opponents in the second round were Belgian team Standard Liège . Liège were runners @-@ up in the Belgian Cup to Anderlecht , but as Anderlecht had won the league this entitled them to compete in the European Cup and Liège took their place in the Cup Winners ' Cup . Liverpool won the first leg in England 3 – 1 and a 2 – 1 victory at Liège 's home ground Stade Maurice Dufrasne ensured a 5 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals Liverpool were drawn against Hungarian Cup winners Honvéd . The first leg at Honvéd 's home ground the Bozsik Stadion ended in a 0 – 0 draw . A 2 – 0 victory in the second leg in England ensured Liverpool won the tie 2 – 0 on aggregate to progress to the semi @-@ finals . Liverpool 's opponents in the semi @-@ finals were Scottish Cup winners Celtic . Celtic won the first leg 1 – 0 at their home ground Celtic Park , thanks to a goal from Bobby Lennox . Liverpool needed to win the second leg at Anfield to progress to the final . Two goals from Tommy Smith and Geoff Strong secured a 2 – 0 victory . Liverpool won the tie 2 – 1 on aggregate to secure their place in their first European final . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Both Liverpool and Borussia Dortmund were appearing in their first European final . It was Liverpool 's second season in European competition , the previous season they had been eliminated in the semi @-@ finals of the 1964 – 65 European Cup by Internazionale . Dortmund first competed in European competition in the 1956 – 57 European Cup , when they were eliminated in the second round . Their best performance in Europe to date was in the 1963 – 64 European Cup . Like Liverpool they were eliminated in the semi @-@ finals by Internazionale . 
 Liverpool had won the 1965 – 66 Football League , a victory over Chelsea F.C. ensured they became English champions . Their league success meant that whatever the result they would be competing in the European Cup the following season . Borussia Dortmund had finished as runners @-@ up in the 1965 – 66 Fußball @-@ Bundesliga , three points behind champions 1860 Munich . As Bayern Munich had won the 1965 – 66 DFB @-@ Pokal , Dortmund 's only chance of participating in European football the following season was to win the Cup Winners ' Cup . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The weather in Glasgow was stormy , with torrential rain nearly flooding Hampden Park . As a result , the stadium didn 't reach its normal capacity of 100 @,@ 000 , only 41 @,@ 657 spectators attended the match . The first half was mostly uneventful , both teams negated the threat of the other . Despite this both sides had opportunities to take the lead . At the start of the match , Liverpool striker Ian St. John had a shot cleared off the goal line and midway through the second half Dortmund defender Theodor <unk> almost scored an own goal . Towards the end of the half , Dortmund began to have more of an attacking threat . They were only denied by a number of saves from Liverpool goalkeeper Tommy Lawrence , ensuring it remained 0 – 0 at half @-@ time . 
 Liverpool had the majority of the possession up to this point , with Dortmund content to counter @-@ attack . The tactic worked as Dortmund took lead in the 61st minute . Sigfried Held passed to Lothar Emmerich on the left hand side of the pitch , Emmerich played a lofted pass to Held , who volleyed the ball into the goal to give Dortmund a 1 – 0 lead . Seven minutes later Liverpool were level . Peter Thompson ran down the left hand side of the pitch and passed to Roger Hunt who scored to level the match at 1 – 1 . The linesman on the left hand side of the pitch signalled to the referee that the ball had gone out of play , yet the referee ignored him and allowed the goal to stand . There were few chances for either side until the end of the half when Liverpool had a chance to win the match , but Hunt 's shot missed . With the scores still level at 1 – 1 , the match went into extra @-@ time . 
 The winning goal came in the 107th minute . A clearance by Liverpool goalkeeper Lawrence found Dortmund midfielder Reinhard Libuda . Libuda shot 35 yards from goal on the right hand side of the pitch . The shot went over Lawrence and Liverpool defender Ron Yeats hit the post and rebounded off Yeats into the Liverpool goal to give Dortmund a 2 – 1 lead . The score remained the same throughout the remainder of extra @-@ time and Dortmund became the first German team to win the Cup Winners ' Cup . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = Obsessed ( 2009 film ) = 
 Obsessed is a 2009 American thriller film directed by Steve Shill . The Rainforest Films production stars Idris Elba , Beyoncé , and Ali Larter . Obsessed tells the story of Lisa , an office temp played by Larter , who develops romantic feelings for her boss , Derek Charles ( Elba ) , and repeatedly attempts to seduce him . Derek 's wife , Sharon ( Beyoncé ) , learns of Lisa 's obsessive behavior , and suspects an affair . Screen Gems president Clint Culpepper conceived the basic idea of Obsessed , which was then developed by writer David Loughery , allocated a production budget of $ 20 million , and filmed in the summer of 2008 . Obsessed was inspired by the work of directors Roman Polanski and Alfred Hitchcock , and its score was written by James Dooley . Lisa and Sharon were dressed in contrasting styles to reinforce their conflicting characters . Obsessed opened in US theaters on April 24 , 2009 , and UK theaters on May 29 , 2009 , and was distributed by Screen Gems . 
 Obsessed received generally negative reviews from critics , many of whom were disappointed in the absence of an explanation for Lisa 's obsession with Derek . Others noted that the potential theme of interracial conflict between the Charles family , who were black , and Lisa , who was white , was unexplored . The storyline of Obsessed has been compared with that of Fatal Attraction ( 1987 ) , although film critics disliked the fact that Derek did not yield to Lisa 's seduction . The fight scene finale between Sharon and Lisa , however , was commended by reviewers , and won the MTV Movie Award for Best Fight . Obsessed spent its first week atop the US box office , and grossed $ 73 @.@ 8 million from theaters , internationally . Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released the film for home viewing on August 4 , 2009 , in the US and has sold 1 @.@ 3 million DVDs , worth $ 21 million of consumer spending . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Derek Charles ( Idris Elba ) works for a finance company and is married to Sharon ( Beyoncé Knowles ) . While Derek is at work , he greets temporary worker Lisa Sheridan ( Ali Larter ) , who , believing Derek was flirting with her , attempts to seduce him throughout the film . Derek repeatedly rejects her , but Lisa continues to pursue him , making sexual advances on him at the Christmas party and flashing him in his car . Derek intends to report Lisa to his firm 's human resource management , but learns that she has quit her job . Thinking that Lisa has given up , Derek is annoyed when he receives flirtatious emails from her . Derek and his workmates visit a resort for a conference , where he spots and confronts Lisa , who spikes his drink . Incapacitated , Derek is helpless when Lisa follows him into his hotel room and rapes him . He confronts Lisa again the following day , and hours later discovers her lying naked in his bed after attempting suicide by drug overdose , and calls for medical help . 
 After repeated attempts to reach Derek on his phone , Sharon finds Derek at the hospital and suspects that he and Lisa had an affair , as Lisa claims . LAPD Detective Monica Reese ( Christine Lahti ) at first questions Derek 's fidelity to Sharon as well , but soon becomes skeptical of Lisa 's claims , due to inconsistencies in her side of the story , and informs Derek of her belief in him . Sharon , refusing to believe Derek , kicks him out of their house , and he moves into a separate apartment . Months later , Derek and Sharon meet up for dinner and finally reconcile . Meanwhile , Lisa tricks the babysitter Samantha ( Scout Taylor @-@ Compton ) into letting her in under the pretense of being one of Sharon 's friends . When Derek and Sharon return home after dinner , they discover that Lisa had been in the house and seemingly abducted Derek and Sharon 's infant son , Kyle ( Nathan and Nicolas Myers ) . Derek goes to his car with the intent to pursue Lisa , only to find the baby is safely sitting in the back seat . He and Sharon immediately take Kyle to the hospital for a check @-@ up . When Derek and Sharon return home from the hospital , they find Lisa has trashed their bedroom and removed Sharon 's face from their family portrait . Sharon leaves a threatening voice message on Lisa 's phone , and she and Derek set up a home alarm system . 
 Lisa learns that Derek and Sharon will be going away from town for a few days , with Sharon leaving one afternoon and Derek the next day . While Sharon is on her way to pick up Kyle , she realizes she forgot to set the alarm system and returns home . Meanwhile , Lisa breaks into Derek and Sharon 's house again and decorates the master bed with rose petals . While setting the alarm , Sharon hears Lisa in the bedroom . She confronts Lisa , who tries to convince her that Derek was seeing Lisa . However , Sharon sees through her lie and attempts to call the police , but Lisa tackles her to the floor , and the two engage in a fistfight . Derek calls the home phone and Lisa answers ; he calls Detective Reese and they both head toward the house . Lisa runs to the attic and Sharon pursues her . Sharon leads her to a weak spot in the attic floor , where Lisa falls through . Seeing that Lisa is in mortal danger , Sharon reaches out in an attempt to grab Lisa and lift her up , but Lisa refuses and tries to pull Sharon down with her . Seeing that the floor is beginning to buckle , Sharon pries Lisa off of her arm . Lisa falls and smashes onto the glass table below . A chandelier falls from the ceiling onto Lisa , eventually killing her . Detective Reese arrive as Sharon comes out of the house . As soon as Detective Reese goes inside the house to investigate Lisa 's actions , Derek soon arrives ; he and Sharon then tearfully embrace one another . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Idris Elba as Derek Charles 
 Beyoncé Knowles as Sharon Charles 
 Ali Larter as Lisa Sheridan 
 Nathan and Nicolas Myers as Kyle Charles 
 Christine Lahti as Detective Monica Reese 
 Scout Taylor @-@ Compton as Samantha 
 Jerry O 'Connell as Ben 
 Bruce McGill as Joe Gage 
 Matthew Humphreys as Patrick 
 Richard <unk> as Hank 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The concept of Obsessed was thought up by Clint Culpepper , president of Screen Gems , and was shared with David Loughery , who wrote the screenplay . Producer William Packer read the script and signed on ; executive producers for the film were Glenn S. Gainor , Jeff <unk> , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , Beyoncé , Mathew Knowles , Damon Lee and Loughery , while Nicholas Stern and George Flynn served as co @-@ producer and associate producer , respectively . Director Steve Shill signed on after reading the script and hearing that Beyoncé was on board . Part of the reason Elba joined in was that the black – white theme was ignored ; " It 's not mentioned in the film , it 's never an issue , and I think that 's phenomenal ... To me , that was very refreshing that the studio execs didn 't want to make an issue of it . " Obsessed was allocated a production budget of $ 20 million . Shill stated that the intended effect of the film was to have the audience discuss the characters ' motivations . Writer David Loughery designed Lisa as " not a villain in a traditional sense ; she 's not setting out to wreck a marriage or ruin somebody 's life . She really believes that [ Derek ] is in love with her . " Lisa 's past was deliberately omitted from the film , explaining , " It 's scarier if we never really know how she 's developed this personality that can go from very loving to ultimately deadly . " 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 The casting directors for Obsessed were Ron <unk> and Valorie <unk> . According to Packer , Elba and Larter were the favorite actors for their respective lead roles ; he stated that " they both brought the right amount of depth and sex appeal " to the film . He emphasized the need for actors " who were relatable and who can handle that type of human interplay that we have in the film . " Packer showed the film script to Beyoncé 's talent agent , who suggested that Beyoncé play the role of Sharon . The producers " immediately ... fell in love with that idea ; once she suggested Beyoncé , nobody else could play the role . " Packer said that Beyoncé became interested in working on Obsessed because the film was not focused on the music industry , and that it was the first time she played a non @-@ singer . Packer also reported that " she was looking for that challenge and welcomed this opportunity " . Beyoncé stated that she found it challenging to concentrate purely on " the emotion and the psychology of the relationship " . Beyoncé had never taken part in a fight scene , but she was able to learn how to perform the scenes quickly because they were similar to dance choreography , with which she was familiar . Larter was inspired by Rita Hayworth , Barbara Stanwyck and Faye Dunaway , all of whom had previously portrayed femme fatales . Obsessed was filmed over the summer of 2008 , and the final fight scene between Sharon and Lisa was shot over one week . 
 = = = Set and costumes = = = 
 Shill and cinematographer Ken Seng were inspired by Roman Polanski and Alfred Hitchcock when constructing the set , and attempted to make it look both frightening and suburban . Shill stated , " It didn 't look like typical Hollywood ; it didn 't look cosmetic . " The Charles ' family home was set in a 1923 Altadena , California house , however the action scenes were shot on a separate purpose @-@ built set . The set was customized from a house built for The Stepfather ( 2009 ) , which in turn was adapted from a block of apartments for Quarantine ( 2008 ) . The Charles ' living room had a ceiling 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high , and a custom @-@ built chandelier for the climactic ending of the film . According to Gainor , the house is symbolic of the family 's aspirations , and is intentionally too large for the three occupants ; he said , " It 's a little awkward and a little bit eerie . " The fight scene was filmed on a sound stage set , rather than in the house , for safety and practicability reasons . 
 Costume designer Maya Lieberman attempted to contrast the costumes of Sharon and Lisa to reinforce the conflict between the two characters . She said , " With Ali , our discussion started with wanting really clean , classic and sharp lines , whereas Beyoncé 's character [ wore ] more soft , more textural <unk> and knits . " Sharon wore clothes designed by Zac Posen , Yves Saint Laurent , Jimmy Choo , Diane von Fürstenberg , Valentino , Stella McCartney and Missoni , while Lisa wore Gucci , Dolce & Gabbana and Burberry outfits . Derek was dressed in Dolce & Gabbana and Versace suits with Thomas Pink shirts to create a " prestigious yet contemporary " look . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score for Obsessed was written by James Dooley . The beginning of Obsessed , where the Charles are seen in their home , plays adult contemporary music in the background . The remainder of the film 's first act is supported by light piano instrumentation , and occasional " low @-@ register whoosh @-@ thump noises , of the kind you might hear in a stalker movie " , according to Sady Doyle of The Guardian . 
 Studio recorded songs on the soundtrack of Obsessed are " Any Other Day " ( Wyclef Jean and Norah Jones ) , " Black and Gold " ( Sam <unk> ) , " Soul Food " ( Martina Topley @-@ Bird ) , " American Boy " ( Estelle ) , " Jolly Holly ( Deck the Halls ) " ( Mike Strickland ) , " I 'm Gonna Getcha " ( <unk> ) , " The Christmas Song " ( Marcus Miller ) , " Play That Funky Music " ( Wild Cherry ) , " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( Ruben Studdard and <unk> Gray ) , " Wild Thing " ( Tone Lōc ) , " Oye Al Desierto " ( With the <unk> ) , " Destiny " ( Zero 7 ) , " Meet the Brilliant " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " Golden " ( Jill Scott ) , " <unk> Wall " ( Patch ) , and " Smash into You " ( Beyoncé ) . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Obsessed premiered at the School of Visual Arts , New York City on April 23 , 2009 , and opened at US cinemas the following day . The film began showing in the United Kingdom on May 29 , 2009 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Obsessed received generally negative reviews from critics . Based on 85 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a " Rotten " rating from critics , with 19 % positive reviews and an average rating of 3 @.@ 7 out of 10 . The site 's consensus reads " The inevitable Fatal Attraction comparisons aside , Obsessed is a generic , toothless thriller both instantly predictable and instantly forgettable . " Another review <unk> , Metacritic , gave the film a weighted mean score of 25 out of 100 , based on ten reviews from mainstream critics . A common complaint about the film was that , unlike most " deranged stalker " -themed films , Obsessed did not explain why Lisa was so determined to seduce Derek , who showed no interest in her at all . Variety 's John Anderson and The Hollywood Reporter 's Kirk Honeycutt criticized Lisa 's lack of motive and backstory . Stella Papamichael of Digital Spy called the film predictable and blamed the well @-@ defined morality of the characters . She wrote , " Unlike the bunny @-@ boiling ' 80s classic Fatal Attraction , the characters are drawn in 2D . They are either good or bad , and there is absolutely no attempt to understand what drives them either way . " Liz Braun from Jam ! lambasted the lack of character development in Obsessed and called it " a chemistry @-@ free movie " . Jason McKiernan of Filmcritic.com described the film as " so steeped in the formula of the psycho @-@ sexual suspense flick that it works as both a thriller and a comedy " and " very good trash " . 
 Reviewers also noted that the potential for interracial conflict remained unexplored ; Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman wrote , " The movie wants to tease us with intimations of a steamy biracial liaison ; it just doesn 't want to actually go there . " Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe was disappointed that " Obsessed basically plays it safe . The obvious racial buttons are never pushed " . Greg Quill from the Toronto Star agreed , and wrote that Shill and Loughery " stripped the drama of its potentially gripping – and obvious – racial overtones " . However , Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer pointed out that having the two female roles of differing races " creates racial tension " , and noted similarities to " the racially charged " Lakeview Terrace ( 2008 ) , which Loughery also wrote . Braun was of the impression that a well @-@ written script was replaced by the film 's " racial politics " . When Derek confronts Lisa at the business conference , she threatens him with a sexual harassment complaint ; Sady Doyle from The Guardian wrote that this alludes to " the history of black men being lynched for their perceived threat to white women " . Doyle pointed out that historically white women are more revered for their beauty than black women , which is a side theme of the fight between Sharon and Lisa . Melissa Anderson of LA Weekly suggested that awkwardness of the interracial relationship of Derek and Lisa as a reason why the filmmakers did not have the two characters partake in any sexual activity . 
 Critics drew close comparisons between Obsessed and Adrian Lyne 's 1987 stalker thriller Fatal Attraction . However , two distinctions noted were that Obsessed contains no bunny boiling @-@ like incidents , and that Derek and Lisa did not actually have sexual intercourse . John Anderson of Variety wrote , " If Derek had actually slept with Lisa , a la Michael Douglas in Fatal Attraction , Obsessed would at least have had the spurned @-@ woman gambit to play , however hoary . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film zero out of four stars , and wrote that Derek 's lack of interest in Lisa allowed for no conflict in the film . Travers concluded , " Everything you need to know is in the trailer . " The Daily Telegraph 's Tim Robey thought that Obsessed would have been more entertaining had Lisa 's character been fiercer like Alex Forrest in Fatal Attraction . Rickey opined that while the lack of infidelity made the film less thrilling , it " is about the sanctity of marriage rather than the shame of adultery . " 
 The final fight scene between Sharon and Lisa was commended by critics . Marjorie Baumgarten from The Austin Chronicle stated that , despite the predictability of its plot , Obsessed caters to " the American moviegoers ' appetite for a juicy catfight . " E ! Online 's Natasha Vargas @-@ Cooper lauded the choreography and noted the scene as the highlight of the film . McKiernan called it the " best knock @-@ down , drag @-@ out <unk> " of 2009 . However , Alex Navarro from Screened called the fight " boring " because of the poor filming and editing of the scene . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 2009 Teen Choice Awards , Obsessed was nominated in the category of Choice Movie : Drama , while Beyoncé was a nominee for the Choice Movie Actress : Drama award . The fight scene between Sharon and Lisa garnered Beyoncé and Larter a nomination in the Teen Choice Awards ' Choice Movie Rumble category , but lost to Twilight . Beyoncé and Larter were nominated in the categories of Worst Actress and Worst Supporting Actress , but lost to Sandra Bullock and Sienna Miller respectively , at the 30th Golden Raspberry Awards ( " Razzies " ) . Idris Elba was a nominee for the award for Outstanding Actor in a Motion Picture at the 41st NAACP Image Awards , but lost to Morgan Freeman 's portrayal of Nelson Mandela in Invictus ( 2009 ) . Obsessed won the award for Best Fight at the 2010 MTV Movie Awards , for the fight between Sharon and Lisa . The stunt work was recognized at the 2010 Taurus World Stunt Awards with nominations for Best Fight and Best High Work , and the award for Best Overall Stunt by a Woman . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Obsessed was screened at 2 @,@ 514 theaters and grossed $ 11 @,@ 209 @,@ 297 on its opening day of April 24 , 2009 ; it ended its opening weekend at the top of the box office , with gross revenue of $ 28 @,@ 612 @,@ 730 in those three days , and became the second @-@ biggest opening weekend for a Screen Gems film ever . The film spent its entire first week of release at number one and grossed $ 34 @,@ 802 @,@ 334 , however it slipped to number three the following week due to the release of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine and Ghosts of Girlfriends Past . Obsessed closed in US cinemas on June 14 , 2009 , having grossed $ 68 @,@ 261 @,@ 644 domestically in its eight weeks of availability , which made up 92 @.@ 5 % of its gross worldwide takings . Outside the US , the film grossed an additional $ 5 @,@ 568 @,@ 696 , bringing its total gross box office revenue to $ 73 @,@ 830 @,@ 340 . The top performing international territory was Spain , with an opening weekend of $ 646 @,@ 760 and a final total of 1 @,@ 914 @,@ 828 , followed by the United Kingdom with a total of $ 854 @,@ 917 , Germany with $ 529 @,@ 794 , and the region of Southern Africa with $ 343 @,@ 932 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Obsessed was released for home viewing via DVD , Blu @-@ ray and digital distribution by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on August 4 , 2009 in the US . In its first week of release , Obsessed sold 540 @,@ 925 DVD copies in the US , worth $ 8 @,@ 806 @,@ 259 of sales . To date the film has sold 1 @,@ 263 @,@ 325 DVDs in the US , worth $ 22 @,@ 875 @,@ 547 of consumer expenditure . 
 = Baclayon Church = 
 La <unk> Concepcion de la Virgen Maria Parish Church ( also The Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Parish Church ) , commonly known as Baclayon Church , is a Roman Catholic Church in the municipality of Baclayon , Bohol , Philippines within the jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tagbilaran . Baclayon was founded by the Jesuit priest Juan de Torres and Gabriel Sánchez in 1596 , and became the oldest Christian settlement in Bohol . It was elevated as a parish in 1717 and the present coral stone church was completed in 1727 . The Augustinian Recollects succeeded the Jesuits in 1768 and heavily renovated the church since then . 
 The church was declared a National Cultural Treasure by the National Museum of the Philippines and a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines . Together with the churches of Maragondon , Loboc and Guiuan , the Baclayon Church was formerly included for the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List of the Philippines since 1993 under the collective group of Jesuit Churches of the Philippines . When a 7 @.@ 2 magnitude earthquake struck Bohol and other parts of Central Visayas in 2013 , the church building sustained major damage . 
 = = History = = 
 The Jesuits , the first <unk> of the Baclayon , planted the first seed of Christianity in Bohol upon the request of Doña Catalina de Bolaños , mother of the encomendero of Bohol island , Pedro de Gamboa to Father Antonio <unk> , mission superior of Leyte and Samar . In November 17 , 1596 , the first Jesuits , Father Juan de Torres , SJ and Father Gabriel Sánchez , SJ , came to Baclayon . At that time , a Catholic chapel is already existing inside the encomienda . 
 In 1717 , Baclayon was elevated as a parish . The present stone church constructed under the Jesuits was finished in 1727 . When the Jesuits were expelled in the country in 1768 , the Augustinian Recollects immediately succeeded them in the late part of the same year in administering the spiritual needs of the people of Baclayon . Renovations on the church was done during the administration of Father Pedro de la Encarnación , OAR ( 1839 – 1854 ) , Father Antonio Úbeda , OAR ( 1856 – 1859 , 1861 – 1868 ) and Father José María Cabañas , OAR ( 1870 – 1898 ) . The church was saved from destruction that might be brought by American soldiers in exchange for food and water in 1901 . During the Second World War , the church suffered damages but was later restored . From being part of Baclayon , <unk> , Alburquerque , <unk> and Sikatuna became independent parishes in 1829 , 1869 , 1884 and 1914 respectively . Although it survived damages and was eventually restored , the church of Baclayon was heavily damaged when an earthquake struck Bohol on October 15 , 2013 . 
 = = = Historical and cultural declarations = = = 
 Baclayon Church was declared a National Cultural Treasure by the National Museum of the Philippines in 2010 . The National Historical Institute , now National Historical Commission of the Philippines , also declared Baclayon Church a National Historical Landmark on July 27 , 1994 . It is also being considered for addition to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of the Philippines under the collective group of the Jesuit Churches of the Philippines with the churches of Maragondon in Cavite , Loboc in Bohol and Guiuan in Eastern Samar . However , due to its total destruction , it was removed as a nominated site . 
 = = Features = = 
 The church , built out of coral stones , is a cross shaped ( cruciform ) church with its juncture or crossing surmounted by a pyramidal wall . The original tiled roof was replaced by galvanized iron in 1893 . The church complex is strategically located facing the sea . It originally has defensive stone walls around but was removed in the 1870s . It also has a school building built out of coral stones in the middle of the 19th century . A wood and stone market was built in 1881 . 
 = = = Facade = = = 
 The original facade , oriented southwest and located behind the portico , was built together with the stone church built by the Jesuits in 1727 . The facade is simply designed with its upper half hidden by an extended choir loft which houses an 1824 pipe organ . A way of glazed blue tiles connects the facade and the portico . The portico was added as an extension to the facade in 1875 by the Augustinian Recollects . An inscription on the portico 's pediment based on the year of construction of the facade ( 1875 ) was invisible due to church renovations . Two religious images , both dated 1885 , is found on the portico 's niches : St. Joseph and the child Jesus on the uppermost niche and the Immaculate Conception , patroness , on the central niche . 
 Just like the facade , the walls of the church were simply decorated with icons of an angels ' head and wings . 
 = = = Interiors = = = 
 The church entrance is flanked by an arcade leading to the narthex . The entrance to the choir loft and the <unk> for the images of saints is found on the right and left side of the narthex respectively . Since the floor inside is lower than the ground outside , a new floor made of wood ( particularly <unk> ) was installed in 1852 which was later replaced by brick tiles from 1874 to 1875 . 
 Reddish paintings on wooden panels commissioned by Father Antonio <unk> from 1856 to 1859 can be found inside the church . These are the Ascension of Our Lord and Pentecost on the doorway ; and two portraits of the Doctors of the Church . A third portrait belonging to the set of Doctors of the Church is on the church museum while the fourth portrait is lost . The paintings Agony in the Garden and Crowning of Thorns , also commissioned by Father Úbeda , is currently housed at the San Agustin Museum in Intramuros , Manila . The works of art are done by <unk> <unk> . 
 Murals , mostly replaced by monochromatic tin sheets , were also present on the church 's ceilings . Though most ceiling paintings were unpreserved , an original work of Max Aya @-@ ay in 1957 can still be seen on portions of the crossing . The walls were originally adorned with wooden images of Stations of the Cross commissioned by Father <unk> in 1859 which were later replaced by European @-@ made images . 
 A Baroque and Neoclassical pulpit made in the 1870s is located on the right side ( epistle ) of the church , facing the altar . Connected to the convent is the <unk> , a private area for guests and visiting priests on the epistle side . A silver sanctuary lamp , dated 1835 and additional details such as sconce added in 1874 , is hanged on the crossing . 
 = = = Altar or retablo = = = 
 The church has three retablos , one retablo mayor ( central or major retablo ) and two other side altars . The retablo mayor has inscription of the Jesuit motto , Ad <unk> Dei gloriam which gave the idea that the Jesuits left Baclayon with this church altar . On the altar 's center , a medallion with the anagram of the Blessed Virgin Mary can be seen which maybe originally the Jesuit logo . It contains 18th and 19th century images of St. Joseph on the uppermost level ; Holy Trinity ( center ) , Saint Michael and Saint Gabriel on the middle level ; and the Immaculate Conception ( center ) , Saint Anne and Saint Joachim on the lowest level . In 1810 , a silver tabernacle was added to the altar . 
 Above the altar is a ceiling painting depicting the Last Supper and a Spanish inscription dedicated to the Virgin Mary . 
 = = = = Gospel retablo = = = = 
 The side altar located on the left hand side facing the altar is consecrated to the Santo Niño . Joining the statue of the Holy Child are 19th century images of Saint Anthony of Padua and Saint Blaise ; and Saint Lucy on the topmost level . Another smaller neoclassical retablo housing a 19th @-@ century image of Saint Mary Magdalene is located on the left side of the gospel retablo . 
 = = = = Epistle retablo = = = = 
 The opposite side altar on the right side houses another early 19th century image of the Nuestra Señora de la <unk> ( Our Lady of Consolation ) in the central niche . Joining the Marian image are Augustinian Saints : Saint Augustine , Saint Monica and Saint Nicolas de Tolentino . Another smaller neoclassical retablo built in 1875 on the right side houses the image of Saint Joseph in the main niche and Saint Isidore . 
 = = = Baptistry = = = 
 An octagonal baptistry connected to the near the altar of Saint Mary Magdalene in the gospel transept was constructed in 1853 . Inside the baptistry is an earlier image of San Juan Bautista , a baptismal font and an unusual retablo built in 1852 housing the Santo <unk> in a glass coffin and the Nuestra Señora de los Dolores in the central niche . 
 = = = Sacristy = = = 
 Located near the retablo is a large room called the ante @-@ sacristy , a storage room for church utensils and decorations . This room is connected to either the convent or the main sacristy which stores the church 's liturgical vestments . Several wooden chests inside the sacristy carries the flaming heart , a symbol of the Augustinian order and <unk> motifs . The doors leading to both the ante @-@ sacristy and sacristy is similar to the doors of another Jesuit church , the Maragondon Church . The sacristy was also built at that same time with the baptistry in 1852 . 
 = = = Convento = = = 
 The Jesuits left an extension of the epistle transept used as living quarters . In 1872 , it was expanded to become a proper <unk> under Father Cabañas . The <unk> is a typical <unk> @-@ na @-@ <unk> with its first floor made out of coral stones and egg white mixed with plaster as binder and the second floor made out of light materials like bamboo . The convent which serves as the priest 's house , it is much used as the church 's ecclesiastical museum . 
 Other structures around the convent are the Jesuit @-@ built bastion , remnants of an old fortification and a bakery behind the convent which processes egg yolk ( unused from using egg as binder in construction of building ) into <unk> ( <unk> / sponge @-@ fingers ) . 
 = = = Watchtower = = = 
 The <unk> watchtower , which was also the church 's bell tower , was left unfinished by the Jesuits when they were expelled out of the country . The Augustinian Recollects , who succeeded the Jesuits , completed the watchtower . It is used to be a detached structure from the church and was connected after the addition of the portico . Made of coral stones , it also has a bas relief of Saint Andrew with an inscription of the date the tower was finished during Father San Andrés de la Santísima Trinidad 's administration , May 20 , 1777 . It still has the original six out of the nine bells from 1880 to 1894 during Father Cabañas ' terms . The seventh bell ( 1886 ) is in the church museum while the eight bell ( 1872 ) is given to the newly founded parish of <unk> . 
 = = = Mortuary chapel = = = 
 Near the baptistery is a separate rectangular mortuary chapel ( <unk> de <unk> ) built in 1859 . A road from the mortuary chapel leads to the cemetery with stone fences . At the middle of the cemetery is a stone chapel and an ossuary at its back . 
 = = 2013 Bohol earthquake = = 
 One of the largest earthquakes to hit Bohol struck the island at 8 : 12 AM on October 15 , 2013 . The center of the M7.2 earthquake was near <unk> , Bohol . Centuries @-@ old churches in Bohol , including seven churches on Baclayon , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Loboc , Loon and <unk> , declared as National Cultural Treasures , were damaged . The church of Baclayon sustained major damage with its collapsed portico and bell tower . 
 The Diocese of Tagbilaran plans to restore the Church of Baclayon and all other churches destroyed by the earthquake . Together with government agencies , pre @-@ restoration works are currently on @-@ going . 
 = I Can Hear the Heart Beating as One = 
 I Can Hear the Heart Beating as One is the eighth studio album by the American indie rock band Yo La Tengo , released on April 22 , 1997 , by Matador Records . It was produced by Roger Moutenot and recorded at House of David in Nashville , Tennessee . The album expands the guitar @-@ based pop of its predecessor Electr @-@ O @-@ Pura to encompass a variety of other music genres , including bossa nova , krautrock , and electronic music . Most of the songs on the album deal with melancholy emotions and range from short and fragile ballads to long and open @-@ ended dissonance . 
 Upon release , Beating as One reached number 19 on the Billboard 's Heatseekers Albums chart , becoming the first Yo La Tengo album to enter the charts . Three songs from the album , " Autumn Sweater " , " Sugarcube " , and the cover " Little Honda " , were released as singles . The album received considerable acclaim from music critics , who praised the band 's ability to successfully expand the boundaries of nearly any pop style . The album is widely regarded as the band 's best work and is frequently included on several publications ' best album lists . In 2010 , Rolling Stone placed it at number 86 on its list of 100 Best Albums of the Nineties . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 I Can Hear the Heart Beating as One is the follow @-@ up to Yo La Tengo 's highly acclaimed 1995 album Electr @-@ O @-@ Pura , which was ranked at number 9 in The Village Voice 's 1995 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Electr @-@ O @-@ Pura marked a new creative direction for the band . According to singer and guitarist Ira Kaplan , " I think after Electr @-@ O @-@ Pura we 've had a direction of trying not to worry too hard about what the next album is going to sound like [ ... ] we just write a bunch of songs , and then go one baby step at the time and just do what seems right . " At the time , Kaplan also explained that the lyrics used to come last : " What will really happen is somebody will start playing and we 'll all fall in and play for a long time . We 'll finish playing an hour later and kinda say , ' Oh , do you remember what you did ? ' Then we 'll write something down — or maybe we won 't . " 
 Beating as One was recorded at House of David in Nashville , Tennessee and produced by Roger Moutenot , who also produced the band 's previous two albums . Kaplan described the recording sessions of the album as follows : " We hole up in a room and work for a really long time . Then we come out and blink our eyes because it 's sunny out " . Initially , the band did not intend to write a long album , but eventually felt that having a long album was the only way to accommodate the instrumental track " Spec Bebop " , which the band felt it needed to be included in the album " by hook or by crook " . Beating as One is the only Yo La Tengo album that was recorded on an ADAT magnetic tape format , even though it was mixed to analog later . Audio mixing took place at Big House and Magic Shop in New York City . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Beating as One expands Electr @-@ O @-@ Pura 's guitar @-@ based pop to encompass a variety of other music genres , ranging from the bossa nova soundscapes of " Center of Gravity " to the electronic grooves of " Autumn Sweater " , the krautrock jams of " Spec Bebop " , the " jazzy goof " of " Moby <unk> " , the trip hop sound of " Damage " , and the psychedelic folk instrumentation of " We 're an American Band " , among others . The album also contains two cover songs : " Little Honda " , a Beach Boys tune written by Brian Wilson and Mike Love , and " My Little Corner of the World " , recorded by musician and anti @-@ gay activist Anita Bryant , although the band initially did not know she had ever recorded it . The former , which is a song that Kaplan learned for a solo guitar show , was originally used to make sure the recording equipment was set up right . However , it was ultimately included in the album because , according to bassist James McNew , " it just sort of turned out pretty good . " 
 Most of the lyrics on Beating as One deal with melancholy emotions . The track " Stockholm Syndrome " , which is the first Yo La Tengo song sung by McNew , is about captives eventually expressing empathy toward their captors and vice versa . It was described by prominent music critic Robert Christgau as a " simulated Neil Young ballad " . The song " Autumn Sweater " , which is layered with complex rhythms and textures , explores themes of love and lack of communication , while " Center of Gravity " has been described as " a simple lo @-@ fi devotional love song " . Beating as One also marks the debut of Kaplan 's falsetto singing , which was said to blur the line between his voice and that of drummer Georgia Hubley . The album 's title is taken from a line in an unknown film . According to Kaplan , " I think it 's a nice , evocative title — it seems to mean a lot but it doesn 't really mean anything . It comes from a movie , but I 'm not telling what movie . You 'll have to see it one day and say , ' Eureka ! ' " 
 = = Release = = 
 Beating as One was released on April 22 , 1997 , by the independent record label Matador Records and reached number 19 on the Billboard 's Heatseekers Albums chart , becoming the first Yo La Tengo album to enter the charts . Three songs from the album , " Autumn Sweater " , " Sugarcube " , and " Little Honda " , were released as singles or EPs in 1997 . A music video featuring Mr. Show with Bob and David 's comedians David Cross and Bob Odenkirk was made for " Sugarcube " . The song " Moby <unk> " , which was not released as a single , peaked at number 4 on the KEXP Top 90 @.@ 3 Album Chart in 1997 . As of March 2000 , Beating as One has sold 73 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. according to Nielsen SoundScan , becoming Yo La Tengo 's most commercially successful album at the time . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , Beating as One received considerable acclaim from music critics . Matt Diehl of Rolling Stone felt that the album " proves that Yo La Tengo can master nearly any pop style [ ... ] the music 's <unk> is undercut by Yo La Tengo 's infectious joy at simply making noise . It 's just this joy that makes Yo La Tengo stand out amid their indie @-@ rock peers " . Similarly , The A.V. Club reviewer John <unk> described Beating as One as " an example of a band having great fun exploring the possibilities of pop music . " Robert Christgau , in his review for Spin , said that the album gave the band " the grace to professionalize toward the pop melodicism the 've always loved . " He also felt that the first nine songs were perfect and considered " Autumn Sweater " as the " very peak " of the album . 
 Writing for Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot highlighted the album 's diverse influences , stating that the band " fashions sprawling albums out of minimal instrumental strokes and soft voices . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said that , while the band has always been " adept at striking a balance between hurricane @-@ force dissonance and fragile serenity " , Yo La Tengo " crack open their sound even wider here . Their muted , after @-@ hours guitar drone is in full effect [ ... ] As adults who still need to make a racket , they remain addicted to noise , but now the trio integrates the feedback into the arrangements , like squalls rumbling in the distance . " Dele Fadele of NME also praised the open @-@ ended nature of the album , but criticized the instrumental " Spec Bebop " for being " constructed around some hurtful feedback , to end up as an endurance test . " In a very positive review , Jason Josephes of Pitchfork Media praised the album for exploring new directions , commenting that the band takes its " sonic inventions to new levels . " 
 Beating as One was ranked number 5 in The Village Voice 's 1997 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll , the band 's highest position to date . In the poll 's accompanying essay , Christgau referred to the album as one of his " favorite albums of the year , easy " , alongside those by Pavement , Sleater @-@ Kinney , and Arto Lindsay . Similarly , editors of NME magazine placed the album at number 19 in their albums of the year list for 1997 , while Spin journalists placed the album at number 8 in their list of Top 20 Albums of the Year . 
 Retrospectively , Beating as One is widely regarded as the band 's best work . AllMusic reviewer Fred Thomas described it as " a definitive master statement . The subtly shifting moods and wide , curious palette of stylistic exploration resulted in a lasting indie rock classic , essential listening and also something of a blueprint for much of what followed from like @-@ minded bands for years to come . " In his review of the band 's 2003 album Summer Sun , Christgau praised Beating as One as Yo La Tengo 's " career album " , commenting that " It 's no challenge or insult to state categorically that they 'll never top it . " The album is frequently included on several publications ' best album lists . In 1999 , it was ranked number 78 on Spin 's list of The 90 Greatest Albums of the ' 90s . In 2003 , Pitchfork ranked it number 25 on its list of the Top 100 albums of the 1990s . Similarly , Rolling Stone placed the record at number 86 on its 2010 compilation of 100 Best Albums of the Nineties . In 2012 , the album appeared at number 22 in Paste 's list of The 90 Best Albums of the 1990s . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Yo La Tengo unless otherwise noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Yo La Tengo – performers , writers of tracks 1 to 8 and 10 to 15 
 Roger Moutenot – production 
 Greg Calbi – mastering 
 Jad Fair – artwork 
 Steve Thornton – photography 
 = U.S. Route 131 = 
