 first aid . 
 Practical exam 
 Safe handling : this comprises : 
 inspecting , whether the firearms is loaded ( safely unloading ) , 
 field stripping as needed for clean @-@ up , 
 preparation of firearm and ammunition for shooting , shooting , procedure of handling the firearm in case of malfunction , conclusion of shooting . 
 Touching the trigger , pointing in different than appointed safe direction or trying to field strip loaded gun ( dummy round is used ) results in exam 's fail . Depending on the categories of licenses sought , the applicants may be asked to show their ability of safe manipulation on multiple firearms ( typically CZ 75 and / or CZ 82 pistol , bolt @-@ action CZ 452 rifle and a double @-@ barreled shotgun ) . 
 Shooting test , which requires specific scores dependent on the category of license applied for : 
 For the B and C category license it is 25m on rifle target ( A4 sheet sized ) with 4 out of 5 rounds hitting the target sheet shooting from a rifle ( 2 out of five for A category ) . .22 Long Rifle chambered rifle is used . 
 For the C category license , the applicant must also successfully hit the rifle target from the distance of 25m shooting from a shotgun , 3 out of 4 rounds must hit the target ( at least partially ) . 
 For the E category license , the applicant must successfully hit the international pistol target 50 / 20 ( 50 cm x 50 cm ) from a distance of 10m ( 15m for D category license ) shooting from a pistol , 4 out of 5 rounds must hit the sheet ( 2 out of 5 for A category ) . 
 In each of the cases above , the actual score is irrelevant , only the projectiles have to hit the target sheet within the circles . Also in each case , the applicant is allowed 3 test shots to familiarize with the particular firearm used for the test . The shotgun is an exception to this , where only one round is allowed as a test shot . 
 A person can obtain more or all of the categories at once . But the set of categories needs to be known before the exam and highest score needs to be met . Typically , people obtain E and B category because these two categories provides the best versatility ( almost any firearm can be owned and carried concealed ) . The D category is required by the law for the members of the municipal police ( members of the state police do not need license for on duty firearms ) and does not itself permit private gun ownership ( unless the person obtains also other license category ) . 
 = = = = Health clearance = = = = 
 Applicant ( license holder ) must be cleared by his general practitioner as being fit to possess , carry and use a firearm . The health check includes probes into the applicant 's <unk> and a complete physical screening ( including eyesight , hearing , balance ) . The doctor may request examination by a specialist in case he deems it necessary to exclude illnesses or handicaps stated in the respective governmental regulation . Specialist medical examination is obligatory in case of illnesses and handicaps that restrict the ability to drive a car . 
 Governmental Regulation No. 493 / 2002 <unk> divides the listed illnesses and handicaps into four groups , covering various issues from psychological and <unk> to eyesight and hearing ( for example , the applicant must be able to hear casual speech over distance of 6 meters to be cleared for the E category ) . Generally , the regulation is more permissive when it comes to the license categories A and B , and more strict with view to the other categories , listing which illnesses and handicaps may curtail or outright prevent positive clearance by the general practitioner . The outcome of the medical examination may be either full clearance , denial , or conditional clearance that lists obligatory health accessories ( glasses , hearing aid , etc . ) or sets obligatory escort when armed ( e.g. B - sport shooters with minor psychological issues , or with addiction habits cured more than three years prior to the health check ) . 
 = = = = Criminal integrity = = = = 
 The enactment specifies the amount of time which must elapse after a person is released from prison for serving time for particular groups of crimes . Ex @-@ convicts punished for committing selected crimes , such as public endangerment , or participation in organized crime group or murder , if sentenced to more than 12 years imprisonment , may never fulfill this condition . There is a central registry of criminal offenses in the Czech Republic . The criminal integrity is reviewed notwithstanding any possible <unk> of the records for other purposes . 
 Police may order temporary seizure of firearm license and firearms in case that the holder is charged with any intentional crime , or a negligent crime connected with breach of duties relating to possession , carrying or use of firearms or ammunition . 
 = = = = Personal reliability = = = = 
 A person who <unk> excessively drinks alcohol or uses illegal drugs , as well who was repeatedly found guilty of specified misdemeanors ( e.g. related to firearms , DUI , public order , etc . ) in the preceding three years , is considered unreliable for the purposes of issuing a gun license . The police has the right to inquire information regarding these issues also from municipal authorities ( misdemeanors are dealt with by municipal authorities and there is no central registry related to them ) . 
 Police may order temporary seizure of firearm license and firearms in case that administrative proceedings against the holder are initiated for committing selected misdemeanors ( e.g. carrying while intoxicated , refusing to undergo intoxication test while armed , shooting outside licensed range unless in self @-@ defense ) . 
 = = = = Obtaining of a license by a foreigner = = = = 
 The law distinguishes foreigners according to their country of origin . For selected foreigners , a license is shall @-@ issue as same as for Czech citizens , while for others it is a may @-@ issue . 
 Foreign born residents are treated equally in the eye of Czech law ( see above ) , but proof of a lack of criminal record in their country of origin must be provided ; persons having residence also in another EU country must provide documentation showing that they are allowed to own a firearm therein . All the documents must be translated into Czech language by a sworn translator . 
 Foreigners with registered place of residence in the Czech Republic may purchase firearms after obtaining corresponding licenses and permits ; persons having residence also in another EU country must provide documentation showing that they are allowed to own such a firearm therein in order to be granted a permit to purchase a B category gun . 
 The written test as well as the practical exam has to be taken in the Czech language . Until 31 December 2011 , test @-@ takers were allowed to use a sworn interpreter / translator , but this has since been forbidden . 
 = = = Categories of guns = = = 
 Under the current gun law , guns , ammunition and some accessories are divided into four categories ( these should not be mistaken with categories of licenses ) : 
 A - Restricted firearms and accessories 
 Includes full automatic firearms , military firearms and ammunition not inspected and marked for civilian use , some types of ammunition such as armor @-@ piercing and incendiary ammunition , night vision scopes , suppressors and gun mounted laser pointers . The use of hollow point ammunition in pistols is also restricted , however , hollow points are legal to purchase for rifles and pistol carbines . 
 B - Guns requiring permit 
 Includes semi automatic and single or multiple shot handguns , revolvers , semi automatic rifles and shotguns with magazine capacity over 3 rounds or with a detachable magazine , semi automatic " military " style rifles , rim @-@ fire firearms under 280 mm of length and all shotguns under 600 mm of length , flare guns with caliber larger than 16mm . 
 C - Guns requiring registration 
 Includes single shot or bolt action rifles longer than 280 mm , shotguns , semi @-@ automatic rifles not included in B , air rifles with muzzle energy over 16 J and black powder repeaters . 
 D - Guns available to adults above 18 
 Includes air guns ( muzzle energy up to 16 J ) , mechanical guns ( with kinetic energy from 150 N ) , replicas ( black powder up to two shots - e.g. not black powder revolvers ) , airsoft guns , vintage firearms ( manufactured prior to 1890 ) , expansion guns and .22 CB cap ( muzzle energy up to 7 @.@ 5 J ) . 
 A person must obtain the Gun License ( <unk> <unk> ) to be allowed to own gun of categories A , B and C. To own a gun in the D category only the age of 18 is required . A , B and C category weapon has to be registered within 10 working day with the police after it is bought . 
 = = = Obtaining firearms = = = 
 Each of the A , B , C and E categories of gun license allows the person to buy a B or C category of gun . Holders of an A category license may , after being granted may @-@ issue exemption by the police , also purchase an A category firearm ; holders of D category may possess and carry any category of firearm ( which remains the property of the employer ) . 
 In case of B license the person is allowed to use their guns at shooting ranges . The C license is required by other laws for hunting . The E license allows the person to own a gun for self @-@ defense purpose and carry the concealed weapon . All guns need to be registered with the police in 10 working days after buying except for the D category . 
 To obtain a gun from the A category ( typically a full @-@ automatic or select @-@ fire firearm ) , the person must ask for a may @-@ issue " exemption " from the police and demonstrate a specific reason why they want such a weapon . 
 For private physical persons , the only acceptable reason is collecting ; 
 for physical or legal persons having an armament license ( this is a completely different certificate than the gun license ) for professional purposes the acceptable reasons include providing security for dangerous or valuable shipments or VIP objects , manufacturing or testing of firearms , providing training in use of A category firearms , or filming in case that the firearm is adjusted for use of dummy rounds . 
 The B category of guns ( typically any semi @-@ automatic firearm ) requires permission from the police . Before buying the gun the person must visit the police and fill in the " permit to buy , own and carry " form for the particular weapon ( depending on the police department , usually caliber and type of weapon is required ) . 
 As a formality , a person must state a justifiable reason for purchasing a B category firearm , which include collecting , sporting , hunting or cultural activity , conducting business with firearms and ammunition , providing security , exercise of profession and self @-@ defense . The police will issue the permit in up to 30 days ( usually immediately ) and the permit is shall @-@ issue if the applicant has a valid gun license ( and fulfills all of its requirements , e.g. clean criminal record ) ; the purchase permit is valid for 12 months . 
 The C category of guns can be bought at a gun shop after presenting the gun license . However , the gun needs to be registered later at the police . 
 There is no limit in the law on number of owned guns . The law specifies safe storage requirements for those owning more than two weapons or more than 500 rounds of ammunition . The safe storage requirements are further exacerbated for those owning more than 10 and more than 20 firearms . 
 Possession of a firearm without a gun license ( as well as sale , manufacturing , <unk> , etc . ) is a criminal offense which carries a penalty of up to two years imprisonment ( up to eight years in defined cases ) . 
 = = = Shooting ranges = = = 
 Firearm owners are allowed to practice only at licensed shooting ranges and may otherwise use the firearm only in case of self @-@ defense , or when permitted by other laws ( e.g. hunting ) . As of 2014 , there are almost two hundred places opened for the public . Any adult can visit such a range and shoot from available weapons , without restrictions or permits . A person without a gun license has to be supervised ( if younger than 18 , then by a person at least 21 years old who has been a holder of a gun license for at least 3 years ) . 
 = = = Carrying a firearm = = = 
 Holders of different categories of firearms licenses have different possibility of carrying their firearms . In general , it is prohibited to carry firearms to court buildings ( they may be left for safe keeping with the judicial guard upon entry before passing through metal detector ) , at demonstrations or mass meetings . It is also generally considered irresponsible to take guns to clubs or bars even though it is not explicitly prohibited by law . Carrying a gun while intoxicated is , however , illegal and can lead to heavy fines and losing the gun license , with police frequently conducting intoxication tests of open @-@ carrying hunters . Carrying guns in schools and campuses is not prohibited by law and there are no so called " gun @-@ free zones " . 
 The Czech Republic is a relatively safe country : Prague , with the highest crime rate in the country , still ranks as one of the safest capitals in the European Union . Considering the number of E category licenses issued , there are about 200 @,@ 000 people who could potentially carry a firearm ; however , it is not clear how many regularly do so . 
 = = = = License types = = = = 
 No carry : Holders of A license ( collection purposes ) may only obtain and possess firearms ( also those falling into the A - restricted guns category , subject to being granted a may @-@ issue permit ) and are not allowed to carry them . 
 Transport only : Holders of B ( sport shooting ) license may only transport their firearms to and from the areas designated for sport shooting . The firearms must be transported in a closed container and in a manner that excludes their immediate use . 
 Meanwhile , holders of C ( hunting ) license may too transport their firearms only to and from the areas designated for hunting in a manner that excludes their immediate use . In case that they use public transportation , the firearm must also be transported in a closed container , otherwise it may be transported ( carried unloaded ) openly . 
 Concealed carry : Holders of category D ( exercise of profession ) and E ( self @-@ defense ) license may carry up to two firearms ready for immediate use ( bullet @-@ in @-@ chamber ) . The firearms must be carried in concealed manner . The requirement of concealed carry applies also for D holders of restricted firearms ( e.g. private security with fully automatic firearms ) . 
 Open carry : Only the members of Municipal Police and of the Czech National Bank 's security , as holders of D ( exercise of profession ) license , may carry their firearms openly while on duty . Members of state police , prison service and other governmental security agencies do not need any gun license and are permitted / required by other laws to open or concealed carry while on duty . 
 Open carry may be allowed by police for special occasions , such as gun shows , war reenactments or liberation day celebrations ; these are however technically referred to as " public display of firearm " rather than " carrying " . Each person that wishes to " display " firearm must submit a request detailing the given occasion , firearm ( s ) , their protection against theft , etc . Also , during these occasion the police often conducts inspections of gun holders regarding the respective paperwork and intoxication testing . 
 = = = Ammunition restrictions = = = 
 All of the high @-@ penetrating ( armor @-@ piercing ) and hollow @-@ point ammunition is classified as category A ( see above ) . The alternative to a hollow point ammunition was Federal <unk> , which has been classified into the arms group A in mid 2009 , effectively outlawing it . Therefore , only full metal jacket or soft @-@ nosed semi @-@ jacketed rounds and or just <unk> bullets ( lead only ) are allowed . Generally , no ammunition with higher wounding potential is allowed . 
 There is currently no restriction on caliber size and no restriction on magazine capacity . However , special safe storage requirements apply for those having more than 500 , 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 bullets . 
 = = Self defense with firearms = = 
 There are no specific legal provisions covering self @-@ defense by a civilian using a firearm . The general provision regarding criminal aspects of self @-@ defense are contained in the Section 29 ( Necessary self defense ) of the Criminal Code . General provisions regarding civil liability in respect of self @-@ defense are contained in the Section 14 of the Civil Code . 
 In general , Czech penal theory recognizes certain classes of circumstances where criminal & civil liability will be excluded in respect of actions which would normally attract a criminal penalty . These include " utmost necessity " , " necessary self defense " and other cases involving " eligible use of a gun " . 
 = = = <unk> necessity = = = 
 <unk> necessity may be invoked where an interest protected by the Criminal Code ( such as right to property or right to life ) is endangered . An example of necessity would be a defense against a raging dog ( unless the dog was directly sent by the owner , which would be case of necessary defense ) . The necessity may be invoked only in case of imminent danger and only if there is no other way of avoiding it ( subsidiarity ) , such as locking oneself behind a fence or calling the police . Also , the consequence of the necessity must be less serious than the consequence of the endangering act ( proportionality ) . 
 Necessity is excluded in cases where : 
 the consequence of necessity is equal to or greater than that of endangerment 
 the necessity continues after the endangerment has ceased 
 the endangerment could have been deflected in other ways , i.e. with less serious consequences 
 there is a duty to withstand the endangerment ( a special situation which does not cover civilians ) 
 = = = Necessary self defense = = = 
 The basis of necessary self @-@ defense is deflection of an imminent or ongoing attack against an interest covered by the Criminal Code ( such as right to property or right to life ) by performing an action which would otherwise be punishable ( such as use of a firearm against the other person ) . The imminent part means that a party is evidently and immediately threatened , it is not necessary to wait for the attacker to start the attack , especially if he is known for his aggressiveness . ( That , however , is not the case if the attack is being prepared , but not imminent ) . The necessary self @-@ defense may also be enacted when defending someone else 's interest ( i.e. defending their person or their property ) as long as the same requirements are met . However , defending against a provoked attack is not considered " necessary self defense " . 
 There is no requirement of subsidiarity : in this respect " necessary self defense " differs from " utmost necessity " . The main limitation is that the defense may not be manifestly disproportionate to the manner of the attack . The manner of the attack is not the same as its intensity , which is only a part of it . For example , " intensity " covers whether the attack is committed by a single attacker or a group , with or without a gun , and the relative strength of the attacker and the party attacked , etc . But the manner also includes future imminent dangers , such as the possibility that single attacker might imminently be joined by others . 
 As regards proportionality , the law states that a self @-@ defense may not be manifestly disproportionate . It is evident , that for a self @-@ defense to be successful , it has to be performed on a level exceeding the attack . Unlike in case of necessity , the consequence of necessary self @-@ defense may be more serious than consequence of the attack . The defense may not be restricted to a passive one , it can also be active . It is not the outcome of the incident but the sequence of actions at its beginning which determines who is to be deemed the attacker , and who is the party attacked . 
 There are two main excesses , which are not recognized as necessary self @-@ defense : 
 defense , which continues after the attack is over , i.e. when a robber is running away without any loot ( excess in time ) 
 defense , which is manifestly disproportionate , such as shooting children who steal apples from a tree , or shooting a perpetrator who has passed over a fence , without giving indication of further malevolent or criminal intentions ( excess in intensity ) 
 = = = Eligible use of a gun = = = 
 Eligible use of a gun is addressed in special enactments dealing with police , secret security service , prison guards etc . Thus for example a policeman may , under specified conditions , shoot on an escaping suspect , a privilege which an armed civilian does not have . 
 = = = General tendencies = = = 
 It is acceptable to defend from a violent attack anywhere on the street especially when a person is attacked with a knife or another deadly weapon . Shooting an unarmed attacker also occurs and becomes sometimes a subject of controversy . In general , each case is investigated in great detail before being eventually dismissed as a legitimate self @-@ defense . The defense is judged according to the subjective and objective perception of the defender during the time of the imminent or ongoing attack , and not according to the view of persons who are judging it ex post . 
 The American style Castle Doctrine is also not applied however it is usually considered acceptable to defend from a violent home invasion with a firearm . In 2014 , an amendment of laws concerning self @-@ defense was proposed with the aim of giving greater leeway to defenders , especially in cases when they would not normally meet the bar for legitimate self @-@ defense under the current legislation , but face extraordinary circumstances , such as confusion as a consequence of the attack , or when facing home invasion . 
 Although there is no stand @-@ your @-@ ground law , the fact that necessary defense ( unlike utmost necessity ) is not subject to subsidiarity means that there is also no duty to retreat . The mere fact that a defender uses a weapon against unarmed attacker does not mean that the defense is disproportionate ( and thus not legitimate ) to the manner of the attack and the proportionality of defense does not depend on the relative effectiveness of the defender 's weapon compared to the intensity of the attack , but on the manner in which the weapon is used ( aiming at leg , i.e. intended non @-@ deadly defense , may be proportionate where aiming at chest may be manifestly disproportionate , notwithstanding if the slug hits a leg artery and the attacker bleeds to death ) . 
 The fact that a person prepares a weapon in order to defend themselves against expected attack does not preclude the defense from being legitimate and , according to courts , it may not be expected from a defender to wait and rely on chance that a damage which is , both objectively and in the defender 's subjective understanding , threatened to happen , will not take place . The defender may use proportionate accessible means in order to prevent an imminent attack and disarm the attacker . 
 A number of successful defensive uses of firearms or other weapon is being cleared as legitimate self @-@ defense by authorities every year without raising wider public concern , including for example a 2014 shooting of an attacker by a bartender in <unk> , or a 2014 shooting of an aggressive burglar in a garage by homeowner in <unk> . However , some cases become rather notable , such as : 
 In 1991 a group of white supremacy skinheads attacked a couple on a street in Prague after a man called on them to cease nazi salutes . The commotion was witnessed by Pavel Opočenský , a former anti @-@ communist dissident , émigré and famous sculptor , who immediately rushed to help the victims . During the fight , Opočenský used his hunting knife and killed a 17 @-@ year @-@ old metal @-@ bar @-@ wielding skinhead . Opočenský was first charged with murder and spent 2 months in a remand prison . He was released from remand prison after the charges were diminished to intentional infliction of bodily harm resulting in death ( i.e. manslaughter ) . He was first convicted by the Municipal Court in Prague and conditionally sentenced to 2 years imprisonment with 4 years probation period . After a lengthy legal proceedings in which higher court repeatedly overturned the Municipal Court 's convictions and ordered retrial , Opočenský 's actions were finally cleared as legitimate self @-@ defense by the High Court in Prague 's decision four and half years later . The trial attracted attention of WP skinheads who conducted various protests . A neo @-@ nazi band <unk> 95 released a song titled " We shall go together and kill Opočenský . " 
 In 2003 , Slavoj Hašek was awaken by commotion from outside of his house . Hašek left his house with a shotgun and pursued a thief . After the thief got to his own car and drove it in the Hašek 's direction , he shot and killed him . Hašek was sentenced to five years imprisonment with the High Court in Olomouc arguing that defense could not be legitimate , since the shot went through a side window rather than through the front windshield . Hašek was pardoned by the President Klaus shortly thereafter . 
 In 2004 , a Ukrainian immigrant attempted to rape a university student from Russia in Prague . While the rapist was forcing himself on her , she managed to grab a knife from her purse and stabbed him directly in the heart , instantly killing him . The police closed the case as a legitimate self @-@ defense 3 months later with no charges being brought . 
 In 2006 a private security guard with a pistol pursued on foot two men whom he believed tried to steal scrap metal . The men climbed on a railway embankment and started throwing rocks down at the guard who thereafter shot ten rounds in their direction , mortally wounding one of them in the head . The guard was first convicted of murder by the Municipal Court in Prague and given a sentence of 7 years imprisonment . The decision was changed by the High Court in Prague to conviction of intentional infliction of bodily harm resulting in death ( i.e. manslaughter ) and a sentence of five years imprisonment . The guard was finally exonerated by the Supreme Court in Brno which considered his action legitimate self @-@ defense , noting that defense must be clearly more intensive than attack in order to be successful , and that the stones and bricks being thrown presented grave danger to the man 's life . 
 In 2009 , a security system at a scrap metal yard , which had been repeatedly burglarized , went off . The yard 's owner was at the time on a hunt close to the yard and drove directly to it . A group of burglars jumped into their car and attempted to drive away . The owner used his shotgun and attempted to shoot the car 's tires , hitting and wounding two of its occupants . He was sentenced to 6 years imprisonment for intentional infliction of bodily harm , a sentence that was confirmed also on appeal . The owner received full presidential pardon . 
 In 2010 , a student from Azerbaijan was verbally attacked by a group of other foreigners in a bar in Prague . The student left the bar and proceeded to his friend 's car , being followed by the group who continued to verbally attack him and his family and stating that " the issue needs to be solved immediately " . The student recovered a knife from the car and took a stand . Thereafter one of the foreigners started punching him . The student stabbed one of the four attackers and then engaged in fight with another , whom he stabbed in the leg and who bled to death . The Municipal Court in Prague convicted the <unk> student of intentional infliction of bodily harm with excusable motive and sentenced him to two year in prison . The decision was overturned by the High Court in Prague who considered the death an outcome of legitimate self @-@ defense . The Supreme State Attorney mounted an extraordinary appeal to the Supreme Court , which however confirmed the acquittal , noting that the verbal abuse continued even after the victim got into the car and he could thus legitimately perceive it as an ongoing attack . The Supreme Court also refused the Municipal Court 's previous line of argumentation that the victim could have easily left the place once in the car ( as there is no duty to retreat under Czech law ) as well as its reasoning that the threat did not reach such an intensity as to justify a lethal defense . 
 In 2012 , two brothers in their early 20s , one of them armed with a knife , attacked a 63 @-@ year @-@ old man in a town in the Northern Bohemian borderland . He shot both attackers with his legally owned pistol , killing one of them . The police closed the case as legitimate self @-@ defense six months later and brought charges against the surviving attacker . 
 = = Popularity of guns = = 
 Despite the relatively liberal gun laws , guns are not especially popular in the Czech Republic with only 3 % of population having gun licenses . Nevertheless , sport shooting is the third most popular sport after football and hockey and with 2 @,@ 3 % of population having self @-@ defense licenses , the country had higher ratio of people with concealed carry permits than USA up to 2008 . In 2015 , there were 292 @,@ 022 licenses and 806 @,@ 895 registered firearms ( for the 10 @,@ 5 million population ) . In the long term number of licenses slightly decreases while number of registered guns keeps growing . 
 Unprecedented rise in gun sales took place in 2015 . While the average annual rise in the number of registered firearms amounted to 14 @,@ 500 guns between 2006 and 2014 , there were 54 @,@ 508 new registered firearms in 2015 alone . Following the culmination of European migrant crisis , November 2015 Paris attacks and an EU proposal to ban selected firearms , there was also huge rise in number of qualification exam applications which by November tripled compared to the monthly average of Q1 2015 . 
 The Czech Republic is home to many firearms manufacturers including Česká Zbrojovka . Famous models of handguns such as CZ 75 are very popular among Czechs . Czechs also favour various types of <unk> and 1911 clones . Semi @-@ automatic rifles made by Czech manufacturers , especially vz . 58 and AR 15 , are also very popular especially among Czech competition shooters or hunters . There are relatively fewer revolvers , mostly from US manufacturers such as Smith & Wesson and Colt , or Czech producers <unk> and Kora . 
 = = Incidents and gun crimes = = 
 In 2005 , there were 5 @,@ 317 misdemeanors and 924 criminal offenses committed with firearms compared to <unk> misdemeanors and 836 criminal acts in 2007 . 
 It is generally not common for licensed gun owners to commit violent crimes with their guns , and most of the gun crimes are committed with illegal weapons that are beyond the control of the law . The number of murders committed with legally owned guns reached its peak in 2000 , when 20 people were murdered . There were 16 murders committed with legally owned guns in 2003 , 17 in 2007 and 2 in 2010 . The majority of them are committed during family quarrels , with only a minimum being premeditated . 
 Occasionally , crimes with legally owned guns do happen . The most notable examples include : 
 2001 shooting of three policemen who were called by a woman claiming she was being attacked by her husband , František <unk> . On the scene , the policemen were negotiating with the husband who was threatening to commit suicide with his legally owned .38 revolver . When the situation seemed about to be peacefully solved , the hysteric wife ran into the room . <unk> thereafter shot three policemen ( two mortally ) and committed suicide . 
 Viktor Kalivoda , a.k.a. " Forest Killer " , who was planning to go on a killing spree in Prague Metro in 2005 . As part of his preparation , the former policeman randomly murdered two hikers in a forest and another person four days later in another forest about 200 km from the first killing with his legally owned Glock . Police captured Kalivoda a week later , thus preventing further murders . Kalivoda was sentenced to life imprisonment . While in prison , he committed suicide in 2010 . As a former policeman , Kalivoda had passed a difficult psychological evaluation as part of the police selection procedure . 
 2008 shooting at former PM 's birthday party , which occurred at a party of a Czech politician and former Prime Minister Jiří <unk> , where his acquaintance <unk> Ďuričko shot Václav <unk> junior , the son of a Prague businessman , with his legally carried gun after a short quarrel . Ďuričko later claimed he was acting in self @-@ defense after <unk> attacked his pregnant girlfriend . According to the eyewitness testimony , it seemed highly unlikely . In April 2009 , <unk> Ďuričko was found guilty of murder and sentenced to 12 @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years in prison . 
 2013 <unk> shooting , where a 31 @-@ year @-@ old schoolteacher invaded the house of one of his students , aged 17 , with whom he had allegedly been previously intimately involved , and shot the student and her grandparents , using various legally owned firearms ( with caliber .22 , .38 and .45 ) . The perpetrator had further 10 firearms at home and over 10 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition ; he had passed psychological evaluation ordered by his general practitioner before getting gun license . The perpetrator was sentenced to 27 years imprisonment . 
 2015 Uherský Brod shooting , the largest mass shooting in the country 's peacetime history , in which a deranged individual murdered 8 people . He was a holder of a gun license and legally owned both of the guns he used in the shooting . Previously , he and his wife committed misdemeanors against public order , which would 've allowed police to revoke his license . 
 = = General attitudes to guns and efforts to tighten the law = = 
 The gun law in the Czech Republic is quite liberal . It is mostly caused by the fact that after the fall of communist regime people wanted to regain their rights to keep and bear arms and these needs resulted in passing quite a liberal legislation in 1996 , which surpassed the previous restrictive communist enactment . The law became widely accepted and led to quite massive civilian arming . Especially many businessmen felt the actual need to obtain a firearm because the times shortly after the Velvet Revolution are known for the rise in organized crime often related to the economic transformation in the early 1990s . 
 Due to falling crime rates fewer people felt the need to carry a firearm for protection after 2000s . This trend however changed in 2015 following the European migrant crisis and November 2015 Paris attacks . Gun advocacy groups argue that there is no point in banning guns because criminals will get guns no matter how tight the law is . At the same time , however , the rules are deemed to be restrictive enough to prevent criminals from easily obtaining firearms , while allowing upstanding citizens to own them for personal protection . For example , in 2010 , a Norwegian terrorist , incited by reports of British newspapers describing Prague as " being the most important transit site point for illicit weapons in Europe " , found himself unable to obtain any in the country when preparing for the 2011 Norway attacks . Similarly , a Polish terrorist obtained guns illegally in 1200 km distant Belgium , despite living mere 70 km from the Czech border . Also the fact that Czech Republic has a strong tradition in firearms manufacturing and competition shooting contributes to generally moderate attitude to gun control . 
 A sharp increase in regional gun ownership took place in 2011 after a number of attacks of Romani perpetrators against victims from the majority population , some of which were racially motivated . This arming was taking place especially in regions such as <unk> Hook , where high crime rates are often attributed to people from Roma minority , and where majority population distrust police and authorities . This local trend however didn 't significantly influence long term statistics . 
 Efforts to tighten the law usually arise after deadly incidents like those described above . <unk> psychological testing for gun owners is a common subject of discussion , but it has always been rejected . Gun advocates point out that the nature of the tests and the parties responsible for them are not clear . It is also pointed out that it is unlikely that any psychological testing would reveal a potentially dangerous individual , because some famous killers in the past were members of the military or the law enforcement and passed very difficult psychological testing successfully . 
 The law was last tightened in 2008 introducing for example stricter sanctions for carrying gun while intoxicated . Proposals to introduce mandatory psychological testing were not passed . The efforts to tighten gun legislation are also unlikely to pass as about a fifth of members of the Czech Parliament are holders of gun license ; some of them are believed to carry firearms also within the parliament grounds ( parliamentarians are not required to pass gun check on entry unlike other staff or visitors ) . 
 = = = 2014 European parliamentary elections = = = 
 Generally , firearms possession is not a politicized issue that would be debated during Czech elections . The 2014 European Parliament election became an exception in connection with the Swedish European Commissioner Cecilia <unk> 's initiative to introduce new common EU rules that would significantly restrict the possibilities of legally owning firearms . 
 In connection with that , a Czech gun owners association asked the parties running in the elections in the Czech Republic whether they agree ( 1 ) that the citizens should have the right to own and carry firearms , ( 2 ) that the competence on deciding firearms issues should lay in the hands of the nation states and not be decided on the EU level , and ( 3 ) whether they support <unk> 's activity leading to the curbing of the right of upstanding citizens to own and carry firearms . Out of 39 parties running , 22 answered . The answers were almost unanimously positive to the first two questions and negative to the third one . Exception were only two fringe parties , the Greens - which , while supporting the right for gun ownership in its current form , also support further unification of rules on the European level and labeled the opposing reaction to <unk> 's proposal as premature , and the Pirates which support unification of the rules leading to less restrictions elsewhere , commenting that one may not cross the borders out of the Czech Republic legally even with a pepper spray . Other fringe parties at the same time voiced their intent to introduce American style castle doctrine or to arm the general population following the example of the Swiss militia . 
 = = Other types of weapons = = 
 There is currently no regulation on other type of weapons such as knives , pepper sprays , batons or electrical <unk> . These weapons can be freely bought and carried in concealed manner by anybody above 18 . Similarly as in the case of firearms , it is prohibited to carry these weapons to court buildings , demonstrations and mass meetings . The Ministry of the Interior officially recommends carrying non @-@ lethal weapons such as pepper sprays , <unk> , or gas pistols as means of self @-@ defense 
 = Carly Foulkes = 
 Carly Foulkes ( born August 4 , 1988 ) , also known colloquially as The T @-@ Mobile Girl , is a Canadian model and actress who became known for appearing in a series of T @-@ Mobile <unk> 4G television commercials , in which she often wore pink / magenta @-@ and @-@ white summer dresses . She continued as spokeswoman in other T @-@ Mobile ads in which she was depicted as a pink @-@ and @-@ black leather @-@ clad biker girl . She served as the T @-@ Mobile spokesman primarily from fall 2010 until spring 2013 , with occasional appearances since then . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Modeling = = = 
 Foulkes began modeling in the Toronto area at age 13 . After high school , she moved to New York City to model for agents . Subsequently , she found modeling work in Singapore and Europe . After returning to New York to model , she began to pursue acting . She appeared on the April 2009 cover of Mexican Elle magazine and in advertisements for Rugby Ralph Lauren , Abercrombie & Fitch , Macy 's , and Tommy Hilfiger . She is represented by <unk> and Sutherland Models . A Los Angeles Times writer described her look as Anne Hathaway meets Kim Basinger and noted that , as of early 2011 , she was still often confused with fellow Canadian Jessica Paré . 
 = = = T @-@ Mobile television ads = = = 
 After struggling for several years as an aspiring model / actress , Foulkes became the T @-@ Mobile 4G spokesperson in fall 2010 despite not using the American English pronunciation of " mobile " in her summer 2009 audition , but rather pronouncing the word as rhyming with " smile " , an accepted Canadian English pronunciation . Her advertising campaign was at first noted for similarities to the 2006 – 2010 Justin Long / John Hodgman " Get a Mac " ads . Foulkes derides the iPhone 4 and its exclusive provider at the time , AT & T , the same way the Apple Inc. derided Windows @-@ based personal computers . As a T @-@ Mobile spokesperson , her most immediate predecessor was Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones . Her T @-@ Mobile USA ads ran on major United States networks and multiple websites . Although she was originally only expected to perform in two or three commercials , as of December 2011 she has produced a dozen commercials with more anticipated . 
 Foulkes has been described as a " picture @-@ perfect brunette " . Since becoming the T @-@ Mobile girl she is known for the pink summer dresses that she wears in most of the ads . She has been styled by Debra LeClair , a stylist at T @-@ Mobile . In August 2011 , Sprint Nextel 's Virgin Mobile prepaid service referred to T @-@ Mobile and Foulkes with caricature ads featuring a brunette in a pink dress . Two months earlier , Cricket Wireless used negative attack marketing against T @-@ Mobile without referring to Foulkes . Although dresses in the earlier commercials were frequently described as pink , more recent commercials are noted for the use of magenta dresses . T @-@ mobile has a color trademark for the color magenta and markets itself using its corporate colors . 
 One of her more notable commercials was a 2011 holiday season production . On November 30 , 2011 , T @-@ mobile announced a surprise event at the Woodfield Mall . On December 1 , 2011 veteran Glee director Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon directed about six surprise singing and dancing mall performances of " Home for the Holidays " by Foulkes and 100 Chicago @-@ area women in magenta dresses . The performances were later edited into a music video with the hope that it would go viral . The full video that has been posted on YouTube has a run time of 3 : 48 and it was presented in a 60 @-@ second national television commercial starting on December 12 . The video was produced by Ridley and Tony Scott 's RSA Films . The musical director was Paul <unk> . 
 On April 17 , 2012 , T @-@ Mobile launched a rebranded ad campaign that included broadcast and cable TV , Hulu , YouTube and mobile as well as print . In the refreshed ad campaign Foulkes starred in a commercial , entitled " Alter Ego " , in which she discards her usual pink dresses and high heels for a black @-@ and @-@ pink biker outfit and boots before embarking on a motorcycle ride . The commercials are perceived as a departure from previous female @-@ friendly Foulkes ads . The commercial is planned to run until the Fall when the complete relaunch of the T @-@ Mobile ad campaign is scheduled . In announcing the ad to the media , T @-@ Mobile said : 
 She has also been a popular sex symbol since the ads started . After months of email support , Foulkes was included in the SI.com feature " Hot Clicks " on May 18 , 2011 . During a rash of servicemen 's online request of celebrities as escorts to military balls , Airman Adam <unk> asked Foulkes to the Air Force Ball on Guam , and she declined by posting a video . 
 In March 2013 , she was described as " one of the most recognizable brand spokespeople " by Business Insider journalist Laura <unk> even after converting from a pink dress wardrobe to a bad girl / biker chick image . Later that spring , when T @-@ Mobile prepared for its April rollout of the iPhone 5 , it selected an advertising campaign without Foulkes , ending her two and a half year tenure as spokesperson . Foulkes ' last new commercial was posted to YouTube on February 25 , 2013 . The new ad campaign featured Cowboys . T @-@ Mobile debuted its new ad campaign on March 26 , 2013 without Foulkes . The company has said that the ' T @-@ Mobile Girl ' character has been sidelined for now , but this is believed to be a permanent advertising change . An official T @-@ Mobile statement said " This campaign represents a new direction for the brand -- offering consumers a simple choice . As such , the current campaign will not feature the character of the T @-@ Mobile Girl , however she is still a part of the company ’ s brand family . " 
 In early July 2013 Foulkes returned to participate in T @-@ Mobile press events . At the same time , she tweeted a six @-@ second Vine video hinting that she would be returning to the ad campaign . In September , Foulkes appeared in a T @-@ Mobile public service announcement regarding texting and driving . On October 10 , 2013 , T @-@ Mobile announced that they had signed a multi @-@ year contract with Shakira as a corporate spokesperson . Foulkes would not be part of the campaign , but remained under contract with T @-@ Mobile and vaguely remained in the future plans . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Foulkes ' parents are British , although she was raised in Toronto and attended Loretto Abbey . She has two sisters , Kimmy and Angie . She spent summers in England while growing up . 
 Foulkes claims to be a video game junkie who plays on a PlayStation 3 . She also describes herself as adept at skateboarding . Despite the association with pink dresses due to the T @-@ Mobile ad campaign , she claims not to wear pink in her personal wardrobe , and in fact used to wear a lot of black and leather cuffs in high school . 
 As of February 2011 , she had been in a two and a half year relationship with an actor named Tyler . When asked about her status as an internet sex symbol , she says she does not classify herself as such : " I 'm flattered , " says Foulkes , " but it 's funny . " 
 = Family Trade = 
 Family Trade is an American reality television series broadcast by Game Show Network . The show premiered on March 12 , 2013 , and continued to air new episodes until April 16 , 2013 . Filmed in Middlebury , Vermont , the series chronicles the daily activities of G. Stone Motors , a GMC and Ford car dealership that employs the barter system in selling its automobiles . The dealership is operated by its founder , Gardner Stone , his son and daughter , Todd and Darcy , and General Manager Travis Romano . The series features the shop 's daily interaction with its customers , who bring in a variety of items that can be resold in order to receive a down payment on the vehicle they are leasing or purchasing . Commentary and narration are also often provided by the Stones during the episodes . 
 = = Format = = 
 The series features customers , usually two to three per episode , bringing in anything they believe is <unk> within reason to the dealership to help cover the cost of a new or used vehicle ( including pigs , maple syrup , and collectable dolls ) , rather than paying for it with cash . The customers then negotiate the value of their items , usually with Gardner , but occasionally also with other members of the shop 's staff . The trade usually is not enough to cover the full value of the car or truck ; because of this , the value of the trade provides the customers with a down payment on the vehicle . Once the trade is completed , Todd , Darcy , and Travis take the items the dealership has acquired , and attempt to resell them for a profit . 
 = = Production = = 
 Production for Family Trade began with the dealership receiving a phone call from Eli Frankel and Lionsgate proposing the idea of filming a reality show . The Stones eventually agreed to have Lionsgate film a fifteen @-@ minute clip of various trades performed at the dealership . Lionsgate pitched the idea to a few networks , such as History , but GSN eventually picked the series up after ordering a pilot show . 
 In the network 's 2012 upfronts , GSN announced plans to launch a new category of programming entitled " Real @-@ Life Games " , stating that series under that category , " take place in real @-@ world settings and feature real @-@ life risk and reward , winners and losers , joy and disappointment " . Family Trade first appeared in the network 's upfronts on March 21 , 2012 under that same section . Despite this , the Stones insisted that there were little to no " game " aspects to the series , rather that everything seen in the show was related to business . GSN then proceeded to order eight episodes of the series on August 9 , 2012 . The series was originally expected to premiere on March 5 , 2013 ; however , GSN later pushed the premiere date back a week to March 12 . Although the network never made an official cancelation announcement , the show has not aired on GSN since the end of the first season . Combined with the show 's absence in the network 's most recent annual upfront presentation , it is presumed to be canceled . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Gardner Stone – President and founder of G. Stone Motors . Born and raised in Middlebury , Stone started the company in 1974 before moving it to its current location in 1983 . Stone is an avid fan and supporter of American cars and has stated this on the dealership 's website and on Family Trade . 
 Todd Stone – Gardner 's son and the dealership 's Vice President . Stone began working at G. Stone Motors in 1985 by washing cars while he was still in school . Stone often has the task of reselling the items the shop takes in trade . He and Gardner often disagree on what makes a good trade , which can lead to minor conflicts between the two and the shop 's other employees . 
 Darcy Stone – Gardner 's daughter and the General Manager of G. Stone Commercial Group , who also works as a service coordinator . Stone occasionally is involved in helping Gardner take in items customers have to trade ; however , she is usually seen helping reselling those items . 
 Travis Romano – The dealership 's General Manager who began working at the shop in 2002 as a sales consultant . Romano oversees many daily operations by working with both the sales and finance departments of the shop , and also sometimes works with Todd by reselling many of the shop 's acquired items . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Family Trade was considered by many to be a risk for GSN due to the network 's history of exclusively airing game shows . Greg Braxton of the Los Angeles Times called the show a " game @-@ changer " , and a " key part in [ GSN 's ] strategy to broaden its programming and brand " . The day after the series premiere , Michael Tyminski of Manhattan Digest gave a negative review of the show , calling it " incredibly bland " , and stating that it appeared to lack much of the family drama that had previously been advertised . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Family Trade started off with decent ratings by GSN 's standards , averaging 403 @,@ 000 viewers for the two episodes shown on the night of the show 's premiere , slightly above the network 's primetime viewership average . However , the show quickly fell in the ratings , with all new episodes airing in March ( including the premiere night 's episodes ) averaging 296 @,@ 000 viewers , and only 40 @,@ 000 viewers ( with a 0 @.@ 0 rating ) among adults 18 – 49 . In April , the series dropped even lower in terms of total viewers , with an average of 274 @,@ 000 , and only improved <unk> among adults 18 – 49 , with 46 @,@ 000 viewers ( again with a 0 @.@ 0 rating ) . 
 = John Van Antwerp MacMurray = 
 John Van Antwerp MacMurray ( 1881 – 1960 ) was an American attorney , author and diplomat best known as one of the leading China experts in the U.S. government . He served as Assistant Secretary of State from November 1924 to May 1925 , and was subsequently appointed Minister to China in 1925 . Although MacMurray had coveted the China post , he soon fell into disagreement with the State Department over U.S. policy towards the ruling Kuomintang government . He resigned the position in 1929 and briefly left the foreign service . Following several years in academia , MacMurray returned to the State Department to become Minister to Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania from 1933 to 1936 . He later served as ambassador to Turkey from 1936 to 1941 , and then was made a special assistant to the Secretary of State until his retirement in 1944 . 
 In 1935 , MacMurray was commissioned to write a memorandum on the conflict between China and Japan . In it , he suggested that the United States , China , and Great Britain were partly to blame for Japan 's aggression , and anticipated that unless the United States recognized Japan 's grievances , a war between the two powers was likely . His warnings proved prescient , and the Pacific war broke out when Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 MacMurray was born in Schenectady , New York to Junius Wilson MacMurray and Henrietta MacMurray ( née Van Antwerp ) . His father was a career soldier , serving as a captain in the Union Army during the American Civil War , and later joining the regular army . MacMurray 's father also taught military tactics at the University of Missouri and Cornell University , and was the author of several books . His mother , Henrietta <unk> Van Antwerp , was the daughter of a bank president . 
 In 1892 , at the age of eleven , MacMurray attended Captain Wilson ’ s boarding school near Princeton , New Jersey . Later , while he was attending the nearby Lawrenceville School , his father 's death dealt a “ deep emotional blow ” , according to historian Arthur Waldron . After graduating in 1898 , MacMurray enrolled at Princeton University . The school ’ s president , Woodrow Wilson , encouraged him to pursue a career in academia , noting his aptitude for language and literature . MacMurray was also said to display an independent nature , declining to participate in eating clubs or attend chapel . 
 In 1903 , MacMurray was admitted to the Columbia University Law School , and gained admission to the New York State Bar Association in 1906 . He concurrently pursued a master of arts degree in Elizabethan drama at Princeton University , which he received in 1907 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Following his admission to the New York Bar , MacMurray sought a career in government . A letter of commendation from Woodrow Wilson helped MacMurray secure an opportunity to take the foreign service examination . In 1907 , he was appointed as Consul @-@ General and Secretary of Legation in Bangkok , Siam , and then became second secretary at the U.S. embassy in St. Petersburg . There he worked under ambassador William Woodville Rockhill , who was credited with helping to shape the United States ’ open door policy towards China . 
 Upon returning to Washington in 1911 , MacMurray was made chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs , a position he held until 1913 . He then had several appointments in East Asia : from 1913 to 1917 , he was secretary of Legation in Peking , China , and from 1917 to 1919 , he was counselor of the embassy in Tokyo . He had been offered a post as Minister to Siam in 1913 , but declined in order to pursue the position in Peking . He again returned to the State Department in 1919 to serve as Chief of Division for Far Eastern Affairs from 1919 to 1924 . During that time , MacMurray was involved as an observer to negotiations between China and Japan concerning the status of the Shandong Peninsula , and authored a book titled Treaties and Agreements with and Concerning China . The book was a compilation of all treaties and agreements with China from 1894 to 1919 , and was published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 
 MacMurray briefly served as Assistant Secretary of State from 1924 to 1925 . In 1925 , he was appointed Minister to China under President Calvin Coolidge , who described him as " our top China expert " . He assumed the post in July 1925 . MacMurray was well regarded within the diplomatic community in Peking ; Sir Ronald Macleay with the British delegation described him as friendly and agreeable , and relatively unburdened by the preconceived ideas and sentimentality towards China that afflicted several of his predecessors . Macleay noted that MacMurray could express himself well and forcefully in diplomatic meetings , but that he was " rather academic " , and may have lacked confidence in himself . " I imagine that he allows himself very little freedom of action and refers to Washington on every possible occasion , " wrote Macleay . Another British diplomat , Sir Miles W. Lampson , recorded MacMurray 's complaints that Washington allowed him little initiative , and seldom adopted his proposals . 
 Soon after arriving in China , MacMurray fell into disagreement with Washington over U.S. policy towards the ruling Kuomintang ( Nationalist ) government , which had been demanding immediate revisions to or a cessation of the treaty system in place between the two countries . Whereas Washington wished to make concessions to the Nationalist government , MacMurray favored the enforcement of existing treaties . These differences of opinion led him to resign in November 1929 , whereupon he became a professor of International Relations at Johns Hopkins University . 
 In 1933 , MacMurray returned to the foreign service . On September 9 of that year , he was appointed Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania — a position he held until 1936 . From 1936 to 1941 , MacMurray served as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary in Turkey . He returned to Washington in 1942 and worked as a special assistant to the Secretary of State until his retirement in 1944 . 
 = = = 1935 Memorandum = = = 
 In 1935 , as tensions in East Asia were mounting , the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs , Stanley Hornbeck , commissioned MacMurray to write a memorandum on the situation . The memorandum , " Developments Affecting American Policy in the Far East " , challenged many of the underlying assumptions of U.S. policy towards Japan . The conventional wisdom held that Japan was the unprovoked aggressor in the brewing conflict with China . However , MacMurray posited that Chinese and American policies were partly to blame for Japan ’ s actions ; whereas Japan had closely adhered to the treaties and agreements brokered during the Washington Disarmament Conference , the United States , Great Britain and China frequently undermined them . Up until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 , the " Japanese Government ... was endeavoring in unimpeachable good faith to live up to its undertakings " , wrote MacMurray . " The issue of success or failure for the policies evolved at the Washington Conference was actually in the hands of China herself , of Great Britain , and of the United States . " 
 According to Arthur Waldron , MacMurray found that China in particular " systematically flouted the legal framework that alone guaranteed her international position , and by so doing invited Japan ’ s wrath . " MacMurray believed that the United States should have valued Japan ’ s efforts to comply with the treaty agreements , and suggested that the United States should acknowledge Japanese grievances , rather than aligning ever more closely with China . Barring that , he wrote , an American war with Japan was likely : 
 To oppose the Japanese domination of China and actively take all available means and occasions to frustrate it ... would , if pursued consistently and determinedly , almost inevitably mean war with Japan ... Such a war would be a major misfortune for us , even assuming our victory ... It would be a hideously long and costly process ... Even the elimination of Japan , if it were possible , would be no blessing to the Far East or to the world . It would merely create a new set of stresses , and substitute for Japan the USSR as the successor of Imperial Russia as a contestant ( and at least an equally unscrupulous and dangerous one ) for mastery of the East . Nobody except perhaps Russia would gain from our victory in such a war . 
 MacMurray 's classified memorandum was immediately shelved by the State Department , and his warnings went unheeded . Following the Second World War , it was available only in select archives . In 1992 , the memorandum was published for first time with an introduction by University of Pennsylvania historian Arthur Waldron . Although it had been suppressed and largely disregarded at the time it was written , MacMurray 's analysis was considered prescient by later generations of scholars and diplomats . George F. Kennan wrote of the 1935 memorandum : " I know of no document on record in our government with respect to foreign policy which is more penetrating and thoughtful and prescient than this one . " 
 = = Films and photography = = 
 Throughout his diplomatic tours in China , MacMurray captured thousands of photographs and recorded hours of footage of everyday life . A collection consisting of more than 1 @,@ 600 of MacMurray 's photographs taken in rural China between 1913 and 1917 is held by the Princeton University library . 
 In 1925 , just two years after the advent of the Cine @-@ Kodak motion picture camera , MacMurray began making amateur films of life and travels in China , such as his trips to the Great Wall of China and a journey down the Yangtze River . One film depicted the procession of Sun Yat @-@ sen 's body from its original burial place in Peking to a new mausoleum in Nanking . Another film recorded in April 1928 captured scenes of daily life in Kalgan , north of Peking . MacMurray , along with his wife and sister , had traveled to Kalgan and Changpeh with Roy Chapman Andrews , an American explorer and naturalist who made multiple expeditions to the Gobi desert . During the civil war in 1928 , however , rogue brigands and soldiers had made travel difficult in the region . To secure passage between Kalgan and Changpeh , MacMurray enlisted the aid of local warlord Chang Tso @-@ lin , who provided an escort of 50 cavalry , 8 cars , and 150 camels . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1916 , MacMurray married Lois R. Goodnow , the daughter of Frank Johnson Goodnow — a legal scholar , president of Johns Hopkins University , and a former advisor to the government of the Republic of China . Goodnow had been one of MacMurray 's professors at Columbia University . The couple had three children : Joan Goodnow MacMurray , Frank Goodnow MacMurray , and Lois Van Antwerp MacMurray . 
 = = Works = = 
 Treaties and Agreements with and Concerning China , 1894 @-@ 1919 : Manchu period ( 1894 @-@ 1911 ) 
 = Ecclesiastical heraldry = 
 Ecclesiastical heraldry refers to the use of heraldry within the Christian Church for dioceses and Christian clergy . Initially used to mark documents , ecclesiastical heraldry evolved as a system for identifying people and dioceses . It is most formalized within the Catholic Church , where most bishops , including the Pope , have a personal coat of arms . Clergy in Anglican , Lutheran , Eastern Catholic , and Orthodox churches follow similar customs , as do institutions such as schools and dioceses . 
 Ecclesiastical heraldry differs notably from other heraldry in the use of special insignia around the shield to indicate rank in a church or denomination . The most prominent of these insignia is the low crowned , wide brimmed ecclesiastical hat , commonly the Roman galero . The color and ornamentation of this hat indicate rank . Cardinals are famous for the " red hat " , but other offices and other churches have distinctive hat colors , such as black for ordinary clergy and green for bishops , customarily with a number of tassels increasing with rank . 
 Other insignia include the processional cross , the mitre and the crosier . Eastern traditions favor the use of their own style of head gear and crosier , and the use of the mantle or cloak rather than the ecclesiastical hat . The motto and certain shapes of shields are more common in ecclesiastical heraldry , while supporters and crests are less common . The papal coats of arms have their own heraldic customs , primarily the Papal Tiara ( or mitre ) , the keys of Saint Peter , and the ombrellino ( umbrella ) . Pope Benedict XVI replaced the use of the Papal Tiara in his coat of arms with a mitre . He was the first pope to do so , despite the fact that Pope Paul VI was the last pope to be crowned with the tiara . The arms of institutions have slightly different traditions , using the mitre and crozier more often than is found in personal arms , though there is a wide variation in uses by different churches . The arms used by organizations are called impersonal or corporate arms . 
 = = History = = 
 Heraldry developed in medieval Europe from the late 11th century , originally as a system of personal badges of the warrior classes , which served , among other purposes , as identification on the battlefield . The same insignia were used on seals to identify documents . The earliest seals bore a likeness of the owner of the seal , with the shield and heraldic insignia included . Over time , the seals were reduced to just the shield . 
 The Church likewise identified the origin and ownership of documents and buildings with seals , which were typically a pointed oval called a vesica to distinguish from round seals in non @-@ religious use . Edward I of England decreed in 1307 that all legal documents required a seal . These seals initially depicted a person , but as secular seals began to depict only a shield , clergy likewise used seals with heraldic insignia . Personal seals of bishops and abbots continued to be used after their deaths , gradually becoming an impersonal seal . Clergy tended to replace military devices with clerical devices . The shield was retained , but ecclesiastical hats often replaced helmets and coronets . In some religious arms a skull replaces the helmet . 
 The structure of Church heraldry developed significantly in the 17th century when a system for ecclesiastical hats attributed to Pierre <unk> came into use . The full system of emblems around the shield was regulated in the Catholic Church by the letter of Pope Pius X Inter <unk> curas of February 21 , 1905 , while the composition of the shield itself was regulated through the Heraldry Commission of the Roman Curia until this office was abolished by Pope John XXIII in 1960 . The <unk> <unk> ceased publishing the arms of Cardinals and previous Popes after 1969 . International custom and national law govern limited aspects of Church heraldry , but shield composition is now largely guided by expert advice . Archbishop Bruno Heim , a noted ecclesiastical <unk> ( designer of arms ) , said 
 Ecclesiastical heraldry is not determined by heraldic considerations alone , but also by doctrinal , liturgical and canonical factors . It not only produces arms denoting members of the ecclesiastical state but shows the rank of the bearer .... In the eyes of the Church it is sufficient to determine who has a right to bear an ecclesiastical coat of arms and under what conditions the different insignia are acquired or lost ... The design of <unk> arms is often a disastrous defiance of the rules of heraldry , if only as a breach of good taste . 
 A similar system for the Church of England was approved in 1976 . The traditions of Eastern Christian heraldry have less developed regulation . Eastern secular coats of arms often display a shield before a mantle topped with a crown . Eastern clergy often display coats of arms according to this style , replacing the crown with an appropriate hat drawn from liturgical use . 
 Marking documents is the most common use of arms in the Church today . A Roman Catholic bishop 's coat of arms was formerly painted on miniature wine barrels and presented during the ordination ceremony . Cardinals may place their coat of arms outside the church of their title in Rome . Impersonal arms are often used as the banner of a school or religious community . 
 = = Shield = = 
 The shield is the normal device for displaying a coat of arms . Clergy have used less @-@ military shapes such as the oval cartouche , but the shield has always been a clerical option . Clergy in Italy often use a shield shaped like a horse 's face @-@ armor . Clergy in South Africa sometimes follow the national style using a <unk> shield . Women traditionally display their coats of arms on a diamond @-@ shaped lozenge ; abbesses follow this tradition or use the cartouche . 
 = = = Personal design = = = 
 In the Roman Catholic Church , unless a new bishop has a family coat of arms , he typically adopts within his shield symbols that indicate his interests or past service . Devotion to a particular saint is represented by symbols established in iconography and heraldic tradition . In the Church of England , new bishops typically choose a coat that looks entirely non @-@ clerical , not least because their descendants may seek reassignment of the arms , and few of them are likely to be clerics . 
 The first rule of heraldry is the rule of tincture : " Colour must not appear upon colour , nor metal upon metal . " The heraldic metals are gold and silver , usually represented as yellow and white , while red , green , blue , purple and black normally comprise the colors . Heraldic bearings are intended for recognition at a distance ( in battle ) , and a contrast of light metal against dark color is desirable . The same principle can be seen in the choice of colors for most license plates . 
 This rule of tincture is often broken in clerical arms : the flag and arms of Vatican City notably have yellow ( gold ) and white ( silver ) placed together . In Byzantine tradition , colors have a mystical interpretation . Because gold and silver express sublimity and solemnity , combinations of the two are often used regardless of the rule of tincture . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 If a bishop is a diocesan bishop , it is customary for him to combine his arms with the arms of the diocese following normal heraldic rules . This combining is termed marshalling , and is normally accomplished by impalement , placing the arms of the diocese to the viewer 's left ( dexter in heraldry ) and the personal arms to the viewer 's right . The arms of Thomas Arundel are found impaled with those of the See of Canterbury in a document from 1411 . In Germany and Switzerland , quartering is the norm rather than impalement . Guy Selvester , an American ecclesiastical heraldist , says if arms are not designed with care , marshalling can lead to " busy " , crowded shields . <unk> can be reduced by placing a smaller shield overlapping the larger shield , known as an inescutcheon or an escutcheon <unk> . In the arms of Heinrich <unk> , Bishop of Aachen , the personal arms are placed in front of the diocesan arms , but the opposite arrangement is found in front on the arms of Paul Gregory <unk> , Bishop of Metuchen . Cardinals sometimes combine their personal arms with the arms of the Pope who named them a cardinal . As Prefect of the Pontifical Household , Jacques Martin impaled his personal arms with those of three successive <unk> . A married Church of England bishop combines his arms with those of his wife and the diocese on two separate shields placed <unk> , or side @-@ by @-@ side . 
 Roman Catholic bishops in England historically used only their personal arms , as dioceses established by the See of Rome are not part of the official state Church of England and cannot be recognized in law , though in Scotland the legal situation has been different and many Roman Catholic dioceses have arms . If a suffragan or auxiliary bishop has a personal coat of arms , he does not combine it with the arms of the diocese he serves . 
 = = Around the shield = = 
 The shield is the core of heraldry , but other elements are placed above , below , and around the shield , and are usually collectively called external ornaments . The entire composition is called the achievement of arms or the armorial bearings . Some of these accessories are unique to Church armory or differ notably from those which normally accompany a shield . 
 = = = Ecclesiastical hat = = = 
 The ecclesiastical hat is a distinctive part of the achievement of arms of a Roman Catholic cleric . This hat , called a galero ( or <unk> ) , was originally a pilgrim 's hat like a sombrero . It was granted in red to cardinals by Pope Innocent IV at the First Council of Lyon in the 13th century , and was adopted by heraldry almost immediately . The galero in various colors and forms was used in heraldic achievements starting with its adoption in the arms of bishops in the 16th century . In the 19th century the galero was viewed heraldically as specifically " Catholic " , but the Public Register of Arms in Scotland show Roman Catholic , presbyterian Church of Scotland and Anglican Episcopalian clergy all using the wide brimmed , low crowned hat . The galero is ornamented with tassels ( also called <unk> or <unk> ) indicating the cleric 's current place in the hierarchy ; the number became significant beginning in the 16th century , and the meaning was fixed , for Catholic clergy , in 1832 . A bishop 's galero is green with six tassels on each side ; the color originated in Spain where formerly a green hat was actually worn by bishops . A territorial abbot was equivalent to a bishop and used a green galero . An archbishop 's galero is green but has ten tassels . Bishops in Switzerland formerly used ten tassels like an archbishop because they were under the immediate jurisdiction of the Holy See and not part of an archiepiscopal province . Both patriarchs and cardinals have hats with fifteen tassels . A cardinal 's hat is red or scarlet while a patriarch who is not also a cardinal uses a green hat ; the patriarch 's tassels are interwoven with gold . Primates may use the same external ornaments as patriarchs . 
 The depiction of the galero in arms can vary greatly depending on the artist 's style . The top of the hat may be shown flat or round . Sometimes the brim is shown much narrower ; with a domed top it can look like a <unk> <unk> with tassels , but in heraldry it is still called a galero . The tassels may be represented as knotted cords . 
 An exception is made for Chinese bishops , who often avoid using green hat in their arms since " wearing a green hat " is the Chinese idiom for cuckold . Rather than green , these bishops use a variety of colors from violet and black to blue , or scarlet if a cardinal . A cross behind the shield denotes a bishop . 
 Lesser Roman Catholic prelates use a variety of colors . Violet hats were once actually worn by certain <unk> , and so in heraldry they have used a violet hat with red or violet tassels in varying numbers , currently fixed at six on each side . The lowest grade of monsignor , a Chaplain of His Holiness , uses a black hat with violet tassels . The superior general of an order displays a black galero with six tassels on each side , while provincial superiors and abbots use a black galero with six or three tassels on each side , although <unk> ( White Canons ) use a white galero . Although a priest would rarely assume arms unless he had an ancestral right to arms independent of his clerical state , a priest would use a simple black ecclesiastical hat with a single tassel on each side . Priests who hold an office such as rector would have two tassels on each side . 
 Clergy of the Church of England who were not bishops historically bore arms identical to a layman , with a shield , helm and crest , and no ecclesiastical hat . In England in 1976 a system for deans , archdeacons and canons was authorized by the College of Arms , allowing a black ecclesiastical hat , black or violet cords , and three violet or red tassels on each side . A priest uses a black and white cord with a single tassel on each side , and a deacon a hat without tassels . A Doctor of Divinity may have cords interwoven with red and a hat appropriate to the degree , and members of the Ecclesiastical Household add a Tudor rose on the front of the hat . According to Boutell 's Heraldry , this system represents the practice of the Church in England in the 16th century . 
 Within Presbyterian Church heraldry , a minister 's hat is represented as black with a single tassel on each side , sometimes blue , though a doctoral bonnet or Geneva cap may replace the brimmed hat . Clergy of the Chapel Royal display red tassels . The office of moderator does not have corporate arms , but for official occasions , a moderator may add tassels to his personal arms to indicate parity with offices of other churches : three for a moderator of a presbytery , and six for a moderator of a regional synod . The moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland now uses a differenced version of the General Assembly 's arms , with a hat having a blue cord and ten tassels on each side , and may also show the moderator 's staff , a gold Celtic crosier , behind the shield as can be seen in vol 41 , p 152 of the Scots Public Register . 
 = = = Cross = = = 
 In the Catholic Church , display of a cross behind the shield is restricted to bishops as a mark of their dignity . The cross of an ordinary bishop has a single horizontal bar or traverse , also known as a Latin cross . A patriarch uses the patriarchal cross with two traverses , also called the cross of Lorraine . The papal cross has three traverses , but this is never displayed behind the papal arms . 
 Beginning in the 15th century , the cross with a double traverse is seen on the arms of archbishops , and relates to their processional cross and the jurisdiction it symbolizes . Except for cardinals of the Roman Curia , most cardinals head an archdiocese and use an archiepiscopal cross on their arms . Other cardinals use a simple Latin cross , as is found in the arms of Cardinal Joseph Zen , bishop emeritus of Hong Kong , because Hong Kong is not an archdiocese . 
 Today all cardinals are required to be bishops , but priests named cardinal at an advanced age often petition the Pope for an exception to this rule . Bruno Heim says that since the cross is one heraldic emblem that only bishops have the right to bear , cardinals who are not bishops do not use it . Notable examples are Cardinals Albert <unk> and Avery Dulles ; the latter 's arms do display a cross . 
 = = = Mitre and pallium = = = 
 In the western churches , the mitre was placed above the shield of all persons who were entitled to wear the mitre , including abbots . It substituted for the helmet of military arms , but also appeared as a crest placed atop a helmet , as was common in German heraldry . In the Anglican Churches , the mitre is still placed above the arms of bishops and not an ecclesiastical hat . In the Roman Catholic Church , the use of the mitre above the shield on the personal arms of clergy was suppressed in 1969 , and is now found only on some corporate arms , like those of dioceses . Previously , the mitre was often included under the hat , and even in the arms of a cardinal , the mitre was not entirely displaced . 
 The mitre may be shown in all sorts of colours . It may be represented either gold or jewelled , the former more common in English heraldry . A form of mitre with coronet is proper to the Bishop of Durham because of his role as Prince @-@ Bishop of the palatinate of Durham . For similar reasons the Bishop of Durham and some other bishops display a sword behind the shield , pointed downward to signify a former civil jurisdiction . 
 The pallium is a distinctive vestment of metropolitan archbishops , and may be found in their bearings as well as the corporate arms of archdioceses , displayed either above or below the shield . The pallium is sometimes seen within the shield itself . With the exception of York , the archiepiscopal dioceses in England and Ireland include the pallium within the shield . 
 = = = Crosier = = = 
 The crosier was displayed as a symbol of pastoral jurisdiction by bishops , abbots , abbesses , and cardinals even if they were not bishops . The crosier of a bishop is turned outward or to the right . Frequently the crosier of an abbot or abbess is turned inward , either toward the mitre or to the left , but this distinction is disputed and is not an absolute rule . Pope Alexander VII decreed in 1659 that the <unk> of abbots include a <unk> or veil , but this is not customary in English heraldry . The veil may have arisen because abbots , unlike bishops , did not wear gloves when carrying an actual crosier . Because the cross has similar symbolism , the crosier was suppressed for cardinals and bishops by the Catholic Church in 1969 , and is now used only on some corporate arms , and the personal arms of abbots and some abbesses . In English custom and in the Anglican Churches , two <unk> are often found crossed in saltire behind the shield . In the Lutheran Church of Sweden , the crosier is displayed in the arms of bishops in office but is removed when a bishop retires . 
 A <unk> or knobbed staff is shown behind the arms of some priors and <unk> as a symbol of office analogous to the crosier . Arms of priors from the 15th century had a banner surrounding the shield , but today this is often a rosary . 
 = = = Mantle = = = 
 <unk> was originally a piece of material attached to a helmet and covering the shoulders , possibly to protect from the sun . In secular heraldry the mantling was depicted shredded , as if from battle . In the 17th and 18th centuries , another form of mantling called a " robe of estate " became prominent . This form is used especially in the Orthodox Churches , where bishops display a mantle tied with cords and tassels above the shield . The heraldic mantle is similar to the <unk> , and represents the bishop 's authority . It can also be found in the arms of the Grand Master of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta . 
 The outside of the mantle may be any color , typically red , while the inside is white or sometimes yellow to distinguish it from a secular mantle . David Johnson suggested that the mantle of all bishops should be white inside , excepting only patriarchs who use ermine , to indicate that all bishops are equally bishops . Above the mantle is a mitre ( of the Eastern style ) between a processional cross and a crosier . The earliest examples of the arms of Orthodox hierarchs have the cross to the dexter of the mitre and the bishop 's staff to sinister , but opposite examples exist . An abbot ( archimandrite or hegumen ) should display a veiled abbot 's staff to distinguish it from the bishop 's staff . 
 <unk> and priests would use a less ornate mantle in their arms , and an ecclesiastical hat of the style they wear liturgically . Although an Orthodox monk ( not an abbot ) displaying personal arms is rare , a <unk> ( monk who has been ordained a priest ) would appropriately display a monastic hat ( <unk> ) and a black cloak or veil suggestive of his attire , and a <unk> ( monastic deacon ) would display an <unk> behind the shield . 
 A shield in front of a mantle or cloak may be found among bishops of the Eastern Catholic Churches . However , some Eastern ecclesiastical variations omit the mantle but retain the mitre , cross and staff . Maronite bishops traditionally display a pastoral staff behind the shield , topped with a globe and cross or a cross within a globe . Eastern Catholic bishops may follow the Roman style with a low crowned , wide brimmed ecclesiastical hat , although the shield itself is often rendered in a Byzantine artistic style , and a mitre if present would be in the appropriate liturgical style . 
 = = = Motto = = = 
 A motto is a short phrase usually appearing below the shield as a statement of belief . Catholic bishops and Presbyterian churches use a motto in their arms , though it is rare among Anglican bishops . A notable exception is the motto on the coat of arms of Rowan Williams , former Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 Gustavo Testa , created cardinal in December 1959 , quickly selected as his arms a shield with the words sola gratia tua and the motto et patria et cor in order to meet a publishing deadline . Literally these phrases mean " only by your favor " and " both fatherland and heart " . Testa explained to Pope John XXIII that the shield meant " I am a cardinal because of you alone " , and the motto meant " because I am from Bergamo and a friend " . 
 = = Papal insignia = = 
 Saint Peter was represented holding keys as early as the fifth century . As the Roman Catholic Church considers him the first pope and bishop of Rome , the keys were adopted as a papal emblem ; they first appear with papal arms in the 13th century . Two keys perpendicular were often used on coins , but beginning in the 15th century were used to represent St. Peter 's Basilica . Perpendicular keys last appeared in the shield of the papacy in 1555 , after which the crossed keys are used exclusively . The keys are gold and silver , with the gold key placed to dexter ( viewer 's left ) on the personal arms of the Pope , although two silver keys or two gold keys were used late into the 16th century . The keys as a symbol of Saint Peter may be found within many coats of arms ; the coat of arms of the Prince @-@ Archbishopric of Bremen displayed two argent ( silver ) crossed keys as Saint Peter is the patron saint of the <unk> archiepiscopal cathedral . 
 The Papal Tiara or <unk> is the three @-@ tiered crown used by the Pope as a sovereign power . It is first found as an independent emblem in the 13th century , though at that time with only one coronet . In the 15th century , the tiara was combined with the keys above the papal shield . The tiara and keys together within a shield form the arms of Vatican City . In heraldry , the white tiara is depicted with a bulbous shape and with two attached red strips called lappets or <unk> . The coat of arms of Pope Benedict XVI sparked controversy by displaying a mitre and pallium instead of the customary tiara . 
 Besides the Holy See , another Catholic see has the right to bear the triple tiara in its coat of arms : the Patriarchate of Lisbon . The title of Patriarch of Lisbon was created in 1716 and is held by the archbishop of Lisbon since 1740 . While the coat of arms of the Holy See combines the tiara with the crossed keys of St. Peter , that of the Lisbon Patriarchate combines it with a processional cross and a pastoral staff . 
 The red and gold striped ombrellino or pavilion was originally a processional canopy or sunshade and can be found so depicted as early as the 12th century . The earliest use of the ombrellino in heraldry is in the 1420s when it was placed above the shield of Pope Martin V. It is more commonly used together with the keys , a combination first found under Pope Alexander VI . This combined badge represents the temporal power of Vatican City between Papal reigns , when the acting head of state is the cardinal Camerlengo . The badge first appeared with a cardinal 's personal arms on coins minted by order of the Camerlengo , Cardinal <unk> , during the inter @-@ regnum of 1521 . During the 17th and 18th centuries , it appeared on coins minted sede vacante by papal legates , and on coins minted in 1746 and 1771 while a pope reigned . The ombrellino appears in the arms of basilicas since the 16th century , with ornamentation for major basilicas . If found in a family 's coat of arms , it indicates that a relative had been pope . 
 The papal coats of arms are often depicted with angels as supporters . Other Catholic or Anglican clergy do not use supporters unless they were awarded as a personal honor , or were inherited with family arms . Some cathedral arms use a single chair ( cathedra ) as a supporter . 
 = = Chivalric insignia = = 
 Roman Catholic clergy may not display insignia of knighthood in their arms , except awards received in the Order of the Holy Sepulchre or the Sovereign Military Order of Malta . If entitled , Roman Catholic clergy may display the red Jerusalem Cross for the former or the Maltese cross for the latter behind the shield , or may display the ribbon of their rank in the order . This restriction does not apply to laymen who have been knighted in any royal or Papal order , who may display the insignia of their rank , either a ribbon at the base of the shield or a chain surrounding the shield . 
 Church of England clergy may display chivalric insignia . The Dean of Westminster is also the Dean of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath , and displays the civil badge of that order . 
 = Marwari horse = 
 The Marwari or Malani is a rare breed of horse from the Marwar ( or Jodhpur ) region of India . Known for its inward @-@ turning ear tips , it comes in all equine colours , although pinto patterns tend to be the most popular with buyers and breeders . It is known for its hardiness , and is quite similar to the Kathiawari , another Indian breed from the Kathiawar region southwest of Marwar . Many breed members exhibit a natural ambling gait . The Marwari are descended from native Indian ponies crossed with Arabian horses , possibly with some Mongolian influence . 
 The Rathores , traditional rulers of the Marwar region of western India , were the first to breed the Marwari . Beginning in the 12th century , they espoused strict breeding that promoted purity and hardiness . Used throughout history as a cavalry horse by the people of the Marwar region , the Marwari was noted for its loyalty and bravery in battle . The breed deteriorated in the 1930s , when poor management practices resulted in a reduction of the breeding stock , but today has regained some of its popularity . The Marwari is used for light draught and agricultural work , as well as riding and packing . In 1995 , a breed society was formed for the Marwari in India . The exportation of Marwaris was banned for decades , but between 2000 and 2006 , a small number of exports were allowed . Since 2008 , visas allowing temporary travel of Marwaris outside India have been available in small numbers . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Marwari averages between 15 and 16 hands ( 60 and 64 inches , 152 and 163 cm ) high . Horses originating in different parts of India tend to be of different heights , with the breed having an outside range of 14 to 17 hands ( 56 to 68 inches , 142 to 173 cm ) high . They can be bay , grey , chestnut , palomino , piebald , or skewbald . Although white horses are bred specifically for religious use in India , they are generally not accepted into Marwari stud books . Gray horses are considered auspicious , and tend to be the most valuable , with piebald and skewbald horses the second @-@ most favoured . Black horses are considered unlucky , as the colour is a symbol of death and darkness . Horses that have the white markings of a blaze and four white socks are considered lucky . 
 The facial profile is straight , and the ears are pointed with inward turning tips . The neck is slender , running into pronounced withers , a deep chest , and fairly straight shoulders . Marwaris generally have a long back and sloping croup . The legs tend to be slender and the hooves small but well @-@ formed . Members of the breed are hardy and easy keepers , but they can also be of tenacious and unpredictable temperaments . They are quite similar to the Kathiawari horse , another breed from India , having much of the same history and physical features . The main difference between the Marwari and the Kathiawari is their original geographic origin – Marwaris are mainly from the Marwar region while Kathiawaris are from the Kathiawar peninsula . Kathiawaris tend to have slight facial differences from the Marwari , and are slightly taller in general . 
 The Marwari often exhibits a natural ambling gait , close to a pace , called the <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . Hair whorls and their placement are important to breeders of Marwaris . Horses with long whorls down the neck are called <unk> and considered lucky , while horses with whorls below their eyes are called <unk> and are unpopular with buyers . <unk> on the fetlocks are thought to bring victory . The horses are expected to have correct proportions , based on the width of a finger , said to be the equal of five grains of barley . For example , the length of the face should be between 28 and 40 fingers , and the length from the poll to the dock should be four times the length of the face . 
 = = History = = 
 The Marwari is descended from native Indian ponies crossed with Arabian horses . The ponies were small and hardy , but with poor conformation ; the influence of the Arabian blood improved the appearance without compromising the hardiness . The Arabians possibly came ashore from a cargo ship wrecked off India 's west coast . Legend in India states that the Arabian ship , containing seven Arabian horses of good breeding , was shipwrecked off the shore of the <unk> District . These horses were then taken to the Marwar district and used as foundation bloodstock for the Marwari . There is also the possibility of some Mongolian influence from the north . The breed probably originated in northwest India on the Afghanistan border , as well as in Uzbekistan , Kazakhstan , and Turkmenistan , and takes its name from the Marwar region ( also called the Jodhpur region ) of India . 
 The Rathores , rulers of Marwar and successful Rajput cavalry , were the traditional breeders of the Marwari . The Rathores were forced from their Kingdom of <unk> in 1193 , and withdrew into the Great Indian and Thar Deserts . The Marwari was vital to their survival , and during the 12th century they followed strict selective breeding processes , keeping the finest stallions for the use of their subjects . During this time , the horses were considered divine beings , and at times they were only allowed to be ridden by members of the Rajput families and the Kshatriyas warrior caste . When the Moguls captured northern India in the early 16th century they brought Turkoman horses that were probably used to supplement the breeding of the Marwari . Marwaris were renowned during this period for their bravery and courage in battle , as well as their loyalty to their riders . During the late 16th century , the Rajputs of Marwar , under the leadership of Moghul emperor Akbar , formed a cavalry force over 50 @,@ 000 strong . The Rathores believed that the Marwari horse could only leave a battlefield under one of three conditions – victory , death , or carrying a wounded master to safety . The horses were trained to be extremely responsive in battlefield conditions , and were practised in complex riding maneuvers . Over 300 years later , during the First World War , Marwar lancers under Sir Pratap Singh assisted the British . 
 = = = 1900s to today = = = 
 The period of the British Raj hastened the Marwari 's downfall , as did the eventual independence of India . The British occupiers preferred other breeds , and tried to eliminate the Marwari , along with the Kathiawari . The British instead preferred Thoroughbreds and polo ponies , and reduced the reputation of the Marwari to the point where even the inward @-@ turning ears of the breed were mocked as the " mark of a native horse " . During the 1930s the Marwari deteriorated , with breeding stock diminishing and becoming of poorer quality due to poor breeding practices . Indian independence , along with the obsolescence of warriors on horseback , led to a decreased need for the Marwari and many animals were subsequently killed . In the 1950s many Indian noblemen lost their land and hence much of their ability to take care of animals , resulting in many Marwari horses being sold as pack horses , castrated , or killed . The breed was on the verge of extinction until the intervention of Maharaja <unk> Singhji in the first half of the 20th century saved the Marwari . His work was carried on by his grandson , Maharaja Gaj Singh II . 
 A British horsewoman named Francesca Kelly founded a group called Marwari Bloodlines in 1995 , with the goal of promoting and preserving the Marwari horse around the world . In 1999 , Kelly and <unk> Singh <unk> , a descendant of Indian nobility , led a group that founded the Indigenous Horse Society of India ( of which the Marwari Horse Society is part ) , a group that works with the government , breeders , and the public to promote and conserve the breed . Kelly and <unk> also entered and won endurance races at the Indian national equestrian games , convincing the Equestrian Federation of India to sanction a national show for indigenous horses – the first in the country . The pair worked with other experts from the Indigenous Horse Society to develop the first breed standards . 
 The government of India had originally banned the export of indigenous horse breeds , although not polo ponies or Thoroughbreds , in 1952 . This ban was partially lifted in 1999 , when a small number of indigenous horses could be exported after receiving a special license . Kelly imported the first Marwari horse into the United States in 2000 . Over the next seven years , 21 horses were exported , until , in 2006 , licenses stopped being granted over concerns that native breeding populations were being threatened . One of the last Marwaris to be exported was the first to be imported to Europe , in 2006 , when a stallion was given to the French Living Museum of the Horse . In 2008 , the Indian government began granting licenses for " temporary exports " of up to one year , to allow horses to be exhibited in other countries . This was in response to breeders and the breed society , who felt they were not being allowed a fair chance to exhibit their animals . 
 In late 2007 plans were announced to create a stud book for the breed , a collaborative venture between the Marwari Horse Society of India and the Indian government . A registration process was initiated in 2009 , when it was announced that the Marwari Horse Society had become a government body , the only government @-@ authorized registration society for Marwari horses . The registration process includes an evaluation of the horse against the breed standards , during which unique identification marks and physical dimensions are recorded . After the evaluation , the horse is cold branded with its registration number and photographed . In late 2009 the Indian government announced that the Marwari horse , along with other Indian horse breeds , would be commemorated on a set of stamps issued by that country . 
 = = Genetic studies = = 
 As a direct result of indiscriminate breeding practices , as of 2001 only a few thousand purebred Marwaris existed . Research studies have been conducted to examine the genetics of the Marwari and its relationship to other Indian and non @-@ Indian horse breeds . Six different breeds have been identified in India : the Marwari , Kathiawari , Spiti pony , Bhutia pony , Manipuri Pony , and <unk> . These six are distinct from each other in terms of unique performance traits and different <unk> conditions in the various areas of India where they originated . A 2005 study was conducted to identify past genetic bottlenecks in the Marwari . The study found that , in the DNA of the horses tested , there was no evidence of a genetic bottleneck in the breed 's history . However , since the population has decreased rapidly in past decades , bottlenecks may have occurred that were not identified in the study . In 2007 , a study was conducted to assess genetic variation among all Indian horse breeds except the Kathiawari . Based on analysis of microsatellite DNA , the Marwari was found to be the most genetically distinct breed of the five studied , and was most distant from the Manipuri ; none of the breeds were found to have close genetic ties to the Thoroughbred . The Marwari was distinguishable from the other breeds in terms of both physical characteristics ( mainly height ) and environmental adaptability . The physical differences were attributed to differing ancestries : the Marwari are closely associated with the Arabian horse , while the four other breeds are supposedly descended from the Tibetan pony . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Marwari is used for riding , packing and light draught , and agricultural work . Marwaris are often crossed with Thoroughbreds to produce a larger horse with more versatility . Despite the fact that the breed is indigenous to the country , cavalry units of the Indian military make little use of the horses , although they are popular in the Jodhpur and Jaipur areas of Rajasthan , India . They are particularly suited to dressage , in part due to a natural tendency to perform . Marwaris are also used to play polo , sometimes playing against Thoroughbreds . Within the Marwari breed was a strain known as the <unk> , believed by local people to be " born to dance " . Decorated in silver , jewels , and bells , these horses were trained to perform complex prancing and leaping movements at many ceremonies , including weddings . Although the <unk> strain is extinct today , horses trained in those skills are still in demand in rural India . 
 = Hanford Site = 
 The Hanford Site is a mostly decommissioned nuclear production complex operated by the United States federal government on the Columbia River in the U.S. state of Washington . The site has been known by many names , including : Hanford Project , Hanford Works , Hanford Engineer Works and Hanford Nuclear Reservation . Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project in Hanford , south @-@ central Washington , the site was home to the B Reactor , the first full @-@ scale plutonium production reactor in the world . Plutonium manufactured at the site was used in the first nuclear bomb , tested at the Trinity site , and in Fat Man , the bomb detonated over Nagasaki , Japan . 
 During the Cold War , the project expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five large plutonium processing complexes , which produced plutonium for most of the more than 60 @,@ 000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal . Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period , and Hanford scientists produced major technological achievements . Many early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate , and government documents have confirmed that Hanford 's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials into the air and the Columbia River . 
 The weapons production reactors were decommissioned at the end of the Cold War , and decades of manufacturing left behind 53 million US gallons ( 200 @,@ 000 m3 ) of high @-@ level radioactive waste stored within 177 storage tanks , an additional 25 million cubic feet ( 710 @,@ 000 m3 ) of solid radioactive waste , and 200 square miles ( 520 km2 ) of contaminated groundwater beneath the site . In 2011 , DOE emptied 149 single @-@ shell tanks by pumping nearly all of the liquid waste out into 28 newer double @-@ shell tanks . DOE later found water intruding into at least 14 single @-@ shell tanks and that one of them had been leaking about 640 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 400 l ; 530 imp gal ) per year into the ground since about 2010 . In 2012 , DOE discovered a leak also from a double @-@ shell tank caused by construction flaws and corrosion in the bottom , and that 12 double @-@ shell tanks have similar construction flaws . Since then , DOE changed to monitoring single @-@ shell tanks monthly and double @-@ shell tanks every 3 years , and also changed monitoring methods . In March 2014 , DOE announced further delays in the construction of the Waste Treatment Plant , which will affect the schedule for removing waste from the tanks . Intermittent discoveries of undocumented contamination have slowed the pace and raised the cost of cleanup . 
 In 2007 , the Hanford site represented two @-@ thirds of the nation 's high @-@ level radioactive waste by volume . Hanford is currently the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation 's largest environmental cleanup . Besides the cleanup project , Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant , the Columbia Generating Station , and various centers for scientific research and development , such as the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the LIGO Hanford Observatory . 
 On November 10 , 2015 , it was designated as part of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park alongside other sites in Oak Ridge and Los Alamos . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Hanford Site occupies 586 square miles ( 1 @,@ 518 km2 ) — roughly equivalent to half of the total area of Rhode Island — within Benton County , Washington . This land is closed to the general public . It is a desert environment receiving under 10 inches of annual precipitation , covered mostly by shrub @-@ steppe vegetation . The Columbia River flows along the site for approximately 50 miles ( 80 km ) , forming its northern and eastern boundary . The original site was 670 square miles ( 1 @,@ 740 km2 ) and included buffer areas across the river in Grant and Franklin counties . Some of this land has been returned to private use and is now covered with orchards and irrigated fields . In 2000 , large portions of the site were turned over to the Hanford Reach National Monument . The site is divided by function into three main areas . The nuclear reactors were located along the river in an area designated as the 100 Area ; the chemical separations complexes were located inland in the Central Plateau , designated as the 200 Area ; and various support facilities were located in the southeast corner of the site , designated as the 300 Area . 
 The site is bordered on the southeast by the Tri @-@ Cities , a metropolitan area composed of Richland , Kennewick , Pasco , and smaller communities , and home to over 230 @,@ 000 residents . Hanford is a primary economic base for these cities . 
 = = Climate = = 
 = = Early history = = 
 The confluence of the Yakima , Snake , and Columbia rivers has been a meeting place for native peoples for centuries . The archaeological record of Native American habitation of this area stretches back over ten thousand years . Tribes and nations including the Yakama , Nez Perce , and Umatilla used the area for hunting , fishing , and gathering plant foods . Hanford archaeologists have identified numerous Native American sites , including " pit house villages , open campsites , fishing sites , hunting / kill sites , game drive complexes , quarries , and spirit quest sites " , and two archaeological sites were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1976 . Native American use of the area continued into the 20th century , even as the tribes were relocated to reservations . The Wanapum people were never forced onto a reservation , and they lived along the Columbia River in the Priest Rapids Valley until 1943 . Euro @-@ Americans began to settle the region in the 1860s , initially along the Columbia River south of Priest Rapids . They established farms and orchards supported by small @-@ scale irrigation projects and railroad transportation , with small town centers at Hanford , White Bluffs , and Richland . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 During World War II , the Uranium Committee of the federal Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) sponsored an intensive research project on plutonium . The research contract was awarded to scientists at the University of Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory ( Met Lab ) . At the time , plutonium was a rare element that had only recently been isolated in a University of California laboratory . The Met Lab researchers worked on producing chain @-@ reacting " piles " of uranium to convert it to plutonium and finding ways to separate plutonium from uranium . The program was accelerated in 1942 , as the United States government became concerned that scientists in Nazi Germany were developing a nuclear weapons program . 
 = = = Site selection = = = 
 In September 1942 , the Army Corps of Engineers placed the newly formed Manhattan Project under the command of General Leslie R. Groves , charging him with the construction of industrial @-@ size plants for manufacturing plutonium and uranium . Groves recruited the DuPont Company to be the prime contractor for the construction of the plutonium production complex . DuPont recommended that it be located far away from the existing uranium production facility at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . The ideal site was described by these criteria : 
 A large and remote tract of land 
 A " hazardous manufacturing area " of at least 12 by 16 miles ( 19 by 26 km ) 
 Space for laboratory facilities at least 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the nearest reactor or separations plant 
 No towns of more than 1 @,@ 000 people closer than 20 miles ( 32 km ) from the hazardous rectangle 
 No main highway , railway , or employee village closer than 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the hazardous rectangle 
 A clean and abundant water supply 
 A large electric power supply 
 Ground that could bear heavy loads . 
 In December 1942 , Groves dispatched his assistant Colonel Franklin T. Matthias and DuPont engineers to scout potential sites . Matthias reported that Hanford was " ideal in virtually all respects , " except for the farming towns of White Bluffs and Hanford . General Groves visited the site in January and established the Hanford Engineer Works , codenamed " Site W " . The federal government quickly acquired the land under its eminent domain authority and relocated some 1 @,@ 500 residents of Hanford , White Bluffs , and nearby settlements , as well as the Wanapum people , Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation , the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation , and the Nez Perce Tribe . 
 = = = Construction begins = = = 
 The Hanford Engineer Works ( HEW ) broke ground in March 1943 and immediately launched a massive and technically challenging construction project . DuPont advertised for workers in newspapers for an unspecified " war construction project " in southeastern Washington , offering " attractive scale of wages " and living facilities . 
 The construction workers ( who reached a peak of 44 @,@ 900 in June 1944 ) lived in a construction camp near the old Hanford townsite . The administrators and engineers lived in the government town established at Richland Village , which eventually had accommodation in 4 @,@ 300 family units and 25 dormitories . 
 Construction of the nuclear facilities proceeded rapidly . Before the end of the war in August 1945 , the HEW built 554 buildings at Hanford , including three nuclear reactors ( 105 @-@ B , 105 @-@ D , and 105 @-@ F ) and three plutonium processing canyons ( 221 @-@ T , 221 @-@ B , and 221 @-@ U ) , each 250 meters ( 820 ft ) long . 
 To receive the radioactive wastes from the chemical separations process , the HEW built " tank farms " consisting of 64 single @-@ shell underground waste tanks ( 241 @-@ B , 241 @-@ C , 241 @-@ T , and 241 @-@ U ) . The project required 386 miles ( 621 km ) of roads , 158 miles ( 254 km ) of railway , and four electrical substations . The HEW used 780 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 600 @,@ 000 m3 ) of concrete and 40 @,@ 000 short tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) of structural steel and consumed $ 230 million between 1943 and 1946 . 
 = = = Plutonium production = = = 
 The B Reactor ( 105 @-@ B ) at Hanford was the first large @-@ scale plutonium production reactor in the world . It was designed and built by DuPont based on an experimental design by Enrico Fermi , and originally operated at 250 megawatts ( thermal ) . The reactor was graphite moderated and water cooled . It consisted of a 28 @-@ by @-@ 36 @-@ foot ( 8 @.@ 5 by 11 @.@ 0 m ) , 1 @,@ 200 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 1 @,@ 100 t ) graphite cylinder lying on its side , penetrated through its entire length horizontally by 2 @,@ 004 aluminium tubes . Two hundred short tons ( 180 t ) of uranium slugs , 1 @.@ 625 inches ( 4 @.@ 13 cm ) diameter by 8 inches ( 20 cm ) long , sealed in aluminium cans went into the tubes . Cooling water was pumped through the aluminium tubes around the uranium slugs at the rate of 30 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 110 @,@ 000 L ) per minute . 
 Construction on B Reactor began in August 1943 and was completed on September 13 , 1944 . The reactor went critical in late September and , after overcoming nuclear poisoning , produced its first plutonium on November 6 , 1944 . Plutonium was produced in the Hanford reactors when a uranium @-@ 238 atom in a fuel slug absorbed a neutron to form uranium @-@ 239 . U @-@ 239 rapidly undergoes beta decay to form neptunium @-@ 239 , which rapidly undergoes a second beta decay to form plutonium @-@ 239 . The irradiated fuel slugs were transported by rail to three huge remotely operated chemical separation plants called " canyons " that were about 10 miles ( 16 km ) away . A series of chemical processing steps separated the small amount of plutonium that was produced from the remaining uranium and the fission waste products . This first batch of plutonium was refined in the 221 @-@ T plant from December 26 , 1944 , to February 2 , 1945 , and delivered to the Los Alamos laboratory in New Mexico on February 5 , 1945 . 
 Two identical reactors , D Reactor and F reactor , came online in December 1944 and February 1945 , respectively . By April 1945 , shipments of plutonium were headed to Los Alamos every five days , and Hanford soon provided enough material for the bombs tested at Trinity and dropped over Nagasaki . Throughout this period , the Manhattan Project maintained a top secret classification . Until news arrived of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima , fewer than one percent of Hanford 's workers knew they were working on a nuclear weapons project . General Groves noted in his memoirs that " We made certain that each member of the project thoroughly understood his part in the total effort ; that , and nothing more . " 
 Initially six reactors or " piles " were proposed , when the plutonium was to be used in the gun @-@ type Thin Man bomb . In mid @-@ 1944 a simple gun @-@ type bomb was found to be impractical for plutonium , and the more advanced Fat Man bomb required less plutonium . The number of piles was reduced to four and then three ; and the number of chemical separation plants from four to three . 
 = = = Technological innovations = = = 
 In the short time frame of the Manhattan Project , Hanford engineers produced many significant technological advances . As no one had ever built an industrial @-@ scale nuclear reactor before , scientists were unsure how much heat would be generated by fission during normal operations . Seeking the greatest possible production while maintaining an adequate safety margin , DuPont engineers installed ammonia @-@ based refrigeration systems with the D and F reactors to further chill the river water before its use as reactor coolant . 
 Another difficulty the engineers struggled with was how to deal with radioactive contamination . Once the canyons began processing irradiated slugs , the machinery would become so radioactive that it would be unsafe for humans ever to come in contact with it . The engineers therefore had to devise methods to allow for the replacement of any component via remote control . They came up with a modular cell concept , which allowed major components to be removed and replaced by an operator sitting in a heavily shielded overhead crane . This method required early practical application of two technologies that later gained widespread use : Teflon , used as a gasket material , and closed @-@ circuit television , used to give the crane operator a better view of the process . 
 = = Cold War expansion = = 
 In September 1946 , the General Electric Company assumed management of the Hanford Works under the supervision of the newly created Atomic Energy Commission . As the Cold War began , the United States faced a new strategic threat in the rise of the Soviet nuclear weapons program . In August 1947 , the Hanford Works announced funding for the construction of two new weapons reactors and research leading to the development of a new chemical separations process . With this announcement , Hanford entered a new phase of expansion . 
 By 1963 , the Hanford Site was home to nine nuclear reactors along the Columbia River , five reprocessing plants on the central plateau , and more than 900 support buildings and radiological laboratories around the site . Extensive modifications and upgrades were made to the original three World War II reactors , and a total of 177 underground waste tanks were built . Hanford was at its peak production from 1956 to 1965 . Over the entire 40 years of operations , the site produced about 63 short tons ( 57 t ) of plutonium , supplying the majority of the 60 @,@ 000 weapons in the U.S. arsenal . Uranium @-@ 233 was also produced . 
 = = = Decommissioning = = = 
 Most of the reactors were shut down between 1964 and 1971 , with an average individual life span of 22 years . The last reactor , N Reactor , continued to operate as a dual @-@ purpose reactor , being both a power reactor used to feed the civilian electrical grid via the Washington Public Power Supply System ( <unk> ) and a plutonium production reactor for nuclear weapons . N Reactor operated until 1987 . Since then , most of the Hanford reactors have been entombed ( " cocooned " ) to allow the radioactive materials to decay , and the surrounding structures have been removed and buried . The B @-@ Reactor has not been cocooned and is accessible to the public on occasional guided tours . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992 , and some historians advocate converting it into a museum . B reactor was designated a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service on August 19 , 2008 . 
 = = Later operations = = 
 The United States Department of Energy assumed control of the Hanford Site in 1977 . Although uranium enrichment and plutonium breeding were slowly phased out , the nuclear legacy left an indelible mark on the Tri @-@ Cities . Since World War II , the area had developed from a small farming community to a booming " Atomic Frontier " to a powerhouse of the nuclear @-@ industrial complex . Decades of federal investment created a community of highly skilled scientists and engineers . As a result of this concentration of specialized skills , the Hanford Site was able to diversify its operations to include scientific research , test facilities , and commercial nuclear power production . 
 As of 2013 , operational facilities located at the Hanford Site include : 
 The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory , owned by the Department of Energy and operated by Battelle Memorial Institute 
 The Fast Flux Test Facility ( <unk> ) , a national research facility in operation from 1980 to 1992 ( its last fuel was removed in 2008 ) 
 LIGO 's Hanford Observatory , an interferometer searching for gravitational waves 
 Columbia Generating Station , a commercial nuclear power plant operated by Energy Northwest . 
 A US Navy nuclear submarine reactor dry storage site contains sealed reactor sections of 114 US Navy submarines ( as of 2008 ) . 
 The Department of Energy and its contractors offer tours of the site . Sixty public tours , each five hours long , were planned for 2009 . The tours are free , require advance reservation via the department 's web site , and are limited to U.S. citizens at least 18 years of age . 
 = = Environmental concerns = = 
 A huge volume of water from the Columbia River was required to dissipate the heat produced by Hanford 's nuclear reactors . From 1944 to 1971 , pump systems drew cooling water from the river and , after treating this water for use by the reactors , returned it to the river . Before its release into the river , the used water was held in large tanks known as retention basins for up to six hours . Longer @-@ lived isotopes were not affected by this retention , and several terabecquerels entered the river every day . The federal government kept knowledge about these radioactive releases secret . Radiation was later measured 200 miles downstream as far west as the Washington and Oregon coasts . 
 The plutonium separation process resulted in the release of radioactive isotopes into the air , which were carried by the wind throughout southeastern Washington and into parts of Idaho , Montana , Oregon , and British Columbia . <unk> were exposed to radionuclides , particularly iodine @-@ 131 , with the heaviest releases during the period from 1945 to 1951 . These radionuclides entered the food chain via dairy cows grazing on contaminated fields ; hazardous fallout was ingested by communities who consumed radioactive food and milk . Most of these airborne releases were a part of Hanford 's routine operations , while a few of the larger releases occurred in isolated incidents . In 1949 , an intentional release known as the " Green Run " released 8 @,@ 000 curies of iodine @-@ 131 over two days . Another source of contaminated food came from Columbia River fish , an impact felt disproportionately by Native American communities who depended on the river for their customary diets . A U.S. government report released in 1992 estimated that 685 @,@ 000 curies of radioactive iodine @-@ 131 had been released into the river and air from the Hanford site between 1944 and 1947 . 
 Beginning in the 1960s , scientists with the U.S. Public Health Service published reports about radioactivity released from Hanford , and there were protests from the health departments of Oregon and Washington . In response to an article in the Spokane Spokesman Review in September 1985 , the Department of Energy announced to declassify environmental records and , in February 1986 , released 19 @,@ 000 pages of previously unavailable historical documents about Hanford 's operations . The Washington State Department of Health collaborated with the citizen @-@ led Hanford Health Information Network ( <unk> ) to publicize data about the health effects of Hanford 's operations . <unk> reports concluded that residents who lived downwind from Hanford or who used the Columbia River downstream were exposed to elevated doses of radiation that placed them at increased risk for various cancers and other diseases . A mass tort lawsuit brought by two thousand Hanford <unk> against the federal government has been in the court system for many years . Two of six plaintiffs who went to trial in 2005 were awarded $ 500 @,@ 000 in damages . 
 On February 15 , 2013 , Governor Jay Inslee announced that a tank storing radioactive waste at the site had been leaking liquids on average of 150 to 300 gallons per year . He said that the leak posed no immediate health risk to the public , but said that should not be an excuse for not doing anything . On February 22 , 2013 , the Governor stated that " 6 more tanks at Hanford site " were " leaking radioactive waste " As of 2013 , there are 177 tanks at Hanford , 149 of which have a single shell . Historically single shell tanks were used for storing radioactive liquid waste and designed to last 20 years . By 2005 , some liquid waste was transferred from single shell tanks to ( safer ) double shell tanks . A substantial amount of residue remains in the older single shell tanks with one containing an estimated 447 @,@ 000 gallons of radioactive sludge , for example . It is believed that up to six of these " empty " tanks are leaking . Two tanks are reportedly leaking at a rate of 300 gallons ( 1 @,@ 136 liters ) per year each , while the remaining four tanks are leaking at a rate of 15 gallons ( 57 liters ) per year each . 
 Since 2003 , radioactive materials are known to be leaking from Hanford into the environment . " The highest tritium concentration detected in riverbank springs during 2002 was 58 @,@ 000 pCi / L ( 2 @,@ 100 Bq / L ) at the Hanford Townsite . The highest iodine @-@ 129 concentration of 0 @.@ 19 pCi / L ( 0 @.@ 007 Bq / L ) was also found in a Hanford Townsite spring . The WHO guidelines for radionuclides in drinking @-@ water limits levels of iodine @-@ 129 at 1 Bq / L , and tritium at 10 @,@ 000 Bq / L. Concentrations of radionuclides including tritium , technetium @-@ 99 , and iodine @-@ 129 in riverbank springs near the Hanford Townsite have generally been increasing since 1994 . This is an area where a major groundwater plume from the 200 East Area intercepts the river ... Detected radionuclides include strontium @-@ 90 , technetium @-@ 99 , iodine @-@ 129 , uranium @-@ 234 , − 235 , and − 238 , and tritium . Other detected contaminants include arsenic , chromium , chloride , fluoride , nitrate , and sulfate . " 
 = = = Occupational health concerns = = = 
 Since 1987 , workers have reported exposure to harmful vapors after working around underground nuclear storage tanks , with no solution found . More than 40 workers in 2014 alone reported smelling vapors and became ill with " nosebleeds , headaches , watery eyes , burning skin , contact dermatitis , increased heart rate , difficulty breathing , coughing , sore throats , <unk> , dizziness and nausea , ... Several of these workers have long @-@ term disabilities . " Doctors checked workers and cleared them to return to work . Monitors worn by tank workers have found no samples with chemicals close to the federal limit for occupational exposure . 
 In August 2014 , OSHA ordered the facility to rehire a contractor and pay $ 220 @,@ 000 in back wages for firing them for whistleblowing on safety concerns at the site . 
 On November 19 , 2014 , Washington Attorney General Bob Ferguson said the state planned to sue the DOE and its contractor to protect workers from hazardous vapors at Hanford . A 2014 report by the DOE Savannah River National Laboratory initiated by ' Washington River Protection Solutions ' found that DOE 's methods to study vapor releases were inadequate , particularly , that they did not account for short but intense vapor releases . They recommended " proactively sampling the air inside tanks to determine its chemical makeup ; accelerating new practices to prevent worker exposures ; and modifying medical evaluations to reflect how workers are exposed to vapors " . 
 = = Cleanup era = = 
 On June 25 , 1988 , the Hanford site was divided into four areas and proposed for inclusion on the National Priorities List . On May 15 , 1989 , the Washington Department of Ecology , the United States Environmental Protection Agency , and the Department of Energy entered into the Tri @-@ Party Agreement , which provides a legal framework for environmental remediation at Hanford . As of 2014 the agencies are engaged in the world 's largest environmental cleanup , with many challenges to be resolved in the face of overlapping technical , political , regulatory , and cultural interests . The cleanup effort is focused on three outcomes : restoring the Columbia River corridor for other uses , converting the central plateau to long @-@ term waste treatment and storage , and preparing for the future . The cleanup effort is managed by the Department of Energy under the oversight of the two regulatory agencies . A citizen @-@ led Hanford Advisory Board provides recommendations from community stakeholders , including local and state governments , regional environmental organizations , business interests , and Native American tribes . Citing the 2014 Hanford Lifecycle Scope Schedule and Cost report , the 2014 estimated cost of the remaining Hanford clean up is $ 113 @.@ 6 billion – more than $ 3 billion per year for the next six years , with a lower cost projection of approximately $ 2 billion per year until 2046 . About 11 @,@ 000 workers are on site to consolidate , clean up , and mitigate waste , contaminated buildings , and contaminated soil . Originally scheduled to be complete within thirty years , the cleanup was less than half finished by 2008 . Of the four areas that were formally listed as Superfund sites on October 4 , 1989 , only one has been removed from the list following cleanup . 
 While major releases of radioactive material ended with the reactor shutdown in the 1970s and many of the most dangerous wastes are contained , there are continued concerns about contaminated groundwater headed toward the Columbia River and about workers ' health and safety . 
 The most significant challenge at Hanford is stabilizing the 53 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 l ; 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of high @-@ level radioactive waste stored in 177 underground tanks . By 1998 , about a third of these tanks had leaked waste into the soil and groundwater . As of 2008 , most of the liquid waste has been transferred to more secure double @-@ shelled tanks ; however , 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 l ; 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of liquid waste , together with 27 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 l ; 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of salt cake and sludge , remains in the single @-@ shelled tanks . DOE lacks information about the extent to which the 27 double @-@ shell tanks may be susceptible to corrosion . Without determining the extent to which the factors that contributed to the leak in AY @-@ 102 were similar to the other 27 double @-@ shell tanks , DOE cannot be sure how long its double @-@ shell tanks can safely store waste . That waste was originally scheduled to be removed by 2018 . As of 2008 , the revised deadline was 2040 . Nearby aquifers contain an estimated 270 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 1 @.@ 0 × 1012 l ; 2 @.@ 2 × 1011 imp gal ) of contaminated groundwater as a result of the leaks . As of 2008 , 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 l ; 830 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of radioactive waste is traveling through the groundwater toward the Columbia River . This waste is expected to reach the river in 12 to 50 years if cleanup does not proceed on schedule . The site includes 25 million cubic feet ( 710 @,@ 000 m3 ) of solid radioactive waste . 
 Under the Tri @-@ Party Agreement , lower @-@ level hazardous wastes are buried in huge lined pits that will be sealed and monitored with sophisticated instruments for many years . Disposal of plutonium and other high @-@ level wastes is a more difficult problem that continues to be a subject of intense debate . As an example , plutonium @-@ 239 has a half @-@ life of 24 @,@ 100 years , and a decay of ten half @-@ lives is required before a sample is considered to cease its radioactivity . In 2000 , the Department of Energy awarded a $ 4 @.@ 3 billion contract to Bechtel , a San Francisco @-@ based construction and engineering firm , to build a vitrification plant to combine the dangerous wastes with glass to render them stable . Construction began in 2002 . The plant was originally scheduled to be operational by 2011 , with vitrification completed by 2028 . As of 2012 , according to a study by the General Accounting Office , there were a number of serious unresolved technical and managerial problems . As of 2013 estimated costs were $ 13 @.@ 4 billion with commencement of operations estimated to be in 2022 and about 3 decades of operation . 
 In May 2007 , state and federal officials began closed @-@ door negotiations about the possibility of extending legal cleanup deadlines for waste vitrification in exchange for shifting the focus of the cleanup to urgent priorities , such as groundwater remediation . Those talks stalled in October 2007 . In early 2008 , a $ 600 million cut to the Hanford cleanup budget was proposed . Washington state officials expressed concern about the budget cuts , as well as missed deadlines and recent safety lapses at the site , and threatened to file a lawsuit alleging that the Department of Energy is in violation of environmental laws . They appeared to step back from that threat in April 2008 after another meeting of federal and state officials resulted in progress toward a tentative agreement . 
 During excavations from 2004 to 2007 a sample of purified plutonium was uncovered inside a safe in a waste trench , and has been dated to about the 1940s , making it the second @-@ oldest sample of purified plutonium known to exist . Analyses published in 2009 concluded that the sample originated at Oak Ridge , and was one of several sent to Hanford for optimization tests of the T @-@ Plant until Hanford could produce its own plutonium . Documents refer to such a sample , belonging to " Watt 's group " , which was disposed of in its safe when a radiation leak was suspected . 
 Some of the radioactive waste at Hanford was supposed to be stored in the planned Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository , but after that project was cancelled due to the opposition of citizens of Nevada , Washington State sued . They were joined by South Carolina . Their first suit was dismissed , and second suits have been filed . 
 A potential radioactive leak was reported in 2013 ; the clean up was estimated to have cost $ 40 billion with $ 115 billion more required . 
 = = Hanford organizations = = 
 The Hanford site operations were initially directed by Colonel Franklin Matthias of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . Postwar the Atomic Energy Commission took over , and then the Energy Research and Development Administration . Hanford operations are currently directed by the U.S. Department of Energy . It has been operated under government contract by various private companies over the years – the table which follows summarizes the operating contractors through 2000 . 
 = = Other divisions of the site ( historical ) = = 
 Plutonium Finishing Plant ( <unk> ) – made plutonium metal for use in weapons 
 B Plant , S Plant , T Plant – processing , separation , and extraction of various chemicals and isotopes 
 Health Instruments Section – an attempt to keep workers and the environment safe 
 <unk> Plant / C Plant – recovered wasted uranium from World War II processes 
 Experimental Animal Farm and Aquatic Biology Laboratory 
 Technical Center – radiochemistry , physics , metallurgy , biophysics , radioactive sewer , neutralization , metal fab , fuels manufacturing 
 Tank Farms – storage of liquid nuclear waste 
 Metal Recovery Plant / U Plant – recover uranium from tank farms 
 Uranium <unk> Plant ( aka Uranium Oxide Plant aka UO3 Plant ) – took output from other plants ( i.e. liquid uranyl nitrate hexahydrate from U plant and PUREX plant ) , made uranium trioxide powder 
 Plutonium @-@ Uranium Extraction Plant / PUREX Plant – extracted useful material from spent fuel waste ( also see the PUREX article ) 
 Plutonium Recycle Test Reactor ( <unk> ) – experimented with alternative fuel mixtures 
 Plutonium Fuels Pilot Plant ( <unk> ) – see <unk> 
 = = Historic photos = = 
 = Åråsen Stadion = 
 Åråsen Stadion is an all @-@ seater football stadium located in Lillestrøm , a city east of Oslo in Skedsmo , Norway . With a capacity for 12 @,@ 250 spectators , the venue is home of Norwegian Premier League side Lillestrøm SK ( LSK ) . The venue has four stands , of which the West Stand has luxury boxes and club seating for 700 . Because of the stadium 's proximity to Kjeller Airport , it has retractable floodlights . The record attendance of 13 @,@ 652 dates from 2002 . In addition to league , cup and UEFA Cup matches for LSK , the venue has been used for one Strømmen IF top @-@ league match in 1986 , the UEFA Women 's Euro 1997 , eight other Norway women 's national football team matches , the 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship , and seven Norway national under @-@ 21 football team matches . 
 LSK started purchasing land for their own stadium in 1947 , having previously played at Lillestrøm Stadion . Construction started in 1950 and Åråsen opened on 7 July 1951 , having cost 150 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The grandstand was supplemented with a second stand in 1960 . On 7 April 1967 , the stadium burned down , but was rebuilt by September 1968 . Another stand opened on the east side in 1974 , the same year as LSK was promoted to the 1 @.@ <unk> , then the highest division of Norwegian football . The East Stand was moved to the north side and a new 3 @,@ 700 @-@ seat stand built on the east side in 1978 , which remains today . Between 1999 and 2002 , the other three sides were redeveloped , costing NOK 240 million . This included luxury boxes , a new pitch with under @-@ soil heating , three grandstands , and adjacent commercial and residential property . 
 = = History = = 
 Lillestrøm SK originally used <unk> Stadion in Strømmen for their matches , as there was no suitable stadium in Lillestrøm . On 6 June 1920 , the municipality opened Lillestrøm Stadion , where Lillestrøm SK moved their matches . In 1930 , the club started working on plans for their own stadium . Led by the chairman Erling Nicolaysen , a stadium fund was established , which grew to NOK 200 . However , during the Second World War , the club 's funds eradicated . 
 On 2 June 1947 , the club 's board appointed a committee to work with the stadium issue . They determined that the area <unk> , part of a farm belonging to Knut <unk> , was the ideal location , despite it being fallow and scrub on a marsh . <unk> og <unk> made plans for developing the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ hectare ( 11 @-@ acre ) lot . The purchase was approved by the club 's annual meeting on 29 September . Additional land was bought in 1948 and 1950 , raising the area to 7 @.@ 2 hectares ( 18 acres ) . 
 Construction was mostly done by volunteers ; the building of the stadium required 31 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours in volunteer work and cost NOK 150 @,@ 000 . After the land was cleared , a layer of mixed sand and earth were laid . The pitch , with the dimensions 108 by 68 meters ( 118 by 74 yd ) , was sown in mid @-@ 1950 . The work also included a grandstand , changing rooms , a watering system and kiosks . The stand could accommodate 2 @,@ 500 spectators , and the stadium had a total permitted capacity of 6 @,@ 000 people . The inaugural match was played against Sarpsborg on 7 July 1951 in front of 3 @,@ 500 spectators . A training pitch beside the stadium pitch opened in 1953 . The following year , a new steel entrance was built , following in 1955 with a referees ' changing room and administrative offices . In 1959 , after eight years of planning , construction of an additional terrace started , which opened in 1960 . 
 On 7 April 1967 , the grandstand caught fire and the entire structure burned down beyond repair . The buildings and stands were subsequently demolished . At the same time , the Norwegian Public Roads Administration proposed that the <unk> road , which runs to the south of the stadium , should be moved to run through the stadium , which would have required the stadium to be moved . However , the Public Roads Administration abandoned their plans and a building permit was issued . New changing rooms , club house and terraces were completed in September 1968 . 
 To accommodate increasing interest for the club following good results during the early 1970s , the board approved a new grandstand on the east long side . Construction started in late 1973 , with the stand covering two @-@ thirds of the length of the pitch , and opened ahead of the 1974 season with capacity for 1 @,@ 056 spectators . The club house was expanded to 200 square meters ( 2 @,@ 200 sq ft ) . In 1974 , the club won promotion to the First Division , and the new grandstand was extended by 352 seats . On the west side , two wooden and steel standing terraces were built . The expansion was done with help of volunteer work , with 30 to 40 people helping each weekday evening and up to 80 people helping at the weekends . 
 The grandstand was moved to the north side and a new grandstand with seating for 3 @,@ 700 people was opened on the east end in 1978 . The new stand was the first in Norway to have plastic seats and is the oldest part of the current stadium . Construction cost NOK 2 @.@ 8 million , which was largely loan @-@ financed . Between 1980 and 1986 , the area under the new grandstand was built to include new changing rooms , meeting rooms , offices and other facilities totaling 1 @,@ 300 square meters ( 14 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . Some of the office space was rented out . 
 After five years of planning , construction of a completely renovated stadium started in February 1999 . To finance the stadium , a limited company , Åråsen Stadion AS , was established , and owned by the club , rather than by the limited company which runs the elite team . Only the East Stand from 1978 was kept . In 2000 , new grass was laid on the pitch , replacing the original grass from 1950 . This included installation of under @-@ soil heating and an automatic irrigation sprinkler system . The new pitch had the dimensions 105 @-@ by @-@ 65 @-@ meter ( 115 by 71 yd ) . Combined , this cost NOK 12 million . The first new stand to be completed was the West Stand , which opened ahead of the 2000 season . In addition to luxury boxes , it consists of 6 @,@ 500 square meters ( 70 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of commercial property , including a car dealer , a medical center and a restaurant . 
 The investments at Åråsen cost NOK 800 million , of which NOK 240 million was used on the stadium itself . Other investments in the area were carried out by private investors and public agencies , who bought land from Lillestrøm SK . The training pitch to the north was demolished to make way for student housing for 100 people . The area to the west of the stadium was turned into a car retailer . Immediately surrounding the stadium was a complex of commercial and residential properties . This included a 8 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 91 @,@ 000 sq ft ) section to the north which consists of 96 apartments , some with balconies facing the pitch , and a grocery store . Construction of the South Stand and affiliated buildings started on 15 November 2000 and was completed ahead of the 2002 season . In conjunction with the stand was a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 22 @,@ 000 sq ft ) commercial area rented by Akershus County Municipality , which hosts a psychiatric clinic for children and youth . 
 Because of the stadium 's close proximity to Kjeller Airport , the stadium is limited to a height of 12 meters ( 39 ft ) , which meant the upgrade could not incorporate floodlights . When mounted on four posts , the flood lights need to be 40 meters ( 130 ft ) above ground to give 1 @,@ 200 lux on the field . In 2000 , this caused Lillestrøm SK to have to play their home match in the 2000 – 01 UEFA Cup against Alavés at Marienlyst Stadion in Drammen . In 2001 , an evening league game was played using floodlighting mounted on four temporary cranes . A retractable floodlighting system was installed in January 2002 . 
 In 2006 , team @-@ owner Per Berg stated that Lillestrøm SK would be in need of a new venue and indicated that one could be built at Kjeller , should the airport close . By 2007 , the club 's management was working on ideas to building new stadium , as the luxury boxes were all sold out and the club could not make more than NOK 22 to 23 million per year on commercial income from Åråsen . In 2009 , Lillestrøm launched itself as one of six candidate cities for Norway 's joint bid with Sweden to host Euro 2016 . This would involve building a new venue seating between 35 @,@ 000 and 44 @,@ 000 in Lillestrøm . The stadium would be built in modules , so the upper tiers could be dismounted after the championship and installed on other venues . The proposal was selected as one of four for the bid , but the bid was never sent . In January 2009 , the club sold 25 percent of their ownership in Åråsen Eiendom , which is responsible for operating the commercial facilities at the stadium , to <unk> , a local bank , for NOK 9 million . The club retained full ownership of Åråsen Stadion AS , the company which owns the venue . In a 2012 survey carried out by the Norwegian Players ' Association among away @-@ team captains , Åråsen was found to be the league 's third @-@ best stadium , with a score of 4 @.@ 33 on a scale from one to five . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Åråsen Stadion has a capacity of 12 @,@ 250 spectators , all seated . The stadium consists of four single @-@ tier stands . The western stand is the main stand , with the upper section consisting of luxury boxes and club seating for 700 people . For sponsorship reasons it is known as the Lillestrøm Torv Stand , after a local shopping center . The southern part of the East Stand houses the <unk> , the official LSK supporters ' group , while the northern part has unreserved seating . The South Stand is named for <unk> <unk> , the local newspaper , while the North Stand is named for Legea , a sportswear manufacturer . The latter is used for away fans . The stadium is owned by Åråsen Stadion AS , which is again wholly owned by Lillestrøm SK . Operation of the venue 's commercial properties is done by Åråsen Eiendom AS , which is owned 75 percent by Åråsen Stadion and 25 percent by <unk> . The stadium is within walking distance of both the town center of Lillestrøm and Lillestrøm Station . Lillestrøm SK hold their training sessions in the nearby Lillestrøm Stadion and LSK @-@ Hallen . 
 = = Events = = 
 Åråsen has been the home venue for Lillestrøm SK since the 1951 season and has been the venue for all their home league games . Since the 1975 season , LSK has played every season in the top tier of the league system . Åråsen has also been the venue for most LSK matches in UEFA tournaments , including the Champions League and the UEFA Cup , but the club has previously played some home matches at Ullevaal Stadion in Oslo and Marienlyst Stadion . The record attendance of 13 @,@ 652 spectators was set on 16 May 2002 in the match between Lillestrøm and their rivals Vålerenga . The second @-@ highest attended match was a cup match against Rosenborg in 1993 , which attracted 13 @,@ 595 people . The team 's highest average league attendance was set in the 2007 season , when there was an average of 9 @,@ 018 spectators per match . The team 's season average has been above 6 @,@ 000 during the 2000s , and was as low as 6 @,@ 165 in 2010 and 6 @,@ 448 in 2001 . The team also saw high attendances in the 1970s , attracting its fourth @-@ ever highest average in 1977 with 8 @,@ 430 spectators , and attendances of 6 @,@ 531 and 6 @,@ 346 in 1978 and 1976 , respectively . LSK 's club seats was in 2009 the most expensive tickets in the league , costing NOK 660 per match . 
 When Strømmen IF were promoted to First Division ahead of the 1986 season , the team originally announced that they would play their fall games at Åråsen , as Strømmen Stadion was in need of a new pitch . In the end , Strømmen only played one of their matches at Åråsen , drawing 1 – 1 against Rosenborg on 10 August 1986 in front of 1 @,@ 649 spectators . 
 Norway co @-@ hosted UEFA Women 's Euro 1997 , and three group @-@ stage matches and a semi @-@ final were held at Åråsen . This included Norway playing two matches , against Denmark and Italy , which attracted 4 @,@ 221 and 4 @,@ 067 spectators , respectively . Norway 's national women 's team has also played eight other matches at Åråsen : 3 – 0 against Finland in 1983 , 2 – 2 against Sweden in 1984 , 1 – 0 against Finland in 1985 , 4 – 0 against England in 1997 , 2 – 0 against England in 1998 , 4 – 0 against Ukraine in 2001 , 4 – 1 against Ukraine in 2005 and 3 – 0 against Austria in 2007 . 
 Norway hosted the 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship , with two group @-@ stage matches being played at Åråsen . On 23 July , Slovakia beat the Czech Republic 5 – 2 , and on 26 July Germany beat Belgium 2 – 1 . The former attracted 611 spectators . The Norway national under @-@ 21 football team has played seven home matches at Åråsen : 1 – 3 against Sweden in 1979 , 1 – 2 against France in 1987 , 3 – 2 against San Marino in 1992 , 0 – 0 against Georgia in 1999 , 3 – 0 against Germany in 2001 , 0 – 0 against Slovenia in 2004 , and 1 – 0 against Turkey in 2007 . 
 = Poetry = 
 Poetry is a form of literature that uses aesthetic and rhythmic qualities of language — such as <unk> , sound symbolism , and metre — to evoke meanings in addition to , or in place of , the prosaic ostensible meaning . 
 Poetry has a long history , dating back to the Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh . Early poems evolved from folk songs such as the Chinese Shijing , or from a need to retell oral epics , as with the Sanskrit Vedas , Zoroastrian <unk> , and the Homeric epics , the Iliad and the Odyssey . Ancient attempts to define poetry , such as Aristotle 's Poetics , focused on the uses of speech in rhetoric , drama , song and comedy . Later attempts concentrated on features such as repetition , verse form and rhyme , and emphasized the aesthetics which distinguish poetry from more objectively informative , prosaic forms of writing . From the mid @-@ 20th century , poetry has sometimes been more generally regarded as a fundamental creative act employing language . 
 Poetry uses forms and conventions to suggest differential interpretation to words , or to evoke emotive responses . Devices such as assonance , alliteration , onomatopoeia and rhythm are sometimes used to achieve musical or incantatory effects . The use of ambiguity , symbolism , irony and other stylistic elements of poetic diction often leaves a poem open to multiple interpretations . Similarly figures of speech such as metaphor , simile and metonymy create a resonance between otherwise disparate images — a layering of meanings , forming connections previously not perceived . Kindred forms of resonance may exist , between individual verses , in their patterns of rhyme or rhythm . 
 Some poetry types are specific to particular cultures and genres and respond to characteristics of the language in which the poet writes . Readers accustomed to identifying poetry with Dante , Goethe , Mickiewicz and Rumi may think of it as written in lines based on rhyme and regular meter ; there are , however , traditions , such as Biblical poetry , that use other means to create rhythm and euphony . Much modern poetry reflects a critique of poetic tradition , playing with and testing , among other things , the principle of euphony itself , sometimes altogether forgoing rhyme or set rhythm . In today 's increasingly globalized world , poets often adapt forms , styles and techniques from diverse cultures and languages . 
 = = History = = 
 Poetry as an art form may predate literacy . The oldest surviving epic poem is the Epic of Gilgamesh , from the 3rd millennium BC in Sumer ( in Mesopotamia , now Iraq ) , which was written in cuneiform script on clay tablets and , later , papyrus . A tablet dating to c . 2000 BC describes an annual rite in which the king symbolically married and mated with the goddess Inanna to ensure fertility and prosperity , and is considered the world 's oldest love poem . Examples of Egyptian epic poetry include The Story of Sinuhe ( c . 1800 BC ) . Other ancient epic poetry includes the Greek epics Iliad and Odyssey , the Avestan books the <unk> Avesta and <unk> , the Roman national epic , Virgil 's Aeneid , and the Indian epics Ramayana and Mahabharata . 
 Epic poetry , including the Indian Vedas , the <unk> , and the Odyssey , appears to have been composed in poetic form to aid memorization and oral transmission , in prehistoric and ancient societies . Other forms of poetry developed directly from folk songs . The earliest entries in the ancient compilation Shijing , were initially lyrics , preceding later entries intended to be read . 
 The efforts of ancient thinkers to determine what makes poetry distinctive as a form , and what distinguishes good poetry from bad , resulted in " poetics " — the study of the aesthetics of poetry . Some ancient poetic traditions ; such as , contextually , Classical Chinese poetry in the case of the Shijing ( Classic of Poetry ) , which records the development of poetic canons with ritual and aesthetic importance . More recently , thinkers have struggled to find a definition that could encompass formal differences as great as those between Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales and Matsuo Bashō 's Oku no Hosomichi , as well as differences in context spanning Tanakh religious poetry , love poetry , and rap . 
 = = = Western traditions = = = 
 Classical thinkers employed classification as a way to define and assess the quality of poetry . Notably , the existing fragments of Aristotle 's Poetics describe three genres of poetry — the epic , the comic , and the tragic — and develop rules to distinguish the highest @-@ quality poetry in each genre , based on the underlying purposes of the genre . Later aestheticians identified three major genres : epic poetry , lyric poetry , and dramatic poetry , treating comedy and tragedy as subgenres of dramatic poetry . 
 Aristotle 's work was influential throughout the Middle East during the Islamic Golden Age , as well as in Europe during the Renaissance . Later poets and aestheticians often distinguished poetry from , and defined it in opposition to prose , which was generally understood as writing with a proclivity to logical explication and a linear narrative structure . 
 This does not imply that poetry is illogical or lacks narration , but rather that poetry is an attempt to render the beautiful or sublime without the burden of engaging the logical or narrative thought process . English Romantic poet John Keats termed this escape from logic " Negative Capability " . This " romantic " approach views form as a key element of successful poetry because form is abstract and distinct from the underlying notional logic . This approach remained influential into the 20th century . 
 During this period , there was also substantially more interaction among the various poetic traditions , in part due to the spread of European colonialism and the attendant rise in global trade . In addition to a boom in translation , during the Romantic period numerous ancient works were rediscovered . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century and 21st @-@ century disputes = = = 
 Some 20th @-@ century literary theorists , relying less on the opposition of prose and poetry , focused on the poet as simply one who creates using language , and poetry as what the poet creates . The underlying concept of the poet as creator is not uncommon , and some modernist poets essentially do not distinguish between the creation of a poem with words , and creative acts in other media . Yet other modernists challenge the very attempt to define poetry as misguided . 
 The rejection of traditional forms and structures for poetry that began in the first half of the 20th century coincided with a questioning of the purpose and meaning of traditional definitions of poetry and of distinctions between poetry and prose , particularly given examples of poetic prose and prosaic poetry . Numerous modernist poets have written in non @-@ traditional forms or in what traditionally would have been considered prose , although their writing was generally infused with poetic diction and often with rhythm and tone established by non @-@ metrical means . While there was a substantial formalist reaction within the modernist schools to the breakdown of structure , this reaction focused as much on the development of new formal structures and syntheses as on the revival of older forms and structures . 
 Recently , postmodernism has come to convey more completely prose and poetry as distinct entities , and also among genres of poetry , as having meaning only as cultural artifacts . Postmodernism goes beyond modernism 's emphasis on the creative role of the poet , to emphasize the role of the reader of a text ( <unk> ) , and to highlight the complex cultural web within which a poem is read . Today , throughout the world , poetry often incorporates poetic form and diction from other cultures and from the past , further confounding attempts at definition and classification that were once sensible within a tradition such as the Western canon . 
 The early 21st century poetic tradition appears to continue to strongly orient itself to earlier precursor poetic traditions such as those initiated by Whitman , Emerson , and Wordsworth . The literary critic Geoffrey Hartman has used the phrase " the anxiety of demand " to describe contemporary response to older poetic traditions as " being fearful that the fact no longer has a form " , building on a trope introduced by Emerson . Emerson had maintained that in the debate concerning poetic structure where either " form " or " fact " could predominate , that one need simply " Ask the fact for the form . " This has been challenged at various levels by other literary scholars such as Bloom who has stated in summary form concerning the early 21st century that : " The generation of poets who stand together now , mature and ready to write the major American verse of the twenty @-@ first century , may yet be seen as what Stevens called ' a great shadow 's last embellishment , ' the shadow being Emerson 's . " 
 = = Elements = = 
 = = = Prosody = = = 
 Prosody is the study of the meter , rhythm , and intonation of a poem . Rhythm and meter are different , although closely related . Meter is the definitive pattern established for a verse ( such as iambic pentameter ) , while rhythm is the actual sound that results from a line of poetry . Prosody also may be used more specifically to refer to the scanning of poetic lines to show meter . 
 = = = = Rhythm = = = = 
 The methods for creating poetic rhythm vary across languages and between poetic traditions . Languages are often described as having timing set primarily by accents , syllables , or <unk> , depending on how rhythm is established , though a language can be influenced by multiple approaches . Japanese is a mora @-@ timed language . Syllable @-@ timed languages include Latin , Catalan , French , Leonese , Galician and Spanish . English , Russian and , generally , German are stress @-@ timed languages . Varying intonation also affects how rhythm is perceived . Languages can rely on either pitch , such as in Vedic Sanskrit or Ancient Greek , or tone . Tonal languages include Chinese , Vietnamese and most Subsaharan languages . 
 Metrical rhythm generally involves precise arrangements of stresses or syllables into repeated patterns called feet within a line . In Modern English verse the pattern of stresses primarily differentiate feet , so rhythm based on meter in Modern English is most often founded on the pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables ( alone or elided ) . In the classical languages , on the other hand , while the metrical units are similar , vowel length rather than stresses define the meter . Old English poetry used a metrical pattern involving varied numbers of syllables but a fixed number of strong stresses in each line . 
 The chief device of ancient Hebrew Biblical poetry , including many of the psalms , was parallelism , a rhetorical structure in which successive lines reflected each other in grammatical structure , sound structure , notional content , or all three . Parallelism lent itself to antiphonal or call @-@ and @-@ response performance , which could also be reinforced by intonation . Thus , Biblical poetry relies much less on metrical feet to create rhythm , but instead creates rhythm based on much larger sound units of lines , phrases and sentences . Some classical poetry forms , such as Venpa of the Tamil language , had rigid grammars ( to the point that they could be expressed as a context @-@ free grammar ) which ensured a rhythm . In Chinese poetry , tones as well as stresses create rhythm . Classical Chinese poetics identifies four tones : the level tone , rising tone , departing tone , and entering tone . 
 The formal patterns of meter used in Modern English verse to create rhythm no longer dominate contemporary English poetry . In the case of free verse , rhythm is often organized based on looser units of cadence rather than a regular meter . Robinson Jeffers , Marianne Moore , and William Carlos Williams are three notable poets who reject the idea that regular accentual meter is critical to English poetry . Jeffers experimented with sprung rhythm as an alternative to accentual rhythm . 
 = = = = Meter = = = = 
 In the Western poetic tradition , meters are customarily grouped according to a characteristic metrical foot and the number of feet per line . The number of metrical feet in a line are described using Greek terminology : tetrameter for four feet and hexameter for six feet , for example . Thus , " iambic pentameter " is a meter comprising five feet per line , in which the predominant kind of foot is the " iamb " . This metric system originated in ancient Greek poetry , and was used by poets such as Pindar and Sappho , and by the great tragedians of Athens . Similarly , " dactylic hexameter " , comprises six feet per line , of which the dominant kind of foot is the " dactyl " . <unk> hexameter was the traditional meter of Greek epic poetry , the earliest extant examples of which are the works of Homer and Hesiod . Iambic pentameter and dactylic hexameter were later used by a number of poets , including William Shakespeare and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , respectively . The most common metrical feet in English are : 
 iamb – one unstressed syllable followed by a stressed syllable ( e.g. describe , Include , retract ) 
 trochee – one stressed syllable followed by an unstressed syllable ( e.g. picture , flower ) 
 dactyl – one stressed syllable followed by two unstressed syllables ( <unk> an @-@ no @-@ <unk> ) 
 <unk> – two unstressed syllables followed by one stressed syllable ( e.g. comprehend com @-@ pre @-@ <unk> ) 
 spondee – two stressed syllables together ( e.g. e @-@ <unk> ) 
 pyrrhic – two unstressed syllables together ( rare , usually used to end dactylic hexameter ) 
 There are a wide range of names for other types of feet , right up to a <unk> , a four syllable metric foot with a stressed syllable followed by two unstressed syllables and closing with a stressed syllable . The <unk> is derived from some ancient Greek and Latin poetry . Languages which utilize vowel length or intonation rather than or in addition to syllabic accents in determining meter , such as Ottoman Turkish or Vedic , often have concepts similar to the iamb and dactyl to describe common combinations of long and short sounds . 
 Each of these types of feet has a certain " feel , " whether alone or in combination with other feet . The iamb , for example , is the most natural form of rhythm in the English language , and generally produces a subtle but stable verse . Scanning meter can often show the basic or fundamental pattern underlying a verse , but does not show the varying degrees of stress , as well as the differing pitches and lengths of syllables . 
 There is debate over how useful a multiplicity of different " feet " is in describing meter . For example , Robert Pinsky has argued that while dactyls are important in classical verse , English dactylic verse uses dactyls very irregularly and can be better described based on patterns of <unk> and <unk> , feet which he considers natural to the language . Actual rhythm is significantly more complex than the basic scanned meter described above , and many scholars have sought to develop systems that would scan such complexity . Vladimir Nabokov noted that overlaid on top of the regular pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables in a line of verse was a separate pattern of accents resulting from the natural pitch of the spoken words , and suggested that the term " <unk> " be used to distinguish an unaccented stress from an accented stress . 
 = = = = Metrical patterns = = = = 
 Different traditions and genres of poetry tend to use different meters , ranging from the Shakespearean iambic pentameter and the Homeric dactylic hexameter to the anapestic tetrameter used in many nursery rhymes . However , a number of variations to the established meter are common , both to provide emphasis or attention to a given foot or line and to avoid boring repetition . For example , the stress in a foot may be inverted , a caesura ( or pause ) may be added ( sometimes in place of a foot or stress ) , or the final foot in a line may be given a feminine ending to soften it or be replaced by a spondee to emphasize it and create a hard stop . Some patterns ( such as iambic pentameter ) tend to be fairly regular , while other patterns , such as dactylic hexameter , tend to be highly irregular . Regularity can vary between language . In addition , different patterns often develop distinctively in different languages , so that , for example , iambic tetrameter in Russian will generally reflect a regularity in the use of accents to reinforce the meter , which does not occur , or occurs to a much lesser extent , in English . 
 Some common metrical patterns , with notable examples of poets and poems who use them , include : 
 Iambic pentameter ( John Milton in Paradise Lost , William Shakespeare in his Sonnets ) 
 <unk> hexameter ( Homer , Iliad ; Virgil , Aeneid ) 
 Iambic tetrameter ( Andrew Marvell , " To His Coy Mistress " ; Aleksandr Pushkin , Eugene Onegin , Robert Frost , Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening ) 
 <unk> octameter ( Edgar Allan Poe , " The Raven " ) 
 Alexandrine ( Jean Racine , <unk> ) 
 = = = Rhyme , alliteration , assonance = = = 
 Rhyme , alliteration , assonance and consonance are ways of creating repetitive patterns of sound . They may be used as an independent structural element in a poem , to reinforce rhythmic patterns , or as an ornamental element . They can also carry a meaning separate from the repetitive sound patterns created . For example , Chaucer used heavy alliteration to mock Old English verse and to paint a character as archaic . 
 Rhyme consists of identical ( " hard @-@ rhyme " ) or similar ( " soft @-@ rhyme " ) sounds placed at the ends of lines or at predictable locations within lines ( " internal rhyme " ) . Languages vary in the richness of their rhyming structures ; Italian , for example , has a rich rhyming structure permitting maintenance of a limited set of rhymes throughout a lengthy poem . The richness results from word endings that follow regular forms . English , with its irregular word endings adopted from other languages , is less rich in rhyme . The degree of richness of a language 's rhyming structures plays a substantial role in determining what poetic forms are commonly used in that language . 
 Alliteration is the repetition of letters or letter @-@ sounds at the beginning of two or more words immediately succeeding each other , or at short intervals ; or the recurrence of the same letter in accented parts of words . Alliteration and assonance played a key role in structuring early Germanic , Norse and Old English forms of poetry . The alliterative patterns of early Germanic poetry interweave meter and alliteration as a key part of their structure , so that the metrical pattern determines when the listener expects instances of alliteration to occur . This can be compared to an ornamental use of alliteration in most Modern European poetry , where alliterative patterns are not formal or carried through full stanzas . Alliteration is particularly useful in languages with less rich rhyming structures . 
 <unk> , where the use of similar vowel sounds within a word rather than similar sounds at the beginning or end of a word , was widely used in skaldic poetry , but goes back to the Homeric epic . Because verbs carry much of the pitch in the English language , assonance can loosely evoke the tonal elements of Chinese poetry and so is useful in translating Chinese poetry . Consonance occurs where a consonant sound is repeated throughout a sentence without putting the sound only at the front of a word . Consonance provokes a more subtle effect than alliteration and so is less useful as a structural element . 
 = = = = Rhyming schemes = = = = 
 In many languages , including modern European languages and Arabic , poets use rhyme in set patterns as a structural element for specific poetic forms , such as ballads , sonnets and rhyming couplets . However , the use of structural rhyme is not universal even within the European tradition . Much modern poetry avoids traditional rhyme schemes . Classical Greek and Latin poetry did not use rhyme . Rhyme entered European poetry in the High Middle Ages , in part under the influence of the Arabic language in Al Andalus ( modern Spain ) . Arabic language poets used rhyme extensively from the first development of literary Arabic in the sixth century , as in their long , rhyming <unk> . Some rhyming schemes have become associated with a specific language , culture or period , while other rhyming schemes have achieved use across languages , cultures or time periods . Some forms of poetry carry a consistent and well @-@ defined rhyming scheme , such as the chant royal or the <unk> , while other poetic forms have variable rhyme schemes . 
 Most rhyme schemes are described using letters that correspond to sets of rhymes , so if the first , second and fourth lines of a quatrain rhyme with each other and the third line does not rhyme , the quatrain is said to have an " a @-@ a @-@ b @-@ a " rhyme scheme . This rhyme scheme is the one used , for example , in the <unk> form . Similarly , an " a @-@ b @-@ b @-@ a " quatrain ( what is known as " enclosed rhyme " ) is used in such forms as the Petrarchan sonnet . Some types of more complicated rhyming schemes have developed names of their own , separate from the " a @-@ b @-@ c " convention , such as the <unk> rima and terza rima . The types and use of differing rhyming schemes is discussed further in the main article . 
 = = = Form = = = 
 Poetic form is more flexible in modernist and post @-@ modernist poetry , and continues to be less structured than in previous literary eras . Many modern poets eschew recognisable structures or forms , and write in free verse . But poetry remains distinguished from prose by its form ; some regard for basic formal structures of poetry will be found in even the best free verse , however much such structures may appear to have been ignored . Similarly , in the best poetry written in classic styles there will be departures from strict form for emphasis or effect . 
 Among major structural elements used in poetry are the line , the stanza or verse paragraph , and larger combinations of stanzas or lines such as cantos . Also sometimes used are broader visual presentations of words and calligraphy . These basic units of poetic form are often combined into larger structures , called poetic forms or poetic modes ( see following section ) , as in the sonnet or haiku . 
 = = = = Lines and stanzas = = = = 
 Poetry is often separated into lines on a page . These lines may be based on the number of metrical feet , or may emphasize a rhyming pattern at the ends of lines . Lines may serve other functions , particularly where the poem is not written in a formal metrical pattern . Lines can separate , compare or contrast thoughts expressed in different units , or can highlight a change in tone . See the article on line breaks for information about the division between lines . 
 Lines of poems are often organized into stanzas , which are denominated by the number of lines included . Thus a collection of two lines is a couplet ( or <unk> ) , three lines a triplet ( or tercet ) , four lines a quatrain , and so on . These lines may or may not relate to each other by rhyme or rhythm . For example , a couplet may be two lines with identical meters which rhyme or two lines held together by a common meter alone . 
 Other poems may be organized into verse paragraphs , in which regular rhymes with established rhythms are not used , but the poetic tone is instead established by a collection of rhythms , <unk> , and rhymes established in paragraph form . Many medieval poems were written in verse paragraphs , even where regular rhymes and rhythms were used . 
 In many forms of poetry , stanzas are interlocking , so that the rhyming scheme or other structural elements of one stanza determine those of succeeding stanzas . Examples of such interlocking stanzas include , for example , the ghazal and the villanelle , where a refrain ( or , in the case of the villanelle , refrains ) is established in the first stanza which then repeats in subsequent stanzas . Related to the use of interlocking stanzas is their use to separate thematic parts of a poem . For example , the strophe , antistrophe and epode of the ode form are often separated into one or more stanzas . 
 In some cases , particularly lengthier formal poetry such as some forms of epic poetry , stanzas themselves are constructed according to strict rules and then combined . In skaldic poetry , the <unk> stanza had eight lines , each having three " lifts " produced with alliteration or assonance . In addition to two or three <unk> , the odd numbered lines had partial rhyme of consonants with dissimilar vowels , not necessarily at the beginning of the word ; the even lines contained internal rhyme in set syllables ( not necessarily at the end of the word ) . Each half @-@ line had exactly six syllables , and each line ended in a trochee . The arrangement of <unk> followed far less rigid rules than the construction of the individual <unk> . 
 = = = = Visual presentation = = = = 
 Even before the advent of printing , the visual appearance of poetry often added meaning or depth . <unk> poems conveyed meanings in the initial letters of lines or in letters at other specific places in a poem . In Arabic , Hebrew and Chinese poetry , the visual presentation of finely calligraphed poems has played an important part in the overall effect of many poems . 
 With the advent of printing , poets gained greater control over the mass @-@ produced visual presentations of their work . Visual elements have become an important part of the poet 's toolbox , and many poets have sought to use visual presentation for a wide range of purposes . Some Modernist poets have made the placement of individual lines or groups of lines on the page an integral part of the poem 's composition . At times , this complements the poem 's rhythm through visual caesuras of various lengths , or creates juxtapositions so as to accentuate meaning , ambiguity or irony , or simply to create an aesthetically pleasing form . In its most extreme form , this can lead to concrete poetry or <unk> writing . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Poetic diction treats the manner in which language is used , and refers not only to the sound but also to the underlying meaning and its interaction with sound and form . Many languages and poetic forms have very specific poetic <unk> , to the point where distinct grammars and dialects are used specifically for poetry . Registers in poetry can range from strict employment of ordinary speech patterns , as favoured in much late @-@ 20th @-@ century prosody , through to highly ornate uses of language , as in medieval and Renaissance poetry . 
 Poetic diction can include rhetorical devices such as simile and metaphor , as well as tones of voice , such as irony . Aristotle wrote in the Poetics that " the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor . " Since the rise of Modernism , some poets have opted for a poetic diction that de @-@ emphasizes rhetorical devices , attempting instead the direct presentation of things and experiences and the exploration of tone . On the other hand , Surrealists have pushed rhetorical devices to their limits , making frequent use of <unk> . 
 Allegorical stories are central to the poetic diction of many cultures , and were prominent in the West during classical times , the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance . Aesop 's Fables , repeatedly rendered in both verse and prose since first being recorded about 500 B.C. , are perhaps the richest single source of allegorical poetry through the ages . Other notables examples include the Roman de la Rose , a 13th @-@ century French poem , William Langland 's Piers <unk> in the 14th century , and Jean de la Fontaine 's Fables ( influenced by Aesop 's ) in the 17th century . Rather than being fully allegorical , however , a poem may contain symbols or allusions that deepen the meaning or effect of its words without constructing a full allegory . 
 Another element of poetic diction can be the use of vivid imagery for effect . The juxtaposition of unexpected or impossible images is , for example , a particularly strong element in surrealist poetry and haiku . Vivid images are often endowed with symbolism or metaphor . Many poetic <unk> use repetitive phrases for effect , either a short phrase ( such as Homer 's " rosy @-@ fingered dawn " or " the wine @-@ dark sea " ) or a longer refrain . Such repetition can add a sombre tone to a poem , or can be laced with irony as the context of the words changes . 
 = = Forms = = 
 Specific poetic forms have been developed by many cultures . In more developed , closed or " received " poetic forms , the rhyming scheme , meter and other elements of a poem are based on sets of rules , ranging from the relatively loose rules that govern the construction of an elegy to the highly formalized structure of the ghazal or villanelle . Described below are some common forms of poetry widely used across a number of languages . Additional forms of poetry may be found in the discussions of poetry of particular cultures or periods and in the glossary . 
 = = = Sonnet = = = 
 Among the most common forms of poetry , popular from the Late Middle Ages on , is the sonnet , which by the 13th century had become standardized as fourteen lines following a set rhyme scheme and logical structure . By the 14th century and the Italian Renaissance , the form had further crystallized under the pen of Petrarch , whose sonnets were translated in the 16th century by Sir Thomas Wyatt , who is credited with introducing the sonnet form into English literature . A traditional Italian or Petrarchan sonnet follows the rhyme scheme abba , abba , <unk> , though some variation , especially within the final six lines ( or sestet ) , is common . The English ( or Shakespearean ) sonnet follows the rhyme scheme abab , cdcd , efef , gg , introducing a third quatrain ( grouping of four lines ) , a final couplet , and a greater amount of variety with regard to rhyme than is usually found in its Italian predecessors . By convention , sonnets in English typically use iambic pentameter , while in the Romance languages , the <unk> and Alexandrine are the most widely used meters . 
 Sonnets of all types often make use of a volta , or " turn , " a point in the poem at which an idea is turned on its head , a question is answered ( or introduced ) , or the subject matter is further complicated . This volta can often take the form of a " but " statement contradicting or complicating the content of the earlier lines . In the Petrarchan sonnet , the turn tends to fall around the division between the first two quatrains and the sestet , while English sonnets usually place it at or near the beginning of the closing couplet . 
 Sonnets are particularly associated with high poetic diction , vivid imagery , and romantic love , largely due to the influence of Petrarch as well as of early English practitioners such as Edmund Spenser ( who gave his name to the <unk> sonnet ) , Michael Drayton , and Shakespeare , whose sonnets are among the most famous in English poetry , with twenty being included in the Oxford Book of English Verse . However , the twists and turns associated with the volta allow for a logical flexibility applicable to many subjects . Poets from the earliest centuries of the sonnet to the present have utilized the form to address topics related to politics ( John Milton , Percy Bysshe Shelley , Claude McKay ) , theology ( John Donne , Gerard Manley Hopkins ) , war ( Wilfred Owen , e. e. <unk> ) , and gender and sexuality ( Carol Ann Duffy ) . Further , postmodern authors such as Ted Berrigan and John Berryman have challenged the traditional definitions of the sonnet form , rendering entire sequences of " sonnets " that often lack rhyme , a clear logical progression , or even a consistent count of fourteen lines . 
 = = = Shi = = = 
 Shi ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : shih ) Is the main type of Classical Chinese poetry . Within this form of poetry the most important variations are " folk song " styled verse ( <unk> ) , " old style " verse ( gushi ) , " modern style " verse ( jintishi ) . In all cases , rhyming is obligatory . The <unk> is a folk ballad or a poem written in the folk ballad style , and the number of lines and the length of the lines could be irregular . For the other variations of shi poetry , generally either a four line ( quatrain , or <unk> ) or else an eight line poem is normal ; either way with the even numbered lines rhyming . The line length is scanned by according number of characters ( according to the convention that one character equals one syllable ) , and are predominantly either five or seven characters long , with a caesura before the final three syllables . The lines are generally end @-@ stopped , considered as a series of couplets , and exhibit verbal parallelism as a key poetic device . The " old style " verse ( gushi ) is less formally strict than the jintishi , or regulated verse , which , despite the name " new style " verse actually had its theoretical basis laid as far back to Shen Yue , in the 5th or 6th century , although not considered to have reached its full development until the time of Chen Zi 'ang ( 661 – 702 ) A good example of a poet known for his gushi poems is Li Bai . Among its other rules , the jintishi rules regulate the tonal variations within a poem , including the use of set patterns of the four tones of Middle Chinese The basic form of jintishi ( <unk> ) has eight lines in four couplets , with parallelism between the lines in the second and third couplets . The couplets with parallel lines contain contrasting content but an identical grammatical relationship between words . <unk> often have a rich poetic diction , full of allusion , and can have a wide range of subject , including history and politics . One of the masters of the form was Du Fu , who wrote during the Tang Dynasty ( 8th century ) . 
 = = = Villanelle = = = 
 The villanelle is a nineteen @-@ line poem made up of five triplets with a closing quatrain ; the poem is characterized by having two refrains , initially used in the first and third lines of the first stanza , and then alternately used at the close of each subsequent stanza until the final quatrain , which is concluded by the two refrains . The remaining lines of the poem have an a @-@ b alternating rhyme . The villanelle has been used regularly in the English language since the late 19th century by such poets as Dylan Thomas , W. H. Auden , and Elizabeth Bishop . 
 = = = Tanka = = = 
 Tanka is a form of unrhymed Japanese poetry , with five sections totalling 31 <unk> ( phonological units identical to <unk> ) , structured in a 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 7 pattern . There is generally a shift in tone and subject matter between the upper 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 5 phrase and the lower 7 @-@ 7 phrase . Tanka were written as early as the Asuka period by such poets as <unk> no <unk> , at a time when Japan was emerging from a period where much of its poetry followed Chinese form . Tanka was originally the shorter form of Japanese formal poetry ( which was generally referred to as " waka " ) , and was used more heavily to explore personal rather than public themes . By the tenth century , tanka had become the dominant form of Japanese poetry , to the point where the originally general term waka ( " Japanese poetry " ) came to be used exclusively for tanka . Tanka are still widely written today . 
 = = = Haiku = = = 
 Haiku is a popular form of unrhymed Japanese poetry , which evolved in the 17th century from the hokku , or opening verse of a renku . Generally written in a single vertical line , the haiku contains three sections totalling 17 <unk> , structured in a 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 5 pattern . Traditionally , haiku contain a <unk> , or cutting word , usually placed at the end of one of the poem 's three sections , and a kigo , or season @-@ word . The most famous exponent of the haiku was Matsuo Bashō ( 1644 – 1694 ) . An example of his writing : 
 <unk> 
 <unk> no kaze ya <unk> ni <unk> Edo <unk> 
 the wind of Mt . Fuji 
 I 've brought on my fan ! 
 a gift from Edo 
 = = = Ode = = = 
 Odes were first developed by poets writing in ancient Greek , such as Pindar , and Latin , such as Horace . Forms of odes appear in many of the cultures that were influenced by the Greeks and Latins . The ode generally has three parts : a strophe , an antistrophe , and an epode . The <unk> of the ode possess similar metrical structures and , depending on the tradition , similar rhyme structures . In contrast , the epode is written with a different scheme and structure . Odes have a formal poetic diction , and generally deal with a serious subject . The strophe and antistrophe look at the subject from different , often conflicting , perspectives , with the epode moving to a higher level to either view or resolve the underlying issues . Odes are often intended to be recited or sung by two choruses ( or individuals ) , with the first reciting the strophe , the second the antistrophe , and both together the epode . Over time , differing forms for odes have developed with considerable variations in form and structure , but generally showing the original influence of the <unk> or Horatian ode . One non @-@ Western form which resembles the ode is the <unk> in Persian poetry . 
 = = = Ghazal = = = 
 The ghazal ( also <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> ) is a form of poetry common in Arabic , Persian , Turkish , Azerbaijani , Urdu and Bengali poetry . In classic form , the ghazal has from five to fifteen rhyming couplets that share a refrain at the end of the second line . This refrain may be of one or several syllables , and is preceded by a rhyme . Each line has an identical meter . The ghazal often reflects on a theme of unattainable love or divinity . 
 As with other forms with a long history in many languages , many variations have been developed , including forms with a quasi @-@ musical poetic diction in Urdu . Ghazals have a classical affinity with Sufism , and a number of major Sufi religious works are written in ghazal form . The relatively steady meter and the use of the refrain produce an incantatory effect , which complements Sufi mystical themes well . Among the masters of the form is Rumi , a 13th @-@ century Persian poet . One of the most famous poet in this type of poetry is Hafez . Themes of his Ghazal is exposing hypocrisy . His life and poems have been the subject of much analysis , commentary and interpretation , influencing post @-@ fourteenth century Persian writing more than any other author . West @-@ <unk> Diwan of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe that is a collection of lyrical poems , has been inspired by the Persian poet Hafez . 
 = = Genres = = 
 In addition to specific forms of poems , poetry is often thought of in terms of different genres and subgenres . A poetic genre is generally a tradition or classification of poetry based on the subject matter , style , or other broader literary characteristics . Some commentators view genres as natural forms of literature . Others view the study of genres as the study of how different works relate and refer to other works . 
 = = = Narrative poetry = = = 
 Narrative poetry is a genre of poetry that tells a story . Broadly it subsumes epic poetry , but the term " narrative poetry " is often reserved for smaller works , generally with more appeal to human interest . Narrative poetry may be the oldest type of poetry . Many scholars of Homer have concluded that his Iliad and Odyssey were composed from compilations of shorter narrative poems that related individual episodes . Much narrative poetry — such as Scottish and English ballads , and Baltic and Slavic heroic poems — is performance poetry with roots in a preliterate oral tradition . It has been speculated that some features that distinguish poetry from prose , such as meter , alliteration and kennings , once served as memory aids for bards who recited traditional tales . 
 Notable narrative poets have included Ovid , Dante , Juan Ruiz , Chaucer , William Langland , Luís de Camões , Shakespeare , Alexander Pope , Robert Burns , Fernando de Rojas , Adam Mickiewicz , Alexander Pushkin , Edgar Allan Poe and Alfred Tennyson . 
 = = = Epic poetry = = = 
 Epic poetry is a genre of poetry , and a major form of narrative literature . This genre is often defined as lengthy poems concerning events of a heroic or important nature to the culture of the time . It recounts , in a continuous narrative , the life and works of a heroic or mythological person or group of persons . Examples of epic poems are Homer 's Iliad and Odyssey , Virgil 's Aeneid , the Nibelungenlied , Luís de Camões ' Os <unk> , the <unk> de Mio Cid , the Epic of Gilgamesh , the Mahabharata , Valmiki 's Ramayana , Ferdowsi 's <unk> , Nizami ( or <unk> ) ' s <unk> ( Five Books ) , and the Epic of King <unk> . While the composition of epic poetry , and of long poems generally , became less common in the west after the early 20th century , some notable epics have continued to be written . Derek Walcott won a Nobel prize to a great extent on the basis of his epic , <unk> . 
 = = = Dramatic poetry = = = 
 Dramatic poetry is drama written in verse to be spoken or sung , and appears in varying , sometimes related forms in many cultures . Greek tragedy in verse dates to the 6th century B.C. , and may have been an influence on the development of Sanskrit drama , just as Indian drama in turn appears to have influenced the development of the <unk> verse dramas in China , forerunners of Chinese Opera . East Asian verse dramas also include Japanese Noh . Examples of dramatic poetry in Persian literature include Nizami 's two famous dramatic works , Layla and <unk> and Khosrow and Shirin , Ferdowsi 's tragedies such as Rostam and Sohrab , Rumi 's <unk> , <unk> 's tragedy of Vis and Ramin , and Vahshi 's tragedy of Farhad . 
 = = = Satirical poetry = = = 
 Poetry can be a powerful vehicle for satire . The Romans had a strong tradition of satirical poetry , often written for political purposes . A notable example is the Roman poet Juvenal 's satires . 
 The same is true of the English satirical tradition . John Dryden ( a Tory ) , the first Poet Laureate , produced in 1682 Mac <unk> , subtitled " A Satire on the True Blue Protestant Poet , T.S. " ( a reference to Thomas Shadwell ) . Another master of 17th @-@ century English satirical poetry was John Wilmot , 2nd Earl of Rochester . Satirical poets outside England include Poland 's Ignacy Krasicki , Azerbaijan 's Sabir and Portugal 's Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage . 
 = = = Light poetry = = = 
 Light poetry , or light verse , is poetry that attempts to be humorous . Poems considered " light " are usually brief , and can be on a frivolous or serious subject , and often feature word play , including puns , adventurous rhyme and heavy alliteration . Although a few free verse poets have excelled at light verse outside the formal verse tradition , light verse in English is usually formal . Common forms include the limerick , the <unk> , and the double dactyl . 
 While light poetry is sometimes condemned as doggerel , or thought of as poetry composed casually , humor often makes a serious point in a subtle or subversive way . Many of the most renowned " serious " poets have also excelled at light verse . Notable writers of light poetry include Lewis Carroll , Ogden Nash , X. J. Kennedy , Willard R. Espy , and Wendy Cope . 
 = = = Lyric poetry = = = 
 Lyric poetry is a genre that , unlike epic and dramatic poetry , does not attempt to tell a story but instead is of a more personal nature . Poems in this genre tend to be shorter , melodic , and contemplative . Rather than depicting characters and actions , it portrays the poet 's own feelings , states of mind , and perceptions . Notable poets in this genre include John Donne , Gerard Manley Hopkins , and Antonio Machado . 
 = = = Elegy = = = 
 An elegy is a mournful , melancholy or plaintive poem , especially a lament for the dead or a funeral song . The term " elegy , " which originally denoted a type of poetic meter ( elegiac meter ) , commonly describes a poem of mourning . An elegy may also reflect something that seems to the author to be strange or mysterious . The elegy , as a reflection on a death , on a sorrow more generally , or on something mysterious , may be classified as a form of lyric poetry . 
 Notable practitioners of elegiac poetry have included Propertius , Jorge Manrique , Jan Kochanowski , <unk> Tichborne , Edmund Spenser , Ben Jonson , John Milton , Thomas Gray , Charlotte Turner Smith , William Cullen Bryant , Percy Bysshe Shelley , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Evgeny <unk> , Alfred Tennyson , Walt Whitman , Louis Gallet , Antonio Machado , Juan Ramón Jiménez , Giannina Braschi , William Butler Yeats , Rainer Maria Rilke , and Virginia Woolf . 
 = = = Verse fable = = = 
 The fable is an ancient literary genre , often ( though not invariably ) set in verse . It is a succinct story that features anthropomorphized animals , plants , inanimate objects , or forces of nature that illustrate a moral lesson ( a " moral " ) . Verse fables have used a variety of meter and rhyme patterns . 
 Notable verse <unk> have included Aesop , Vishnu Sarma , Phaedrus , Marie de France , Robert Henryson , <unk> of Lublin , Jean de La Fontaine , Ignacy Krasicki , Félix María de Samaniego , Tomás de Iriarte , Ivan Krylov and Ambrose Bierce . 
 = = = Prose poetry = = = 
 Prose poetry is a hybrid genre that shows attributes of both prose and poetry . It may be indistinguishable from the micro @-@ story ( a.k.a. the " short short story " , " flash fiction " ) . While some examples of earlier prose strike modern readers as poetic , prose poetry is commonly regarded as having originated in 19th @-@ century France , where its practitioners included Aloysius Bertrand , Charles Baudelaire , Arthur Rimbaud and Stéphane Mallarmé . Since the late 1980s especially , prose poetry has gained increasing popularity , with entire journals , such as The Prose Poem : An International Journal , Contemporary <unk> Online , and <unk> Today devoted to that genre and its hybrids . Latin American poets of the 20th century who wrote prose poems include Octavio Paz and Giannina Braschi 
 = = = Speculative poetry = = = 
 Speculative poetry , also known as fantastic poetry , ( of which weird or macabre poetry is a major subclassification ) , is a poetic genre which deals thematically with subjects which are ' beyond reality ' , whether via extrapolation as in science fiction or via weird and horrific themes as in horror fiction . Such poetry appears regularly in modern science fiction and horror fiction magazines . Edgar Allan Poe is sometimes seen as the " father of speculative poetry " . 
 = = = Anthologies = = = 
 Ferguson , Margaret ; Salter , Mary Jo ; <unk> , Jon , eds . ( 1996 ) . The Norton Anthology of Poetry ( 4th ed . ) . W. W. Norton & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Gardner , Helen , ed . ( 1972 ) . New Oxford Book of English Verse 1250 – 1950 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Larkin , Philip , ed . ( 1973 ) . The Oxford Book of Twentieth Century English Verse . Oxford University Press . 
 Yeats , WB , ed . ( 1936 ) . Oxford Book of Modern Verse 1892 – 1935 . Oxford University Press . 
 = Dalek ( Doctor Who episode ) = 
 " Dalek " is the sixth episode of the revived first series of British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , which was first broadcast on 30 April 2005 . This episode is the first appearance of the Daleks in the 21st century revival of Doctor Who ; it also marks the first appearance of Bruno Langley as companion Adam Mitchell . 
 The episode is set in Utah in the year 2012 , in the underground bunker owned by Henry van Statten , a rich collector of alien artifacts . The Doctor encounters his one living exhibit : a creature called " the Metaltron " , which the Doctor is horrified to discover is a surviving Dalek . When the Dalek escapes , the Doctor races against time to stop it from getting to the surface and wreaking havoc on humanity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor and Rose land the TARDIS in a massive underground bunker near Salt Lake City , Utah in the year 2012 . They were drawn there by a distress signal being transmitted from the bunker . They look around at various alien artifacts that have been set up on display in glass cases . After touching one case , they are surrounded by soldiers who take them to see Henry van Statten , the owner of the collection . The Doctor talks to van Statten , while Rose tours the facility with a technician named Adam Mitchell . Van Statten wants the Doctor 's opinion on the pride of his collection , which he calls the " Metaltron " . Van Statten orders the Doctor locked into the vault with the Metaltron . The Doctor is first shocked and then horrified to find that the Metaltron is actually a Dalek , all of whom he thought had been destroyed in the Time War . The Doctor finds out that the Dalek is weakened and chained down , unable to fight back . The Doctor attempts to destroy it , but is stopped by van Statten 's guards and escorted back to his offices . 
 Meanwhile , Adam takes Rose to the vault to see the Dalek . She takes pity on the Dalek , touching its casing . The Dalek absorbs her DNA and the time energy she has been exposed to from travelling in the TARDIS . The Dalek becomes re @-@ energised , plugging itself into the electrical grid and drawing power from all over the western United States to recharge itself . It rebuilds its casing and breaks the chains that were holding it . In another part of the complex , van Statten reveals to the Doctor that not only does he collect aliens , but he also tortures them ; he proceeds to invasively and violently scrutinize the Doctor 's body so that he can learn more about his physiology . Upon hearing the alarms sound , van Statten releases the Doctor who tries to stop the Dalek . The Dalek breaks out of the cage it was sealed in and plugs itself into the Internet , learning that it is ( apparently ) the last Dalek . Without other Daleks coming , it reverts to its original mission - the destruction of all non @-@ Dalek life . The Dalek chases Adam and Rose , killing the guards in the way . It kills a large group of soldiers in a warehouse before declaring it will speak only to the Doctor . The Doctor then suggests the Dalek kill itself to remove the presence of its race from the universe , but the Dalek decides to proceed with exterminating everyone . 
 Adam tries to help Rose escape , but she is trapped inside the vault when it is sealed by the Doctor . The video feeds are disrupted moments before the Dalek encounters Rose . The Dalek finds that it cannot exterminate Rose , and is conflicted by the human DNA it absorbed from her . The Dalek forces the Doctor to let it out of the vault in exchange for Rose 's life , and it makes its way to van Statten 's office to kill him . Rose convinces the Dalek to spare van Statten and accompanies it to the highest part of the vault , where it blasts a hole in the ceiling . The Dalek opens its casing and basks in the sunlight as the Doctor arrives with an alien weapon . Rose pleads for the Dalek 's life , arguing that it has changed because it couldn 't kill her or van Statten . The Dalek is disturbed by the new emotions and ideas that it has developed from absorbing Rose 's DNA and is now repulsed by its own existence . It asks Rose to order it to self @-@ destruct . She reluctantly agrees , and the Dalek engages its self @-@ destruct mechanism and implodes . 
 Van Statten 's assistant takes over , ordering van Statten 's mind wiped and having him dropped off on the side of the road somewhere beginning with S. The Doctor and Rose head back to the TARDIS with Adam following them . He tries to convince them to leave immediately because the vault is about to be filled with cement , but instead Rose invites him to travel with them . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The Dalek ability to fly or hover dates back to The Chase , where a Dalek was implied to have taken flight , while in Revelation of the Daleks , a Dalek hovered to exterminate two victims . The first part of the 1988 serial Remembrance of the Daleks shows a Dalek who was clearly seen to hover up a flight of stairs to the Doctor 's horror . Rose and Adam allude to a long @-@ held fan joke about the Daleks ' inability to climb stairs , and are horrified when it does so . 
 This episode marks the first on @-@ screen appearance of the Daleks as a primary adversary , without their creator Davros , since the 1974 Third Doctor story Death to the Daleks . Since his introduction in 1975 's Genesis of the Daleks , Davros had appeared in every subsequent Dalek story in the original series run . He is not named in this episode , but the Doctor describes him as " a genius ... a man who was king of his own little world " . Davros would later be re @-@ introduced in the 2008 two @-@ part story The Stolen Earth / Journey 's End . 
 The museum 's display items feature the arm of a Slitheen ( <unk> ) from " Aliens of London " , which Rose recognises , and something that the Doctor refers to as " An old friend , well , enemy ... " – a Cyberman head ( from Revenge of the Cybermen , but the label on its display case references The Invasion ) . A reference book , Doctor Who : The Visual Dictionary , describes the exhibit behind the Doctor 's and Rose 's heads when they are looking at the Cyberman 's helmet as the decayed head of a Sea Devil from the Jon Pertwee serial The Sea Devils . As well as a dead <unk> from the serial " The Chase " seen from a few long shots in the darkened side of the Vault after they first materialize , and before they depart . 
 The callsign for van Statten 's personal helicopter is " Bad Wolf One " , a recurrent phrase throughout the first series . An excerpt from this episode is used in " Bad Wolf " , when Rose recalls where she had encountered the phrase before . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Rob Shearman , the writer of the episode , had his first encounter with the revived series of Doctor Who in 2003 after he created the Sixth Doctor audio Jubilee . Executive producer Russell T Davies drew heavily on Jubilee to create " Return of the Daleks " for his pitch to the BBC , a story which Davies hoped to recreate the menace shown by the Daleks in their 1963 debut The Daleks . The adventure changed the setting from the alternate Earth in Jubilee to 2012 Utah , with the lone Dalek featured being held captive by businessman Henry Van Statten , a caricature of Microsoft 's chairman Bill Gates . 
 The script went through several changes . The story itself was initially called " Creature of Lies " , and Van Statten was originally called Hiram Duchesne . For a short period of time , Adam was the villains son , but Shearman decided against it . The most notable change to the script happened when the Nation estate , holders of the rights for the Daleks , blocked the use of the Daleks due to the BBC licensing them out too much . The changed story contained an alien akin to a child who kills for pleasure , which eventually evolved into the <unk> from " The Sound of Drums " and " Last of the Time Lords " . Finally , the BBC were able to secure the rights from the Nation estate , and at the same time gave the episode its final name , " Dalek " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was placed in the third production block , along with " Father 's Day " and " The Long Game " , the latter taken out due to delays in special effects creation . The episode 's placement in the series was intentional so as to stave off an anticipated mid @-@ series drop in viewership , although the BBC suggested that the episode be the premiere . Filming of the episode began on 25 October 2004 at the National Museum Cardiff , before moving to the Millennium Stadium the following day , where most of the episode was filmed . Most of the filming finished on 3 November 2004 , with pick @-@ up shots completed at the show 's studio space in Newport throughout the remainder of the month . 
 = = Critical reception and awards = = 
 Before the broadcast , media watchdog organisation Mediawatch @-@ uk complained about certain elements of the episode , characterising Van Statten 's chaining and invasive scan of the Doctor as a " sado @-@ masochistic " torture scene . Mediawatch also objected to Van Statten 's invitation to Adam and Rose to " <unk> or spoon , or whatever you British do " as inappropriate sexual language . 
 When it was released on DVD , British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) gave the episode a 12 rating , because of the scenes where the Doctor is seen to torture the Dalek . The BBFC stated : 
 " We are concerned about role models for children using the sort of tactics that Doctor Who used against the Dalek . If that was transferred into the playground it would be something we would want to tackle . " 
 Reception to the episode was positive . The episode 's overnight ratings was 7 @.@ 73 million viewers , 46 % of the audience share , a figure that was finalised to 8 @.@ 64 million viewers . The Times stated that the episode was an " unqualified triumph " . The Guardian commented that " Shearman 's script <unk> expectations " , and the episode " should hopefully show 2005 's kids what was always so wonderful about the iconic tin @-@ <unk> . " . The London Evening Standard found the lack of surprise ( namely , calling the episode " Dalek " ) the only disappointment , and Daily Mirror simply stated that " for 30 pant @-@ <unk> wonderful minutes , BBC1 's new Doctor Who was the best thing on telly . Ever . " In 2010 Den of Geek placed the episode as number 2 in their list of the Top 10 Dalek stories . 
 The episode was nominated for the 2006 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form along with other Doctor Who episodes " Father 's Day " and " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " . The stories came third , fifth , and first , respectively . 
 = Typhoon Longwang = 
 Typhoon Longwang ( <unk> ) , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Maring , was the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact China during the 2005 Pacific typhoon season . Longwang was first identified as a tropical depression on September 25 north of the Mariana Islands . Moving along a general westward track , the system quickly intensified and reached typhoon status on September 27 . After reaching Category 4 @-@ equivalent intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale , adverse atmospheric conditions along with internal structural changes resulted in temporary weakening . The structural change culminated in Longwang becoming an annular typhoon and prompted re @-@ intensification . The storm attained peak strength with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) and a pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) on October 1 as it approached Taiwan . Interaction with the mountainous terrain of the island and further structural changes caused some weakening before the typhoon made landfall near Hualien City early on October 2 . Crossing the island in six hours , Longwang emerged over the Taiwan Strait before moving onshore again later that day , this time in Fujian Province , China as a minimal typhoon . Once over mainland China , the storm quickly weakened and ultimately dissipated late on October 3 . 
 Prior to the storm 's arrival , officials in Taiwan activated all emergency operations centers and urged residents to take serious precautions . The storm brought record @-@ breaking winds , peaking at 234 km / h ( 145 mph ) in Hualien City , and torrential rains . Despite the intensity of the storm , damage was relatively limited there . Two people lost their lives , 73 were injured , and damage reached NT $ 570 million ( US $ 17 @.@ 7 million ) . Large @-@ scale evacuations took place in mainland China , with 684 @,@ 860 people relocating . Losses were extensive in Fujian Province where 1 @-@ in @-@ 100 year rains caused disastrous flooding in Fuzhou , killing 62 people . In <unk> County , 85 paramilitary police perished when a landslide destroyed their barracks . Throughout China , 147 people were killed and damage amounted to 7 @.@ 81 billion RMB ( US $ 944 @.@ 6 million ) . Due to the severe damage , the name Longwang was later retired . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 24 , 2005 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring a tropical disturbance a tropical disturbance north of the Mariana Islands . Convective banding features soon consolidated around a low pressure area associated with the system , prompting the issuance of a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert the following day . Later on September 25 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) declared the system a tropical depression . Situated in a region characterized by low wind shear and favorable upper @-@ level divergence , steady intensification ensued . Early on September 26 , the JTWC also classified the system as a tropical depression , designating it as 19W . Hours later , both agencies assessed sustained winds to have reached 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , indicating tropical storm intensity . As such , the JMA named the storm Longwang . Situated to the southwest of a ridge , the storm tracked slowly west @-@ northwest , while strengthening at an increasing rate . A temporary turn northwest occurred on September 26 as Longwang approached a weakness in the ridge which had previously steered it west @-@ northwestward . In the 24 hours following the storm 's naming , Longwang quickly intensified into a typhoon . Once at typhoon status , the storm resumed a more westerly track as a second ridge extending from eastern Asia became the dominant steering factor . 
 On a westerly course toward Taiwan and eastern China , Longwang underwent a period of rapid intensification from September 27 – 28 . At the end of this phase , the JMA assessed peak winds at 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) while the JTWC rated it as a Category 4 @-@ equivalent typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . On September 29 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration assigned the typhoon the local name Maring as it entered their area of responsibility . The following day , Longwang underwent a structural change , transitioning from asymmetrical banding to symmetrical , making it an annular tropical cyclone . During the transition , upper @-@ level divergence and outflow significantly decreased , resulting in temporary weakening of the typhoon . Additionally , an increase in westerly wind shear caused the interior structure to become asymmetric , with a southwest to northeast tilt noted by dropsondes released by the <unk> Observations for Typhoon Surveillance project . Once the transition into an annular cyclone completed , Longwang re @-@ intensified and attained its peak intensity on October 1 while situated 400 km ( 250 mi ) south of Okinawa . The JMA assessed winds at 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) along with a barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) . The JTWC estimated Longwang to have been slightly stronger , with one @-@ minute sustained winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . 
 At the time of peak intensity , an unmanned weather reconnaissance vehicle , known as Aerosonde , was flown into the typhoon and recorded peak winds of 211 km / h ( 131 mph ) at an altitude of 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . As the storm approached Taiwan late on October 1 , an eyewall replacement cycle began , with a large secondary eyewall forming around the inner one . At 1848 UTC , Doppler weather radar velocity estimates indicated winds of 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) at an altitude of 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . An interpolated surface pressure of 924 @.@ 5 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 30 inHg ) was obtained based on data from the Aerosonde . After flying in the storm for ten hours , the unmanned vehicle encountered severe turbulence and crashed about 80 km ( 50 mi ) east of Taitung City . Interaction with the mountainous terrain of Taiwan caused Longwang to weaken somewhat . The system ultimately made landfall near Hualien City at 0500 UTC on October 2 . Just six hours after moving inland , Longwang emerged over the Taiwan Strait with its circulation mostly intact ; however , weakening continued as it approached eastern China . Remaining over water for less than 12 hours , the typhoon made its second and ultimate landfall in Fujian Province late on October 2 . The storm quickly degraded over the following day , with winds decreasing below gale @-@ force within 12 hours . The former typhoon slowed and turned northward over western Fujian before dissipating late on October 3 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The first indications of Longwang impacting Taiwan were on September 27 when the Central Weather Bureau ( CWB ) stated that the storm was on a westerly course to the island . On September 30 , the CWB issued a sea warning for areas surrounding Taiwan . Shortly thereafter , the island 's Central Emergency Operations Center was activated . Early on October 1 , the whole of Taiwan was placed under a storm warning , prompting the Emergency Center to go to its maximum level of alert . Daily meetings held by the Emergency Center provided officials with information on the storm and its expected impacts . Details disseminating from the meetings prompted the activation of all emergency operation centers in Taiwan . Nine counties were placed under debris flow advisories by the end of October 1 . On October 2 , then @-@ President Chen Shui @-@ bian urged all residents to take serious precautions . A total of 2 @,@ 280 people were mountain climbing at the time and were advised to leave , the majority of whom complied . The Taiwan Railway Administration suspended operations on four rail lines . Rapid transit lines in Taipei maintained operations , though ran on slower schedules . For southern Taiwan , the main risk was fresh water flooding . Fifteen rivers were placed under high alert while 340 more were under moderate alert . By the time Longwang made landfall , 37 shelters opened across the island , accommodating nearly 1 @,@ 000 people . Additionally , 5 @,@ 464 Chinese fishermen temporarily sheltered at Taiwanese ports . All airports were closed on October 2 and sea travel was suspended . With international airports shut down , President Chen , who was returning from a visit to the United Arab Emirates , was forced to land in Indonesia . The landing in Indonesia was seen as a political breakthrough for Taiwan as Indonesia does not recognize them as a separate nation from China . 
 By October 1 , officials in Mainland China issued warnings for Fujian Province and urged residents to evacuate . An estimated 537 @,@ 000 people heeded these warnings in Fujian and a further 86 @,@ 000 and 61 @,@ 860 evacuated in Zhejiang and Guangdong provinces , respectively . The majority of evacuees were from the cities of <unk> , Fuzhou , Putian , Quanzhou , Xiamen , and Zhangzhou , with 376 @,@ 000 evacuating from Xiamen alone . Along the coast , roughly 38 @,@ 000 seagoing vessels returned to port . Thousands of officials in the province oversaw flood preparations . Public transportation across Fujian Province was temporarily suspended as well . The local airport in Xiamen shut down late on October 2 as rain bands from the storm began impacting the area . Throughout Fujian , more than 120 flights were canceled . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On October 1 , Typhoon Longwang brushed the southern Ryukyu Islands of Japan . Wind gusts in excess of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) battered the islands of Ishigaki , Iriomote , and Yonaguni ; a peak gust of 159 km / h ( 99 mph ) was measured on Ishigaki . These winds caused travel disruptions , minor damage , and scattered power outages . Four people sustained minor injuries in Ishigaki City after being knocked down by the winds . Heavy rains accompanied the winds and accumulations peaked at 84 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) in the Yaeyama District . Significant agricultural damage took place as well , with losses in the sector reaching ¥ 1 billion ( US $ 8 @.@ 7 million ) . Further south , the Batanes Islands of the Philippines experienced winds of 30 to 60 km / h ( 19 to 37 mph ) in relation to the typhoon . 
 Due to the substantial loss of life and damage , the name Longwang was retired and replaced with <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ) in 2006 . 
 = = = Taiwan = = = 
 Striking Taiwan as a powerful storm early on October 2 , Longwang brought destructive winds to many areas along the island 's east coast . Hualien City experienced the brunt of the impact with sustained winds reaching 163 km / h ( 101 mph ) and gusts up to 234 km / h ( 145 mph ) . These gusts were the highest ever recorded in the city , surpassing the previous record set during Typhoon Louise in 1959 . On the west coast of Taiwan , gusts reached 153 km / h ( 95 mph ) in <unk> . Torrential rains impacted many areas , with a peak 24 hour accumulations in Hualien County reaching 764 @.@ 5 mm ( 30 @.@ 10 in ) . A one @-@ day total of 576 mm ( 22 @.@ 7 in ) was also measured in Yilan County . 
 At the height of the storm , 749 @,@ 621 households lost power while 24 @,@ 817 lost telephone service . In Hualien County , a man was killed after being struck in the head by an iron bar that crashed into his home ; 33 others were injured in the county . At least one home collapsed and six others were damaged in the county . High waves broke a 200 m ( 660 ft ) stretch of a levee near <unk> , a coastal community in Hualien , and flooded nearby homes . Part of the entrance to the Hualien Martyrs Shrine collapsed amid strong winds . Numerous billboards and trees fell across Hualien City , littering the streets with debris . Elsewhere on the island , 13 others sustained injuries and one person was reported missing . In Chiayi City , a bus and truck collided , injuring 16 and on Provincial Highway 16 , 11 people were injured when their coach bus crashed into a telephone pole . It is unknown how much , if any , of a role the typhoon was in these accidents . In Kaohsiung , a concrete slab was torn off a building and wedged into a high rise apartment . One woman died after being swept away by flash flooding in the central town of Hoping . Within the Alishan National Scenic Area 106 landslides occurred , covering an area of 1 @.@ 29 km2 ( 0 @.@ 8 mi2 ) . Along the coast , a 7 @,@ 000 ton cargo vessel broke loose from its mooring and drifted for 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) before running aground and breaking apart . 
 Overall , 2 people lost their lives and 73 more were injured across Taiwan . Infrastructural damage was less than feared with losses amounting to NT $ 70 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) . Then @-@ Premier Frank Hsieh stated that the relative lack of damage " was some good fortune in the midst of this misfortune . " Substantial agricultural took place , with rice , bananas , <unk> grapes , and leafy vegetables being the hardest hit . Losses in the sector exceeded NT $ 500 million ( US $ 15 million ) . Though unrelated to the typhoon , a magnitude 5 @.@ 4 earthquake struck Taiwan late on October 1 , sending residents in Hualien panicking into streets despite the ongoing typhoon . 
 = = = East China = = = 
 Typhoon Longwang , weakened from its passage of Taiwan , struck mainland China late on October 2 as a low @-@ end typhoon . Off the coast of <unk> County , gusts reached 164 km / h ( 102 mph ) on <unk> Island . Gusts onshore peaked at 137 km / h ( 85 mph ) in Changle within Fuzhou City . Though the storm brought typhoon @-@ force winds , they were mostly confined to coastal areas and its greatest impacts resulted from torrential rains . Much of Fuzhou City experienced over 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) of rain , with a maxima of 332 mm ( 13 @.@ 1 in ) in Changle . Of that total , 316 mm ( 12 @.@ 4 in ) fell in a 12 ‑ hour span . Furthermore , one hour accumulations peaked at 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) . These rains were described as a 1 @-@ in @-@ 100 year event . Zhejiang and Jiangxi Provinces also experienced heavy rains ; 292 mm ( 11 @.@ 5 in ) fell in Taizhou , Zhejiang while 128 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) was recorded in <unk> County , Jiangxi . 
 The greatest damage from Longwang took place in Fujian Province , especially within the city of Fuzhou where torrential rains overwhelmed the Jinan River and its tributaries . The ensuing flood inundated a 13 @.@ 69 km2 ( 8 @.@ 5 mi2 ) of the city and resulted in 62 fatalities and left 24 people missing . Direct losses from the flood in Fuzhou alone reached 2 @.@ 2 billion RMB ( US $ 264 million ) . Some areas were submerged by flood waters 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep and many landslides caused significant damage . A large auto plant owned by the Fujian Motor Industry Corporation , covering 83 hectares , was completely flooded . Many auto parts sustained heavy damage and losses at the plant reached 330 million RMB ( US $ 39 @.@ 9 million ) . In <unk> County , Fuzhou , a landslide destroyed a barracks of the Chinese paramilitary police where 142 officers were staying . Roughly 7 @,@ 000 soldiers were deployed to the area for search and rescue . Ultimately , 47 people were rescued ( 39 of whom were hospitalized ) and 85 bodies were recovered . 
 Striking during the week @-@ long holiday following Chinese National Day , tourism suffered greatly in the region . Across China , 4 @.@ 7 million people were directly affected by the typhoon , 4 million of whom were in Fujian Province . Preliminary assessments indicated that 9 @,@ 400 homes were destroyed , leaving 129 @,@ 400 people homeless . Fifty schools were damaged or destroyed as well . A total of 160 @,@ 000 hectares ( 3 @.@ 9 million acres ) of farmland was damaged and 40 @,@ 900 heads of livestock were lost . Collectively , 417 km ( 259 mi ) of roadways washed away or sustained damage and 103 km ( 64 mi ) of river embankments were lost . Total losses reached 7 @.@ 81 billion RMB ( US $ 944 @.@ 6 million ) , nearly half of which took place in the industrial sector . Typhoon Longwang was the deadliest storm to strike China in 2005 with 147 lives lost . 
 Reconstruction and restoration within Fujian Province began shortly after the storm 's passage . By October 6 , power had been restored to most areas and roads were cleared . On November 13 , five officers stationed at the barracks that was destroyed were punished as accountable for the deaths of the 85 cadets . Following an investigation by the Central Military Commission and State Council , all five were dismissed from their posts while Hou <unk> , the director of the brigade , was to be prosecuted . 
 = Justice League ( Smallville ) = 
 The Justice League is a fictional group of superheroes on the television series , Smallville , who were adapted for television by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar . The Justice League originally included Oliver Queen , Bart Allen , Victor Stone , and Arthur Curry ; Clark Kent did not accept a role until three seasons later . As the team continued to appear in the series , new characters were introduced and subsequently joined the team . The original Justice League first appeared in the DC comic book The Brave and the Bold # 28 ( 1960 ) , and consisted of members Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Flash , Green Lantern , Aquaman , and the Martian Manhunter . In Smallville , the team did not make its first official appearance until the season six episode " Justice " , although each member had been previously introduced individually on various episodes since season four . In the series , the team never formalized a name for themselves , although the cast and crew officially recognized the team as the " Justice League " . 
 Series ' writers wanted to make sure the characters had similar characteristics to their comic book counterparts , but at the same time , could become a means for Clark Kent to learn about himself . The creative team attempted to stay true to the spirit of the comic in costume design for certain characters , while costumes for other characters were changed dramatically . All of the characters possess superpowers , with the exception of Green Arrow / Oliver Queen , so Entity FX was brought in to digitally create each character 's powers using 3 @-@ D and 2 @-@ D technologies . 
 In addition to the live @-@ action television series , the Justice League has also been featured in a promotional tie @-@ in with Toyota , through an interactive , online comic book . On an individual level , Oliver Queen received his own tie @-@ in that provided Sprint users with animated episodes depicting Oliver 's backstory on their mobile phones . Overall , the reception for the characters has been mixed . Critics have viewed Ritchson 's acting ability and the shortened introductory storylines for the team negatively , while the characters of Green Arrow and Black Canary were viewed more positively . 
 = = Roles in Smallville = = 
 = = = Individual storylines = = = 
 Although the Justice League first appeared in season six 's " Justice " , each member had their own introduction and recurring storylines in the series prior to the formation of the team . The first member to appear on Smallville , other than Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) , was Bart Allen ( Kyle Gallner ) , who was introduced in the season four episode " Run " . In the episode , Bart is the first person Clark discovers to have a superhuman ability — being able to run at supersonic speeds — that was not created from exposure to kryptonite . When Clark and Bart first meet , Bart is a pickpocket who saves Jonathan Kent ( John Schneider ) from being hit by a truck . Eventually , Clark convinces Bart to give up his life of crime . Arthur Curry ( Alan Ritchson ) , who has the ability to swim at superhuman speeds and create energy blasts through the water , is next to appear in the season five episode " Aqua " . Arthur arrives in Smallville to stop an underwater weapon developed by Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) , which is killing the surrounding ocean life . Arthur and Clark initially clash on Arthur 's tactics ; Arthur tries to blow up Lex 's lab , while Clark insists that they should simply talk to Lex face @-@ to @-@ face and ask him to stop . Eventually , Arthur and Clark locate and destroy the weapon outright . Season five also introduced Victor Stone ( Lee Thompson Young ) in the episode " Cyborg " . Here , it is revealed that Victor was mortally wounded in a car accident that also took the lives of his family , but Lex 's company , LuthorCorp , took Victor 's body to a research lab where they experimented on him — ultimately replacing his bone skeleton with a metal one . Clark attempts to provide Victor with a safe haven after Victor escapes from Lex 's facility . Clark manages to convince Lex to stop hunting Victor , who eventually leaves Smallville with his girlfriend . 
 Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) , a billionaire who left Star City to live in Metropolis , arrives in the season six episode " Sneeze " to investigate Lex Luthor . In the episode " Arrow " , Oliver begins masquerading around Metropolis as a costumed vigilante , named " Green Arrow " by Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) , who robs from the rich — only taking objects he knows were already stolen by those wealthy individuals — and gives to the poor . Oliver also begins a romantic relationship with Lois . Eventually , Oliver 's vigilante life takes priority , and he and Lois break up when Oliver is forced to leave town to investigate more of Lex 's machinations . In season eight 's premiere , Oliver moves back to Metropolis , and begins searching for Lex , who has been missing since the season seven finale . Oliver believes he has tracked Lex 's whereabouts in the episode " Bride " , but he does not find Lex when he arrives ; instead , Oliver reveals that he plans to kill Lex when he does find him because of the threat he perceives Lex poses to both Clark and the rest of the world . In the episode " Requiem " , Oliver takes controlling interest in LuthorCorp after Tess Mercer ( Cassidy Freeman ) , Lex 's handpicked successor for LuthorCorp , sells him the company . As a result , Lex attempts to kill him . Oliver tracks Lex down and blows @-@ up the medical caravan that Lex was supposedly traveling in . 
 John Jones ( Phil Morris ) is also introduced in season six , where he appears in " Labyrinth " , guiding Clark out of a fictitious reality that was created by Dr. Hudson , a Phantom Zone criminal attempting to take over Clark 's body . It is revealed in the season 's finale that he has been working with Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) , and was once an emissary of Clark 's biological father , Jor @-@ El . John explains that he has been watching over Clark since his arrival on Earth , instructed by Jor @-@ El only to interfere if Clark 's life was in true danger . In the season seven premiere , John lends assistance to Clark in defeating the last of the Phantom Zone criminals , which turned itself into Clark 's doppelganger . In the season eight premiere , John sacrifices his own abilities to save Clark 's life . In season eight 's " Prey " , John informs Clark that he has taken a job as a Metropolis police detective so that he can be around if Clark needs assistance . In season nine 's " Absolute Justice " , John has his Martian powers restored by Dr. Fate ( Brent <unk> ) and then helps Clark and other members of the Justice Society of America defeat a mutual enemy . 
 = = = Justice League storylines = = = 
 The Justice League made its first official team appearance in the season six episode " Justice " . Here , Clark discovers that Oliver has also met Bart , Arthur , and Victor , and that he has organized them into a team of superheroes focused on stopping those who believe that they are above the law . Oliver reveals that Lex has been conducting experiments on people who developed special abilities thanks to exposure to kryptonite . Clark and Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) work alongside the team to dismantle Lex 's local experimental facility , known as Level 33 @.@ 1 , and after destroying the building , Oliver and his team leave Smallville to seek out Lex 's other facilities around the world . Oliver asks Clark to become a full fledged member of the team , but Clark turns Oliver down explaining that he is not ready to do that . In the season seven episode " Siren " , Lex puts a bounty on Oliver and his team , convincing the vigilante Dinah Lance ( Alaina Huffman ) , who goes by the name " Black Canary " and has the ability to emit an ultrasonic sound wave with a single scream , that these individuals are terrorists . In the end , Clark proves to Dinah that Lex lied to her , so she decides to join Oliver 's team . In the season eight premiere , the Justice League set out to find Clark , who has disappeared following the destruction of his Fortress of Solitude in the previous season 's finale . Clark is eventually found , but the true identities of the League 's members are compromised , so the team decides to disband until it is safe again for them to work together . In the season eight episode " Hex " , Oliver reforms his team and gives Chloe the role of " Watchtower " . In that season 's finale , it is revealed that the League has been tracking the genetically engineered Kryptonian known as Doomsday . Oliver tries to convince Clark to kill the creature , but Clark refuses and instead informs Dinah and Bart that Oliver murdered Lex , while simultaneously kicking Oliver off of the team . Using subterfuge , Dinah and Bart betray Clark , revealing that they were in agreement with Oliver 's plan all along , and capture Doomsday to force Clark into a fight . Their plan backfires , and Doomsday injures all of them during his escape . In the end , Clark defeats the creature by burying him a mile underground , and Oliver and his team apologize for not following Clark 's plan from the start . The League leaves Metropolis afterward , feeling responsible for the death of Jimmy Olsen ( Aaron Ashmore ) , who was killed after Doomsday escaped . In response , Chloe turns a Metropolis clock tower , which is also the tallest building in the city , into the Watchtower base with the hope that the team will one day return home . The team eventually reforms off screen , and assists Clark in hunting down other Kryptonians who are attempting to take over the Earth . Starting with the ninth episode of the final season , " Patriot " , the Justice League are alerted to the arrival of Darkseid , and for the rest of the season they attempt to stop him before he destroys Earth . Subsequent episodes " Dominion " and " Prophecy " also imply that Michael Carter ( Booster Gold ) and Kara have joined the team . 
 = = Portrayals = = 
 The producers wanted to use either Wally West or Barry Allen as the Flash alter ego for the show , but DC Comics would only approve the use of Bart Allen . In DC Comics , Bart typically goes by the codename of " Impulse " , but did have a short series in 2006 where he took over the role of Flash . Kyle Gallner learned through his agent about a superhero role being called for on Smallville , and when he learned that it was going to be Impulse , he convinced himself that he was going to win the role . Gallner went in for two auditions , but was so disappointed with his performance during the second audition that he believed he had failed to get the role . His fear was unfounded when the producers offered him the part . 
 After being cast as Arthur Curry , a character who had previously never been officially portrayed in any live @-@ action form , Alan Ritchson did some research on his character when he discovered that Aquaman had a " serious ... fan base " . Ritchson wanted to live up to the expectations he felt fans of the character would have . Like Gallner , Ritchson did not expect to be a part of the show again . After season five , there was an attempt to launch an Aquaman television series , which ultimately was never picked up . Ritchson relished the opportunity to return when he was called in to appear in the episode that would feature the first official appearance of the Justice League . 
 Until season five 's " Cyborg " , the DC Comics superheroes who had paid Clark a visit on the show were all members of the Justice League of America , but Gough and Miller felt that Victor Stone shared a " relatable dilemma " with Clark — the fact that both Victor and Clark 's abilities get in the way of their romantic relationships with the women they love — and was someone the developers felt was just an interesting character . Victor normally goes by the alias " Cyborg " and is a member of the Teen Titans in the comics . Casting Lee Thompson Young was something the producers had always wanted to do , even before they had decided to bring in Cyborg . The actor revealed that his first contact with the Cyborg character came not from the comics , but from the Teen Titans animated television series . According to Young , he was fortunate that this version of Victor Stone was Smallville 's spin on the character , and as such , the majority of the character 's background was in the script . While preparing , Young expressed his pleasure in the fact that the producers decided to keep Victor 's robotic parts internal , as opposed to the comic version , where half of Cyborg 's visible body is covered in metal . 
 According to Gough , Justin Hartley was the producers ' first choice to play the role of Oliver Queen , and his alter ego Green Arrow . Oliver was designed to provide an alternative view for what it means to be a hero . At the same time , the producers wanted a character that could impact the lives of both Clark and Lois . The actor is also the first to portray Oliver Queen / Green Arrow in any live @-@ action media . Hartley believed that it was the season six episode " Reunion " that really helped him to understand his character . In the episode , it is revealed that Oliver was " a jerk to Lex " when the two were at school together , and after another kid falls into a coma because of Oliver and Lex 's actions , Oliver decides to start a new path for himself . According to Hartley , this allowed the actor to " justify why someone would put their life in danger every night and have such strong feelings about going out and being this social advocate " . Hartley was a recurring guest in the sixth and seventh seasons , but became a series regular in season eight . 
 Alaina Huffman auditioned for Smallville without being aware of which role was being cast , and was offered the part of Dinah Lance / Black Canary . When the producers informed her of how major this character is to the DC mythology , Huffman used various comic books and online sources to learn more about her character . Approached by the producers , Phil Morris auditioned twice for the role of John Jones / Martian Manhunter , and then waited three weeks before receiving confirmation of the role . Morris relished the new design of the character , stepping away from the cape and tights , and going with a more contemporary look . He classified John Jones as Jor @-@ El 's " tool , security force , his guardian , and his protector " . The actor has stated that he would like his character to lead the future Justice League on the show , as he sees John Jones as a natural leader . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 When Steven S. DeKnight was writing the episode " Run " for the first official appearance of Bart Allen , he knew he had to give the character certain characteristics that embodied his comic book counterpart . DeKnight knew Bart had faster than Clark , because in the comic , that is one advantage Flash has over Superman . DeKnight also featured Bart as a " smart @-@ ass " , after being inspired by the sarcastic Flash that appears in the animated television series , Justice League . DeKnight 's belief is that Bart enjoys his powers , and would not exhibit the more " somber or serious " characteristics of other character . As Gallner pointed out , Bart accepts who he is , and what he can do , and he even abuses his gifts somewhat . The difference between him and Clark is that Bart is not afraid to show the world what he can do . Gallner also suggested that in his character 's initial appearance , Bart is living in a " confused " state , because he has developed these extraordinary powers , his parents do not accept him , and he ends up turning to thievery just to take care of himself . 
 Ritchson described Arthur Curry as someone who will " do anything to save what he loves " . The actor goes on to say that Arthur is " passionate about nature , about the earth , and about the seas " , and is not afraid to use his abilities to save those things that are dear to him . When comparing his character to Clark , Ritchson stated that Arthur is more confident in his abilities , and already knows what he can do and what his path is in life . Another big difference the actor pointed out is that unlike Clark , Arthur is willing to sacrifice people and things if it means preserving the greater good . When he first appears , one of Victor Stone 's key characteristics is that both he and Clark can relate to the fact that they feel their abilities inhibit them from having a true relationship with the women they love . The writers tried to create parallels between the characters to emphasize this more , like Victor 's fear of telling his girlfriend the truth about what LuthorCorp did to his body , and Clark 's fear of Lana Lang discovering he is an alien . Writer Tracy Bellomo characterized Oliver as a guy that does not take himself very seriously , and enjoys making fun of people that try to take him that way . Bellomo believed that this is one of the reasons that Oliver is attracted to Lois , with the other being that Lois provides a challenge for him . Oliver 's relationship with Clark is designed to " broaden Clark 's rather limited horizons " , and to teach Clark that a world exists beyond Smallville . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 In the episode " Wither " , Oliver and Lois attend a costumed ball , where Oliver dresses up as Robin Hood . The designers decided to model Oliver 's costume after the comic book character Green Arrow . Costume designer Caroline Cranstoun designed Oliver 's official Green Arrow costume in conjunction with illustrator Andy Poon . To hide his face , Green Arrow typically wears a mask over his eyes , but Cranstoun and Keith Christensen , of Ocean Drive Leather , opted to use a hood and a pair of dark sunglasses to hide Oliver 's face . Cranstoun revealed that Miles Millar was the one who came up with the hood idea . The costume is also made entirely out of leather , as the creative team wanted to keep away from using tights . Hartley was very impressed with the costume , but confessed that it was uncomfortable to wear because it had layers of leather , and he had to wear boots with four inch lifts . 
 After creating Oliver 's Green Arrow costume , Cranstoun had the task of crafting updated costume looks for Bart , Arthur , and Victor for the " Justice " episode . Cranstoun explained that even though Victor does not have any metal on his physical body like his comic book counterpart , she wanted to include a metallic look to his costume . The designer tried to give Victor a more " futuristic " feel , along with " a bit of Transformer @-@ y " essence , by including angular pieces on his vest and coloring them silver , black , and purple . For Bart , the costume designers tried to take what was used in his season four appearance and move that to the next level . In season four , Bart wore a red hoodie with yellow cargo pants , which were used to reflect his teenage identity . With his Justice League appearance , they tried to give the character an appearance that seemed faster . His yellow cargo pants were replaced with red jeans , and his red hoodie was updated to incorporate more of a lightning bolt logo throughout the piece . 
 Arthur 's costume was the easiest to create , as the color scheme mirrored his comic book counterpart , and was constructed to give a " wetsuit look " . The costume was also designed to be more form @-@ fitting , to complement Ritchson 's physique . Victor and Arthur 's tops were also hoodie variations . When designing Dinah Lance 's Black Canary costume , certain aspects of the comic book character were kept , while others changed entirely . For instance , the character retains her classic fishnet stockings , but the external , black mask the character wears is swapped for a painted mask . Cranstoun researched the various versions of Black Canary 's costume , looking through the 1940s and 50s , to try to come up with the right version for the show . Cranstoun explained that she primarily came across two versions . One version reminded the designer of a Playboy Bunny , with a " curvy , corseted , strapless thing that was not at all action @-@ friendly " . The other was more reminiscent of Lara Croft and Tank Girl , which is the route Cranstoun took . What Cranstoun created was a " zipped , sleeveless body suit with a boot that was really flat and practical " . The designer also kept the yellow accents the comic version had , as well as the long gloves . The filming crew did test shots with various masks for the character , including a leather mask reminiscent of the comic book character 's look , before going with the painted variation . 
 Hartley is quick to point out that before " Justice " , the series did not focus on " the costumes and the capes , the flying and the superhero stuff " , because they have their " no flights , no tights " rule in effect . That changed with " Justice " , and Hartley suggested that the actors really had to commit themselves to their roles while wearing the costumes , " otherwise you look like a standup comedian who doesn 't like his jokes very much " . Young stated that he was one of the luckiest out of the group , because he only had to wear a silver vest and regular pants , unlike Ritchson , who had to put on a " <unk> Speedo " . Ritchson felt you could get distracted by what you were wearing , but it was best to try to take your mind off of the subject . Hartley , Ritchson , and Young stated that they felt sorry for Gallner for having to wear a costume that they believed " sucked " . The group described Gallner 's costume as something his mom might have made with " some cotton fabric and a Magic Marker " . 
 = = = Creating superpowers = = = 
 In order to illustrate the special abilities of the Justice League members , special effects company Entity FX had to come in and digitally create the powers for each character . Senior Producer at Entity FX , Trent Smith , explained that they wanted to give Bart 's super speed a " more current " look , so they employed 3D techniques in conjunction with the 2D graphics from season four to create a " hybrid " image for the screen . Smith explained that the 3D technology allowed the team to " [ choose ] a path for [ Bart ] that he may not be able to achieve in the 2D composite world " . Entity FX used Autodesk Maya and Adobe After Effects to create the 3D stream that follows Bart when he is running at super speed . 
 For Victor , Entity FX tried to create digital imagery of the character 's inner workings to give the audience the chance to see how his robotic side operates . For instance , Entity FX visually walked the audience through the process of how Victor 's CPU downloads the schematics and diagrams to Lex 's Level 33 @.@ 1 facility , as well as disarming the security . Creating abilities for Arthur posed their own challenges , as there were not a lot of opportunities to put the character in the water when he was in the Mid @-@ West . Using the technology they had when Arthur first came to Smallville , as well as the effects used in the unaired pilot for Aquaman , Entity FX was able to digitally create both Arthur and the water he swims in for the character 's arrival shot at Level 33 @.@ 1 . When creating Arthur 's super swimming speed , the team attempted to give the imagery a look similar to that of a torpedo gliding through the water . The team battled back and forth on how to illustrate Arthur 's movements , deciding between having the character leave a trail of bubbles like a torpedo , or " maneuvering around the water and ... actually traveling with the bubbles " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When judging individual appearances , DVD Verdict 's Jennifer Malkowski felt that Alan Ritchson 's performance as Arthur Curry in " Aqua " was rather " wooden " , while Filip <unk> , of IGN , felt that the introductions for Victor Stone and Arthur Curry were simply wasted , as the characters are not " given anything to do " in the episodes . Commenting on the introduction of Oliver Queen 's Green Arrow persona in the season six episode " Arrow " , IGN 's Chris Carabott felt that the series took its time developing a character that fit the style of the show . Carabott acknowledged that Green Arrow 's costume , though not exactly like in the comics , respects the spirit of the character in its design ; the gadgets he uses make it feel like the producers are taking a page out of the Justice League Unlimited book , which makes for " quality entertainment " . 
 Carabott felt that Phil Morris did well as John Jones / Martian Manhunter but lacked a proper introduction , stating : " Phil Morris does a respectable job of portraying John Jones in the few scenes we see him in . He lacks the screen presence of someone like Carl Lumbly , who voiced the character on Justice League , but Morris holds his own and delivers the lines in that strong , straight forward tone that is signature Manhunter . " Alan Blair , editor of Airlock Alpha , felt that Smallville 's approach to Black Canary succeeded where the television series Birds of Prey failed . First , Smallville dropped the idea of " meta @-@ humans " , which Blair believed is what doomed Birds of Prey , managed to make Black Canary look more like her comic book counterpart , and also give her Canary Cry " some level of credibility " . Carabott acknowledged that Smallville created a " fairly good depiction " of Black Canary , but disagreed with certain <unk> choices . First , Carabott did not appreciate the removal of Black Canary 's long , blonde hair , or the addition of make @-@ up around the eyes that gave the character the look of " Pris from Blade Runner " . Carabott stated that Huffman 's acting came off as " a little over @-@ the @-@ top at times " , but overall he felt that she was the right choice for Smallville . 
 Carabott also had his own feelings about the first official " Justice League " appearance in season six 's " Justice " . The writer suggested that the first live @-@ action appearance of the League since the failed pilot back in the 1990s deserved more than just a single episode . Carabott stated that at least two or three episodes would have been needed to properly tell the narrative of their introduction . Instead , he felt like the character introductions were rushed , even though they had all appeared on the series prior to season six . " Justice " would go on to earn the highest ratings of any episode in season six , with 5 @.@ 26 million viewers . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Following the end of the sixth season , DC Direct announced at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con that they would be releasing new action figures , this time modeled after Smallville 's Justice League as they appeared in the season six episode " Justice " . The toys featured detailed likenesses of Welling , Hartley , Ritchson , Gallner , and Young . 
 = = Other media appearances = = 
 = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = 
 At various points throughout the series , the studio discussed developing individual shows for Bart , Oliver , Arthur , and the entire Justice League . The topic of a television series based on the Flash came underway a year before the character made his first appearance on Smallville . According to writer Steven S. DeKnight , there was creative differences over how a Flash television series should be handled , given the previous attempt at translating the character to the small screen in 1990 . DeKnight explained that the studio wanted to create a Flash who was a " time @-@ traveling college student from Gotham City " . As a result , the series never materialized , and the character was ultimately brought to Smallville . 
 Following the appearance of Arthur Curry , which became one of the highest rated episodes of that season , Smallville developers Al Gough and Miles Millar began work on an Aquaman pilot for The WB Television Network , with Justin Hartley as Arthur Curry . As work progressed on season five 's " Aqua " , the character was recognized to have potential for his own series . The season five episode was never meant to be a backdoor pilot for an Aquaman television spin @-@ off , so Alan Ritchson was never considered for the role . Gough stated in a November 2005 interview that the series would have put a different spin on the Aquaman mythology . Although Gough did not look at the new series as a true spin @-@ off , he did suggest an interest in doing a crossover with Smallville . Aquaman is currently the only series to go into production , though it was ultimately not picked up by The CW network , which had formed from a merger between The WB and UPN during the production of the pilot . 
 During the sixth season , there was talk about creating a new series based on the Green Arrow / Oliver Queen character . Hartley refused to talk about the possibility of a spin @-@ off during the filming of the sixth season out of respect for his role on Smallville . The actor felt he should respect what Smallville had accomplished in five seasons , and not " steal the spotlight " by thinking he was better than he was just because there was " talk " of a spin @-@ off after only two appearances on the show . According to Hartley , " talking " was as far as the spin @-@ off ever got . According to Gough , the Green Arrow spin @-@ off would have introduced the idea of Oliver acting in more of a " Professor X " role , where he takes in people with superpowers who have no place to go and trains them . The series would have used characters that would be more easily cleared by the film division at Warner Bros. As DeKnight clarified , the series would have featured the introduction of new characters — some from the Teen Titans and others from the DC Comics Universe — as well as going into more depth for the background story of its primary characters , like Bart , Victor , and Arthur . As with the other potential series , this one never came to fruition . 
 = = = Mobile phone / online tie @-@ ins = = = 
 Although the team 's prominent appearances are on the television series , there have been additional media appearances based around marketing tie @-@ ins . In early 2007 , Oliver Queen received a personal treatment with a promotional tie @-@ in with Sprint , titled Smallville Legends : The Oliver Queen Chronicles . The series looked at the origins of Oliver 's alternate identity . On April 19 , 2007 , a tie @-@ in with Toyota promoting their new <unk> featured an online comic strip as interstitial programs during new episodes of Smallville — titled Smallville Legends : Justice & Doom . The interactive comic was based on the episode " Justice " , and picks up after the events of that episode , following Oliver , Bart , Victor and Arthur , as they seek to destroy all of LuthorCorp 's secret experimental labs . The team eventually uncovers a prototype soldier LuthorCorp is working on , that combines the superpowers of various kryptonite enhanced individuals and places them into a single soldier . The online comic then directly ties @-@ into the television series when Oliver and his team , off @-@ screen , contact Clark in the episode Prototype , and tell him how to defeat one of these soldiers . The online series allowed viewers to investigate alongside the fictional team in an effort to win prizes . Stephan Nilson wrote all five episodes , while working with a team of artists for the illustrations . The plot for each comic episode would be given to Nilson at the same time the production crew for Smallville was filming their current television episode . Artist Steve Scott would draw comic book panels , which would be sent to a group called Motherland . That group would review the drawings and tell Scott which images to draw on a separate overlay . This allowed for multiple objects to be moved in and out of the same frame . Before and after the first appearance of the League on Smallville , there were talks among studio heads about spinning off individual characters , or the entire team , into their own television shows , but nothing came to fruition . Smallville is the first series — television or film — to feature live @-@ action portrayals of Aquaman , Green Arrow , and Cyborg . 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 In 2012 , the Smallville series was continued through the comic book medium with Smallville : Season 11 . Written by Bryan Q. Miller , who also wrote for the television series , the first issues features Chloe Sullivan referencing that each team member has established an info hub on their own territory , with communication systems linked to the Watchtower . In the second issue , Lex Luthor discovers that Queen Industries is building a facility on the far side of Earth 's moon as a base for the Justice League , and its construction is under John Jones ' supervision . Despite having died after her encounter with Lex Luthor , the League 's liaison is Tess Mercer , whose consciousness is revealed to be bonded to her half @-@ brother 's mind . Luthor sees this as an opportunity to learn the heroes ' secrets before removing Tess from his mind , and creates measures to prevent them from finding out his situations with Tess . Despite his efforts , Tess still manage to send her message to the League of her predicaments with Lex , and they extract her consciousness from him and uploaded it to the Watchtower computer system as a temporary home for her mind . 
 In issue five , the Justice League begins to investigate the warning given by a parallel universe version of Chloe Sullivan about a " Crisis " . It is also implied that Oliver Queen has known Bruce Wayne , who is secretly the vigilante Batman of Gotham City , since childhood , due to Wayne 's father Thomas Wayne was invited to join the secret society , Veritas , by Lionel Luthor . Batman , along with his partner , Nightwing ( Barbara Gordon ) , arrive to Metropolis in search of his parents ' killer Joe Chill , who works as a contact for Intergang . 
 Bart Allen returns in the ninth issue , donning a new costume and explores the source of his powers : the Speed Force , as well as encountering the Black Flash from it while battling a bunch of super @-@ intelligent gorillas in Paris . Bart once again challenges Clark to a race , this time with the latter in flight . In the eleventh issue , it reveals that Bart got his powers after the JSA member Jay Garrick refuses to run , forcing the Speed Force 's sentience to create a new speedster to take his place . In a story arc chronologically parallel to Clark and Bart 's , while Batman and Nightwing chase members of the criminal gang in Gotham , the Mutants , the latter is attacked by a White Martian and left injured . John Jones appears and offers his assistance to Bruce on investigating the attack . Jones also adapts the superhero identity " Martian Manhunter " . In addition , the new Watchtower outpost on the Moon is shown being built , and that S.T.A.R. Labs is helping Queen Industries in its construction , as well as using Emil Hamilton 's Hazardous Environmental Drones as crew . It also reveals that Batman has joined the Justice League . 
 = Franz Kafka = 
 Franz Kafka ( 3 July 1883 – 3 June 1924 ) was a German @-@ language writer of novels and short stories who is widely regarded as one of the major figures of 20th @-@ century literature . His work , which fuses elements of realism and the fantastic , typically features isolated protagonists faced by bizarre or surrealistic predicaments and incomprehensible social @-@ bureaucratic powers , and has been interpreted as exploring themes of alienation , existential anxiety , guilt , and absurdity . His best known works include " Die Verwandlung " ( " The Metamorphosis " ) , Der Process ( The Trial ) , and Das Schloss ( The Castle ) . The term Kafkaesque has entered the English language to describe situations like those in his writing . 
 Kafka was born into a middle @-@ class , German @-@ speaking Jewish family in Prague , the capital of the Kingdom of Bohemia , then part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire . He trained as a lawyer , and after completing his legal education he was employed with an insurance company , forcing him to relegate writing to his spare time . Over the course of his life , Kafka wrote hundreds of letters to family and close friends , including his father , with whom he had a strained and formal relationship . He died in 1924 at the age of 40 from tuberculosis . 
 Few of Kafka 's works were published during his lifetime : the story collections Betrachtung ( Contemplation ) and Ein Landarzt ( A Country Doctor ) , and individual stories ( such as " Die Verwandlung " ) were published in literary magazines but received little public attention . Kafka 's unfinished works , including his novels Der Process , Das Schloss and Amerika ( also known as Der Verschollene , The Man Who Disappeared ) , were ordered by Kafka to be destroyed by his friend Max Brod , who nonetheless ignored his friend 's direction and published them after Kafka 's death . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Kafka was born near the Old Town Square in Prague , then part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire . His family were middle @-@ class Ashkenazi Jews . His father , Hermann Kafka ( 1852 – 1931 ) , was the fourth child of Jakob Kafka , a shochet or ritual slaughterer in <unk> , a Czech village with a large Jewish population located near <unk> in southern Bohemia . Hermann brought the Kafka family to Prague . After working as a travelling sales representative , he eventually became a fancy goods and clothing retailer who employed up to 15 people and used the image of a jackdaw ( <unk> in Czech , pronounced and colloquially written as <unk> ) as his business logo . Kafka 's mother , Julie ( 1856 – 1934 ) , was the daughter of Jakob <unk> , a prosperous retail merchant in Poděbrady , and was better educated than her husband . 
 Kafka 's parents probably spoke a German influenced by Yiddish that was sometimes pejoratively called <unk> , but , as the German language was considered the vehicle of social mobility , they probably encouraged their children to speak High German . Hermann and Julie had six children , of whom Franz was the eldest . Franz 's two brothers , Georg and Heinrich , died in infancy before Franz was seven ; his three sisters were Gabriele ( " Ellie " ) ( 1889 – 1944 ) , Valerie ( " Valli " ) ( 1890 – 1942 ) and <unk> ( " Ottla " ) ( 1892 – 1943 ) . They all died during the Holocaust of World War II . Valli was deported to the Łódź Ghetto in Poland in 1942 , but that is the last documentation of her . 
 Hermann is described by the biographer Stanley <unk> as a " huge , selfish , overbearing businessman " and by Franz Kafka as " a true Kafka in strength , health , appetite , loudness of voice , eloquence , self @-@ satisfaction , worldly dominance , endurance , presence of mind , [ and ] knowledge of human nature " . On business days , both parents were absent from the home , with Julie Kafka working as many as 12 hours each day helping to manage the family business . Consequently , Kafka 's childhood was somewhat lonely , and the children were reared largely by a series of governesses and servants . Kafka 's troubled relationship with his father is evident in his Brief an den Vater ( Letter to His Father ) of more than 100 pages , in which he complains of being profoundly affected by his father 's authoritarian and demanding character ; his mother , in contrast , was quiet and shy . The dominating figure of Kafka 's father had a significant influence on Kafka 's writing . 
 The Kafka family had a servant girl living with them in a cramped apartment . Franz 's room was often cold . In November 1913 the family moved into a bigger apartment , although Ellie and Valli had married and moved out of the first apartment . In early August 1914 , just after World War I began , the sisters did not know where their husbands were in the military and moved back in with the family in this larger apartment . Both Ellie and Valli also had children . Franz at age 31 moved into Valli 's former apartment , quiet by contrast , and lived by himself for the first time . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 From 1889 to 1893 , Kafka attended the Deutsche <unk> German boys ' elementary school at the <unk> <unk> / <unk> ( meat market ) , now known as <unk> Street . His Jewish education ended with his Bar Mitzvah celebration at the age of 13 . Kafka never enjoyed attending the synagogue and went with his father only on four high holidays a year . 
 After leaving elementary school in 1893 , Kafka was admitted to the rigorous classics @-@ oriented state gymnasium , <unk> Deutsches Gymnasium , an academic secondary school at Old Town Square , within the Kinský Palace . German was the language of instruction , but Kafka also spoke and wrote in Czech . He studied the latter at the gymnasium for eight years , achieving good grades . Although Kafka received compliments for his Czech , he never considered himself fluent in Czech , though he spoke German with a Czech accent . He completed his <unk> exams in 1901 . 
 Admitted to the Deutsche Karl @-@ Ferdinands @-@ Universität of Prague in 1901 , Kafka began studying chemistry , but switched to law after two weeks . Although this field did not excite him , it offered a range of career possibilities which pleased his father . In addition , law required a longer course of study , giving Kafka time to take classes in German studies and art history . He also joined a student club , <unk> @-@ und <unk> der Deutschen <unk> ( Reading and Lecture Hall of the German students ) , which organized literary events , readings and other activities . Among Kafka 's friends were the journalist Felix <unk> , who studied philosophy , the actor Yitzchak Lowy who came from an orthodox Hasidic Warsaw family , and the writers Oskar Baum and Franz Werfel . 
 At the end of his first year of studies , Kafka met Max Brod , a fellow law student who became a close friend for life . Brod soon noticed that , although Kafka was shy and seldom spoke , what he said was usually profound . Kafka was an avid reader throughout his life ; together he and Brod read Plato 's Protagoras in the original Greek , on Brod 's initiative , and Flaubert 's L <unk> <unk> and La Tentation de St. Antoine ( The Temptation of Saint Anthony ) in French , at his own suggestion . Kafka considered Fyodor Dostoyevsky , Flaubert , Nikolai Gogol , Franz <unk> , and Heinrich von Kleist to be his " true blood brothers " . Besides these , he took an interest in Czech literature and was also very fond of the works of Goethe . Kafka was awarded the degree of Doctor of Law on 18 July 1906 and performed an obligatory year of unpaid service as law clerk for the civil and criminal courts . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 On 1 November 1907 , Kafka was hired at the <unk> <unk> , an Italian insurance company , where he worked for nearly a year . His correspondence during that period indicates that he was unhappy with a working time schedule — from 08 : 00 until 18 : 00 — making it extremely difficult to concentrate on writing , which was assuming increasing importance to him . On 15 July 1908 , he resigned . Two weeks later he found employment more amenable to writing when he joined the Worker 's Accident Insurance Institute for the Kingdom of Bohemia . The job involved investigating and assessing compensation for personal injury to industrial workers ; accidents such as lost fingers or limbs were commonplace at this time . The management professor Peter Drucker credits Kafka with developing the first civilian hard hat while employed at the Worker 's Accident Insurance Institute , but this is not supported by any document from his employer . His father often referred to his son 's job as an insurance officer as a <unk> , literally " bread job " , a job done only to pay the bills ; Kafka often claimed to despise it . Kafka was rapidly promoted and his duties included processing and investigating compensation claims , writing reports , and handling appeals from businessmen who thought their firms had been placed in too high a risk category , which cost them more in insurance premiums . He would compile and compose the annual report on the insurance institute for the several years he worked there . The reports were received well by his superiors . Kafka usually got off work at 2 p.m. , so that he had time to spend on his literary work , to which he was committed . Kafka 's father also expected him to help out at and take over the family fancy goods store . In his later years , Kafka 's illness often prevented him from working at the insurance bureau and at his writing . Years later , Brod coined the term Der <unk> Prager Kreis ( " The Close Prague Circle " ) to describe the group of writers , which included Kafka , Felix <unk> and him . 
 In late 1911 , Elli 's husband Karl Hermann and Kafka became partners in the first asbestos factory in Prague , known as Prager <unk> Hermann & Co . , having used dowry money from Hermann Kafka . Kafka showed a positive attitude at first , dedicating much of his free time to the business , but he later resented the encroachment of this work on his writing time . During that period , he also found interest and entertainment in the performances of Yiddish theatre . After seeing a Yiddish theater troupe perform in October 1911 , for the next six months Kafka " immersed himself in Yiddish language and in Yiddish literature " . This interest also served as a starting point for his growing exploration of Judaism . It was at about this time that Kafka became a vegetarian . Around 1915 Kafka received his draft notice for military service in World War I , but his employers at the insurance institute arranged for a deferment because his work was considered essential government service . Later he attempted to join the military but was prevented from doing so by medical problems associated with tuberculosis , with which he was diagnosed in 1917 . In 1918 the Worker 's Accident Insurance Institute put Kafka on a pension due to his illness , for which there was no cure at the time , and he spent most of the rest of his life in sanatoriums . 
 = = = Private life = = = 
 Kafka was never married . According to Brod , Kafka was " tortured " by sexual desire and Kafka 's biographer Reiner Stach states that his life was full of " incessant womanising " and that he was filled with a fear of " sexual failure " . He visited brothels for most of his adult life and was interested in pornography . In addition , he had close relationships with several women during his life . On 13 August 1912 , Kafka met Felice Bauer , a relative of Brod , who worked in Berlin as a representative of a dictaphone company . A week after the meeting at Brod 's home , Kafka wrote in his diary : 
 Miss FB . When I arrived at Brod 's on 13 August , she was sitting at the table . I was not at all curious about who she was , but rather took her for granted at once . Bony , empty face that wore its emptiness openly . Bare throat . A blouse thrown on . Looked very domestic in her dress although , as it turned out , she by no means was . ( I alienate myself from her a little by inspecting her so closely ... ) Almost broken nose . Blonde , somewhat straight , unattractive hair , strong chin . As I was taking my seat I looked at her closely for the first time , by the time I was seated I already had an unshakeable opinion . 
 Shortly after this , Kafka wrote the story " Das Urteil " ( " The Judgment " ) in only one night and worked in a productive period on Der Verschollene ( The Man Who Disappeared ) and " Die Verwandlung " ( " The Metamorphosis " ) . Kafka and Felice Bauer communicated mostly through letters over the next five years , met occasionally , and were engaged twice . Kafka 's extant letters to her were published as Briefe an Felice ( Letters to Felice ) ; her letters do not survive . According to biographers Stach and James Hawes , around 1920 Kafka was engaged a third time , to Julie <unk> , a poor and uneducated hotel chambermaid . Although the two rented a flat and set a wedding date , the marriage never took place . During this time Kafka began a draft of the Letter to His Father , who objected to Julie because of her Zionist beliefs . Before the date of the intended marriage , he took up with yet another woman . While he needed women and sex in his life , he had low self @-@ confidence , felt sex was dirty , and was shy — especially about his body . 
 Stach and Brod state that during the time that Kafka knew Felice Bauer , he had an affair with a friend of hers , Margarethe " Grete " Bloch , a Jewish woman from Berlin . Brod says that Bloch gave birth to Kafka 's son , although Kafka never knew about the child . The boy , whose name is not known , was born in 1914 or 1915 and died in Munich in 1921 . However , Kafka 's biographer Peter @-@ André Alt claims that , while Bloch had a son , Kafka was not the father as the pair were never intimate . Stach states that Bloch had a son , but there is not solid proof but contradictory evidence that Kafka was the father . 
 Kafka was diagnosed with tuberculosis in August 1917 and moved for a few months to the Bohemian village of Zürau ( <unk> in the Czech language ) , where his sister Ottla worked on the farm of her brother @-@ in @-@ law Hermann . He felt comfortable there and later described this time as perhaps the best time in his life , probably because he had no responsibilities . He kept diaries and <unk> ( octavo ) . From the notes in these books , Kafka extracted 109 numbered pieces of text on Zettel , single pieces of paper in no given order . They were later published as Die <unk> <unk> oder <unk> über Sünde , Hoffnung , Leid und den <unk> Weg ( The Zürau Aphorisms or Reflections on Sin , Hope , Suffering , and the True Way ) . 
 In 1920 Kafka began an intense relationship with Milena <unk> , a Czech journalist and writer . His letters to her were later published as Letters to Milena . During a vacation in July 1923 to Graal @-@ <unk> on the Baltic Sea , Kafka met Dora Diamant , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old kindergarten teacher from an orthodox Jewish family . Kafka , hoping to escape the influence of his family to concentrate on his writing , moved briefly to Berlin and lived with Diamant . She became his lover and caused him to become interested in the Talmud . He worked on four stories , which he prepared to be published as Ein Hungerkünstler ( A Hunger Artist ) . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Kafka feared that people would find him mentally and physically repulsive . However , those who met him found him to possess a quiet and cool demeanor , obvious intelligence , and a dry sense of humour ; they also found him boyishly handsome , although of austere appearance . Brod compared Kafka to Heinrich von Kleist , noting that both writers had the ability to describe a situation realistically with precise details . Brod thought Kafka was one of the most entertaining people he had met ; Kafka enjoyed sharing humour with his friends , but also helped them in difficult situations with good advice . According to Brod , he was a passionate reciter , who was able to phrase his speaking as if it were music . Brod felt that two of Kafka 's most distinguishing traits were " absolute truthfulness " ( absolute <unk> ) and " precise conscientiousness " ( <unk> <unk> ) . He explored details , the inconspicuous , in depth and with such love and precision that things surfaced that were unforeseen , seemingly strange , but absolutely true ( nichts als wahr ) . 
 Although Kafka showed little interest in exercise as a child , he later showed interest in games and physical activity , as a good rider , swimmer , and rower . On weekends he and his friends embarked on long hikes , often planned by Kafka himself . His other interests included alternative medicine , modern education systems such as Montessori , and technical novelties such as airplanes and film . Writing was important to Kafka ; he considered it a " form of prayer " . He was highly sensitive to noise and preferred quiet when writing . 
 Pérez @-@ Álvarez has claimed that Kafka may have possessed a schizoid personality disorder . His style , it is claimed , not only in " Die Verwandlung " ( " The Metamorphosis " ) , but in various other writings , appears to show low to medium @-@ level schizoid traits , which explain much of his work . His anguish can be seen in this diary entry from 21 June 1913 : 
 The tremendous world I have in my head . But how to free myself and free them without ripping apart . And a thousand times rather tear in me they hold back or buried . For this I 'm here , that 's quite clear to me . 
 and in Zürau <unk> number 50 : 
 Man cannot live without a permanent trust in something indestructible within himself , though both that indestructible something and his own trust in it may remain permanently concealed from him . 
 Though Kafka never married , he held marriage and children in high esteem . He had several girlfriends . He may have suffered from an eating disorder . Doctor Manfred M. <unk> of the Psychiatric Clinic , University of Munich , presented " evidence for the hypothesis that the writer Franz Kafka had suffered from an atypical anorexia nervosa " , and that Kafka was not just lonely and depressed but also " occasionally suicidal " . In his 1995 book Franz Kafka , the Jewish Patient , Sander Gilman investigated " why a Jew might have been considered ' hypochondriac ' or ' homosexual ' and how Kafka incorporates aspects of these ways of understanding the Jewish male into his own self @-@ image and writing " . Kafka considered committing suicide at least once , in late 1912 . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Prior to World War I , Kafka attended several meetings of the Klub <unk> , a Czech anarchist , anti @-@ militarist , and anti @-@ clerical organization . Hugo Bergmann , who attended the same elementary and high schools as Kafka , fell out with Kafka during their last academic year ( 1900 – 1901 ) because " [ Kafka 's ] socialism and my Zionism were much too strident " . " Franz became a socialist , I became a Zionist in 1898 . The synthesis of Zionism and socialism did not yet exist " . Bergmann claims that Kafka wore a red carnation to school to show his support for socialism . In one diary entry , Kafka made reference to the influential anarchist philosopher Peter Kropotkin : " Don 't forget Kropotkin ! " 
 During the communist era , the legacy of Kafka 's work for Eastern bloc socialism was hotly debated . Opinions ranged from the notion that he satirised the bureaucratic bungling of a crumbling Austria @-@ Hungarian Empire , to the belief that he embodied the rise of socialism . A further key point was Marx 's theory of alienation . While the orthodox position was that Kafka 's depictions of alienation were no longer relevant for a society that had supposedly eliminated alienation , a 1963 conference held in <unk> , Czechoslovakia , on the eightieth anniversary of his birth , reassessed the importance of Kafka 's portrayal of bureaucracy . Whether or not Kafka was a political writer is still an issue of debate . 
 = = = Judaism and Zionism = = = 
 Kafka grew up in Prague as a German @-@ speaking Jew . He was deeply fascinated by the Jews of Eastern Europe , who he thought possessed an intensity of spiritual life that was absent from Jews in the West . His diary is full of references to Yiddish writers . Yet he was at times alienated from Judaism and Jewish life : " What have I in common with Jews ? I have hardly anything in common with myself and should stand very quietly in a corner , content that I can breathe " . In his adolescent years , Kafka had declared himself an atheist . 
 Hawes suggests that Kafka , though very aware of his own Jewishness , did not incorporate it into his work , which , according to Hawes , lacks Jewish characters , scenes or themes . In the opinion of literary critic Harold Bloom , although Kafka was uneasy with his Jewish heritage , he was the quintessential Jewish writer . Lothar Kahn is likewise unequivocal : " The presence of Jewishness in Kafka 's oeuvre is no longer subject to doubt " . Pavel Eisner , one of Kafka 's first translators , interprets Der Process ( The Trial ) as the embodiment of the " triple dimension of Jewish existence in Prague ... his protagonist Josef K. is ( symbolically ) arrested by a German ( <unk> ) , a Czech ( <unk> ) , and a Jew ( <unk> ) . He stands for the ' guiltless guilt ' that imbues the Jew in the modern world , although there is no evidence that he himself is a Jew " . 
 In his essay Sadness in Palestine ? ! , Dan Miron explores Kafka 's connection to Zionism : " It seems that those who claim that there was such a connection and that Zionism played a central role in his life and literary work , and those who deny the connection altogether or dismiss its importance , are both wrong . The truth lies in some very elusive place between these two simplistic poles " . Kafka considered moving to Palestine with Felice Bauer , and later with Dora Diamant . He studied Hebrew while living in Berlin , hiring a friend of Brod 's from Palestine , Pua Bat @-@ <unk> , to tutor him and attending Rabbi Julius <unk> 's and Rabbi Julius Guttmann 's classes in the Berlin Hochschule für die Wissenschaft des Judentums ( College for the Study of Judaism ) . 
 Livia Rothkirchen calls Kafka the " symbolic figure of his era " . His contemporaries included numerous Jewish , Czech , and German writers who were sensitive to Jewish , Czech , and German culture . According to Rothkirchen , " This situation lent their writings a broad cosmopolitan outlook and a quality of exaltation bordering on transcendental metaphysical contemplation . An illustrious example is Franz Kafka " . 
 Towards the end of his life Kafka sent a postcard to his friend Hugo Bergman in Tel Aviv , announcing his intention to emigrate to Palestine . Bergman refused to host Kafka because he had young children and was afraid that Kafka would infect them with tuberculosis . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Kafka 's laryngeal tuberculosis worsened and in March 1924 he returned from Berlin to Prague , where members of his family , principally his sister Ottla , took care of him . He went to Dr. Hoffmann 's sanatorium in <unk> near Vienna for treatment on 10 April , and died there on 3 June 1924 . The cause of death seemed to be starvation : the condition of Kafka 's throat made eating too painful for him , and since parenteral nutrition had not yet been developed , there was no way to feed him . Kafka was editing " A Hunger Artist " on his deathbed , a story whose composition he had begun before his throat closed to the point that he could not take any nourishment . His body was brought back to Prague where he was buried on 11 June 1924 , in the New Jewish Cemetery in Prague @-@ Žižkov . Kafka was unknown during his own lifetime , but he did not consider fame important . He became famous soon after his death . The Kafka tombstone was designed by architect Leopold Ehrmann . 
 = = Works = = 
 All of Kafka 's published works , except some letters he wrote in Czech to Milena <unk> , were written in German . What little was published during his lifetime attracted scant public attention . 
 Kafka finished none of his full @-@ length novels and burned around 90 percent of his work , much of it during the period he lived in Berlin with Diamant , who helped him burn the drafts . In his early years as a writer , he was influenced by von Kleist , whose work he described in a letter to Bauer as frightening , and whom he considered closer than his own family . 
 = = = Stories = = = 
 Kafka 's earliest published works were eight stories which appeared in 1908 in the first issue of the literary journal Hyperion under the title Betrachtung ( Contemplation ) . He wrote the story " Beschreibung eines <unk> " ( " Description of a Struggle " ) in 1904 ; he showed it to Brod in 1905 who advised him to continue writing and convinced him to submit it to Hyperion . Kafka published a fragment in 1908 and two sections in the spring of 1909 , all in Munich . 
 In a creative outburst on the night of 22 September 1912 , Kafka wrote the story " Das Urteil " ( " The Judgment " , literally : " The Verdict " ) and dedicated it to Felice Bauer . Brod noted the similarity in names of the main character and his fictional fiancée , Georg Bendemann and Frieda <unk> , to Franz Kafka and Felice Bauer . The story is often considered Kafka 's breakthrough work . It deals with the troubled relationship of a son and his dominant father , facing a new situation after the son 's engagement . Kafka later described writing it as " a complete opening of body and soul " , a story that " evolved as a true birth , covered with filth and slime " . The story was first published in Leipzig in 1912 and dedicated " to Miss Felice Bauer " , and in subsequent editions " for F. " 
 In 1912 , Kafka wrote " Die Verwandlung " ( " The Metamorphosis " , or " The Transformation " ) , published in 1915 in Leipzig . The story begins with a travelling salesman waking to find himself transformed into a <unk> Ungeziefer , a monstrous vermin , Ungeziefer being a general term for unwanted and unclean animals . Critics regard the work as one of the seminal works of fiction of the 20th century . The story " In der <unk> " ( " In the Penal Colony " ) , dealing with an elaborate torture and execution device , was written in October 1914 , revised in 1918 , and published in Leipzig during October 1919 . The story " Ein Hungerkünstler " ( " A Hunger Artist " ) , published in the periodical Die neue Rundschau in 1924 , describes a victimized protagonist who experiences a decline in the appreciation of his strange craft of starving himself for extended periods . His last story , " Josefine , die <unk> oder Das Volk der <unk> " ( " Josephine the Singer , or the Mouse Folk " ) , also deals with the relationship between an artist and his audience . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 He began his first novel in 1912 ; its first chapter is the story " Der Heizer " ( " The Stoker " ) . Kafka called the work , which remained unfinished , Der Verschollene ( The Man Who Disappeared or The Missing Man ) , but when Brod published it after Kafka 's death he named it Amerika . The inspiration for the novel was the time spent in the audience of Yiddish theatre the previous year , bringing him to a new awareness of his heritage , which led to the thought that an innate appreciation for one 's heritage lives deep within each person . More explicitly humorous and slightly more realistic than most of Kafka 's works , the novel shares the motif of an oppressive and intangible system putting the protagonist repeatedly in bizarre situations . It uses many details of experiences of his relatives who had emigrated to America and is the only work for which Kafka considered an optimistic ending . 
 During 1914 , Kafka began the novel Der Process ( The Trial ) , the story of a man arrested and prosecuted by a remote , inaccessible authority , with the nature of his crime revealed neither to him nor to the reader . Kafka did not complete the novel , although he finished the final chapter . According to Nobel Prize winner and Kafka scholar Elias Canetti , Felice is central to the plot of Der Process and Kafka said it was " her story " . Canetti titled his book on Kafka 's letters to Felice Kafka 's Other Trial , in recognition of the relationship between the letters and the novel . Michiko Kakutani notes in a review for The New York Times that Kafka 's letters have the " earmarks of his fiction : the same nervous attention to minute particulars ; the same paranoid awareness of shifting balances of power ; the same atmosphere of emotional suffocation — combined , surprisingly enough , with moments of boyish ardor and delight . " 
 According to his diary , Kafka was already planning his novel Das Schloss ( The Castle ) , by 11 June 1914 ; however , he did not begin writing it until 27 January 1922 . The protagonist is the <unk> ( land surveyor ) named K. , who struggles for unknown reasons to gain access to the mysterious authorities of a castle who govern the village . Kafka 's intent was that the castle 's authorities notify K. on his deathbed that his " legal claim to live in the village was not valid , yet , taking certain auxiliary circumstances into account , he was to be permitted to live and work there " . Dark and at times surreal , the novel is focused on alienation , bureaucracy , the seemingly endless frustrations of man 's attempts to stand against the system , and the futile and hopeless pursuit of an unobtainable goal . Hartmut M. <unk> noted in his thesis : " Like dreams , his texts combine precise " realistic " detail with absurdity , careful observation and reasoning on the part of the protagonists with inexplicable obliviousness and carelessness . " 
 = = = Publishing history = = = 
 Kafka 's stories were initially published in literary periodicals . His first eight were printed in 1908 in the first issue of the bi @-@ monthly Hyperion . Franz <unk> published two dialogues in 1909 which became part of " Beschreibung eines <unk> " ( " Description of a Struggle " ) . A fragment of the story " Die Aeroplane in Brescia " ( " The Aeroplanes at Brescia " ) , written on a trip to Italy with Brod , appeared in the daily Bohemia on 28 September 1909 . On 27 March 1910 , several stories that later became part of the book Betrachtung were published in the Easter edition of Bohemia . In Leipzig during 1913 , Brod and publisher Kurt Wolff included " Das Urteil . Eine Geschichte von Franz Kafka . " ( " The Judgment . A Story by Franz Kafka . " ) in their literary yearbook for the art poetry Arkadia . The story " Vor dem Gesetz " ( " Before the Law " ) was published in the 1915 New Year 's edition of the independent Jewish weekly <unk> ; it was reprinted in 1919 as part of the story collection Ein Landarzt ( A Country Doctor ) and became part of the novel Der Process . Other stories were published in various publications , including Martin Buber 's Der Jude , the paper Prager Tagblatt , and the periodicals Die neue Rundschau , Genius , and Prager Presse . 
 Kafka 's first published book , Betrachtung ( Contemplation , or Meditation ) , was a collection of 18 stories written between 1904 and 1912 . On a summer trip to Weimar , Brod initiated a meeting between Kafka and Kurt Wolff ; Wolff published Betrachtung in the <unk> Verlag at the end of 1912 ( with the year given as 1913 ) . Kafka dedicated it to Brod , " Für M.B. " , and added in the personal copy given to his friend " So wie es hier schon <unk> ist , für meinen <unk> Max ‍ — ‌ Franz K. " ( " As it is already printed here , for my dearest Max " ) . 
 Kafka 's story " Die Verwandlung " ( " The Metamorphosis " ) was first printed in the October 1915 issue of Die Weißen Blätter , a monthly edition of expressionist literature , edited by René Schickele . Another story collection , Ein Landarzt ( A Country Doctor ) , was published by Kurt Wolff in 1919 , dedicated to Kafka 's father . Kafka prepared a final collection of four stories for print , Ein Hungerkünstler ( A Hunger Artist ) , which appeared in 1924 after his death , in Verlag Die <unk> . On 20 April 1924 , the Berliner <unk> @-@ Courier published Kafka 's essay on Adalbert <unk> . 
 = = = = Max Brod = = = = 
 Kafka left his work , both published and unpublished , to his friend and literary executor Max Brod with explicit instructions that it should be destroyed on Kafka 's death ; Kafka wrote : " Dearest Max , my last request : Everything I leave behind me ... in the way of diaries , manuscripts , letters ( my own and others ' ) , sketches , and so on , [ is ] to be burned unread " . Brod ignored this request and published the novels and collected works between 1925 and 1935 . He took many papers , which remain unpublished , with him in suitcases to Palestine when he fled there in 1939 . Kafka 's last lover , Dora Diamant ( later , <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , also ignored his wishes , secretly keeping 20 notebooks and 35 letters . These were confiscated by the Gestapo in 1933 , but scholars continue to search for them . 
 As Brod published the bulk of the writings in his possession , Kafka 's work began to attract wider attention and critical acclaim . Brod found it difficult to arrange Kafka 's notebooks in chronological order . One problem was that Kafka often began writing in different parts of the book ; sometimes in the middle , sometimes working backwards from the end . Brod finished many of Kafka 's incomplete works for publication . For example , Kafka left Der Process with unnumbered and incomplete chapters and Das Schloss with incomplete sentences and ambiguous content ; Brod rearranged chapters , copy edited the text , and changed the punctuation . Der Process appeared in 1925 in Verlag Die <unk> . Kurt Wolff published two other novels , Das Schloss in 1926 and Amerika in 1927 . In 1931 , Brod edited a collection of prose and unpublished stories as <unk> Bau der <unk> Mauer ( The Great Wall of China ) , including the story of the same name . The book appeared in the Gustav <unk> Verlag . Brod 's sets are usually called the " Definitive Editions " . 
 = = = = Modern editions = = = = 
 In 1961 , Malcolm Pasley acquired most of Kafka 's original handwritten work for the Oxford Bodleian Library . The text for Der Process was later purchased through auction and is stored at the German Literary Archives in Marbach am Neckar , Germany . Subsequently , Pasley headed a team ( including Gerhard Neumann , Jost Schillemeit and Jürgen Born ) which reconstructed the German novels ; S. Fischer Verlag republished them . Pasley was the editor for Das Schloss , published in 1982 , and Der Process ( The Trial ) , published in 1990 . Jost Schillemeit was the editor of Der Verschollene ( Amerika ) published in 1983 . These are called the " Critical Editions " or the " Fischer Editions " . 
 = = = = Unpublished papers = = = = 
 When Brod died in 1968 , he left Kafka 's unpublished papers , which are believed to number in the thousands , to his secretary Esther <unk> . She released or sold some , but left most to her daughters , Eva and Ruth , who also refused to release the papers . A court battle began in 2008 between the sisters and the National Library of Israel , which claimed these works became the property of the nation of Israel when Brod emigrated to British Palestine in 1939 . Esther <unk> sold the original manuscript of Der Process for US $ 2 million in 1988 to the German Literary Archive Museum of Modern Literature in Marbach am Neckar . Only Eva was still alive as of 2012 . A ruling by a Tel Aviv family court in 2010 held that the papers must be released and a few were , including a previously unknown story , but the legal battle continued . The <unk> claim the papers are their personal property , while the National Library argues they are " cultural assets belonging to the Jewish people " . The National Library also suggests that Brod bequeathed the papers to them in his will . The Tel Aviv Family Court ruled in October 2012 that the papers were the property of the National Library . 
 = = = Critical interpretations = = = 
 The poet W. H. Auden called Kafka " the Dante of the twentieth century " ; the novelist Vladimir Nabokov placed him among the greatest writers of the 20th century . Gabriel García Márquez noted the reading of Kafka 's " The Metamorphosis " showed him " that it was possible to write in a different way " . A prominent theme of Kafka 's work , first established in the short story " Das Urteil " , is father – son conflict : the guilt induced in the son is resolved through suffering and atonement . Other prominent themes and archetypes include alienation , physical and psychological brutality , characters on a terrifying quest , and mystical transformation . 
 Kafka 's style has been compared to that of Kleist as early as 1916 , in a review of " Die Verwandlung " and " Der Heizer " by Oscar Walzel in Berliner Beiträge . The nature of Kafka 's prose allows for varied interpretations and critics have placed his writing into a variety of literary schools . Marxists , for example , have sharply disagreed over how to interpret Kafka 's works . Some accused him of distorting reality whereas others claimed he was critiquing capitalism . The hopelessness and absurdity common to his works are seen as emblematic of existentialism . Some of Kafka 's books are influenced by the expressionist movement , though the majority of his literary output was associated with the experimental modernist genre . Kafka also touches on the theme of human conflict with bureaucracy . William Burroughs claims that such work is centred on the concepts of struggle , pain , solitude , and the need for relationships . Others , such as Thomas Mann , see Kafka 's work as allegorical : a quest , metaphysical in nature , for God . 
 According to Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari , the themes of alienation and persecution , although present in Kafka 's work , have been over @-@ emphasised by critics . They argue Kafka 's work is more deliberate and subversive — and more joyful — than may first appear . They point out that reading his work while focusing on the futility of his characters ' struggles reveals Kafka 's play of humour ; he is not necessarily commenting on his own problems , but rather pointing out how people tend to invent problems . In his work , Kafka often created malevolent , absurd worlds . Kafka read drafts of his works to his friends , typically concentrating on his humorous prose . The writer Milan Kundera suggests that Kafka 's surrealist humour may have been an inversion of Dostoyevsky 's presentation of characters who are punished for a crime . In Kafka 's work a character is punished although a crime has not been committed . Kundera believes that Kafka 's inspirations for his characteristic situations came both from growing up in a patriarchal family and living in a totalitarian state . 
 Attempts have been made to identify the influence of Kafka 's legal background and the role of law in his fiction . Most interpretations identify aspects of law and legality as important in his work , in which the legal system is often oppressive . The law in Kafka 's works , rather than being representative of any particular legal or political entity , is usually interpreted to represent a collection of anonymous , incomprehensible forces . These are hidden from the individual but control the lives of the people , who are innocent victims of systems beyond their control . Critics who support this absurdist interpretation cite instances where Kafka describes himself in conflict with an absurd universe , such as the following entry from his diary : 
 Enclosed in my own four walls , I found myself as an immigrant imprisoned in a foreign country ; ... I saw my family as strange aliens whose foreign customs , rites , and very language defied comprehension ; ... though I did not want it , they forced me to participate in their bizarre rituals ; ... I could not resist . 
 However , James Hawes argues many of Kafka 's descriptions of the legal proceedings in Der Process — metaphysical , absurd , bewildering and nightmarish as they might appear — are based on accurate and informed descriptions of German and Austrian criminal proceedings of the time , which were inquisitorial rather than adversarial . Although he worked in insurance , as a trained lawyer Kafka was " keenly aware of the legal debates of his day " . In an early 21st @-@ century publication that uses Kafka 's office writings as its point of departure , <unk> Ghosh states that with Kafka , law " has no meaning outside its fact of being a pure force of domination and determination " . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 The earliest English translations of Kafka 's works were by Edwin and Willa Muir , who in 1930 translated the first German edition of Das Schloss . This was published as The Castle by Secker & Warburg in England and Alfred A. Knopf in the United States . A 1941 edition , including a homage by Thomas Mann , spurred a surge in Kafka 's popularity in the United States the late 1940s . The <unk> translated all shorter works that Kafka had seen fit to print ; they were published by Schocken Books in 1948 as The Penal Colony : Stories and Short Pieces , including additionally The First Long Train Journey , written by Kafka and Brod , Kafka 's " A Novel about Youth " , a review of Felix <unk> 's Die Geschichte des <unk> Oswald , his essay on Kleist 's " Anecdotes " , his review of the literary magazine Hyperion , and an epilogue by Brod . 
 Later editions , notably those of 1954 ( Dearest Father . Stories and Other Writings ) , included text , translated by Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser , which had been deleted by earlier publishers . Known as " Definitive Editions " , they include translations of The Trial , Definitive , The Castle , Definitive , and other writings . These translations are generally accepted to have a number of biases and are considered to be dated in interpretation . Published in 1961 by Schocken Books , Parables and Paradoxes presented in a bilingual edition by Nahum N. Glatzer selected writings , drawn from notebooks , diaries , letters , short fictional works and the novel Der Process . 
 New translations were completed and published based on the recompiled German text of Pasley and Schillemeit ‍ — ‌ The Castle , Critical by Mark Harman ( Schocken Books , 1998 ) , The Trial , Critical by <unk> Mitchell ( Schocken Books , 1998 ) , and Amerika : The Man Who Disappeared by Michael Hofmann ( New Directions Publishing , 2004 ) . 
 = = = Translation problems to English = = = 
 Kafka often made extensive use of a characteristic particular to the German language which permits long sentences that sometimes can span an entire page . Kafka 's sentences then deliver an unexpected impact just before the full stop — this being the finalizing meaning and focus . This is due to the construction of subordinate clauses in German which require that the verb be positioned at the end of the sentence . Such constructions are difficult to duplicate in English , so it is up to the translator to provide the reader with the same ( or at least equivalent ) effect found in the original text . German 's more flexible word order and syntactical differences provide for multiple ways in which the same German writing can be translated into English . An example is the first sentence of Kafka 's " The Metamorphosis " , which is crucial to the setting and understanding of the entire story : 
 Als Gregor <unk> eines <unk> aus <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> er sich in <unk> Bett zu einem <unk> Ungeziefer <unk> . ( original ) 
 As Gregor <unk> one morning from restless dreams awoke , found he himself in his bed into an enormous vermin transformed . ( literal word @-@ for @-@ word translation ) 
