 = = Other uses = = 
 Reflector sights have been used over the years in nautical navigation devices and surveying equipment . <unk> type sights were used on early large format cameras , " Point and shoot " type cameras , and on simple disposable cameras . 
 These sights are also used on astronomical telescopes as <unk> , to help aim the telescope at the desired object . There are many commercial models , the first of which was the <unk> , invented by amateur astronomer Steve <unk> in the late 1970s . Others are now available from companies such as Apogee , <unk> , Photon , Rigel , and <unk> . Reflector sights are also used in the entertainment industry in productions such as live theater on " Follow Spot " spotlights . Sights such as <unk> 's adapted for use and the purpose built Spot Dot allow the spotlight operator to aim the light without turning it on . 
 = = Similar types = = 
 <unk> sights ( also called collimating or " occluded eye gunsight " ( <unk> ) ) are simply the optical collimator focusing a reticle without any optical window . The viewer cannot see through them and only sees an image of the reticle . They are used either with both eyes open while one looks into the sight , with one eye open and moving the head to alternately see the sight and then at the target , or using one eye to partially see the sight and target at the same time . The reticle is illuminated by an electric , <unk> or passive ambient light source . The <unk> <unk> and the <unk> Corp. <unk> are two examples of commercially available ambient lit collimator sights . These sights have the advantage of requiring less illumination for the reticle for the same level of usability , due to the high contrast black background behind the reticle . For this reason occluded eye gunsights were more practical for use on small arms before low power consumption illumination sources such as LEDs became commonplace . 
 Holographic weapon sights are similar in layout to reflector sights but do not use a projected reticle system . Instead , a representative reticle is recorded in three @-@ dimensional space onto holographic film at the time of manufacture . This image is part of the optical viewing window . The recorded hologram is illuminated by a collimated laser built into the sight . The sight can be adjusted for range and windage by simply tilting or pivoting the optical window . 
 = HMS Hermione ( 1782 ) = 
 HMS Hermione was a 32 @-@ gun fifth @-@ rate frigate of the Royal Navy . She was notorious for having the bloodiest mutiny in British naval history , which saw her captain and most of the officers killed . The mutineers then handed the ship over to the Spanish , with whom she remained for two years before being cut out and returned to Royal Navy service under the names Retaliation and later Retribution . 
 = = Early years = = 
 HMS Hermione was the lead ship of a six @-@ ship class of frigates designed by Edward Hunt and termed the Hermione class . She was launched on 9 September 1782 from <unk> 's of Bristol , having cost £ <unk> to build , with a further £ <unk> spent on dockyard expenses , and £ <unk> on fitting out . 
 She was commissioned initially under Captain Thomas Lloyd , who commanded her until she was paid off in April 1783 . She recommissioned that same month under Captain John Stone , who sailed her to Nova Scotia on 17 October , after which she was paid off in 1785 . Hermione may have then been recommissioned under Captain William H. Ricketts during the Spanish Armament of 1790 , though this is uncertain . She did , however , undergo a repair between October 1790 and June 1792 , followed by a period spent refitting at Chatham Dockyard until January 1793 . She was recommissioned in December 1792 under Captain John Hills , under whom she sailed to Jamaica on 10 March 1793 . 
 She served in the West Indies during the early years of the French Revolutionary Wars . On 4 June , Hermione , under Hills , participated in the British attack on Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , where she led a small squadron that accompanied the troop transports . Hermione had five men killed and six wounded in the attack . The British captured the town and its defences , and in taking the port they also captured a large number of merchant vessels . Hermione was among the vessels that shared in the capture on 17 July of the Lady <unk> . Hills died from yellow fever ( fatal " Black Vomit " ) , at Port Royal , Jamaica , in September 1794 . Captain Philip Wilkinson replaced Hills and was himself replaced in February 1797 — the year of the Spithead and Nore mutinies — by Captain Hugh Pigot . 
 Pigot was a cruel officer who meted out severe and arbitrary punishment to his crew . During a nine @-@ month period , as captain of his previous command HMS Success he ordered at least 85 floggings , the equivalent of half the crew ; two men died from their injuries . 
 Hermione was sent to patrol the Mona Passage between the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico . Under Pigot , she destroyed three privateers at Puerto Rico on 22 March 1797 . On 20 April Hermione was the lead ship in a squadron formed of the 32 @-@ gun frigates HMS Mermaid and HMS Quebec , the 14 @-@ gun brig HMS Drake , and the cutter HMS Penelope . The squadron cut out nine ships at the Battle of Jean @-@ <unk> without suffering any casualties . On 6 September 1797 she was in company with HMS Diligence and HMS <unk> when Diligence captured a Spanish 6 @-@ gun packet ship with troops on board . 
 = = Mutiny = = 
 Midshipman David Casey was an experienced junior officer who had distinguished himself to Captain Pigot during the previous months , but his <unk> was one of the primary triggers to the mutiny . About a week before the mutiny , Casey was at his station on the main top , and the captain noticed that a gasket , one of the ties that held the sail securely , had not been tied by one of the sailors under his supervision . Casey was brought before the captain , and apologised for the oversight and took responsibility for it . The captain demanded that Casey apologise on his knees , a completely unacceptable and debasing demand for a gentleman . Casey refused to be humiliated in such a way . Pigot offered him one more opportunity and when Casey once more refused , the captain ordered that Casey receive 12 lashes ( more commonly a sailor 's punishment than that of a junior officer ) , and he was <unk> , which would effectively end his career as a naval officer . Casey was a popular officer amongst the crew and they felt that he was punished unfairly . The topmen began to plot mutiny . 
 Pigot had also developed the practice of frequently flogging the last sailor down from working aloft . On 20 September 1797 , Pigot ordered the topsails to be reefed after a squall struck the ship . Dissatisfied with the speed of the operation because " these would be the yard @-@ arm men , the most skilful topmen " he gave the order that the last men off the yard would be flogged . This policy was particularly unreasonable as the men would be spaced along the yard , and the two whose stations were furthest out would always be the last down . Three young sailors , in their haste to get down , fell to their deaths on the deck . One of the sailors hit and injured the master , Mr. Southcott . Pigot ordered their bodies thrown into the sea with the words " throw the <unk> overboard " ; a particularly offensive insult in the seaman 's vocabulary . He then instructed two boatswain 's mates to flog the rest of the topmen when they complained . The topmen were also flogged the next morning . 
 The combination of the humiliation of Casey , the deaths of the topmen , and the severe punishment of the rest of the sailors appears to have driven the crew to mutiny . These factors , however , were arguably the final events in a series of harsh and brutal punishments by the captain . Dudley Pope , in his book The Black Ship , argues that it was not Pigot 's cruelty that drove the men to mutiny but the general injustice that he showed in his favouritism to some and overly harsh punishment of others . Had Pigot remained more even @-@ handed in his leadership , the mutiny might have been avoided . 
 The evening of 21 September 1797 , a number of the crew , drunk on stolen rum , rushed Pigot 's cabin and forced their way in after overpowering the marine stationed outside . They hacked at Pigot with knives and cutlasses before throwing him overboard . The mutineers , probably led by a core group of just 18 men , went on to murder another eight of Hermione 's officers : the first lieutenant , Samuel Reed ; the second lieutenant , Archibald Douglas ; the third lieutenant , Henry <unk> ; the marine commander , Lieutenant McIntosh ; Boatswain William Martin ; Purser Stephen Turner <unk> ; Surgeon H.T. <unk> ; and the captain 's clerk . Two midshipmen were also killed , and all the bodies were thrown overboard . Three warrant officers survived : the gunner and carpenter were spared because they were considered useful to the ship , and Southcott the master was spared so he could navigate . Southcott lived to be a key witness , along with Casey , who was also spared , and their eyewitness accounts and testimony were key to the trials of many of the mutineers . Three petty officers joined the mutiny , one midshipman , Surgeon 's Mate Cronin , and Master 's Mate Turner . 
 Fearing retribution for their actions , the mutineers decided to navigate the ship toward Spanish waters . One reason the master 's life was spared was that Turner could not navigate the ship properly without his help . The Hermione sailed to La Guaira , where they handed the ship over to the Spanish authorities . The mutineers claimed they had set the officers adrift in a small boat , as had happened in the mutiny on the Bounty some eight years earlier . The Spanish gave the mutineers just 25 dollars each in return , and presented them with the options of joining the Spanish army , heavy labour , or refitting their ship . The Spaniards took Hermione into service under the name Santa Cecilia ; her crew included 25 of her former crew , who remained under Spanish guard . 
 = = Recapture and renaming = = 
 Meanwhile , news of the fate of HMS Hermione reached Admiral Sir Hyde Parker when HMS Diligence captured a Spanish schooner . Parker wrote to the governor of La Guaira , demanding the return of the ship and the surrender of the mutineers . Meanwhile he despatched HMS Magicienne under Captain Henry Ricketts to commence negotiations . He also set up a system of informers and posted rewards that eventually led to the capture of 33 of the mutineers , some of whom were tried aboard HMS York , and at least one aboard HMS Gladiator . Of these , 24 were hanged and <unk> , one was transported , and eight were acquitted or pardoned . To Parker 's fury , Admiral Richard Rodney Bligh had issued pardons to several mutineers . Acting against regulations Parker forced Bligh to resign his command and return to Britain in the summer of 1799 . 
 Santa Cecilia , under the command of Captain Don Ramon de <unk> , had meanwhile sat in Puerto Cabello until Captain Edward Hamilton , aboard HMS Surprise , cut her out of the harbour on 25 October 1799 . Hamilton led a boarding party to retake Hermione and , after an exceptionally bloody action , sailed her out of danger under Spanish gunfire . The Spanish casualties included 119 dead ; the British took 231 Spaniards prisoner , while another 15 jumped or fell overboard . Hamilton had 11 men injured , four seriously , but none killed . Hamilton himself was severely wounded . 
 For his daring exploit , Hamilton was made a knight by letters patent , a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath ( 2 January 1815 ) , and eventually became a baronet ( 20 October 1818 ) . The Jamaica House of Assembly awarded him a sword worth 300 guineas , and the City of London awarded him the Freedom of the City in a public dinner on 25 October 1800 . In 1847 , the Admiralty awarded Hamilton a gold medal for the recapture of Hermione , and the Naval General Service Medal with the clasp , " Surprise with Hermione " , to the seven surviving claimants from the action . 
 = = Return to British service = = 
 Parker renamed Santa Cecilia the Retaliation . In late 1799 or early 1800 , Retaliation captured four vessels . These were the two American brigs Gracey , sailing from Trinidad bound for Baltimore with a cargo of sugar , honey , and hides ; the Peggy , sailing from Cartagena to New York with a cargo of sugar , coffee , cotton , <unk> , and hides ; and the Danish sloop Sisters , which was sailing from Jamaica to Baltimore with a cargo of sugar , and which had just left St Thomas . 
 The Admiralty then renamed her Retribution on 31 January 1800 . She was recommissioned in September 1800 at Jamaica under Captain Samuel Forster . Apparently before that she detained an American schooner sailing from Port Republic with a cargo of coffee and logwood . 
 In early 1801 Retribution detained the Spanish schooner La Linda , which was sailing from <unk> to Havana , and the American schooner Sea Horse , which was sailing from Porto <unk> to New York . Retribution sent both into Jamaica . 
 On 1 October Melampus , Juno , and Retribution were in company when they captured the Aquila . 
 = = Fate = = 
 Retribution arrived at Portsmouth in the third week of January 1802 . She was subsequently fitted at Woolwich in October 1803 for service for Trinity House at a cost of £ 484 , equal to £ 39 @,@ 861 @.@ 05 today . She was broken up at Deptford in June 1805 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Captain Sawyer , commander of the ship of the line HMS Renown in the Horatio Hornblower novel Lieutenant Hornblower , is based on Captain Pigot , sharing many of the same mannerisms . Sawyer was portrayed by actor David Warner in the A & E miniseries Hornblower episodes " Mutiny " and " Retribution " . 
 = Maryland Route 97 = 
 Maryland Route 97 ( MD 97 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The route runs 55 @.@ 27 mi ( 88 @.@ 95 km ) from U.S. Route 29 ( US 29 ) in Silver Spring , Montgomery County north to the Pennsylvania border in Carroll County , where the road continues into that state as Pennsylvania Route 97 ( PA 97 ) . Throughout most of Montgomery County , MD 97 is known as Georgia Avenue , which continues south from the southern terminus along US 29 into Washington , D.C. It is a suburban four- to six @-@ lane divided highway from Silver Spring north to Olney . From here , the route continues as a rural two @-@ lane road north through Brookeville and into Howard County . MD 97 continues through Carroll County where it passes through the county seat of Westminster . The route intersects many major roads , including Interstate 495 ( I @-@ 495 , Capital Beltway ) north of Silver Spring , MD 200 ( Intercounty Connector ) in Aspen Hill , MD 28 in Norbeck , I @-@ 70 and US 40 in Cooksville , MD 26 in Dorsey Crossroads , and MD 27 , MD 32 , and MD 140 in the Westminster area . 
 With the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , present @-@ day MD 97 north of Westminster became a part of US 140 . MD 97 was first designated by 1933 from MD 27 / MD 410 ( now US 29 ) in Silver Spring to north of US 40 in Cooksville . Two portions of the route between Cooksville and Westminster became MD 570 in 1939 . In 1956 , MD 97 was extended north from Cooksville to the Pennsylvania border northwest of Emmitsburg , Frederick County . It replaced the two sections of MD 570 and replaced the MD 32 designation between Westminster and the Pennsylvania border . MD 97 was rerouted to bypass Westminster in 1960 and was moved to a new alignment between Westminster and Taneytown in 1965 ; both former alignments became MD 32 . In 1961 , the route was realigned between MD 26 and MD 32 , with the former segment becoming MD 854 . MD 97 was rerouted to its current northern terminus in 1979 , replacing that portion of US 140 , while the former route between Westminster and northwest of Emmitsburg became part of MD 140 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 97 runs through the Washington , D.C. suburbs in Montgomery County , connecting several communities including Silver Spring , Wheaton , Glenmont , Norbeck , and Olney . It continues north from there into rural areas of Howard and Carroll counties , passing through the Carroll County seat of Westminster , before reaching the Pennsylvania border . 
 MD 97 has two stretches along which it is a part of the National Highway System . The highway is a principal arterial from its southern terminus in Silver Spring north to Brookeville Road in Brookeville . Within that section , MD 97 is an intermodal connector from I @-@ 495 north to MD 192 in Forest Glen . The highway is also a principal arterial from MD 32 at Fenby north to MD 140 in Westminster and from MD 140 in Westminster to a point south of MD 496 north of Westminster . MD 97 is a part of the main National Highway System along its concurrency with MD 140 in Westminster . 
 = = = Montgomery County = = = 
 MD 97 begins at an intersection with US 29 and MD 384 ( Colesville Road ) in downtown Silver Spring in Montgomery County , heading north on Georgia Avenue , a six @-@ lane divided highway . Washington Metro 's Red Line runs below the route at this point . From the route ’ s southern terminus , Georgia Avenue continues south as part of US 29 toward Washington , D.C. MD 97 passes commercial areas of high @-@ rise buildings in Silver Spring before heading into residential neighborhoods . The route intersects the northern terminus of MD 390 ( 16th Street ) , which heads south and becomes 16th Street Northwest upon entering the District of Columbia . It continues north as a six @-@ lane undivided road with reversible lanes through commercial areas before coming to a modified cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 495 ( Capital Beltway ) . 
 Past this interchange , the road becomes a divided highway again and intersects MD 192 ( Forest Glen Road ) . MD 97 passes more residences and continues toward Wheaton . The road heads into business areas again as it intersects MD 586 ( Veirs Mill Road ) near the Westfield Wheaton shopping mall . A short distance later , the road crosses MD 193 ( University Boulevard ) and continues back into residential areas past that intersection . The route heads into a mix of residential and commercial areas as it heads toward Glenmont , where it crosses Randolph Road . A short distance later , MD 97 intersects the southern terminus of MD 182 ( <unk> Road ) . 
 From here , MD 97 turns northwest through residential neighborhoods and passes the Glenmont station terminus of Washington Metro 's Red Line , before reaching some businesses near the intersection with the northern terminus of MD 185 ( Connecticut Avenue ) in Aspen Hill . It turns north again past this intersection and crosses Bel Pre Road . After crossing Bel Pre Road , the route heads into wooded neighborhoods before it passes through a mix of businesses and houses , with MD 655 running to the west of the road . MD 97 crosses MD 28 ( Norbeck Road ) in Norbeck , and continues past some residences where it intersects MD <unk> , a short connector that provides access to westbound MD 28 . MD 97 enters more wooded areas and narrows to four lanes , interchanging with MD 200 ( Intercounty Connector ) . 
 The route eventually passes parkland and residential areas as it crosses Emory Lane . The road approaches Olney and passes by residential neighborhoods before heading into a business district at the intersection with MD 108 ( Olney Sandy Spring Road ) . After this intersection , the road heads into wooded residential areas as a two @-@ lane undivided road and enters Brookeville . Upon entering Brookeville , MD 97 becomes High Street and passes more residences . The route makes a left turn onto Market Street and continues through wooded residential areas . It heads out of Brookeville , with the name changing back to Georgia Avenue . The road heads into a more rural setting , with areas of farms , woods , and some residences . MD 97 reaches Sunshine , where the road crosses MD 650 ( New Hampshire Avenue / Damascus Road ) . Past Sunshine , MD 97 resumes through rural areas and enters woodland within Patuxent River State Park as it approaches the Patuxent River . 
 = = = Howard and Carroll counties = = = 
 MD 97 crosses the Patuxent River into Howard County , where it becomes Roxbury Mills Road , named after the Roxbury Mill built in 1753 . It continues north , passing areas of woods and farms along with suburban residential developments . The road passes through the community of Glenwood and continues through agricultural areas before intersecting MD 144 ( Frederick Road ) in Cooksville . A short distance later , the route interchanges with I @-@ 70 and US 40 . Past this interchange , MD 97 becomes Hoods Mill Road and passes rural residential areas , intersecting Old Frederick Road . From here , the road winds through a mix of woods , farm fields , and residences before crossing the South Branch of the Patapsco River . 
 Upon crossing the river , MD 97 enters Carroll County and becomes Old Washington Road . The road crosses CSX 's Old Main Line Subdivision railroad as it passes wooded areas with some residences . It runs through a mix of woods and farms with some residences along the road . The number of residences increases as the route crosses <unk> Road in Berrett . From here , MD 97 passes more residences before intersecting MD 850 ( Old Liberty Road ) at a roundabout ; a short distance later , it intersects MD 26 ( Liberty Road ) at a folded diamond interchange in Dorsey Crossroads . Past MD 26 , MD 97 becomes New Washington Road and heads north through a mix of farmland , woodland , and residential neighborhoods , paralleled to the west by MD 854 ( Old Washington Road ) . The road passes through woodland before intersecting Nicodemus Road , where it continues past farms and woods before crossing MD 32 ( Sykesville Road ) in Fenby . 
 Past this intersection , MD 97 passes to the east of Carroll Community College and heads into residential areas as it approaches Westminster , bypassing the center of the town to the east . The route becomes Malcolm Drive past the intersection with Main Street / Old Westminster Road and continues to an intersection with MD 140 ( Baltimore Boulevard ) . Here , MD 97 makes a left turn to form a concurrency with MD 140 on Baltimore Boulevard , a six @-@ lane divided highway . The two routes head through commercial areas on the outskirts of Westminster , passing by the <unk> of Westminster before interchanging with MD 27 ( Manchester Road ) at a folded @-@ diamond interchange . Past this interchange , the road passes over the Maryland Midland Railway and passes more businesses . At the Sullivan Road intersection , the road becomes College View Boulevard and a short distance later , MD 97 splits from MD 140 at an interchange near McDaniel College . 
 MD 97 continues north on Littlestown Pike , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The road passes Carroll County Regional Airport before heading into a mix of farmland and residences . MD 97 intersects the southern terminus of MD 496 ( <unk> Valley Road ) , and continues northwest through agricultural and wooded areas with intermittent residences . It passes through Union Mills , where the road intersects Old Hanover Road . MD 97 continues to the community of Silver Run , where it passes residences . Upon leaving this community , the route continues through woods and farm fields . A short distance later , MD 97 reaches the Pennsylvania border , where it becomes PA 97 and continues north into Adams County . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , Georgia Avenue was proposed as a state highway between the Washington , D.C. border and Brookeville . This section of state highway was completed by 1915 . By 1921 , a state highway was proposed between Roxbury Mills and Cooksville , with a small piece completed to the south of Cooksville . Also , a state highway was completed between Westminster and the Pennsylvania border , connecting to a road that continued northwest to Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . By 1923 , the state road was finished between south of Cooksville and north of Roxbury Mills and to the north of Cooksville . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , the portion of present @-@ day MD 97 north of Westminster was designated as part of US 140 , a U.S. Highway that ran from Baltimore to Gettysburg . In addition , the portion of Georgia Avenue between Norbeck and Olney was designated as part of MD 28 in 1927 . The state highway was completed south to Roxbury Mills in 1928 . By 1933 , the state road between Brookeville and Roxbury Mills was finished . 
 MD 97 was designated by 1933 to run from MD 27 / MD 410 ( now US 29 ) in Silver Spring to north of US 40 in Cooksville . In 1935 , a state highway was finished south of the MD 26 west Eldersburg and heading south from MD 32 in Fenby . Both these highways were extended south about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) in 1938 . In 1939 , the state highway running south from MD 26 west of Eldersburg and from MD 32 south of Fenby were both designated as MD 570 . By 1946 , the MD 28 concurrency between Norbeck and Olney was removed . The southern section of MD 570 was extended south 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) again in 1948 . MD 97 was widened into a divided highway between Silver Spring and Glenmont in 1950 . 
 In 1956 , MD 97 was extended north to the Pennsylvania border northwest of Emmitsburg , Frederick County . The route ran north from Cooksville to Fenby , replacing both sections of MD 570 , before it replaced MD 32 from Fenby north to Westminster and northwest through Taneytown and Emmitsburg . In 1960 , MD 97 was moved to a new alignment that bypassed Westminster along newly constructed New Washington Road between Fenby and US 140 and the Westminster Bypass to the northwest side of the city . MD 32 was designated onto the former alignment of MD 97 that passed through Westminster on Washington Road and Main Street . In 1961 , MD 97 was shifted to a new alignment to the east between MD 26 and MD 32 ; the former alignment became MD 854 . The intersection with MD 26 was replaced with an interchange in 1962 . In 1964 , construction began on a new alignment of MD 97 slightly to the north between Westminster and Taneytown . This alignment was completed in 1965 , and the former alignment became a part of MD 32 ( now MD 832 ) . In 1966 , the divided highway portion of MD 97 was extended north from Glenmont to MD 28 in Norbeck . 
 In 1977 , plans were made for US 140 to be decommissioned , with MD 97 to replace the section between Westminster and the Pennsylvania border , where it would connect to PA 97 . This proposal was made in order to eliminate short routes from the U.S. Highway System . The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials approved the removal of the US 140 designation on October 28 , 1977 . On January 1 , 1979 , MD 97 was rerouted at Westminster to head north to the Pennsylvania border , replacing US 140 . At the Pennsylvania border , the route connected to PA 97 , which replaced the US 140 designation in Pennsylvania . Meanwhile , the former alignment of MD 97 between Westminster and the Pennsylvania border northwest of Emmitsburg became a part of MD 140 . <unk> of MD 97 in Montgomery County was extended further north from MD 28 to MD 108 by 1989 . There are plans to build an interchange at the route ’ s intersection with Randolph Road in order to improve movements for automobiles as well as for pedestrians and bicycles accessing the nearby Glenmont Metro station . Another new interchange was built with MD 200 ( Intercounty Connector ) north of MD 28 and opened on February 23 , 2011 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD <unk> runs along and old section of MD 97 that parallels the route to the west , running from a cul @-@ de @-@ sac north to an intersection with MD 97 at Emory Church Road in Olney , Montgomery County . The route is 0 @.@ 32 mi ( 0 @.@ 51 km ) long . 
 = Abraham Lincoln ( Flannery ) = 
 Abraham Lincoln is a marble sculpture of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln by Irish artist Lot Flannery , located in front of the old District of Columbia City Hall in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was installed several blocks from Ford 's Theatre , where Lincoln was assassinated . Dedicated in 1868 on the third anniversary of Lincoln 's death , dignitaries at the unveiling ceremony included President Andrew Johnson and Generals Ulysses S. Grant , William Tecumseh Sherman and Winfield Scott Hancock . The statue has been removed and rededicated twice . The first rededication was in 1923 following an outpouring of support from citizens and a veterans group that the statue be restored . The second rededication took place in 2009 after a three @-@ year remodeling of the old City Hall . The statue is the nation 's oldest extant memorial to the president . It previously stood on a column , but now rests on top of an octagonal base . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Most of the residents of Washington , D.C. were shocked and horrified by the assassination of Republican President Abraham Lincoln on April 14 , 1865 . Because of its geographical location , the city was sometimes suspected of being sympathetic to the Confederacy during the Civil War . Since Lincoln was killed in Washington , some of the residents worried Republican congressional leaders would seek revenge on the city . Thirteen days after Lincoln died , in an attempt to show loyalty , city and business leaders decided to erect a memorial honoring the slain president . It was the first Lincoln monument commissioned after his death , but not the first one built . In 1866 , a plaster statue ( later replaced by a metal one ) of Lincoln was erected in San Francisco . It was destroyed during the firestorm that followed the 1906 earthquake . 
 The total cost of the memorial was $ 25 @,@ 000 . Washingtonians were responsible for most of the donations with the remaining funds raised by the Lincoln Monument Association . The largest donation came from John T. Ford , the manager of Ford 's Theatre at the time of Lincoln 's assassination . He held a benefit performance at his theater in Baltimore , raising $ 1 @,@ 800 . Although several designs were submitted , the monument 's planning committee unanimously chose the model by Lot Flannery ( 1836 – 1922 ) , a local Irish @-@ American artist , calling it the " most spirited " and " an excellent likeness . " Flannery had known Lincoln and was at Ford 's Theatre the night of the assassination . His statue is the only statue of Lincoln created by someone who knew him . In addition to the Lincoln sculpture , Flannery 's notable works include the Arsenal Monument at Congressional Cemetery and a sculpture of President Chester Arthur on display at the Smithsonian American Art Museum . Frank G. Pierson was chosen to be the monument 's architect . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 On the evening of April 14 , 1868 , the Lincoln statue was moved from Flannery 's studio to City Hall . The covered statue was guarded by police so no one could see it before the dedication ceremony the following day . On April 15 , all of the city 's offices were closed at noon and all flags were flown at half @-@ staff . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 people , around 20 % of Washington 's population , attended the dedication . Dignitaries at the dedication included President Andrew Johnson , General Ulysses S. Grant , General William Tecumseh Sherman , and General Winfield Scott Hancock . Supreme Court Justices and members of Congress were not in attendance because Johnson 's impeachment trial was taking place . A Masonic ceremony , along with music and prayers , took place at the dedication before the main speech by Major General Benjamin Brown French . Following the speech , Washington mayor Richard Wallach introduced Johnson , who uncovered the statue . The crowd cheered , followed by more music and finally a benediction . 
 = = = Removal and <unk> = = = 
 In 1919 , the memorial was dismantled and placed in storage during the renovations of City Hall . Some of the city 's residents and officials didn 't want the memorial reinstalled when renovations were complete since the much larger and grander Lincoln Memorial was already under construction . Others thought the tall pedestal was unsafe . When the public heard of the plans to leave the monument in storage , many were upset and groups such as the Grand Army of the Republic demanded the statue be reinstalled . President Warren G. Harding even lobbied Congress on behalf of angry citizens . Government officials conceded , but by that point , the statue was missing . It was later found in crates behind the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and cleaned . On June 21 , 1922 , an Act of Congress authorized the rededication , which took place April 15 , 1923 , 55 years after the initial dedication . When the statue was replaced , it was set on a new shorter base instead of the original column . An unexpected consequence of this was vandals having easy access to the statue . Lincoln 's fingers were broken off several times and his right hand had to be replaced . 
 In 2006 , the memorial was moved when renovations once again took place on the old City Hall , now home to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals . The statue was restored and cleaned before being returned when renovations were completed in 2009 . On April 15 , 2009 , 144 years after the original dedication , the memorial was rededicated a second time . The statue is the country 's oldest extant memorial to Lincoln . It is one of six statues in public places in Washington , D.C. honoring the slain president . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The marble statue is located on Indiana Avenue NW , in front of the old District of Columbia City Hall in the Judiciary Square neighborhood . It measures 7 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) high 2 @.@ 9 feet ( 0 @.@ 88 m ) wide while the granite base measures 6 @.@ 4 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) high and 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) wide . The statue portrays Abraham Lincoln standing , wearing a long coat with a bow tie and waistcoat . His left hand rests on a fasces while his right arm is by his side . Lincoln 's partially open right hand points to the ground as he looks to his left . The right hand was replaced at some point and the new one is considered too large to scale . A sword or scroll previously hung by his right side , but is now missing . The two @-@ tiered base consists of a rectangle on top of a lower square @-@ shaped foundation . 
 The statue originally stood on an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) high marble column atop a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) high octagonal base . A reporter asked Lot Flannery why the statue was set on such a high pedestal . He responded : " I lived through the days and nights of gloom following the assassination . As to every one else , it was a personal lamentation . And when it fell to me to carve and erect this statue I resolved and did place it so high that no assassin 's hand could ever again strike him down . " 
 Inscriptions on the monument include the following : 
 Lot Flannery , Sculptor ( rear of the sculpture ) 
 LINCOLN ( front of the base ) 
 <unk> LINCOLN / 1809 – 1865 / THIS <unk> WAS ERECTED / BY THE <unk> OF THE / <unk> OF <unk> / APRIL 15 1868 / RE @-@ ERECTED APRIL 15 1923 / <unk> ACT OF CONGRESS / OF <unk> 21 1922 ( rear of the base ) 
 Frank G. Pierson , Architect ( rear of the base , lowest section ) 
 = Church of St John the Baptist , Asenovgrad = 
 The Church of St John the Baptist ( Bulgarian : църква „ Свети Йоан <unk> “ , tsarkva „ Sveti Yoan <unk> “ ) , also known as the Church of St John the Precursor or , locally , Sveti Yani or Sveti Yan , is a small medieval Eastern Orthodox church in the town of Asenovgrad in Plovdiv Province , south central Bulgaria . The church is located on a cliff west of the town and dates to the 12th – 14th centuries . Its exterior is decorated with many blind arches , while its interior features mostly frescoes from the 18th century , with some fragments of 14th @-@ century murals . Its high position and the arrowslits on the north wall made the church suitable as a defensive outpost . 
 = = Location and history = = 
 The Church of St John the Baptist , known to the locals as Sveti Yani or Sveti Yan , is located on a high cliff on the western outskirts of Asenovgrad , which belong to the old town . To allow its construction , the terrain around its foundations had to be reinforced . The church lies close to several less ancient chapels , such as Saint Barbara 's , Saint George 's and Chapel of the Entry of the Most Holy Mother of God into the Temple . Nearby are also a 17th @-@ century water fountain and remains of medieval fortifications which date to the 11th – 13th century . Together , these buildings contribute to that part of Asenovgrad 's medieval atmosphere . 
 The church has not been conclusively dated . Art historian André Grabar placed it in the 14th century , scholar Nikola Mavrodinov dated it to the 13th century , while archaeologist Krastyu Miyatev is of the opinion that both theories are equally likely . Architecture writer Stefan <unk> gives a possible range from the 12th to the 14th century . 
 The Church of St John the Baptist belonged to the northern fortifications of medieval Asenovgrad ( then known in Greek as Stenimachos ) . It was in continuous operation until the late 18th or early 19th century , when it suffered significant damage , perhaps during Ottoman brigand raids . During the reconstruction works which were carried out soon thereafter , the roof and the upper parts of the church were modified . The interior was also repainted at the time . 
 The church has been protected as a national antiquity since 1940 ; in 1970 , it was enlisted among Bulgaria 's monuments of culture of national importance . The church was reconstructed in the 2000s by a team under architect <unk> <unk> . The restoration efforts restored the windows , the interior frescoes and the iconostasis , and took 42 days . 
 = = Architecture and decoration = = 
 The Church of St John the Baptist is relatively small , measuring 9 @.@ 20 by 5 @.@ 80 metres ( 30 @.@ 2 ft × 19 @.@ 0 ft ) or 8 by 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 26 ft × 18 ft ) , with a height of around 5 metres ( 16 ft ) . In terms of design , it follows the Byzantine cross @-@ in @-@ square style . The church lacks a narthex and features a single triangular apse with three small windows in its eastern part . The wall which carries the iconostasis clearly divides the interior into a cella and an altar . The altar includes a prothesis and a diaconicon , which are housed in bays in the east wall . 
 The church was built out of interchanging rows of stones and brickwork , without any ceramic facing . Blind arches form an important part of the church 's exterior decoration : there are five each on the north and south walls , with an additional three on the west wall . The walls are around 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) thick . In its architecture , the church closely resembles other medieval religious buildings in its close surroundings , most notably the Church of the Holy Mother of God in Asen 's Fortress south of Asenovgrad and the ossuary of the Bachkovo Monastery . However , the Church of St John the Baptist is unique in that it is the only one of the three to feature arrowslits . Six arrowslits on the north wall enabled the church to be quickly converted into a defensive tower . 
 Most of the surviving frescoes on the church 's interior walls date from the 18th century . These include images of the Mother of God , Jesus Christ and John the Baptist , all painted as part of the church 's first reconstruction . However , restoration works carried out in the 2000s have uncovered 14th @-@ century murals depicting the meeting of Elizabeth and Mary as well as John the Baptist . 
 = But I 'm a Cheerleader = 
 But I 'm a Cheerleader is a 1999 satirical romantic comedy film directed by Jamie Babbit and written by Brian Wayne Peterson . Natasha Lyonne stars as Megan Bloomfield , a high school cheerleader whose parents send her to a residential inpatient conversion therapy camp to cure her lesbianism . There Megan soon comes to embrace her sexual orientation , despite the therapy , and falls in love . The supporting cast includes Melanie Lynskey , Dante Basco , Eddie Cibrian , Clea DuVall , Cathy Moriarty , RuPaul , Richard Moll , Mink Stole , Kip Pardue , Michelle Williams and Bud Cort . 
 But I 'm a Cheerleader was Babbit 's first feature film . It was inspired by an article about conversion therapy and her childhood familiarity with rehabilitation programs . She used the story of a young woman finding her sexual identity to explore the social construction of gender roles and heteronormativity . The costume and set design of the film highlighted these themes using artificial textures in intense blues and pinks . 
 When it was initially rated as NC @-@ 17 by the MPAA , Babbit made cuts to allow it to be re @-@ rated as R. When interviewed in the documentary film This Film Is Not Yet Rated Babbit criticized the MPAA for discriminating against films with gay content . 
 Many critics did not like the film , comparing it unfavorably with the films of John Waters and criticizing the colorful production design . Although the lead actors were praised for their performances , some of the characters were described as stereotypical . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Megan ( Natasha Lyonne ) is a sunny high school senior who loves cheerleading and is dating football player Jared ( Brandt Wille ) . She does not enjoy kissing Jared , however , and prefers looking at her fellow cheerleaders . Combined with Megan 's interest in vegetarianism and Melissa Etheridge , her family and friends suspect that Megan is in fact a lesbian . With the help of ex @-@ gay Mike ( RuPaul ) , they surprise her with an intervention . Following this confrontation , Megan is sent to True Directions , a reparative therapy camp which uses a five @-@ step program ( similar to Alcoholics Anonymous ' twelve @-@ step program ) to convert its campers to heterosexuality . 
 At True Directions , Megan meets the founder , strict disciplinarian Mary Brown ( Cathy Moriarty ) , Mary 's supposedly heterosexual son Rock ( Eddie Cibrian ) , and a group of young people trying to " cure " themselves of their homosexuality . With the prompting of Mary and the other campers , Megan reluctantly agrees that she is a lesbian ( step 1 of the five @-@ step program ) . This fact , at odds with her traditional , religious upbringing , distresses her and she puts every effort into becoming heterosexual . Early on in her stay at True Directions , Megan discovers two of the boys , Dolph and Clayton ( Dante Basco and Kip Pardue ) , making out . She panics and screams , leading to their discovery by Mike . Dolph is made to leave and Clayton is punished by being forced into isolation . 
 The True Directions program involves the campers admitting their homosexuality ( step 1 ) , rediscovering their gender identity by performing stereotypically gender @-@ associated tasks ( step 2 ) , finding the root of their homosexuality through family therapy ( step 3 ) , demystifying the other sex ( step 4 ) , and simulating heterosexual intercourse ( step 5 ) . Over the course of the program , Megan becomes friends with another girl at the camp , a college student named Graham ( Clea DuVall ) who , though more comfortable being gay than Megan , was forced to the camp at the risk of otherwise being disowned by her family . 
 The True Directions kids are encouraged to rebel against Mary by two of her former students , ex @-@ ex @-@ gays Larry and Lloyd ( Richard Moll and Wesley Mann ) , who take the campers to a local gay bar where Graham and Megan 's relationship develops into a romance . When Mary discovers the trip , she makes them all picket Larry and Lloyd 's house , carrying placards and shouting homophobic abuse . Megan and Graham sneak away one night to have sex and begin to fall in love . When Mary finds out , Megan , now at ease with her sexual identity , is unrepentant . She is made to leave True Directions and , now homeless , goes to stay with Larry and Lloyd . Graham , afraid to defy her father , remains at the camp . Megan and Dolph , who are also living with Larry and Lloyd , plan to win back Graham and Clayton . 
 Megan and Dolph infiltrate the True Directions graduation ceremony where Dolph easily coaxes Clayton away . Megan entreats Graham to join them as well , but Graham nervously declines . Megan then performs a cheer for Graham and tells her that she loves her , finally winning Graham over . They drive off with Dolph and Clayton . The final scene of the film shows Megan 's parents ( Mink Stole and Bud Cort ) attending a PFLAG meeting to come to terms with their daughter 's homosexuality . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 But I 'm a Cheerleader was Babbit 's first feature film . She had previously directed two short films , Frog Crossing ( 1996 ) and Sleeping Beauties ( 1999 ) , both of which were shown at the Sundance Film Festival . She went on to direct the 2005 thriller The Quiet and the 2007 comedy <unk> Bitty <unk> Committee . Babbit and Sperling ( as producer ) secured financing from Michael Burns , then the vice president of Prudential Insurance ( now Vice Chairman of Lions Gate Entertainment ) after showing him the script at Sundance . According to Babbit , their one @-@ sentence pitch was " Two high @-@ school girls fall in love at a reparative therapy camp . " Burns gave them an initial budget of US $ 500 @,@ 000 which was increased to US $ 1 million when the film went into production . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Babbit , whose mother runs a halfway house called New Directions for young people with drug and alcohol problems , had wanted to make a comedy about rehabilitation and the 12 @-@ step program . After reading an article about a man who had returned from a reparative therapy camp hating himself , she decided to combine the two ideas . With girlfriend Andrea Sperling , she came up with the idea for a feature film about a cheerleader who attends a reparative therapy camp . They wanted the main character to be a cheerleader because it is " ... the pinnacle of the American dream , and the American dream of femininity . " Babbit wanted the film to represent the lesbian experience from the femme perspective to contrast with several films of the time that represented the butch perspective ( for example , Go Fish and The Watermelon Woman ) . She also wanted to satirize both the religious right and the gay community . Not feeling qualified to write the script herself , Babbit brought in screenwriter and recent graduate of USC School of Cinematic Arts Brian Wayne Peterson . Peterson had experience with reparative therapy while working at a prison clinic for sex offenders . He has said that he wanted to make a film that would not only entertain people , but also make people get angry and talk about the issues it raised . 
 = = = Set and costume design = = = 
 Babbit says that her influences for the look and feel of the film included John Waters , David LaChapelle , Edward Scissorhands and Barbie . She wanted the production and costume design to reflect the themes of the story . There is a progression from the organic world of Megan 's hometown , where the dominant colors are orange and brown , to the fake world of True Directions , dominated by intense blues and pinks ( which are intended to show the artificiality of gender construction ) . According to Babbit , the <unk> character of Mary Brown represents AIDS paranoia and her clean , ordered world is filled with plastic flowers , fake sky and PVC outfits . The external shots of the colorful house complete with a bright pink picket fence were filmed in Palmdale , California . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Babbit recruited Clea DuVall , who had starred in her short film Sleeping Beauties , to play the role of Graham Eaton . Babbit says that she was able to get a lot of the cast through DuVall , including Natasha Lyonne and Melanie Lynskey . Lyonne first saw the script in the back of DuVall 's car and subsequently contacted her agent about it . She had seen and enjoyed Babbit 's short Sleeping Beauties and was eager to work with the director . She was not the first choice for the role of Megan . An unnamed actress wanted to play the part but eventually turned it down because of religious beliefs ; she did not want her family to see her face on the poster . Babbit briefly considered Rosario Dawson as Megan but her executive producer persuaded her that Dawson , who is Hispanic , would not be right for the All @-@ American character . 
 Babbit made a conscious effort to cast people of color for minor roles , in an effort to combat what she describes as " racism at every level of making movies . " From the beginning she intended the characters of Mike ( played by RuPaul ) , Dolph ( Dante Basco ) and Andre ( Douglas Spain ) to be African American , Asian and Hispanic , respectively . She initially considered Arsenio Hall for the character of Mike but says that Hall was uncomfortable about playing a gay @-@ themed role . As Mike , RuPaul makes a rare film appearance out of drag . 
 = = Themes = = 
 But I 'm a Cheerleader is not only about sexuality , but also gender and the social construction of gender roles . One of the ways in which Babbit highlighted what she called the artificiality of gender construction was by using intense blues and pinks in her production and costume design . Chris Holmlund in Contemporary American Independent Film notes this feature of the film and calls the costumes " gender @-@ tuned . " Ted <unk> in Out magazine wrote that the costumes and colors of the film show how false the goals of True Directions are . 
 Gender roles are further reinforced by the tasks the campers have to perform in " Step 2 : Rediscovering Your Gender Identity . " Nikki Sullivan in A Critical Introduction to Queer Theory says that this rediscovery is shown to be difficult and unsuccessful rather than the natural discovery of their latent heterosexuality . Sullivan says that the film not only highlights the ways in which gender and sexuality are constructed but also takes the norms and truths about heteronormative society and renders them strange or " queer . " Holmlund says that Babbit makes the straight characters less normal and less likable than the gay ones . Sullivan says that this challenge of heteronormativity makes But I 'm a Cheerleader an exemplification of queer theory . 
 = = Rating and distribution = = 
 When originally submitted to the Motion Picture Association of America rating board , But I 'm a Cheerleader received an NC @-@ 17 rating . In order to get a commercially viable R rating , Babbit removed a two @-@ second shot of Graham 's hand sweeping Megan 's clothed body , a camera pan up Megan 's body when she is masturbating , and a comment that Megan " ate Graham out " ( slang for cunnilingus ) . Babbit was interviewed by Kirby Dick for his 2006 documentary film This Film Is Not Yet Rated . A critique of the MPAA 's rating system , it suggests that films with homosexual content are treated more stringently than those with only heterosexual content , and that scenes of female sexuality draw harsher criticism from the board than those of male sexuality . American Pie ( also released in 1999 ) , which features a teenage boy masturbating , was given an R rating . Babbit says that she felt discriminated against for making a gay film . The film was rated as M ( for mature audiences ) in Australia and in New Zealand , 14A in Canada , 12 in Germany and 15 in the United Kingdom . 
 The film premiered on September 12 , 1999 at the Toronto International Film Festival and was shown in January 2000 at the Sundance Film Festival . It went on to play at several international film festivals including the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras festival and the London Lesbian and Gay Film Festival . It first appeared in U.S. theaters on July 7 , 2000 , distributed by Lions Gate Entertainment . Fine Line Features had intended to distribute the film but dropped it two months before it was due to open following a dispute with the film 's production company , Ignite Entertainment . It closed after 8 weeks , with its widest release having been 115 theaters . 
 The film was released on Region 1 DVD by Lions Gate on July 22 , 2002 and by Universal Studios on October 3 , 2002 . Other than the theatrical trailer , it contains no extras . It was released on Region 2 DVD on June 2 , 2003 by Prism Leisure . In addition to the trailer , it features an interview with Jamie Babbit and behind the scenes footage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office and audience reaction = = = 
 But I 'm a Cheerleader grossed US $ 2 @,@ 205 @,@ 627 in the United States and US $ 389 @,@ 589 elsewhere , giving a total of US $ 2 @,@ 595 @,@ 216 worldwide . In its opening weekend , showing at four theaters , it earned $ 60 @,@ 410 which was 2 @.@ 7 % of its total gross . According to Box Office Mojo , it ranked at 174 for all films released in the US in 2000 and 74 for R @-@ rated films released that year . As of December 2011 , its all time box @-@ office ranking for LGBT @-@ related films is 73 . 
 The film was a hit with festival audiences and received standing ovations at the San Francisco International Lesbian and Gay Film Festival . It has been described as a favorite with gay audiences and on the art house circuit . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical response to But I 'm a Cheerleader was mostly negative . Rotten Tomatoes gave it a score of 34 % based on 47 reviews , and Metacritic gave it a score of 39 % based on 30 reviews . The overall theme of reviews is that it is a heartfelt film with good intentions , but that it is flawed . Some reviewers found it funny and enjoyable with " genuine laughs " , however . Roger Ebert rated it three stars ( of four ) and wrote , it " is not a great , breakout comedy , but more the kind of movie that might eventually become a regular on the midnight cult circuit . " Others found it obvious , leaden , and heavy handed . 
 Writing for The New York Times , Elvis Mitchell described the character of Megan as a sweet heroine and Lyonne and DuVall were praised for their performances . Mick LaSalle called Lyonne wonderful and said that she was well matched by DuVall . Marjorie Baumgarten said that they " hit the right notes . " Alexandra Mendenhall , writing for AfterEllen.com felt that the relationship between Graham and Megan , having great chemistry , does not get enough screen time . Mitchell called their love scenes " tender . " Other characters , particularly the males , were described as " offputting " and " nothing but stereotypes . " 
 Several reviewers compared the film to those of director John Waters but felt that it fell short of the mark . Stephanie Zacharek called it a " Waters knockoff " while Ebert said that Waters might have been ruder and more polished . Babbit says that although Waters is one of her influences , she did not want her film to have the " bite " of his . She states that whereas John Waters does not like romantic comedies , she wanted to tell a conventionally romantic story . The production design , which was important to the overall look and feel of the film , drew mixed responses . LaSalle described it as clever and <unk> and James Berardinelli called it a standout feature . Others found it to be gaudy , dated , cartoonish and ghastly . 
 Stephanie Zacharek , writing for Salon.com said that with regard to issues of sexual orientation and homophobia , Babbit is preaching to the converted . Cynthia Fuchs , for <unk> , agreed , stating that " no one who is phobic might recognize himself in the film " and that " the audience who might benefit most from watching it either won 't see the film or won 't see the point . " David Edelstein said that the one sidedness of the film creates a lack of dramatic tension and calls it lazy <unk> . In contrast , LaSalle said that " the picture manages to make a heartfelt statement about the difficulties of growing up gay " and Timothy Shary said that the film openly challenges homophobia and offers support to teenaged gay viewers . Chris Holmlund said that the film shows that queer identity is multi @-@ faceted , using as an example the scene where the ex @-@ ex @-@ gays tell Megan that there is no one way to be a lesbian . 
 Reviews from the gay media were similar to those from the mainstream press . Jan Stuart , writing for The Advocate , said that although the film tries to subvert gay stereotypes , it is unsuccessful . She called it " numbingly crude " and said that the kitsch portrait of Middle America is out of touch with today 's gay teenagers . Mendenhall for AfterEllen.com called the story predictable and the characters stereotypical . Nevertheless , she said that overall the film was funny and enjoyable . Curve called the film an " incredible comedy " and said that with this and her other work , Babbit has " redefined lesbian film " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The film won the Audience Award and the <unk> de <unk> Award at the 2000 Créteil International Women 's Film Festival , an annual French festival which showcases the work of female directors . Also that year it was nominated by the Political Film Society of America for the PFS award in the categories of Human Rights and Exposé , but lost out to The Green Mile and Boys Don 't Cry , respectively . 
 = = Music = = 
 Pat Irwin composed the score for But I 'm a Cheerleader . The soundtrack has never been released on CD . Artists featured include indie acts Saint Etienne , Dressy Bessy and April March . RuPaul contributed one track , " Party Train , " which Eddie Cibrian 's character , Rock , is shown dancing to . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 " Chick Habit ( <unk> <unk> les filles ) " ( Elinor Blake , Serge Gainsbourg ) performed by April March 
 " Just Like Henry " ( Tammy <unk> , John Hill , Rob Greene , Darren Albert ) performed by Dressy Bessy 
 " If You Should Try and Kiss Her " ( <unk> , Hill , Greene , Albert ) performed by Dressy Bessy 
 " Trailer Song " ( Courtney Holt , Joy Ray ) performed by Sissy Bar 
 " All or Nothing " ( Cris Owen , <unk> ) performed by <unk> 
 " We 're in the City " ( Sarah Cracknell , Bob Stanley , Pete Wiggs ) performed by Saint Etienne 
 " The Swisher " ( Dave Moss , Ian Rich ) performed by Summer 's Eve 
 " Funnel of Love " ( Kent Westbury , Charlie McCoy ) performed by Wanda Jackson 
 " Ray of Sunshine " ( Go Sailor ) performed by Go Sailor 
 " Glass Vase Cello Case " ( Madigan Shive , Jen Wood ) performed by <unk> Tale 
 " Party Train " ( RuPaul ) performed by RuPaul 
 " Evening in Paris " ( Lois Maffeo ) performed by Lois Maffeo 
 " Together Forever in Love " ( Go Sailor ) performed by Go Sailor 
 = = Musical = = 
 In 2005 the New York Musical Theatre Festival featured a musical stage adaptation of But I 'm a Cheerleader written by librettist and lyricist Bill Augustin and composer Andrew Abrams . With 18 original songs , it was directed by Daniel Goldstein and starred Chandra Lee Schwartz as Megan . It played during September 2005 at New York 's Theatre at St. Clement 's . 
 = Third Servile War = 
 The Third Servile War ( 73 – 71 BC ) , also called the Gladiator War and the War of Spartacus by Plutarch , was the last of a series of unrelated and unsuccessful slave rebellions against the Roman Republic , known collectively as the Roman Servile Wars . 
 The Third Servile War , the only one of these slave revolts to directly threaten the Roman heartland of Italy , especially alarmed the Roman people due to the repeated successes of the rapidly growing band of escaped former slaves against Roman armies between 73 and 71 BC . The concentrated military effort of a single commander , Marcus Licinius Crassus , finally crushed the rebellion , though the war continued to have indirect effects on Roman politics for years to come . 
 Between 73 and 71 BC , a band of escaped slaves — originally a small cadre of about 78 ( primarily Thracian , Gallic and Germanic escaped gladiators ) which grew into a band of over 120 @,@ 000 men , women and children — wandered throughout and raided Italy with relative impunity under the guidance of several leaders , including the famous gladiator @-@ general Spartacus . The able @-@ bodied adults of this band proved a surprisingly effective armed force that repeatedly showed that it could withstand the Roman military , from the local Campanian patrols , to the Roman militia , and to trained Roman legions under consular command . Plutarch described the actions of the slaves as an attempt by Roman slaves to escape their masters and to flee through Cisalpine Gaul , while Appian and Florus depicted the revolt as a civil war in which the slaves waged a campaign to capture the city of Rome itself . 
 The Roman Senate 's growing alarm about the continued military successes of this band , and about their depredations against Roman towns and the countryside , eventually led to Rome 's fielding of an army of eight legions under the harsh but effective leadership of Marcus Licinius Crassus . The war ended in 71 BC when the armies of Spartacus , after long and bitter fighting , retreating before the legions of Crassus , and realizing that the legions of Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus ( Pompey ) and Marcus Terentius Varro Lucullus were moving in to entrap them , launched their full strength against Crassus ' legions and were utterly destroyed . 
 The Third Servile War had significance in the broader history of ancient Rome in its effect on the careers of Pompey and Crassus . The two generals used their success in putting down the rebellion to further their political careers , using their public acclaim and the implied threat of their legions to sway the consular elections of 70 BC in their favor . Their actions as Consuls greatly furthered the subversion of Roman political institutions and contributed to the eventual transition of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire . 
 = = Slavery in the Roman republic = = 
 To varying degrees throughout Roman history , the existence of a pool of inexpensive labor in the form of slaves was an important factor in the economy . Slaves were acquired for the Roman workforce through a variety of means , including purchase from foreign merchants and the enslavement of foreign populations through military conquest . With Rome 's heavy involvement in wars of conquest in the 2nd and 1st centuries BC , tens if not hundreds of thousands of slaves at a time were imported into the Roman economy from various European and Mediterranean acquisitions . While there was limited use for slaves as servants , craftsmen , and personal attendants , vast numbers of slaves worked in mines and on the agricultural lands of Sicily and southern Italy . 
 For the most part , slaves were treated harshly and oppressively during the Roman republican period . Under Republican law , a slave was not considered a person , but property . Owners could abuse , injure or even kill their own slaves without legal consequence . While there were many grades and types of slaves , the lowest — and most numerous — grades who worked in the fields and mines were subject to a life of hard physical labor . 
 This high concentration and oppressive treatment of the slave population led to rebellions . In 135 BC and 104 BC , the First and Second Servile Wars , respectively , erupted in Sicily , where small bands of rebels found tens of thousands of willing followers wishing to escape the oppressive life of a Roman slave . While these were considered serious civil disturbances by the Roman Senate , taking years and direct military intervention to quell , they were never considered a serious threat to the Republic . The Roman heartland had never seen a slave uprising , nor had slaves ever been seen as a potential threat to the city of Rome . This would all change with the Third Servile War . 
 = = Rebellion begins ( 73 BC ) = = 
 = = = <unk> revolt = = = 
 In the Roman Republic of the 1st century , gladiatorial games were one of the more popular forms of entertainment . In order to supply gladiators for the contests , several training schools , or ludi , were established throughout Italy . In these schools , prisoners of war and condemned criminals — who were considered slaves — were taught the skills required to fight in gladiatorial games . In 73 BC , a group of some 200 gladiators in the <unk> school owned by Lentulus <unk> plotted an escape . When their plot was betrayed , a force of about 70 men seized kitchen implements , ( " choppers and spits " ) , fought their way free from the school , and seized several wagons of gladiatorial weapons and armor . 
 Once free , the escaped gladiators chose leaders from their number , selecting two Gallic slaves — Crixus and Oenomaus — and Spartacus , who was said either to be a Thracian auxiliary from the Roman legions later condemned to slavery , or a captive taken by the legions . There is some question as to Spartacus 's nationality , however , as a <unk> ( plural <unk> or <unk> ) was a type of gladiator in Rome , the title " Thracian " may simply refer to the style of gladiatorial combat in which he was trained . 
 These escaped slaves were able to defeat a small force of troops sent after them from Capua , and equip themselves with captured military equipment as well as their gladiatorial weapons . Sources are somewhat contradictory on the order of events immediately following the escape , but they generally agree that this band of escaped gladiators plundered the region surrounding Capua , recruited many other slaves into their ranks , and eventually retired to a more defensible position on Mount Vesuvius . 
 = = = Defeat of the praetorian armies = = = 
 As the revolt and raids were occurring in Campania — which was a vacation region of the rich and influential in Rome , and the location of many estates — the revolt quickly came to the attention of Roman authorities . They initially viewed the revolt as more a major crime wave than an armed rebellion . 
 However , later that year , Rome dispatched a military force under praetorian authority to put down the rebellion . A Roman praetor , Gaius Claudius Glaber , gathered a force of 3 @,@ 000 men , not regular legions , but a militia " picked up in haste and at random , for the Romans did not consider this a war yet , but a raid , something like an attack of robbery . " Glaber 's forces besieged the slaves on Mount Vesuvius , blocking the only known way down the mountain . With the slaves thus contained , Glaber was content to wait until starvation forced the slaves to surrender . 
 While the slaves lacked military training , Spartacus ' forces displayed ingenuity in their use of available local materials , and in their use of clever , unorthodox tactics when facing the disciplined Roman armies . In response to Glaber 's siege , Spartacus ' men made ropes and ladders from vines and trees growing on the slopes of Vesuvius and used them to rappel down the cliffs on the side of the mountain opposite Glaber 's forces . They moved around the base of Vesuvius , outflanked the army , and annihilated Glaber 's men . 
 A second expedition , under the praetor Publius Varinius , was then dispatched against Spartacus . For some reason , Varinius seems to have split his forces under the command of his subordinates Furius and <unk> . Plutarch mentions that Furius commanded some 2 @,@ 000 men , but neither the strength of the remaining forces , nor whether the expedition was composed of militia or legions , appears to be known . These forces were also defeated by the army of escaped slaves : <unk> was killed , Varinius was nearly captured , and the equipment of the armies was seized by the slaves . 
 With these successes , more and more slaves flocked to the Spartacan forces , as did " many of the herdsmen and shepherds of the region " , swelling their ranks to some 70 @,@ 000 . The rebel slaves spent the winter of 73 – 72 BC training , arming and equipping their new recruits , and expanding their raiding territory to include the towns of Nola , <unk> , Thurii and Metapontum . 
 The victories of the rebel slaves did not come without a cost . At some time during these events , one of their leaders , Oenomaus , was lost — presumably in battle — and is not mentioned further in the histories . 
 = = Motivation and leadership of the escaped slaves = = 
 By the end of 73 BC , Spartacus and Crixus were in command of a large group of armed men with a proven ability to withstand Roman armies . What they intended to do with this force is somewhat difficult for modern readers to determine . Since the Third Servile War was ultimately an unsuccessful rebellion , no firsthand account of the slaves ' motives and goals exists , and historians writing about the war propose contradictory theories . 
 Many popular modern accounts of the war claim that there was a factional split in the escaped slaves between those under Spartacus , who wished to escape over the Alps to freedom , and those under Crixus , who wished to stay in southern Italy to continue raiding and plundering . This appears to be an interpretation of events based on the following : the regions that Florus lists as being raided by the slaves include Thurii and Metapontum , which are geographically distant from Nola and <unk> . 
 This indicates the existence of two groups : Lucius Gellius Publicola eventually attacked Crixus and a group of some 30 @,@ 000 followers who are described as being separate from the main group under Spartacus . Plutarch describes the desire of some of the escaped slaves to plunder Italy , rather than escape over the Alps . While this factional split is not contradicted by classical sources , there does not seem to be any direct evidence to support it . 
 Fictional accounts sometimes portray the rebelling slaves as ancient Roman freedom fighters , struggling to change a corrupt Roman society and to end the Roman institution of slavery . Although this is not contradicted by classical historians , no historical account mentions that the goal of the rebel slaves was to end slavery in the Republic , nor do any of the actions of rebel leaders , who themselves committed numerous atrocities , seem specifically aimed at ending slavery . 
 Even classical historians , who were writing only years after the events themselves , seem to be divided as to what the motives of Spartacus were . Appian and Florus write that he intended to march on Rome itself — although this may have been no more than a reflection of Roman fears . If Spartacus did intend to march on Rome , it was a goal he must have later abandoned . Plutarch writes that Spartacus merely wished to escape northwards into Cisalpine Gaul and disperse his men back to their homes . 
 It is not certain that the slaves were a homogeneous group under the leadership of Spartacus . While this is the unspoken assumption of the Roman historians , this may be the Romans projecting their own hierarchical view of military power and responsibility on the ad hoc organization of the slaves . Certainly other slave leaders are mentioned — Crixus , Oenomaus , <unk> , and <unk> — and we cannot tell from the historical evidence whether they were aides , subordinates , or even equals leading groups of their own and traveling in convoy with Spartacus ' people . 
 = = Defeat of the consular armies ( 72 BC ) = = 
 In the spring of 72 BC , the escaped slaves left their winter encampments and began to move northwards towards Cisalpine Gaul . 
 The Senate , alarmed by the size of the revolt and the defeat of the praetorian armies of Glaber and Varinius , dispatched a pair of consular legions under the command of Lucius Gellius Publicola and Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus <unk> . Initially , the consular armies were successful . Gellius engaged a group of about 30 @,@ 000 slaves , under the command of Crixus , near Mount Garganus and killed two @-@ thirds of the rebels , including Crixus himself . 
 At this point in the history , there is a divergence in the classical sources as to the course of events which cannot be reconciled until the entry of Marcus Licinius Crassus into the war . The two most comprehensive ( extant ) histories of the war by Appian and Plutarch detail very different events . However , neither account directly contradicts the other , but simply reports different events , ignoring some events in the other account , and reporting events that are unique to that account . 
 = = = Appian 's history = = = 
 According to Appian , the battle between Gellius ' legions and Crixus ' men near Mount Garganus was the beginning of a long and complex series of military maneuvers that almost resulted in the Spartacan forces directly assaulting the city of Rome itself . 
 After his victory over Crixus , Gellius moved northwards , following the main group of slaves under Spartacus who were heading for Cisalpine Gaul . The army of Lentulus was deployed to bar Spartacus ' path , and the consuls hoped to trap the rebel slaves between them . Spartacus ' army met Lentulus ' legion , defeated it , turned , and destroyed Gellius ' army , forcing the Roman legions to retreat in disarray . 
 Appian claims that Spartacus executed some 300 captured Roman soldiers to avenge the death of Crixus , forcing them to fight each other to the death as gladiators . Following this victory , Spartacus pushed northwards with his followers ( some 120 @,@ 000 ) as fast as he could travel , " having burned all his useless material , killed all his prisoners , and butchered his pack @-@ animals in order to expedite his movement " . 
 The defeated consular armies fell back to Rome to regroup while Spartacus ' followers moved northward . The consuls again engaged Spartacus somewhere in the Picenum region , and once again were defeated . 
 Appian claims that at this point Spartacus changed his intention of marching on Rome — implying this was Spartacus ' goal following the confrontation in Picenum — as " he did not consider himself ready as yet for that kind of a fight , as his whole force was not suitably armed , for no city had joined him , but only slaves , deserters , and riff @-@ <unk> " , and decided to withdraw into southern Italy once again . They seized the town of Thurii and the surrounding countryside , arming themselves , raiding the surrounding territories , trading plunder with merchants for bronze and iron ( with which to manufacture more arms ) , and clashing occasionally with Roman forces which were invariably defeated . 
 = = = Plutarch 's history = = = 
 Plutarch 's description of events differs significantly from that of Appian 's . 
 According to Plutarch , after the battle between Gellius ' legion and Crixus 's men ( whom Plutarch describes as " Germans " ) near Mount Garganus , Spartacus ' men engaged the legion commanded by Lentulus , defeated them , seized their supplies and equipment , and pushed directly into northern Italy . After this defeat , both consuls were relieved of command of their armies by the Roman Senate and recalled to Rome . Plutarch does not mention Spartacus engaging Gellius ' legion at all , nor of Spartacus facing the combined consular legions in Picenum . 
 Plutarch then goes on to detail a conflict not mentioned in Appian 's history . According to Plutarch , Spartacus ' army continued northwards to the region around Mutina ( modern Modena ) . There , a Roman army of some 10 @,@ 000 soldiers , led by the governor of Cisalpine Gaul , Gaius Cassius Longinus attempted to bar Spartacus ' progress and were also defeated . 
 Plutarch makes no further mention of events until the initial confrontation between Marcus Licinius Crassus and Spartacus in the spring of 71 BC , omitting the march on Rome and the retreat to Thurii described by Appian . However , as Plutarch describes Crassus forcing Spartacus ' followers to retreat southwards from Picenum , one might infer that the rebel slaves approached Picenum from the south in early 71 BC , implying that they withdrew from Mutina into southern or central Italy for the winter of 72 – 71 BC . 
 Why they might do so , when there was apparently no reason for them not to escape over the Alps — Spartacus ' goal according to Plutarch — is not explained . 
 = = The war under Crassus ( 71 BC ) = = 
 Despite the contradictions in the classical sources regarding the events of 72 BC , there seems to be general agreement that Spartacus and his followers were in the south of Italy in early 71 BC . 
 = = = Crassus takes command of the legions = = = 
 The Senate , now alarmed at the apparently unstoppable rebellion occurring within Italy , gave the task of putting down the rebellion to Marcus Licinius Crassus . Crassus was no stranger to Roman politics , or to military command as he had been a field commander under Lucius Cornelius Sulla during the second civil war between Sulla and the Marian faction in 82 BC , and had served under Sulla during the dictatorship that followed . 
 Crassus was given a praetorship , and assigned six new legions in addition to the two formerly consular legions of Gellius and Lentulus , giving him an estimated army of some 32 @,@ 000 – 48 @,@ 000 trained Roman infantrymen plus their attached auxiliaries ( there being quite a historical range in the size of Republican Legions ) . Crassus treated his legions with harsh , even brutal , discipline , reviving the punishment of unit decimation within his army . Appian is uncertain whether he decimated the two consular legions for cowardice when he was appointed their commander , or whether he had his entire army decimated for a later defeat ( an event in which up to 4 @,@ 000 legionaries would have been executed ) . 
 Plutarch only mentions the decimation of 50 legionaries of one cohort as punishment after Mummius ' defeat in the first confrontation between Crassus and Spartacus . Regardless of what actually occurred , Crassus ' treatment of his legions proved that " he was more dangerous to them than the enemy " , and spurred them on to victory rather than running the risk of displeasing their commander . 
 = = = Crassus and Spartacus = = = 
 When the forces of Spartacus moved northwards once again , Crassus deployed six of his legions on the borders of the region ( Plutarch claims the initial battle between Crassus ' legions and Spartacus ' followers occurred near the Picenum region , Appian claims it occurred near the <unk> region ) , and detached two legions under his legate , Mummius , to maneuver behind Spartacus , but gave them orders not to engage the rebels . When an opportunity presented itself , Mummius disobeyed , attacked the Spartacan forces , and was subsequently routed . Despite this initial loss , Crassus engaged Spartacus and defeated him , killing some 6 @,@ 000 of the rebels . 
 The tide seemed to have turned in the war . Crassus ' legions were victorious in several engagements , killing thousands of the rebel slaves , and forcing Spartacus to retreat south through Lucania to the straits near Messina . According to Plutarch , Spartacus made a bargain with Cilician pirates to transport him and some 2 @,@ 000 of his men to Sicily , where he intended to incite a slave revolt and gather reinforcements . However , he was betrayed by the pirates , who took payment and then abandoned the rebel slaves . Minor sources mention that there were some attempts at raft and shipbuilding by the rebels as a means to escape , but that Crassus took unspecified measures to ensure the rebels could not cross to Sicily , and their efforts were abandoned . 
 Spartacus ' forces then retreated towards Rhegium . Crassus ' legions followed and upon arrival built fortifications across the isthmus at Rhegium , despite harassing raids from the rebel slaves . The rebels were under siege and cut off from their supplies . 
 = = = Reinforcement legions arrive ; the end of the war = = = 
 At this time , the legions of Pompey were returning to Italy , having put down the rebellion of Quintus <unk> in Hispania . 
 Sources disagree on whether Crassus had requested reinforcements , or whether the Senate simply took advantage of Pompey 's return to Italy , but Pompey was ordered to bypass Rome and head south to aid Crassus . The Senate also sent reinforcements under the command of " Lucullus " , mistakenly thought by Appian to be Lucius Licinius Lucullus , commander of the forces engaged in the Third Mithridatic War at the time , but who appears to have been the proconsul of Macedonia , Marcus Terentius Varro Lucullus , the former 's younger brother . With Pompey 's legions marching out of the north , and Lucullus ' troops landing in Brundisium , Crassus realized that if he did not put down the slave revolt quickly , credit for the war would go to the general who arrived with reinforcements , and thus he spurred his legions on to end the conflict quickly . 
 Hearing of the approach of Pompey , Spartacus attempted to negotiate with Crassus to bring the conflict to a close before Roman reinforcements arrived . When Crassus refused , a portion of Spartacus ' forces broke out of confinement and fled toward the mountains west of <unk> ( modern <unk> ) in <unk> , with Crassus ' legions in pursuit . The legions managed to catch a portion of the rebels – under the command of <unk> and <unk> – separated from the main army , killing 12 @,@ 300 . 
 Crassus ' legions also suffered losses . The Roman forces under the command of a cavalry officer named Lucius Quinctius were routed when some of the escaped slaves turned to meet them . The rebel slaves were not a professional army , and had reached their limit . They were unwilling to flee any farther , and groups of men were breaking away from the main force to independently attack the oncoming legions of Crassus . 
 With discipline breaking down , Spartacus turned his forces around and brought his entire strength to bear on the oncoming legions . In this last stand , the Battle of the Siler River , Spartacus ' forces were finally routed completely , with the vast majority of them being killed on the battlefield . All the ancient historians stated that Spartacus was also killed on the battlefield . However , his body was never found . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rebellion of the Third Servile War had been annihilated by Crassus . Although Pompey 's forces did not directly engage Spartacus 's forces at any time , his legions moving in from the north were able to capture some 5 @,@ 000 rebels fleeing the battle , " all of whom he slew " . After this action , Pompey sent a dispatch to the Senate , saying that while Crassus certainly had conquered the slaves in open battle , he himself had ended the war , thus claiming a large portion of the credit and earning the enmity of Crassus . 
 While most of the rebel slaves were killed on the battlefield , some 6 @,@ 000 survivors were captured by the legions of Crassus . All 6 @,@ 000 were crucified along the Appian Way from Rome to Capua . 
 Pompey and Crassus reaped political benefit for having put down the rebellion . Both Crassus and Pompey returned to Rome with their legions and refused to disband them , instead encamping outside Rome . Both men stood for the consulship of 70 BC , even though Pompey was ineligible because of his youth and lack of service as praetor or quaestor . Nonetheless , both men were elected consul for 70 BC , partly due to the implied threat of their armed legions encamped outside the city . 
 The effects of the Third Servile War on Roman attitudes towards slavery , and on the institution of slavery in Rome , are harder to determine . Certainly the revolt had shaken the Roman people , who " out of sheer fear seem to have begun to treat their slaves less harshly than before . " The wealthy owners of the latifundia began to reduce the number of agricultural slaves , opting to employ the large pool of formerly dispossessed freemen in sharecropping arrangements . With the end of Augustus ' reign ( 63 BC - 14 AD ) , the major Roman wars of conquest ceased until the reign of Emperor Trajan ( reigned 98 – 117 AD ) , and with them ended the supply of plentiful and inexpensive slaves through military conquest . This era of peace further promoted the use of freedmen as laborers in agricultural estates . 
 The legal status and rights of Roman slaves also began to change . During the time of Emperor Claudius ( reigned 41 – 54 AD ) , a constitution was enacted that made the killing of an old or infirm slave an act of murder , and decreed that if such slaves were abandoned by their owners , they became freedmen . Under Antoninus Pius ( reigned 138 – 161 AD ) , laws further extended the rights of slaves , holding owners responsible for the killing of slaves , forcing the sale of slaves when it could be shown that they were being mistreated , and providing a ( theoretically ) neutral third party to which a slave could appeal . While these legal changes occurred much too late to be direct results of the Third Servile War , they represent the legal codification of changes in the Roman attitude toward slaves that evolved over decades . 
 It is difficult to determine the extent to which the events of this war contributed to changes in the use and legal rights of Roman slaves . The end of the Servile Wars seems to have coincided with the end of the period of the most prominent use of slaves in Rome and the beginning of a new perception of slaves within Roman society and law . The Third Servile War was the last of the Servile Wars , and Rome did not see another slave uprising of this magnitude again . 
 = = = Classical works = = = 
 Appian , Civil wars , Penguin Classics ; New Ed edition , 1996 . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Caesar , Julius , Commentarii de Bello Gallico . 
 Cicero , M. Tullius . The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero , literally translated by C. D. Yonge , " for <unk> , Sextus Roscius , Quintus Roscius , against Quintus Caecilius , and against <unk> " . London . George Bell & Sons . 1903 . OCLC : <unk> 
 Florus , Publius Annius , Epitome of Roman History . Harvard University Press , 1984 . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Frontinus , Sextus Julius , Stratagems , Loeb edition , 1925 by Charles E. Bennett . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Gaius the Jurist , Gai <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Livius , Titus , This History of Rome 
 Livius , Titus , <unk> , K.G. Saur Verlag , 1981 . ISBN 3 @-@ 519 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Orosius , Histories . 
 <unk> , <unk> , Plutarch 's Lives , " The Life of Crassus " and " The Life of Pompey " . Modern Library , 2001 . ISBN 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Sallust , Histories , <unk> ( Oxford , 1992 / 1994 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Seneca , De <unk> 
 Suetonius , Lives of the Twelve Caesars : The Life of Claudius . 
 = = = Movies = = = 
 Spartacus - Directed by Stanley Kubrick and starring Kirk Douglas 
 = = = Modern books = = = 
 Bradley , Keith . Slavery and Rebellion in the Roman World . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Broughton , T. Robert S. Magistrates of the Roman Republic , vol . 2 . Cleveland : Case Western University Press , 1968 . 
 Davis , William Stearns ed . , Readings in Ancient History : Illustrative Extracts from the Sources , 2 Vols , Vol . II : Rome and the West . Boston : Allyn and Bacon , 1912 – 13 . 
 Matyszak , Philip , The enemies of Rome , Thames & Hudson , 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 500 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Shaw , Brent . Spartacus and the Slave Wars : a brief history with documents . 2001 . [ 1 ] 
 Strachan @-@ Davidson , J. L. ( ed . ) , Appian , Civil Wars : Book I , Oxford University Press , 1902 ( <unk> . 1969 ) . 
 Mommsen , Theodor , The History of Rome , Books I @-@ V , project <unk> electronic edition , 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 William Smith , <unk> , LL.D. , A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities , John Murray , London , 1875 . 
 Barry , Strauss . The Spartacus War Simon & Schuster , 2009 . ISBN 1 @-@ 4165 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Multimedia = = = 
 Fagan , Garret G. , " The History of Ancient Rome : Lecture 23 , Sulla 's Reforms Undone " , The Teaching Company . [ sound recording : CD ] . 
 = Rancho Camulos = 
 Rancho Camulos , now known as Rancho Camulos Museum , is a ranch located in the Santa Clara River Valley 2 @.@ 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) east of Piru , California and just north of the Santa Clara River , in present day Ventura County , California . It was the home of Ygnacio del Valle , an alcalde of the Pueblo de Los Angeles and member of the California State Assembly . The ranch was known as the Home of Ramona because it was widely believed to have been the setting of the popular 1884 novel Ramona by Helen Hunt Jackson . The novel helped in raising awareness about the Californio lifestyle and " romanticizing of the mission and rancho era of California history . " 
 The 1 @,@ 800 @-@ acre ( 7 km2 ) working ranch is a prime example of an early California rancho in its original rural setting . It was the source of the first commercially grown oranges in what is now Ventura County , and is one of the few remaining citrus growers in Southern California . 
 State Route 126 bisects the property , with most of the main buildings located south of the highway , and a few buildings on the north . The main adobe is one of the few extant Spanish Colonial buildings left in the state . Most of the other buildings are done in Mission Revival or Spanish Colonial Revival styles , both of which are derivatives of the original . 
 Rancho Camulos is designated a National Historic Landmark , listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and is also a California Historical Landmark . Many of the buildings and grounds are open to the public as a museum of this period in California history . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1769 , the Spanish Portola expedition , the first Europeans to see inland areas of California , came down the valley and camped by the river on August 10 , exact location unknown but in the area that later became Rancho Camulos . Fray Juan Crespi , a Franciscan missionary travelling with the expedition , named the valley Cañada de Santa Clara . 
 Originally a Tataviam village named <unk> ( meaning " juniper " ) , the area was used by Mission San Fernando Rey de España for growing crops and as a grazing area for livestock as early as 1804 . The population of this relatively isolated area ( only traversed by the El Camino Real ) , as recorded by William Edward Petty Hartnell during his inspection of the mission in 1839 , was 416 . It was included in the 48 @,@ 612 @-@ acre ( 197 km2 ) Rancho San Francisco granted to Del Valle 's father , Antonio del Valle , administrator of Mission San Fernando , by Governor Juan B. Alvarado on January 22 , 1839 , after the secularization of the missions . 
 After Antonio 's death in 1841 , Ygnacio inherited Rancho San Francisco , but this was challenged in court by his father 's second wife . Nevertheless , by 1853 he constructed a four @-@ room adobe house and a corral at Camulos . By 1857 , the land title dispute was settled , with Ygnacio getting the western portion and the remainder was split among Antonio 's children and his second wife . He purchased back some of the other portions from his family as well as the neighboring Rancho Temescal to the north , and began livestock operations on the expanded area . However , Del Valle and his family did not live on the ranch initially , instead settling in a house on what is now Olvera Street in Los Angeles . The Del Valle family did not move back to Camulos , which he had expanded , until 1861 . During this time , the ranch was overseen by José Antonio Salazar , Ygnacio 's majordomo . Thus , despite its close association with Ramona and Mexican California , the house was constructed after California statehood and the family never lived there under Mexican rule . 
 In the 1860s , a drought forced Del Valle to sell off much of his land , but Camulos not only survived , but thrived . By the time of his death in 1880 , the house had expanded to twenty rooms and the compound had become a self @-@ sustaining ranch , complete with a brick winery , chapel , barn and workers ' housing . Records indicate that in 1870 the ranch was largest vintner in the area . A stagecoach line opened in 1874 and in 1887 , Southern Pacific ran a rail line past the ranch , including a depot at Camulos , ending the ranch 's isolation . 
 In 1908 , the Del Valle Company was incorporated by Ygnacio 's children , but by 1924 , the property was sold to August Rübel , a native of Zürich , Switzerland . Upon its sale , the Los Angeles Times lamented that : 
 An era in the history of California closed yesterday . The Del Valles of Camulos bade farewell to the homestead where they have lived in successive generations since Antonio del Valle . It was the passing of the old regime . They are said to be the last of the old Spanish families who held in unbroken succession to the ancestral acres . 
 Rübel continued operating the ranch in the same manner as the Del Valles , employing many of same workers . He had served in the American Field Service during World War I and when World War II broke out , he volunteered for active duty again . However , he died while serving in Tunisia in 1943 . After his death , his wife Mary married a man named Edwin Burger , who was not as interested in maintaining the rancho . After Mary 's death in 1968 , Burger closed the ranch entirely , and the buildings and grounds were left untended for years . Rübel 's heirs regained control of the property after the 1994 Northridge earthquake , which had damaged a number of buildings on the rancho . 
 The Rübel family restored commercial citrus production and set about repairing the earthquake damage . They successfully lobbied to have Camulos listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1996 . In 2000 , it was further designated a National Historic Landmark . Although the main house was restored in 1996 , funding was not available to restore the smaller buildings until 2006 , with construction completed in spring 2007 . The rancho is on State Route 126 , but little is visible from the highway . 
 The driveway / parking lot and grounds immediate to the highway were used as a filming location for the 1970 science @-@ fiction television movie The Love War . 
 = = Agricultural development = = 
 Del Valle acquired his first Valencia orange seedlings in 1857 from his friend William <unk> . The fruit from these trees was the first to be commercially grown in what is now Ventura County , although this was a relatively small scale because the crops had to be taken by wagon to Los Angeles . A Southern Pacific line opened in 1876 seventeen miles ( 27 km ) to the east in Saugus , providing a more convenient form of transport . 
 However , the primary agricultural product from Rancho Camulos was wine . Ninety acres ( 360 @,@ 000 m ² ) of vineyards were planted in the 1860s and Camulos wines and brandies were known throughout Los Angeles and Santa Barbara . In 1870 , records indicate Camulos was largest of the four vintners in the San Buenaventura Township of Santa Barbara County , with 45 tons ( 40 @,@ 900 kg ) of grapes grown , making 6 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 23 @,@ 000 L ) of wine and 800 US gallons ( 3 @,@ 000 L ) of brandy . In addition to oranges and grapes , the ranch produced almonds , walnuts , apricots , wheat , corn and barley . Rose petals grown at Camulos were shipped to Europe to make perfume . 
 Over the years , the vineyards were replaced by other fruits . Today , about 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) are under cultivation , most of it oranges , but lemons , grapefruit , and avocados are grown too . This makes Camulos a rare instance of a surviving citrus operation . During the years 1920 – 45 , the citrus industry experienced a period of great growth , and , in contrast to the natural desert @-@ like conditions of the area , images of " citrus belts " help cement the image of Southern California as an idyllic farmland in the nation 's eye . After World War II , urban development eliminated much of the Southern California citrus production , with the notable exception of the Santa Clara River Valley . 
 = = Ramona = = 
 Ramona , published in 1884 , was based in part of some of the experiences that Helen Hunt Jackson had had during her visit to Rancho Camulos in 1882 . Jackson only spent two hours on the ranch and did not meet with Ysabel del Valle , and yet she had a keen eye for details , many of which made it into the book . For example , the altar cloth in the rancho 's chapel had a small tear in it which had been mended ; in the story , Margarita accidentally tears the altar cloth and Ramona <unk> it together . The book became extremely popular and inspired a great deal of tourism , which happened to coincide with the opening of Southern Pacific railroad lines in Southern California . 
 With all of the interest generated by the book , a number of communities declared that they were the setting for the novel in order to cash in on the boom , most notably Rancho Guajome in San Diego County , where Jackson had also visited prior to the book 's publication . However , the location of the fictional Moreno Ranch , " midway in the valley [ between lands ] to the east and west , which had once belonged to the Missions of San Fernando and San Bonaventura [ sic ] " corresponds to the location of Rancho Camulos , and the physical description of some of the buildings on the fictional ranch accurately describe actual buildings at Camulos . On the other hand , relative to the other locations in the novel ( Ramona 's having been married in San Diego and Alessandro 's family being from the Temecula area ) , Camulos seems too distant to be the real location . Unfortunately , Jackson died in 1885 , never having publicly disclosed what locations the book was based on . Historians today are unsure whether Moreno Ranch actually represented a real location . 
 Nevertheless , by 1886 , the ranch was already considered the setting of the novel . Edward Roberts published an article entitled , " Ramona 's Home : A Visit to the Camulos Ranch , and to the Scenes Described by ' H.H. ' " in the May 13 , 1886 edition of the San Francisco Chronicle . Significantly , he was one of the first to publish an account that blended fact and fiction . The inclusion of his article as an appendix to later versions of the novel only served to cement that association . 
 The first book solely devoted to Ramona and the ranch was published in 1888 by Charles Fletcher Lummis , a close friend of the Del Valles and who had fallen in love with the teenage Susana Carmen ( nicknamed " <unk> " ) del Valle . Lummis took photographs of the buildings and published them in his own book , Home of Ramona : Photographs of Camulos , the fine old Spanish Estate Described by Mrs. Helen Hunt Jackson as the Home of " Ramona " . He made it clear that the Del Valles were nothing like the fictional Morenos , who treated Ramona poorly , but he too would mix fact with fiction with such statements as , " [ the veranda ] is about a hundred feet in length and runs from the door of Father <unk> 's room to that of Ramona 's room . " 
 Lummis 's goal was to discourage the novel 's association with other properties , as was Adam Clark <unk> 's Ramona Illustrated : The Genesis of the Story of Ramona , which compared photographs of the rancho 's buildings and environs with text from the novel , as well as photographs from competing locations . By 1909 , George Wharton James could confidently declare that Camulos was the " avowed and accepted home of the heroine " . 
 Despite the lack of easy access to the ranch and any lodging in the area , tourists flocked to it , and the 1887 establishment of the Southern Pacific line only served to increase that number , with the railroad featuring the ranch in its advertisements in order to distinguish it from its competitors . Although the ranch was not developed for tourism , the Del Valles , with their Californio sense of hospitality , would lodge the visitors , but by October 1888 , it was getting to be so expensive for the family that <unk> del Valle pressed upon his mother to stop being so hospitable . The tourists themselves would also be quite a nuisance , and uncouth visitors would steal items from the house as souvenirs , or help themselves to fruit from the orchards . 
 Naturally , the name Camulos became so tied to the novel that many people began to use it instead of the original " Moreno Ranch " when referring to the novel . An 1897 play based on the book was called , " Ramona , or the Bells of Camulos " . In Virginia Calhoun 's 1905 stage adaptation , characters in the play called the ranch Camulos as well . 
 Given the general belief that Camulos was indeed the original setting , D. W. Griffith shot portions of his 1910 silent film at the rancho , using the chapel , the adobe and patio , and the nearby mountains as backdrops . Paintings and photographs by noted artists such as Adam Clark <unk> , Henry Sandham ( who had accompanied Jackson on her initial tour ) , Henry Chapman Ford , and Alexander Harmer of the rancho also illustrated later versions of the novel . 
 Although tourism brought much difficulty to the Del Valles , they were not above capitalizing upon their newfound fame themselves , branding their wine and oranges the " Home of Ramona Brand " , with their label using the same view of the veranda that had been popularized in postcards . One Tataviam servant girl apparently also made quite a bit of money by pretending to be the real Ramona and charging tourists for a photograph . 
 Tourists continued to arrive even after the SP relocated their main line through the Santa Susana Pass in 1903 . Two daily trains made stops at Camulos until the service was discontinued in the 1940s and tourism by automobile became commonplace at this time . After the <unk> took ownership in 1924 , they continued to welcome visitors in small numbers , converting the second floor of the winery into a small museum with artifacts from the Del Valle family . Today , the rancho hosts a " Ramona Days " festival annually in October . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 There are fifteen buildings open to the public as part of the Rancho Camulos Museum , all of which were built before 1930 and are still in their original locations . They are mostly built in Spanish Colonial or Mission Revival styles ( the latter is derived from the former ) , but later buildings were done in differing architectural styles , more representing the period in which they were built . Landscaping features such as lawns , flower gardens , ornamental trees , and walkways separate the residential areas from the working portions of the ranch . 
 The main adobe , also called the Ygnacio del Valle adobe , is a 10 @,@ 000 square foot ( 929 m ² ) , twenty @-@ room , U @-@ shaped structure . When initially constructed in 1853 , it was an L @-@ shaped four @-@ room house connected with an external <unk> ( as opposed to an interior hallway ) , as is typical of the Spanish Colonial style . It is unusual for its time period because around this time , the Monterey style was in vogue , as is evidenced by contemporaneous buildings in Santa Barbara . Los Alamos Ranch House in Santa Barbara County , and Rancho Guajome Adobe and Las Flores Adobe in San Diego County , all National Historic Landmarks , are built in a similar vein . 
 The house expanded in several phases . In 1861 before the Del Valle family moved here permanently three additional rooms were added as well as a free @-@ standing <unk> ( kitchen ) . A basement was installed under the new rooms as well . In the 1870s , another wing was added perpendicular to the 1861 attachment . Finally some time after 1895 , one more room was added to the new wing , as well as a breezeway to the kitchen , completing the current shape . Further remodeling done after this time was to the interior only . 
 The basement of the house initially served as the wine storage area , but in 1867 , a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ story brick winery was constructed . After 1900 , when wine grapes were no longer grown commercially , this building served as a storage room . Rübel later converted it to a museum for Ramona visitors , complete with Del Valle family artifacts . Currently it is used for farm equipment and automobile storage . 
 To the west of the main house is a large California Black Walnut ( Juglans californica ) tree that was most likely planted by Juventino del Valle in the 1860s . It measures 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) in circumference and its branches spread out almost half an acre ( 2 @,@ 000 m ² ) . It is believed to be the largest Black Walnut tree in the area . 
 The wooden chapel was constructed around 1867 , replacing a makeshift chapel that had been set up in 1861 . After the secularization of the missions , this chapel became known as the " lost mission " , the only place of worship between Mission San Fernando and Mission San Buenaventura . Directly to the northwest of the chapel is a bell structure which originally containing three bells on a freestanding frame , which were used to call worshipers to Mass . The largest and a second slightly smaller bell were cast at Kodiak , Alaska . The smaller one had previously been used at Mission San Fernando and may have been relocated to Camulos by Antonio del Valle when he was administrator at San Fernando . The third , and smallest bell is missing . 
 The exact dates of construction of the barn , gas station , and bunkhouse are unknown , but the American Craftsman style of architecture indicates it was between 1910 to 1916 . The barn is located to the northwest of the living quarters , in the main work area . The gas station and bunkhouse are not depicted on the map . 
 The small adobe , next to the highway , was built by <unk> del Valle . This Spanish Colonial <unk> house was constructed around 1920 and was damaged severely in the 1994 earthquake . Since its reconstruction , it has served as the museum 's visitor center . 
 The schoolhouse , constructed in 1930 , was the last to be built on the property . It was built by Rübel for his and his bookkeeper 's families and designed to match the main adobe . 
 There are few buildings left on the north side of the highway . The most notable are the wooden Southern Pacific saltbox @-@ style section house and workers ' bunkhouse , both built in 1887 . A train depot and post office both used to exist , but have been torn down . Three extant farmworkers ' bungalows , built by the Del Valle family in 1916 , sit west of the section house . 
 = = Historic designations = = 
 United States National Historic Landmark — added February 16 , 2000 
 United States National Register of Historic Places — reference number <unk> , added November 1 , 1996 
 California Historical Landmark — number 553 
 = Luke P. Blackburn = 
 Luke Pryor Blackburn ( June 16 , 1816 – September 14 , 1887 ) was an American physician , philanthropist , and politician from Kentucky . He was elected the 28th governor of Kentucky , serving from 1879 to 1883 . Until the election of Ernie Fletcher in 2003 , Blackburn was the only physician to serve as governor of Kentucky . After earning a medical degree at Transylvania University , Blackburn moved to Natchez , Mississippi , and gained national fame for implementing the first successful quarantine against yellow fever in the Mississippi River valley in 1848 . He came to be regarded as an expert on yellow fever and often worked pro bono to combat outbreaks . Among his philanthropic ventures was the construction of a hospital for boatmen working on the Mississippi River using his personal funds . He later successfully lobbied Congress to construct a series of similar hospitals along the Mississippi . 
 Although too old to serve in the military , Blackburn supported the Confederate cause during the Civil War . In the early days of the war , he acted as a civilian agent for the governments of Kentucky and Mississippi . By 1863 , he was aiding Confederate blockade runners in Canada . In 1864 , he traveled to Bermuda to help combat a yellow fever outbreak that threatened Confederate blockade running operations there . Shortly after the war 's end , a Confederate double agent accused him of having carried out a plot to start a yellow fever epidemic in the Northern United States that would have hampered the Union war effort . Blackburn was accused of collecting linens and garments used by yellow fever patients and smuggling them into the Northern states to be sold . The evidence against Blackburn was considerable , although much of it was either circumstantial or provided by witnesses of questionable reputation . Although he was acquitted by a Toronto court , public sentiment was decidedly against him throughout much of the United States . Today , historians still disagree as to the strength of the evidence supporting Blackburn 's role in the alleged plot . Any plot of this nature was destined to fail , however ; in 1900 , Walter Reed discovered that yellow fever is spread by mosquitoes , not by contact . 
 Blackburn remained in Canada to avoid prosecution by U.S. authorities , but he returned to his home country in 1868 to help combat a yellow fever outbreak along the Gulf Coast of Texas and Louisiana . Although the charges against him had not been dropped , he was not arrested or prosecuted . He rehabilitated his public image by rendering aid in yellow fever outbreaks in Memphis , Tennessee , in 1873 , Fernandina , Florida , in 1877 , and Hickman , Kentucky , in 1878 . Dubbed the " Hero of Hickman " , Blackburn 's ministrations propelled him to the Democratic gubernatorial nomination the following year . In the general election , he defeated Republican Walter Evans by a wide margin . As governor , Blackburn won passage of several reforms in the areas of state finance and internal improvements , but his signature accomplishments were in the area of penal reform . Troubled by the conditions at the penitentiary in Frankfort , Blackburn attempted to ease overcrowding through liberal use of his gubernatorial pardon , earning him the derisive nickname " <unk> Luke " . He also secured approval of the construction of a new penitentiary at Eddyville , the adoption of a warden system to replace the corrupt private oversight of the old penitentiary , and the implementation of the state 's first parole system . Although his record of reform led historians to laud him as " the father of prison reform in Kentucky " , his liberal pardon record and expenditure of scarce taxpayer money to improve the living conditions of prisoners was unpopular at the time , and he was booed and shouted down at his own party 's nominating convention in 1883 . After his term as governor , he returned to his medical practice and died in 1887 . The Blackburn Correctional Complex , a minimum @-@ security penal facility near Lexington , Kentucky , was named in his honor in 1972 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Luke Blackburn was born June 16 , 1816 , in Woodford County , Kentucky . [ a ] He was the fourth of thirteen children born to Edward M. ( " Ned " ) and Lavinia ( Bell ) Blackburn . Blackburn 's great @-@ uncle , Gideon Blackburn , was a well @-@ known Presbyterian missionary and served as president of Centre College in Danville , Kentucky . Many of Blackburn 's relatives were involved in politics . His maternal grandfather was a delegate to the 1799 Kentucky Constitutional Convention and his uncle , William Blackburn , was President Pro Tempore of the Kentucky Senate and acting lieutenant governor in the administration of Governor James Turner Morehead . Noted statesman Henry Clay was also a distant cousin , and occasionally visited the Blackburn home . 
 Blackburn obtained his early education in the local public schools . At age sixteen , he began a medical apprenticeship under his uncle , physician Churchill Blackburn . During his apprenticeship , he aided his uncle in treating victims of cholera outbreaks in Lexington and Paris . He later matriculated to Transylvania University in Lexington , Kentucky , where he earned a medical degree in March 1835 . After graduation , he opened a medical practice in Lexington and was instrumental in combating a cholera epidemic in nearby Versailles . He accepted no payment for his services during the epidemic . 
 On November 24 , 1835 , Blackburn married his distant cousin , Ella Gist Boswell . [ b ] Boswell 's father , Dr. Joseph Boswell , had died in the Lexington cholera epidemic a year earlier . The couple 's only child , son Cary Bell Blackburn , was born in 1837 . Just before Cary 's birth , Blackburn invested heavily in the hemp rope and bagging industry and suffered a significant financial loss when the business venture subsequently failed . In 1843 , Blackburn was elected as a Whig to the Kentucky House of Representatives and served a single , undistinguished term . He did not seek re @-@ election , and in 1844 , he and his younger brother opened a medical practice in Frankfort , Kentucky . 
 Drawn by the city 's prosperous economy , the <unk> relocated to Natchez , Mississippi , in 1847 . Luke Blackburn quickly became an active member of the community , helping found a temperance society , joining a militia group , and becoming the administrator of a local hospital . He became a close associate of Jefferson Davis and William Johnson . In 1848 , Blackburn served as the city 's health officer and implemented the first successful quarantine against a yellow fever outbreak in the Mississippi River valley . Using his own personal funds , he established a hospital for boatmen who navigated the Mississippi River . He also successfully lobbied the Congress to establish a hospital in Natchez ; upon its completion in 1852 , he was appointed surgeon there . In 1854 , he implemented another successful quarantine against yellow fever . The Mississippi Legislature commissioned Blackburn to lobby the Louisiana State Legislature to establish a quarantine at New Orleans to protect cities along the Mississippi River ; Louisiana authorized him to organize such a system . 
 Blackburn and his son Cary traveled to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , in September 1854 to secure an apprenticeship for Cary under noted physician Samuel D. Gross . While they were there , a yellow fever outbreak hit Fort Washington near Long Island , New York . The mayor of New York City asked Blackburn to help treat victims of the outbreak ; Blackburn accepted the invitation and refused compensation for his services . When he returned home in November 1856 , he found his wife Ella , who suffered from dropsy and a nervous condition , ailing with a fever . Despite Blackburn 's efforts to save her , Ella Blackburn 's condition worsened and she died before the end of the month . Blackburn was stricken with grief , and friends encouraged him to tour Europe , as he had often spoken of doing , to ease his sorrow . He did so in early 1857 , visiting hospitals in England , Scotland , France , and Germany . While in Paris , Blackburn met fellow Kentuckian Julia M. Churchill , who was traveling with her sister and niece . Blackburn and Churchill cut their journeys short , returned home , and were married in November 1857 . After their honeymoon , the couple took up residence in New Orleans in January 1858 , and Blackburn resumed his medical practice . A brief poem written by Blackburn indicates that the couple had a daughter named Abby , but the child apparently died as an infant , and her birth and death dates are unknown . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Blackburn 's sympathies lay with the Confederacy at the outbreak of the Civil War . Too old to enlist in the Confederate Army , he acted as an envoy for Kentucky governor Beriah Magoffin to obtain weapons from Louisiana for the defense of Kentucky , but he failed to secure the arms . In early 1862 , he was assigned to the staff of Major General Sterling Price as a surgeon . Mississippi Governor John J. Pettus appointed him as one of two commissioners to oversee the care of the state 's wounded soldiers in February 1863 . After securing sufficient medical supplies for the wounded , Blackburn traveled to Richmond , Virginia , to meet with Confederate Secretary of War James Seddon and offered to serve as General Inspector of Hospitals and Camps without taking compensation or a rank . When the offer was refused , Governor Pettus asked Blackburn to travel to Canada to collect provisions for blockade runners there . Blackburn and his wife left Mississippi for Halifax , Nova Scotia , in August 1863 , then continued on to Toronto ( in what was then the Province of Canada ) where they lodged in a boardinghouse . On one occasion , Blackburn was aboard a blockade running ship carrying ice from Halifax to Mobile , Alabama , when the ship was captured by the Union Navy . Union officials assumed Blackburn was a civilian passenger on the vessel and released him , after which he returned to Canada . 
 A devastating outbreak of yellow fever struck the island of Bermuda in April 1864 . The island was a major base of operations for Confederate blockade runners , and the epidemic threatened their continued operations there . At the request of Charles Monck , the Governor General of the United Provinces of Canada , Blackburn traveled to Bermuda to aid soldiers and civilians there . Blackburn continued his ministrations until mid @-@ July when he briefly returned to Halifax . The epidemic on the island continued , and Blackburn returned there in September to continue aiding the victims . He remained there until the outbreak abated in mid @-@ October . For his efforts in Bermuda , Blackburn received 100 British pounds and a commendation from Queen Victoria . Although little is known of his actions in Canada for the remainder of the war , he was rumored to have been part of a plot to incite massive insurrections in New England as a diversion , allowing fellow Confederate agent Thomas Hines to lead a prison break at Camp Douglas in Chicago . When word of the plot was leaked to Union officials , they sent troops to reinforce Boston , Massachusetts , Blackburn 's rumored target , quashing his role in the operation . 
 = = = Yellow fever plot = = = 
 On April 12 , 1865 , just days after the last major battle of the Civil War , a Confederate double agent named Godfrey Joseph Hyams approached the U.S. consul in Toronto claiming to have information about a plot by Blackburn to infect Northern cities with yellow fever . Hyams said he and Blackburn had been introduced by Confederate agent Stuart Robinson at the Queen 's Hotel in Toronto in December 1863 . According to Hyams , he had agreed to help Blackburn smuggle trunks of clothes used by patients infected with yellow fever into Boston , Massachusetts ; Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; Washington D.C. ; New Bern , North Carolina ; and Norfolk , Virginia ( the latter two cities being occupied by Union troops ) . Hyams said he was instructed to sell the trunks ' contents to used clothing merchants , and that Blackburn , subscribing to the common nineteenth century belief that yellow fever could be spread by contact , hoped that by dispersing the " contaminated " articles throughout these major cities he could trigger an epidemic that would cripple the Northern war effort . Hyams further alleged that Blackburn had filled a valise with fine shirts and instructed him to deliver it to President Abraham Lincoln at the White House , saying they were from an anonymous admirer . Upon completion of these tasks , Hyams said , Blackburn had promised to pay him $ 60 @,@ 000 . Hyams claimed he delivered the trunks as agreed , but did not attempt to deliver the valise to President Lincoln . According to his testimony , he never received more than nominal compensation for his efforts , partially prompting his decision to reveal the plot to the authorities . 
 Independent of Hyams ' testimony , officials in Bermuda had received information that Blackburn had collected a second cache of " contaminated " garments and linens . According to this information , Blackburn contracted with Edward Swan , a hotel owner in St. George 's , to store them until mid @-@ 1865 and then ship them to New York City , presumably in an attempt to start an outbreak there . Acting on this intelligence , Bermudan officials raided Swan 's hotel and found three trunks of garments and linens with stains consistent with the " black vomit " symptomatic of yellow fever . Swan was arrested and charged with violating the local health code . The contents of the trunks were soaked with sulfuric acid and buried . 
 The assassination of Abraham Lincoln just two days after Hyams related his story to Canadian officials heightened U.S. interest in arresting Blackburn to connect the assassination to Confederate President Jefferson Davis and his operatives in Canada . The U.S. Bureau of Military Justice ordered Blackburn 's arrest for attempted murder , but an arrest could not be effected because Blackburn was in Canada , beyond the Bureau 's jurisdiction . The subsequent discovery of the cache of garments and linens in Bermuda convinced Canadian authorities to act . They arrested Blackburn on May 19 , 1865 , charging him with violation of Canada 's neutrality in the Civil War . He was held for trial on $ 8 @,@ 000 bond . In October 1865 , a Toronto court acquitted Blackburn on grounds that the trunks of garments had been shipped to Nova Scotia , which was out of the court 's jurisdiction . A charge of conspiracy to commit murder was dropped after Blackburn 's attorney reminded the court that such a charge could only be made if the accused had made an attempt on the life of a head of state . Blackburn did not testify in the trial and only spoke of the plot years later when he denounced it as " too preposterous for intelligent gentlemen to believe . " 
 Historians disagree as to the strength of the evidence against Blackburn , and many of the federal and Confederate records relating to the case have been lost . Writing in the journal America 's Civil War , U.S. Navy physician J. D. Haines notes that the Confederate agents who testified against Blackburn were of dubious reputation . Hyams in particular received immunity from prosecution and was paid for his testimony . Haines also points out that Blackburn 's previous reputation as a humanitarian was ignored ; in the hysteria following Lincoln 's assassination , conspiracy theories abounded and Northerners were inclined to believe the worst about anyone with Confederate sympathies . The New York Times vilified Blackburn as " The Yellow Fever Fiend " and " a hideous devil " . Historian Edward Steers concedes that the evidence against Blackburn was circumstantial , but in his book Blood on the Moon , he contends that enough evidence survives not only to prove Blackburn 's involvement in the plot , but to show that high @-@ ranking Confederate officials up to and including President Jefferson Davis were aware of , condoned , and financed it . If true , Blackburn 's plot would have represented one of the earliest attempts at biological warfare . 
 = = Post @-@ war humanitarian work = = 
 After his acquittal , Blackburn remained in Canada to avoid arrest and prosecution by U.S. authorities . When he learned of a yellow fever outbreak in New Orleans and the Texas Gulf Coast , Blackburn wrote to President Andrew Johnson on September 4 , 1867 , asking permission to return to the U.S. and help treat the disease . Not waiting for Johnson 's response — which never came — Blackburn returned to the U.S. , arriving in Louisville on September 25 , 1867 , en route to New Orleans . After rendering aid during the epidemic , he and his family moved to an Arkansas plantation owned by his wife . 
 No attempt to arrest Blackburn was made , and he returned to Kentucky with his family in early 1873 . The family lived in Louisville 's Galt House hotel , and Blackburn resumed his medical practice in that city . During a cholera epidemic in 1873 , Blackburn rightly theorized that the disease was spread by the consumption of contaminated water , but most citizens accepted the competing theory that cholera was a <unk> disease . This theory was espoused by Thomas S. Bell , a better @-@ known physician in Louisville . Thousands died as a result of failing to heed Blackburn 's advice to boil potentially contaminated water before drinking it . Blackburn 's philanthropic work included treating victims of yellow fever outbreaks in Memphis , Tennessee , in 1873 and Fernandina , Florida , in 1877 . He refused to accept compensation for his services in either city , but was presented with gifts from appreciative residents in both cases . Several southern newspapers also carried glowing accounts of Blackburn 's service . 
 Louisville 's Courier @-@ Journal carried an announcement of Blackburn 's candidacy for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in Kentucky on February 11 , 1878 . It is not clear why , with only meager prior political experience , he decided to seek the office . He may have been influenced by the members of his family who were involved in politics . His brother Joseph was , at the time , a member of the U.S. House of Representatives , and another brother , James , had served in the Kentucky Senate . Two of his wife 's brothers also held political office ; Samuel Churchill was Secretary of State under Governors John L. Helm , John W. Stevenson , and Preston Leslie , and Thomas Churchill served as treasurer and later governor of the state of Arkansas . Whatever the reason , even his friends did not believe his announcement was wise due to his political inexperience . He opened his campaign with a speech in Owen County on March 29 , 1878 . 
 About the same time as his gubernatorial campaign began , Blackburn appeared before the Kentucky General Assembly to advocate measures to protect the state against disease outbreaks , including the creation of a state board of health and the construction of quarantine centers in the state 's border towns . To a large degree , his pleas fell upon deaf ears , with the exception of his proposal for the state board of health , which was created in March 1878 . Soon after , news came that yellow fever had appeared in the lower Mississippi Valley earlier than usual ; by August 1878 , it had reached epidemic proportions . Blackburn advocated implementing quarantines to deal with the influx of people fleeing north to escape the disease , but many of the state 's doctors did not believe yellow fever could survive as far north as Kentucky . Some towns in the Jackson Purchase region attempted to implement crude quarantines , but the city of Louisville completely ignored Blackburn 's advice and welcomed refugees from the South . Blackburn temporarily halted his gubernatorial campaign and traveled to Louisville to help treat those who arrived there already suffering from the disease . 
 On September 5 , the mayor of Hickman , Kentucky , a small western town along the Mississippi River , telegraphed the state board of health , informing them that yellow fever had reached epidemic levels in the city and requesting that Blackburn be sent to them as soon as possible . Blackburn arrived on September 7 to find that roughly 20 percent of the town 's population were ill with yellow fever . He organized cleanup crews to disinfect the town and a squad of Negroes to guard vacated homes . In late September , when it appeared the Hickman epidemic was waning , Blackburn traveled to Chattanooga and Martin , Tennessee , to render aid , but within ten days , he received word that the outbreak in Hickman had resurged and spread to nearby Fulton , Kentucky . Blackburn returned to the area and continued his ministrations until late October , when the outbreak had fully subsided . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Returning to Louisville , Blackburn was fêted at the Galt House hotel . For weeks , receptions were held in his honor , gifts of appreciation poured in from across the state and region , and he was hailed as the " Hero of Hickman " . It was against this backdrop that he resumed his gubernatorial campaign in November 1878 . Two other men also sought the Democratic gubernatorial nomination : Lieutenant Governor John C. Underwood and former Congressman Thomas Laurens Jones . Before the yellow fever outbreak , Underwood had been the favorite , but public sentiment had turned in Blackburn 's favor after his service to the people of Hickman . Underwood questioned whether Blackburn 's medical background had adequately prepared him to be the state 's chief executive ; he also mounted a failed legal challenge that claimed Blackburn had not met the constitutional state residency requirement of seven years . In late March 1879 , however , Underwood determined that he would not be able to overcome the " avalanche " of support for Blackburn and withdrew his candidacy . At the May 1 Democratic nominating convention , Blackburn was nominated by an overwhelming majority — 935 delegates to the convention voted for him compared to just 22 for Jones . 
 Due to ill health , Blackburn could not take an active part in the campaign . He sought relief from his ailments at Crab Orchard Springs , while much of the campaign oratory was delivered on his behalf by fellow Democrats Boyd Winchester , Parker Watkins Hardin , W. C. P. Breckinridge , and others . Republicans , who had nominated Walter Evans , had fewer speakers with which to canvass the state , and were at a decided disadvantage . Democrats attacked the administrations of Republican Presidents Ulysses S. Grant and Rutherford B. Hayes , cited the alleged abuses perpetrated in the South by Carpetbaggers and Scalawags , and leveled charges that Republicans favored capitalists over the state 's working class . Republican orators , led by William O 'Connell Bradley , charged Democrats with financial extravagance , citing a $ 3 million surplus in the state treasury in 1865 compared with a $ 1 million debt in 1878 . Bradley claimed that Democrats had maintained their power in the state through gerrymandering election districts . He cited poor conditions at the state penitentiary and inadequate funding of public education as evidence of Democratic mismanagement of the state . 
 In late May 1879 , the Republican @-@ leaning Cincinnati Gazette reported on Blackburn 's alleged plot to infect northern cities with yellow fever during the Civil War , apparently the first time the incident had been reported in Kentucky . The newspaper formed a special department for the sole purpose of investigating the claims against Blackburn and published a daily column in which it related the department 's findings . In the wake of the Gazette 's investigation , other Northern newspapers , including the Canton Repository , Cleveland Herald , and Philadelphia Press , derided Kentuckians for even considering the election of Blackburn ( who they nicknamed " Dr. <unk> " ) . The scandal gained more traction nationally than in Kentucky . Blackburn did not respond to the accusations , and Kentucky Republicans barely made mention of it , knowing that the northern press in general and the Cincinnati Gazette in particular were widely distrusted in the state . Kentucky newspaper editor Henry Watterson opined that most Kentuckians already knew about Blackburn 's Civil War activities and either explicitly approved of them or were apathetic about events that had occurred a decade and a half earlier . 
 In the general election , Blackburn defeated Evans by a vote of 125 @,@ 790 ( 56 % ) to 81 @,@ 882 ( 36 % ) , the largest Democratic margin of victory in a decade . Greenback Party candidate C. W. Cook garnered 18 @,@ 954 votes , approximately 8 percent of the total votes cast . These votes came mainly at the expense of Blackburn and the Democrats . Until the election of Ernie Fletcher in 2003 , Blackburn would be the only physician elected governor of Kentucky . 
 = = = Financial reform = = = 
 Immediately after his election , Blackburn began planning ways to balance the state 's budget . In his 1880 address to the legislature , Blackburn reported that since 1867 , the state had spent three million dollars more than it had taken in . Previous administrations had paid for the excess by using money from the federal government for " war claims " by the state and money from the state 's sinking fund . Further , an economic depression had lowered property values and the state legislature had , in response to public demand , lowered taxes , further shrinking government income . Blackburn forcefully asserted that the situation must be remedied . 
 In response to recommendations from the governor , the General Assembly enacted cost @-@ saving reforms in the judicial system , including the abolition of criminal , chancery , and common pleas courts , dividing the state instead into 18 circuit court districts . The number of jurors required for certain cases was reduced , juror salaries were set at a fixed rate , and penalties were established for soliciting jury duty . Reimbursement amounts for transporting and caring for prisoners were capped to prevent inflation of costs by local law enforcement . Salaries of state officials were reduced by 20 percent . The state property tax was also increased from 40 to 45 cents per $ 100 of taxable property , and laws were strengthened to facilitate the collection of delinquent taxes . 
 = = = Penal reform = = = 
 Blackburn 's primary focus was on reforms to the state 's penal system . According to Blackburn , 953 prisoners were being held at the state penitentiary , although the structure only contained 780 cells . Conditions in the penitentiary were poor and resulted in many illnesses . One fifth of the state 's prisoners suffered from pneumonia in 1875 . When Blackburn became governor in 1879 , the mortality rate of the almost one thousand inmates in the state penitentiary was over 7 percent . Scurvy caused by poor nutrition afflicted 75 percent of prisoners . Blackburn compared conditions at the penitentiary to the infamous Black Hole of Calcutta . 
 The poor conditions at the penitentiary were partially because the state leased management of the facility to private contractors , who frequently neglected prisoners ' needs to cut costs . These contractors often provided benefits such as cheap laundry services and free meals to legislators to secure contracts and encourage them to ignore their abuse of prisoners . Blackburn called for the contract system to be replaced with a system of oversight by wardens employed by the state . 
 Before the General Assembly could act on his recommendations , Blackburn began granting pardons to relieve prison overcrowding . He particularly favored clemency for the incurably sick so they could go home to die with their families . During his term , Blackburn pardoned over one thousand individuals , earning him the nickname " <unk> Luke " . The pardons were extremely unpopular with both the public and the Democratic political establishment . Several newspapers claimed that Blackburn sold pardons for two dollars apiece , though no evidence exists to support such an accusation . 
 In the 1880 legislative session , the General Assembly approved Blackburn 's recommendation to construct a new state penitentiary in Eddyville . Legislators also responded to Blackburn 's call for a warden system , authorizing the state to employ a warden , deputy warden , clerk , physician , and chaplain for the penitentiary . As a means of alleviating overcrowding , the Assembly allowed private contractors to lease convict labor from the penitentiary . These contractors would be responsible for feeding , clothing , housing , and caring for the prisoners in their charge . With no oversight of these contractors , however , prisoner abuses again occurred , including malnutrition , overwork , and beatings that often resulted in injury and death . Finally , legislators adopted , for the first time in state history , a rudimentary parole process . Due to his extensive record of reforming the state prison system , Blackburn is considered " the father of prison reforms in Kentucky " . 
 = = = Other reforms = = = 
 Blackburn was also a zealous advocate for improved river navigation . He persuaded the legislature to apply a $ 100 @,@ 000 allocation from the U.S. Congress to the improvement of navigation along the Kentucky River and gave concurrent jurisdiction over the Big Sandy and Licking Rivers to the federal government so they could be improved as well . Legislators also approved construction of a canal around the Cumberland Falls and improvements along the <unk> River . 
 Blackburn 's other accomplishments included establishing a state railroad commission and reorganizing the Kentucky Agricultural and Mechanical College . Kentucky A & M had been separated from Kentucky University under Blackburn 's predecessor , James B. McCreary ; Blackburn now advocated that it be put under the control of and supported by the state . This was done , and the rechartered institution , located at Lexington , became known commonly as the State College ; in 1916 , it was renamed the University of Kentucky . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Despite his record of reforms , Democratic party leaders were largely displeased with Blackburn and his administration . They decried his record number of pardons and resented the fact that he did not give more consideration to party service and loyalty when appointing individuals to state jobs . Further , state newspapers noted a lack of eloquence by the governor , and this provided additional fodder for Blackburn 's critics . Having announced at the beginning of his term that he would seek no further political office , Blackburn nonetheless attempted to defend his record in a speech at the 1883 Democratic nominating convention , but boos and shouts for him to sit down almost drowned out the address . Finally , Blackburn responded to the heckling by saying he expected to be criticized for his reforms , but that anyone who charged his administration with corruption was a " liar — a base and infamous liar " . At this , the clamor from the crowd became deafening , and Blackburn was forced to end his address and take his seat . 
 Blackburn retired from public life at the expiration of his term . He briefly visited a Virginia resort before returning to his apartment at Louisville 's Galt House and resuming his medical practice . While attending the 1883 National Conference of Charities , Blackburn was lauded for his prison reforms by guest speaker George Washington Cable . He also received praise at a similar conference in Saratoga , New York , a few weeks later . 
 A few months after his return to Louisville , Blackburn opened a sanatorium near Cave Hill Cemetery . His failing health impeded the success of the endeavor , however , and in January 1887 , he returned to the state capital of Frankfort — a city he regarded as his home — knowing that death was near . After a prolonged illness , he became comatose and died September 14 , 1887 . He was buried in Frankfort Cemetery . 
 On May 27 , 1891 , the state erected a monument over Blackburn 's grave . The granite monument features a bas @-@ relief depicting the Parable of the Good Samaritan . In 1972 , the state opened the Blackburn Correctional Complex , a 400 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 6 km2 ) minimum security prison near Lexington named for Governor Blackburn . 
 = Holby City = 
 Holby City styled as <unk> CI + Y is a British medical drama television series that airs weekly on BBC One . 
 The series was created by Tony McHale and Mal Young as a spin @-@ off from the established BBC medical drama Casualty , and premiered on 12 January 1999 . It is set in the same hospital as Casualty , in the fictional city of Holby , and featured occasional crossovers of characters and plots with both Casualty ( which featured dedicated episodes broadcast as Casualty @ Holby City ) and the show 's 2007 police procedural spin @-@ off HolbyBlue . Its first executive producers were Young and Johnathan Young , who were succeeded by Kathleen Hutchison from 2002 to 2004 , Richard Stokes from 2004 to 2006 , McHale from 2006 to 2010 , Belinda Campbell from 2010 to 2011 , Johnathan Young from 2011 to 2013 , and Oliver Kent from 2013 . Since the show 's initial development , it has become a weekly fixture in the schedule . Holby City airs once a week , with around 52 episodes per series . 
 The show follows the lives of medical and ancillary staff at the fictional Holby City Hospital . It began with eleven main characters in its first series , all of whom have since left the show . New main characters have been both written in and out of the series since , with a core of around fifteen main actors employed on the serial at any given time . In casting the first series , Young sought out actors who were already well known in the television industry , something which has continued throughout the show 's history , with cast members including Patsy Kensit , Jane Asher , Robert Powell , Adrian Edmondson and John Michie 
 McHale was the show 's lead writer for several years , and was the first British writer ever to become the showrunner of a major prime time drama . Under his tenure as executive producer , attempts were made at modernising the programme and appealing to a younger audience by taking on the <unk> technique and introducing musical montage segments into each episode . Seventeen series of Holby City have aired , and the eighteenth began airing from 13 October 2015 . The show has run for over 800 hour @-@ long episodes . It is filmed at the BBC Elstree Centre in Hertfordshire , and from 2004 to 2008 featured annual special episodes filmed on location abroad . From October 2010 , Holby City moved to high definition broadcasting . 
 Holby City has attracted comparisons to other medical dramas , often unfavourable , and figures within the television and entertainment industry including Broadcasting Standards Commission director Paul Bolt have accused the BBC of squandering the television licence fee on the programme . The series employs a team of researchers to ensure medical accuracy , and utilises surgeons from different disciplines to check scripts . Cast members are taught to perform basic medical procedures , and given the opportunity to spend time on real hospital wards for research . Holby City has , however , been criticised for its lack of realism , with the British Medical Association denouncing its portrayal of organ donation and unrealistic impression of resuscitation , and an accident and emergency nurse at the 2008 Royal College of Nursing conference accusing the show of fostering unrealistic expectations of the NHS and fuelling compensation culture . 
 Holby City has been nominated for over 100 television awards , of which it has won ten : the 2008 British Academy Television Award for Best Continuing Drama , one <unk> Award , two Ethnic Multicultural Media Awards , two Music Video and Screen Awards , and four Screen Nation Awards . The show 's first series averaged 9 @.@ 27 million viewers , but apart from a rise in its fifth series , ratings declined year @-@ on @-@ year until 2009 , with the eleventh series averaging 5 @.@ 44 million viewers . The twelfth series saw a small rise to 5 @.@ 62 million . Later series have consistently drawn over 4 million viewers per week . 
 = = Production = = 
 The show began with only eleven main characters in its first series , all of whom have since left the show . New main characters have been both written in and out of the series since , with a core of fifteen to twenty main actors employed on the serial at any given time . In casting the first series , Young sought out actors who were already well known in the television industry , something which has continued throughout the show 's history , with cast members including Patsy Kensit , Jane Asher , Robert Powell and Adrian Edmondson . 
 McHale was the show 's lead writer for several years , and was the first British writer ever to become the " showrunner " of a major prime time drama . Under his tenure as executive producer , attempts were made at modernising the programme and appealing to a younger audience by taking on the filmising technique and introducing musical montage segments into each episode . Seventeen complete series of Holby City have aired , and an eighteenth began airing in October 2015 . The show has run for over 600 @-@ hour @-@ long episodes . It is filmed in studios at the BBC Elstree Centre in Hertfordshire , with the 1960s office building Neptune House being used for multiple exteriors and interiors in the series . It has occasionally featured special episodes filmed on location abroad . From October 2010 , Holby City moved to high definition broadcasting . 
 Holby City has attracted comparisons to other medical dramas , often unfavourable , and figures within the television and entertainment industry including Broadcasting Standards Commission director Paul Bolt have accused the BBC of squandering the television licence fee on the programme . The series employs a team of researchers to ensure medical accuracy , and utilises surgeons from different disciplines to check scripts . Cast members are taught to perform basic medical procedures , and given the opportunity to spend time on real hospital wards for research . 
 Holby City has been nominated for over 100 television awards , of which it has won six : the 2008 British Academy Television Award for " Best Continuing Drama " , two Ethnic Multicultural Media Awards and three Screen Nation Awards . The show 's first series averaged 9 @.@ 27 million viewers , but apart from a rise in its fifth series , ratings declined year @-@ on @-@ year until 2009 , with the eleventh series averaging 5 @.@ 44 million viewers . The twelfth series saw as small rise to 5 @.@ 62 million . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Holby City was created by Tony McHale and Mal Young as a spin @-@ off from the BBC medical drama Casualty , which is set in the emergency department of the fictional Holby City Hospital . Young wanted to explore what happened to patients treated in Casualty once they were taken away to the hospital 's surgical wards . While Casualty 's scope is limited to " accident of the week " storylines about patients entering hospital , Holby City allowed the possibility of storylines about long @-@ term care , rather than immediate life and death decisions . The series was commissioned by BBC One Controller Peter Salmon , and began airing on BBC One on 12 January 1999 . 
 Series producer Richard Stokes believes that the series ' popularity stems from the fact the hospital setting presents numerous plotline opportunities , explaining : " You have licence to create life @-@ and @-@ death situations every week , something you cannot do in any other set piece . The interaction of the characters can be sexy and social issues also permeate the writing . But , basically , hospital drama is successful because the viewers will forgive all the <unk> bits for the wonder of a life saved . " The focus of the series has developed since its conception , expanding to cover extra wards , including a gynaecology ward , an acute assessment unit and a maternity ward . When the maternity ward and a special care baby unit were introduced during series four , Young explained that new wards were necessary to allow the crew to rotate sets , maximising filming potential . 
 Episodes of Holby City cost around £ 370 @,@ 000 to produce — more than the BBC soap opera EastEnders , at £ 130 @,@ 000 per episode , but less than Casualty at £ 450 @,@ 000 per episode , or Dalziel and Pascoe at £ 700 – 800 @,@ 000 per episode . As Holby City is a high @-@ volume , year @-@ round production , it has relatively low production costs . Set @-@ up costs can be spread over many years and standing sets can be repeatedly re @-@ used , which is not the case for shorter series or one @-@ off dramas . 
 Young remained an executive producer of Holby City until 2004 , when he left the BBC to work for production company 19 TV . Former Casualty producer Johnathan Young was an executive producer for the duration of Holby 's first series , before joining Channel 4 in 1999 . Kathleen Hutchison served alongside Mal Young as co @-@ executive producer from 2003 to 2004 , when she left the series to become executive producer of EastEnders . Hutchison was succeeded by former series producer Stokes , who remained working on Holby City until 2006 , when McHale returned to the series . McHale was the first British writer ever to become the showrunner of a major prime time drama . He resigned from the position in 2009 , and was succeeded by Belinda Campbell in 2010 . In February 2011 , it was announced that Johnathan Young would return to the BBC from March , succeeding Campbell as executive producer of both Casualty and Holby City . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Holby City storylines are planned eight months in advance . The series utilises a number of scriptwriters , who are found and scheduled by script development editor Simon Harper . Harper receives around 20 speculative scripts a week , and also finds writers through the BBC Writers Academy , a course established in 2005 which guarantees its graduates the opportunity to work on prime time television . McHale teaches at the academy , and graduate Abi Bown went on to become a regular writer for Holby City . Harper also recruits writers through the BBC 's Continuing Drama Shadow Scheme , open to writers from all levels of experience . He believes that scripts which demonstrate synthesis between guest and serial storylines are " the spine of the show " , and has stated that , " Good , cracking , intelligent , ballsy dialogue is a must , " explaining : " It 's about getting the characters voices because the characters drive these shows . It is a love for and investment in these characters and the consistency of those characters . " Harper does not require that writers are necessarily familiar with the show , and would like to attract more female scriptwriters . 
 McHale wrote the series ' first episode , and served as the show 's lead writer . His 2006 promotion to executive producer was part of a bid by Controller of BBC Drama Production John Yorke to " put writers back at the heart of the process " . Yorke called McHale 's promotion " fantastic " , explaining : " It means that for the first time you 've got a writer running one of our big powerhouse BBC1 shows . " Following McHale 's resignation , his replacement as lead writer was Justin Young , who intends to introduce a more writer @-@ led commissioning process from series 13 onwards , with writers creating more of the theme and story of their episodes than was previously the case . 
 = = = Medical accuracy = = = 
 To ensure accuracy in scriptwriting , the serial employs a team of researchers to advise writers on nursing issues and health service politics . One medical advisor was given a cameo role in the series as an orthopaedic surgeon , and another , recovery nurse Rachel Carter , appears in Holby City as a scrub nurse . Another adviser , a heart surgeon , has occasionally left open @-@ heart surgery to advise Holby City writers over the telephone . The programme utilises surgeons from different disciplines , who check scripts for accuracy . Carter believes this is particularly important in case viewers copy procedures they have seen in the show , such as CPR . Series star Amanda Mealing commented : " We pride ourselves on being realistic . You need to know what you are doing and why . It is a complex and foreign thing to act out an operation . For training , I watched a number of real ones . " Cast members are taught how to give realistic injections , monitor blood pressure and check a pulse , and some are given the opportunity to observe procedures in real hospitals . Original cast member George Irving observed coronary artery bypass surgery performed at Papworth and Middlesex Hospital in preparation for his role as Anton Meyer , while Edward MacLiam observed laparoscopic surgery being performed before joining the cast as Greg Douglas in series twelve . 
 = = = Filming and on @-@ screen output = = = 
 Holby City and Casualty are both set in Holby City Hospital , in the fictional county of Wyvern , in the southwest of England close to the Welsh border . The city exterior is represented by Bristol , though Holby City is filmed at the BBC 's Elstree Studios in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire . The Casualty set in Bristol was not large enough to encompass the surgical ward and operating theatre required for Holby City , and as a result , some crossover scenes in the first episode had to be shot twice , first on the Casualty set and then again at Elstree , with cast members travelling between the two locations . In October 2007 , BBC cutbacks led The Daily Telegraph to report that the Elstree site would be sold , and Holby City relocated to share a set with Casualty , possibly in Cardiff . In March 2009 , the BBC confirmed that Casualty would move to a new set in Cardiff , however in the following month , The Guardian announced that the BBC would retain Elstree Studios for at least another four years . 
 Several episodes of the series have been shot on location abroad . In 2004 , the romance between nurse Jess Griffin ( Verona Joseph ) and anaesthetist Zubin Khan ( Art Malik ) culminated in an episode set in Paris . The following year , registrar Diane Lloyd ( Patricia Potter ) followed consultant Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) to Ghana as part of the BBC 's " Africa lives " series , a week of programmes bringing an exploration of African culture to UK audiences . In 2006 , an episode shot in Switzerland featured consultant Elliot Hope 's ( Paul Bradley ) wife Gina ( Gillian Bevan ) committing assisted suicide after her motor neurone disease worsened . A 2007 episode filmed in Dubai focussed on Holby registrars Jac Naylor ( Rosie Marcel ) and Joseph Byrne ( Luke Roberts ) meeting new nurse Faye Morton ( Patsy Kensit ) , and in 2008 , Joseph and consultant Linden Cullen ( Duncan Pow ) travelled to Cape Town when Faye experienced difficulties there . Series producer Diana Kyle stated in November 2008 that due to major BBC budget cuts , the series would not be filming abroad again for the " foreseeable future " . However , in an episode screened on 8 January 2013 , Jac Naylor travelled to Stockholm , Sweden to track down Henrik Hanssen and convince him to return to Holby . She succeeded and Hanssen returned to the hospital and resumed his role . 
 Holby City is shot using the single @-@ camera setup . Filming occurs from 8 am until 6 pm daily , 50 weeks a year . From July 2007 onwards , the show took on the filmising technique , giving episodes the impression of having been shot on film . Kyle stated that this was intended to attract a younger audience and modernise the programme , and that there had been a " very positive " response to the change . On 28 May 2010 , the BBC announced that it would be launching a high definition ( HD ) simulcast of BBC One from the autumn , and that Holby City would move to HD by the end of the year . The series moved to HD broadcasting , with a BBC HD simulcast , from the start of series 13 in October 2010 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The show 's eleventh series saw musical montage or " <unk> " segments become standard in each episode , introduced by McHale as a means of modernising the show . Although McHale initially considered commissioning original pieces , budgetary constraints limited choices to pre @-@ existing tracks . The use of songtages was first popularised by the US medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , however McHale stated he was unaware of this until Holby City had already adopted the technique . Music was generally selected by each episode 's scriptwriter . If the writer was not specific about which songs should be used , the producers and director would select the music in post @-@ production . Actors also have some input : Hugh Quarshie personally selected the music he believed his character Ric Griffin would listen to in theatre . Asked in June 2010 whether she felt songtages were appropriate for a serious drama show , Kyle responded : " Yes – sometimes . On a multi @-@ strand series such as Holby , they are an excellent way of telling stories visually – a moment from each – to open or close an episode or create the passing of time in a concise way for the audience . " Kris Green of entertainment and media website Digital Spy suggested that the number of songs used per episode could be " very jarring " , to which Kyle replied : " We plan to use music carefully in the future – maybe ' songtages ' , as above – and sourced music within a scene , that is music actually playing in the scene itself , for example on a radio – but less incidental . " 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Holby City premiered on 12 January 1999 on BBC One . Fourteen series of the show have since aired , and a fifteenth began airing on 16 October 2012 . The show 's first series ran for nine episodes . In June 2000 , then Director @-@ General of the BBC Greg Dyke pledged extra funding for BBC One , some of which was used for extra episodes of Holby City . The second and third series ran for 16 and 30 episodes respectively , with new episodes then airing on a weekly basis from the fourth series onwards . Series four to nine and eleven all ran for 52 episodes , while series ten ran for 53 episodes , including the stand @-@ alone finale episode " Mad World " , set outside the hospital . All series from then on continued to consist of 52 episodes , with exception to the twelfth series , which consisted of 55 episodes in total . Young explained of the increase in series length : " Longer runs allow you to develop really strong storylines for the regular characters . As long as you do volume with passion , it 'll work . " The series reached its 500th episode on 13 April 2010 . 
 Throughout Holby City 's first series , episodes were 50 minutes long . From the second series onwards , episodes have been one hour in length . The show was originally broadcast on Tuesday nights at 8 @.@ 10 pm , until a switch to Thursdays occurred for the second series , which began broadcasting in November 1999 . Halfway through the third series in 2001 , Holby reverted to its original Tuesday night slot , but now at 8 @.@ 05 pm . Finally , the show moved into the 8 pm timeslot , where it has since remained . The show is occasionally broadcast on a different day dependent on BBC scheduling . In 2007 , the show temporarily moved to Thursday nights , allowing HolbyBlue to air in the 8 pm Tuesday timeslot . BBC Scotland has for the most part broadcast the series at a later date mainly at 10 @.@ 40 , with its slot at 8pm filled with River city , 
 = = Characters and cast = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Holby City follows the professional and personal lives of medical and ancillary staff at Holby General . It features an ensemble cast of main and recurring characters . New main characters have been both written in and out of the series regularly since it started , the show contains a core of 15 to 20 main characters on the show at any given time . 
 As of July 2016 , the main cast of characters includes CEO Henrik Hanssen ( Guy Henry ) , Consultants Serena Campbell ( Catherine Russell ) , Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) , Jac Naylor ( Rosie Marcel ) , Guy Self ( John Michie ) , Sacha Levy ( Bob Barrett ) Bernie Wolfe ( Jemma Redgrave ) and Mo <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , registrars Oliver Valentine ( James Anderson ) and Raffaello " Raf " di Lucca ( Joe McFadden ) , F2 doctors Dominic Copeland ( David Ames ) and Zosia March ( Camilla Arfwedson ) , F1 doctor Morven Shreve ( Eleanor <unk> ) , AAU Ward Manager Adrian " Fletch " Fletcher ( Alex Walkinshaw ) , and transplant coordinator Estelle " Essie " Harrison ( Kaye Wragg ) . 
 The original cast of 11 characters featured in the shows first episode was made up of consultants Anton Meyer ( George Irving ) and Muriel McKendrick ( Phyllis Logan ) , registrars Nick Jordan ( Michael French ) and Kirstie Collins ( Dawn McDaniel ) , senior house officer Victoria Merrick ( Lisa Faulkner ) , ward sister Karen Newburn ( Sarah Preston ) , theatre sister Ellie Sharpe ( Julie Saunders ) , senior staff nurse Ray Sykes ( Ian Curtis ) , staff nurses Julie Bradford ( Nicola Stephenson ) and Jasmine Hopkins ( Angela Griffin ) , and ward clerk Paul Ripley ( Luke Mably ) . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In casting the first series of Holby City , Young — who had previously worked on the soap operas Brookside and Family Affairs — selected actors who were already established names in the acting industry , particularly from a soap opera background . French had starred in the BBC 's EastEnders , while Stephenson and Faulkner had starred in Brookside . Griffin had also appeared in ITV 's Coronation Street . Young explained : " Some of the best performances on screen have come out of soaps in the past few years . There is a fantastic amount of talent on those shows . " This propensity for hiring established actors continued as the soap progressed , with former Brookside actress Patricia Potter cast as registrar Diane Lloyd , Star Wars actor Denis Lawson cast as consultant Tom Campbell @-@ Gore , and Family Affairs star Rocky Marshall cast as SHO Ed Keating . Later roles were awarded to comedian Adrian Edmondson , former film actress Patsy Kensit , and Jesus of Nazareth star Powell . When Jane Asher was cast in the recurring role of Lady Byrne in 2007 , Inside Soap magazine asked Kyle whether the production team intentionally sought out " well @-@ known @-@ names " . She responded : " It 's lovely when we have a new member of the cast come in and bring an audience with them . But we want the best actors , and the star names we cast are always the best – which is why we go for them . " 
 There is a casting department at Elstree Studios which casts actors for Holby City as well as Casualty , EastEnders and Doctors . The programme also has two dedicated casting directors who bring in a shortlist of actors for the producer and director to audition . Some cast members who play main characters have made previous appearances in Holby City in minor roles . Mealing appeared as the mother of a paediatric patient in the show 's fourth series , Roberts appeared as the son of a medical professor in Holby City 's seventh series , and Dhillon appeared as anaesthetist Sunil Gupta in 2001 . Roberts believes that his single scene in series seven was enough for him to be called in for the part of Joseph , while in contrast , Dhillon does not believe that his role contributed to his casting as Michael , but instead worried that it would work against him . 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 Holby City has featured a number of famous guest stars . Emma <unk> , Antonio Fargas , Ronald Pickup and Leslie Phillips made appearances within the show 's first few series , and Anita Dobson , Peter Bowles and Susannah York all appeared in the fiftieth episode . Other notable guest stars include Paul Blackthorne , Suzanne Shaw , Geoffrey Hutchings , Richard Todd , Johnny Briggs , Terence Rigby , Michael Obiora , and Lionel Jeffries . Richard Briers appeared as patient George Woodman in the Christmas episode " Elliot 's Wonderful Life " , Eric Sykes played Roger Ludlow , a patient with Alzheimer 's disease and Phill Jupitus starred as morbidly obese patient Andy Thompson . Kieron Dyer was in four episodes as an injury prone footballer , Denise Welch had a recurring role as risk manager Pam McGrath , mother of nurse Keri , Clarke Peters appeared for five episodes in 2009 as the father of nurse Donna Jackson , and Graeme Garden had a recurring role from 2003 to 2007 as cardiothoracic consultant Edward <unk> . Cascade Brown played Sophie Hindmarsh in 2004 , Antonio Fargas appeared in 2003 as Victor Garrison , a patient with Parkinson 's disease , Sheridan Smith appeared for six episodes in 2001 as teenage stalker Miranda Locke , and David Soul made two appearances as Professor Alan Fletcher . The BBC 's William Gallagher wrote in a November 2001 column that Soul 's guest @-@ appearance had begun a trend for American actors appearing in UK shows . In 2012 , Ron Moody guest starred as patient Vincent Mancini , a war veteran . 
 In 2003 , the BBC reached an agreement with the actors ' union Equity to cease offering walk @-@ on drama series roles to members of the public as prizes . When an untrained person won such a role in Holby City in a competition , Equity complained to the broadcaster that such prizes were " demeaning " to actors , depriving them of paid employment . The competition winner was allowed to visit the Holby City set , but did not appear on @-@ screen as a result of the policy change . 
 = = Adaptations and other appearances = = 
 = = = Casualty @ Holby City = = = 
 Reflecting Holby City 's origins as a spin @-@ off from Casualty and the closely related premises of the two programmes , the BBC has screened occasional crossover mini @-@ dramas entitled Casualty @ Holby City , featuring a number of characters from each of the two casts . Prior to the commissioning of Casualty @ Holby City , the two shows had occasionally crossed @-@ over storylines and cast members before ; for instance developing a romance between Holby City 's Ben Saunders ( David Paisley ) and Casualty 's Tony Vincent ( Lee Warburton ) . The first full crossover was spearheaded by Casualty 's executive producer Mervyn Watson , and Holby City 's McHale . Logistical difficulties arose from the fact the two series are usually produced 120 miles apart , and work on both shows had to be halted for two weeks to release a number of cast members to appear in the special . A second crossover was commissioned in 2005 as part of the BBC 's <unk> season , aiming to raise public awareness of organ donation and help viewers make an informed decision about whether to sign up to the Organ Donor Register . An interactive episode of Casualty @ Holby City was one of the headlining shows of the season , allowing viewers to vote by phone to determine the outcome of a fictional organ donation . The third Casualty @ Holby City crossover aired in October 2005 . The four @-@ part storyline tackled the issue of youth violence , following the events of a turbulent A & E demonstration at an inner @-@ city school . Based on the success of the 2004 Casualty @ Holby City Christmas special , another crossover was ordered for Christmas 2005 . Rather than dividing the episodes between the two series ' crews as had previously been standard , this crossover operated as an entirely separate production , with Kyle producing and Paul Harrison directing . 
 In February 2010 , another crossover occurred when Casualty 's Charlie Fairhead ( Derek Thompson ) was operated on by Holby City 's Elliot Hope after suffering a heart attack . The storyline was , however , broadcast as regular Casualty and Holby City episodes , rather than under the Casualty @ Holby City title . Casualty 's series producer Oliver Kent commented that , while it is " fantastic " to be able to produce crossover episodes , they are logistically difficult , and it is unlikely that another Casualty @ Holby City episode will be produced in the " foreseeable future " . In September 2010 , Holby City 's nurse Donna Jackson ( Jaye Jacobs ) appeared in Casualty , and Kent hopes that characters from the two shows will begin to crossover two or three times a year . 
 = = = HolbyBlue = = = 
 On 27 April 2006 , the BBC announced the commissioning of Holby Blue , a police procedural spin @-@ off from Holby City created by Tony Jordan . Jordan contemplated that " soap snobs " may hold the series in disdain for using the Holby brand , but concluded : " After much thought , I remembered who I was as a writer , the joy I take from surprising an audience , by subverting expectation – and HolbyBlue was born . " Holby City was moved to Thursdays for the duration of HolbyBlue 's first series , with the spin @-@ off broadcast on Tuesday nights at 8 pm . A two @-@ part crossover episode with Holby City was developed for the beginning of the show 's second series , broadcast in 2008 . The episodes were written by McHale and Jordan , and saw Holby City registrar Jac Naylor accused of murder . Yorke compared the crossover to the American CSI franchise , in that : " You really believe it 's a world . " While the second series attracted 5 @.@ 6 million viewers with its opening episode , by the end of May 2008 viewership had fallen to 2 @.@ 5 million . In August 2008 , the BBC announced that due to declining ratings , Holby Blue would not be recommissioned for a third series . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 In June 2002 , cast members from Holby City and Casualty competed against the EastEnders cast for the first Sport Relief fundraiser , in a segment dubbed " Sport in the Square " . The teams competed in events such as taxi pulling , melon tossing and a beer keg relay . The competition was televised on BBC One , and the event as a whole raised £ 10 million . In October 2003 , BBC One aired a " Kenyon <unk> " documentary by Panorama reporter Paul Kenyon , investigating hospitals run by the Private Finance Initiative . He discovered many problems within the hospitals , which were dramatised by the Holby City cast in specially commissioned scenes . March 2004 saw the station air the documentary " Making It at Holby " , as part of a BBC initiative to develop new acting talent . The documentary followed the casting process of Holby City and Casualty , from the audition stages to the filming of the selected actors ' first scenes . Young explained his casting criteria , revealing : " I try to put my head into the head of a viewer and ask : do I want to spend three years in the life of this person ? " 17 November 2006 Children in Need charity telethon included a segment featuring the Holby City cast performing a comical version of " Hung Up " by Madonna . 16 November 2007 Children in Need appeal again contained a musical performance from Holby City cast members . Sharon D Clarke , backed by Nadine Lewington , Rakie Ayola and Phoebe Thomas performed a soul version of Aretha Franklin 's signature song , " Respect " . On 28 June 2008 , Holby City stars competed against their Casualty counterparts in a special charity edition of BBC Two game @-@ show The Weakest Link . Holby City and Casualty cast members united on 20 February 2010 , performing a dance rendition of " Jai Ho " for Let 's Dance for Sport Relief . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Holby City has attracted comparisons to other medical dramas , often unfavourable . In November 2002 , John Whiston , then head of drama at Granada Television , accused the BBC of producing " ersatz parodies " of ITV drama , commenting that : " With Holby City cloned out of Casualty , the BBC has even ended up copying itself . " Paul Hoggart of The Times has written that the differences between the two shows are " mild " , calling Holby City : " Casualty 's cute little sister " . Kevin <unk> , director of television at Channel 4 , referred to Holby City as " sudsy drama " , deeming it , Casualty and HolbyBlue " all decent programmes , but strikingly similar in many aspects of their tone and construction . " Holby City has also been unfavourably compared with the American medical drama ER . Television producer Paul Abbott has commented that although he watches ER , he does not watch Holby City as : " it looks like you 've crammed one hour 's drama into 26 episodes . " In October 2009 , former Holby City writer Peter Jukes wrote a critical piece for Prospect magazine , contrasting the show negatively with the standard of American television dramas . Jukes wrote that Holby City has become a soap opera , rather than a drama , and deemed the episodes he worked on " the most dispiriting experiences in [ his ] 25 years as a dramatist . " 
 On several occasions , people within the television and entertainment industry have suggested that Holby City is a waste of the television licence fee , with some suggesting that it ought to be cancelled . In August 2002 , Paul Bolt , director of the Broadcasting Standards Commission criticised BBC programming as being " humdrum " and " formulaic " , saying of Holby City and the police procedural Mersey Beat : " One begins to wonder what really is the point of the BBC bringing this to us . Let 's have something a bit different . " Then head of BBC drama Jane Tranter responded that Bolt 's examples were " highly selective " as well as " hugely patronising to the millions of viewers who enjoy popular dramas like Holby City – week in , week out " . Young , who at the time held the position of head of drama serials , told The Guardian : " Popular drama has always been singled out for criticism , but people are increasingly voting with their on @-@ buttons . " Also in 2002 , David Cox of the New Statesman criticised BBC One 's 2001 Christmas schedule , for airing Holby City against a contemporary version of Othello . On this basis , Cox advocated the abolition of the licence fee , explaining : " The BBC was invented in a period when the elite decided what the population should know . If that has gone , then the licence fee should go too . " At the 2003 Edinburgh International Television Festival , <unk> chief executive Tony Ball called for stricter restrictions on how the BBC spent licence payers ' money , suggesting that Holby City be sold to the channel 's commercial rivals , with the proceeds used to develop more original programming . The BBC refused Ball 's suggestion , responding in a statement : " This speech clearly reflects BSkyB 's view that programmes are merely a commodity to be bought and sold . " In June 2004 , Charles Allen , chief executive of ITV plc questioned the amount of funding spent on lengthened episodes of Holby City , and in January 2010 , Janet Street @-@ Porter of The Independent , opined Holby City had " come to the end of [ its ] natural life " and should be cancelled . 
 Holby City was praised by campaigners for the Royal National Institute for Deaf People ( RNID ) in October 2003 , when an episode which coincided with " Learn To Sign Week " used deaf actors , and featured characters communicating through British Sign Language . RNID chief executive John Low stated : " Too often individuals have to rely on family members or friends to communicate complicated personal information to professionals . This is the reason the RNID is calling on the government to channel funding into the training of British Sign Language interpreters who could then be available to NHS staff treating deaf patients . " Stokes commented : " The writer had a great story he wanted to tell – for us , that 's what matters first and foremost . " A 2008 report into ethnic diversity on television , commissioned by Channel 4 , cited Holby City as a positive example of " diverse British <unk> [ ing ] " . Five years previously in 2003 , former BBC host Sir Ludovic Kennedy complained that ethnic minorities were over @-@ represented on television , prompting a BBC spokeswoman to explain that Holby City has more ethnic characters as it is set in an area where minorities account for up to 30 % of the population . According to the 2001 census , the population of Bristol – which the city of Holby is loosely based upon – is 88 % white and 12 % ethnic minorities . 
 = = = Realism = = = 
 The show has been criticised for its lack of realism . Former nurse Vici Hoban commented in February 2004 that there existed three stereotypes with regards to nurses : " sex object , doctor 's handmaiden , or angel " . She felt that media portrayal had increased these misconceptions , observing that with " the syringe @-@ toting serial killer Kelly in Holby City , realism has never been top of TV 's agenda . " However , Hoban felt that the worst offender at the time was the Channel 4 medical drama No Angels , which she described as : " so inaccurate that it makes Holby City look like a factual documentary . " No Angels creator Toby Whithouse defended his series , stating that Holby City presents an unfair representation of nursing , deceiving viewers into believing that nursing " is a nice , clean job full of handsome doctors . " Whithouse observed that the content of Holby City is defined by the watershed , describing real nursing work in contrast as " very post @-@ watershed " . In November 2009 , Antony <unk> , CEO of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Hospital Trust , wrote a column criticising Holby City for misrepresenting real hospital life . Tom Sutcliffe of The Independent reviewed a December 2009 episode poorly , finding it " astonishing " that any patients leave Holby General alive , as the staff are " so busy looking stricken or lovelorn at each other " . 
 In December 2003 , The Times ' Libby Purves wrote a critical opinion piece , observing that Holby City 's medical staff are often depicted getting drunk in clubs , but afterwards are able to function properly at work , and that as a result , alcohol " is made to look innocent " . In October 2004 , Canon Kenyon Wright , chair of Alcohol Focus Scotland , criticised an episode of Holby City which saw doctors downing tequila <unk> , stating that it glamorised irresponsible drinking . Similarly , in October 2007 , drinks ' industry body the Portman Group made an official complaint to communications regulator Ofcom about a scene in Holby City which depicted two medics drinking five shots of tequila following a stressful day at work . The body 's chief executive David Poley claimed that in failing to show the negative consequences of this action , the series was presenting a " highly irresponsible portrayal of excessive and rapid drinking " . Ofcom received a total of eight complaints about the incident . 
 Holby City has also been accused of medical inaccuracies . The British Medical Association denounced a January 2004 episode of the serial which portrayed organ donation being carried out despite withdrawal of consent by the patient 's relatives . Dr Michael Wilks , chairman of the Medical Ethics Committee stated : " This simply would not happen , but its portrayal , even in a drama , is totally irresponsible and risks causing huge damage to the already struggling transplant programme . " The British Medical Association later opined that the show was giving viewers an unrealistic impression of resuscitation by typically presenting only two outcomes , death or total recovery . Andrew Thomson , a Dundee GP , deemed this " a terrible distortion of the truth . " In a follow @-@ up story for The Times , Vivienne Parry highlighted the fact that in reality , less than half of patients who require resuscitation survive the initial catastrophe and only a third of those live to leave hospital . At the Royal College of Nursing ( RCN ) conference in Bournemouth in April 2010 , Holby City was accused of fostering unrealistic expectations of the NHS , encouraging patients to believe in miracles and fuelling compensation culture . Accident and emergency nurse John Hill stated : " In A & E it is sometimes a fact that sadly we cannot get people through the trauma they have received . Unfortunately , unlike in Holby City , I am a mere mortal and cannot perform miracles . But many relatives believe because of that , you can . And the injury lawyers assure them that if you don 't they will get recompense for it . " 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 In October 2000 , Dr John Ryan , an Accident & Emergency consultant at the Royal Sussex County Hospital in Brighton criticised the number of patients visiting the department for minor ailments without first contacting their GP . Ryan attributed this phenomenon to patients viewing Holby City and American medical drama ER , and falsely perceiving hospitals as glamorous . A three @-@ year Belgian research project , presented at a British Psychological Society meeting in September 2008 , claimed that watching Holby City and similar medical dramas such as Casualty and ER had a subliminal influence on fear of illness . 1 @,@ 300 teenagers were questioned on their viewing habits , and those who watched more medical dramas were found to be up to 10 % more fearful about their health , with females more affected than males . Dr Jan Van <unk> of Hasselt University stated that further research was needed into the long @-@ term impact of television . 
 In 2008 , Conservative Party strategists identified four archetypes based on TV programmes to help the party target swing voters . Alongside " Top Gear man " , " Apprentice generation " and " Grand Designs couple " , they identified " Holby City worker " , a middle @-@ ranking health service employee . The following year , strategists identified " Holby City woman " as a key voter demographic who may help the party win the 2010 General Election . The " Holby City woman " is a female voter in her 30s or 40s , employed in a clinical or clerical position or some other public sector job . She is a swing voter in General Elections , who has voted for the Labour Party in previous elections , though her identification with the Labour Party is not strong . The " Holby City woman " archetype is modelled on the character of Faye Morton . 
 In January 2009 , Jill Berry , president of the Girls ' Schools Association and head teacher at the Dame Alice Harpur School in Bedford , cited medical dramas such as Holby City as an inspiring force in increasing numbers of female students deciding to pursue careers in medicine . Berry explained : " The girls see that as an exciting and dynamic way of life . They see it as making a difference to people 's lives . It gives them a sense sometimes of the pressures , responsibility and adrenaline . Such TV programmes can be good , as long as they give a realistic impression . " Similarly , consultant surgeon Andrew Raftery uses clips from Holby City as part of the University of Sheffield Outreach and Access to Medicine Scheme , to inspire pupils from under @-@ represented social and educational backgrounds to pursue careers in medicine . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Holby City has been nominated for over 100 awards , of which it has won six . The series has received five nominations for the British Academy Television Awards , winning one . <unk> Spiro was nominated for the " Best New Director ( Fiction ) " award in 2003 for her work on the series . The show itself was nominated for the " Best Continuing Drama " award in 2004 , 2005 and 2006 , winning in 2008 . McHale commented on the win : " It 's fantastic not being the bridesmaid " , hoping that the award would help to make the serial " less of a guilty pleasure " . Holby City received multiple BBC Drama Award nominations between 2002 and 2006 . Its best results saw the show voted fifth " Best Drama " in 2004 and 2006 . Amanda Mealing was voted fourth " Best Actress " in 2006 for her role as Connie Beauchamp , and the " Casualty @ Holby City " moment where doctor Jim Brodie ( Maxwell Caulfield ) sacrifices his life for midwife Rosie Sattar ( Kim <unk> ) was voted viewers ' fourth " Favourite Moment " of 2004 . The series has been nominated for the " Best Drama " award at the Inside Soap Awards on six occasions — in 2004 , then concurrently from 2006 to 2010 . Holby City has received multiple long @-@ list nominations at the National Television Awards ( NTAs ) and TV Choice Awards . Mealing was short @-@ listed for the " Most Popular Newcomer " award at the 2005 NTAs , and for the " Best Actress " award at the 2008 TV Choice Awards . At the 2000 Royal Television Society Awards , Sean De Sparengo and Richard Gort were nominated for the " Best Graphic Design – Titles " award for their contribution to the series . The show itself was nominated in the " Soap and Continuing Drama " category at the 2007 awards . Holby City was nominated " Best Serial Drama " at the 2008 Digital Spy Soap Awards , and in 2009 , Stella <unk> was nominated for the " Acting Performance in TV ( Female ) " award at the British Academy Scotland Awards for her role as CEO Jayne Grayson . In 2010 , the series was shortlisted in the " Best Television Continuing Drama " category at the Writers ' Guild of Great Britain Awards . 
 At the Ethnic Multicultural Media Awards , Angela Griffin won " Best Actress " in 2000 for her role as nurse Jasmine Hopkins , and was nominated " Best TV Actress " in 2002 , alongside co @-@ star <unk> <unk> for her role as registrar Tash Bandara . In 2004 , Art Malik won the " Best TV Actor " award for his role as anaesthetist Zubin Khan . <unk> Singh <unk> of The Times criticised Malik 's award , opining that : " A show such as Holby City doesn 't merit any recognition . " The show has won three Screen Nation Awards , and received nominations for a further seven . Jaye Jacobs won the " Emerging Talent " award in 2005 for her role as nurse Donna Jackson . In 2006 , Rakie Ayola and Hugh Quarshie were nominated for the Female and Male " Performance in TV " awards for their roles as Kyla Tyson and Ric Griffin respectively . Sharon D. Clarke won the 2007 " Female Performance in TV " award for her role as Lola Griffin , while Ginny Holder was nominated in the same category for her role as Thandie Abebe , and Ayola received an Honourable Mention . Also in 2007 , Roger Griffiths was nominated for the " Male Performance in TV " award for his role as Harvey Tyson , and Quarshie received an Honourable Mention in the same category . Quarshie went on to win " Favourite Male TV Star " in 2008 . Also in 2008 , Jacobs was nominated for the " Favourite Female TV Star " award , Ayola was nominated in the " Female Performance in TV " category , and the show itself was nominated for the " Diversity in Drama Production " award . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = Elliott Fitch Shepard = 
 Elliott Fitch Shepard ( July 25 , 1833 – March 24 , 1893 ) was a New York lawyer , banker , and owner of the Mail and Express newspaper , as well as a founder and president of the New York State Bar Association . Shepard was married to Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt , who was the granddaughter of philanthropist , business magnate , and family patriarch Cornelius Vanderbilt . Shepard 's Briarcliff Manor residence Woodlea and the Scarborough Presbyterian Church , which he founded nearby , are contributing properties to the Scarborough Historic District . 
 Shepard was born in Jamestown , New York , one of three sons of the president of a banknote @-@ engraving company . He attended the City University of New York , and practiced law for about 25 years . During the American Civil War , Shepard was a Union Army recruiter and earned the rank of colonel . He was later a founder and benefactor of several institutions and banks . When Shepard moved to the Briarcliff Manor hamlet of Scarborough @-@ on @-@ Hudson , he founded the Scarborough Presbyterian Church and built Woodlea ; the house and its land are now part of Sleepy Hollow Country Club . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shepard was born July 25 , 1833 in Jamestown in Chautauqua County , New York . He was the second of three sons of Fitch Shepard and Delia Maria Dennis ; the others were <unk> Hamilton and Augustus Dennis . Fitch Shepard was president of the National Bank Note Company ( later consolidated with the American and Continental Note Companies ) , and Elliott 's brother Augustus became president of the American Bank Note Company . Fitch , son of Noah Shepard , was a descendant of Thomas Shepard ( a Puritan minister ) and James Fitch ( son @-@ in @-@ law of William Bradford ) . Delia Maria Dennis was a descendant of Robert Dennis , who emigrated from England in 1635 . Elliott was described in 1897 's Prominent Families of New York as " prominent by birth and ancestry , as well as for his personal qualities " . He attended public schools in Jamestown and the college @-@ preparatory University Grammar School ( then located in the City University of New York building ) , and graduated from the university in 1855 . Shepard began studying law under Edwards Pierrepont , and was admitted to the bar in the city of Brooklyn in 1858 . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 At the outbreak of the American Civil War Shepard became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Union Army General Edwin D. Morgan , with the rank of colonel . Shepard never entered the field , but was involved in recruiting volunteers . In 1862 he visited Jamestown to inspect , equip and provide uniforms for the Chautauqua regiment , his first return since age twelve , and was welcomed by a group of prominent citizens . Shepard recruited and organized the 51st Regiment , New York Volunteers , which was named the Shepard Rifles in his honor . George W. Whitman , brother of the poet Walt Whitman and a member of the regiment , was notified by Shepard of a promotion ; Shepard may have influenced his subsequent promotion to major in 1865 . In addition , Shepard was involved in correspondence with Walt Whitman . 
 Shepard was placed in charge of the recruiting station in Elmira , and enlisted 47 @,@ 000 men from the surrounding area . Although President Abraham Lincoln offered him a promotion to brigadier general , Shepard declined in deference to officers who had seen field service . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1864 , Shepard was a member of the executive committee and chair of the Committee on Contributions from Without the City for the New York Metropolitan Fair . He chaired lawyers ' committees for disaster relief , including those in Portland , Maine and Chicago after the 1866 Great Fire and the 1871 Great Chicago Fire respectively , and was a member of the municipal committee for victims of the 1889 Johnstown Flood . 
 In 1867 Shepard was presented to Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt at a reception given by Governor Morgan ; their difficult courtship was opposed by Margaret 's father , William Henry Vanderbilt . A year later , on February 18 , 1868 , they were married in the Church of the Incarnation in New York City . After an 1868 trip to Tarsus , Mersin he helped found Tarsus American College , agreeing to donate $ 5 @,@ 000 a year to the school and leave it an endowment of $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 2 @.@ 63 million in 2015 ) . He became one of the school 's trustees and vice president of the board . 
 In 1868 , Shepard became a partner of Judge Theron R. Strong in Strong & Shepard , continuing the business after Strong 's death . He continued to practice law for the next 25 years ; he helped found the New York State Bar Association in 1876 , and in 1884 was its fifth president . In 1875 Shepard drafted an amendment establishing an arbitration court for the New York Chamber of Commerce , serving on its five @-@ member executive committee the following year . In 1880 , the New York City Board of Aldermen appointed Shepard and Ebenezer B. Shafer to revise and codify the city 's local ordinances to form the New @-@ York Municipal Code ; the last revision was in 1859 . 
 During the 1880s he helped found the American Savings Bank , the Bank of the Metropolis and the Columbian National Bank . On March 20 , 1888 , Shepard purchased the Mail and Express newspaper ( founded in 1836 , with an estimated value of $ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @.@ 27 million in 2015 ) from Cyrus W. Field for $ 425 @,@ 000 ( $ 11 @.@ 2 million in 2015 ) . Deeply religious , Shepard placed a verse from the Bible at the head of each edition 's editorial page . As president of the newspaper company until his death , he approved every important decision or policy . In the same year , Shepard became the controlling stockholder of the Fifth Avenue Stage Company to force it to halt work on Sundays ( the Christian Sabbath ) . 
 When Margaret 's father died in 1885 , she inherited $ 12 million ( $ 316 million in 2015 ) . The family lived at 2 West 52nd Street in Manhattan , one of three houses of the Vanderbilt Triple Palace which were built during the 1880s for William Henry Vanderbilt and his two daughters . After Elliott 's death Margaret transferred the house to her sister 's family , who combined their two houses into one . The houses were eventually demolished ; the nine @-@ story De Pinna Building was built there in 1928 and was demolished around 1969 . 650 Fifth Avenue is the building currently on the site . 
 Shepard and his family toured the world in 1884 , visiting Asia , Africa , and Europe . He documented his 1887 trip from New York to Alaska in The Riva . : New York and Alaska taken by himself , his wife and daughter , six other family members , their maid , a chef , butler , porter and conductor . According to Shepard , the family traveled 14 @,@ 085 miles ( 22 @,@ 668 km ) on 26 railroads and stayed at 38 hotels in nearly five months . After the 1884 trip , aware of the opportunity for church work in the territory , he founded a mission and maintained it with his wife for about $ 20 @,@ 000 ( $ 526 @,@ 700 in 2015 ) a year . For some time Shepard worshiped at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church under John Hall , and was a vice president of the Presbyterian Union of New @-@ York . Shepard was president of the American Sabbath Union for five years , and he also served as the chairman of the Special Committee on Sabbath Observance . 
 = = = Briarcliff Manor developments = = = 
 During the early 1890s Shepard moved to Scarborough @-@ on @-@ Hudson in present @-@ day Briarcliff Manor , purchasing a Victorian house from J. Butler Wright . He had a mansion ( named Woodlea , after Wright 's house ) built south of the house , facing the Hudson River , and improved its grounds . Construction of the mansion began in 1892 , and was completed three years later . Shepard died in 1893 , leaving Margaret to oversee its completion . The finished house has between 65 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 500 m2 ) , making it one of the largest privately @-@ owned houses in the United States . 
 After Shepard 's death Margaret lived there in the spring and fall , with her visits becoming less frequent . By 1900 she began selling property to Frank A. Vanderlip and William Rockefeller , selling them the house in 1910 . Vanderlip and Rockefeller assembled a board of directors to create a country club ; they first met at Vanderlip 's National City Bank Building office at 55 Wall Street ( Vanderlip was president of the bank at the time ) . Sleepy Hollow Country Club was founded , with Woodlea becoming its clubhouse and the J. Butler Wright house as its golf house . 
 Shepard established a small chapel on his Briarcliff Manor property , and founded the Scarborough Presbyterian Church in 1892 . The church and its manse were donated by Margaret after his death . It was designed by Augustus Haydel ( a nephew of Stanford White ) and August D. Shepard , Jr . ( a nephew of Elliott Shepard and William Rutherford Mead ) . The church , dedicated on May 11 , 1895 in Shepard 's memory , was briefly known as Shepard Memorial Church . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Shepard and Margaret had five daughters and one son : Florence ( 1869 – 1869 ) , Maria Louise ( 1870 – 1948 ) , Edith ( 1872 – 1954 ) , Marguerite ( 1873 – 1895 ) , Alice ( 1874 – 1950 ) and Elliott Jr . ( 1877 – 1927 ) . The children attended Sunday school and church , and were educated by private tutors and governesses . Shepard also employed a private chef for his family . Shepard was a strict father known to beat his son , who was described as being as wild as his father was rigid and moralizing . 
 Shepard was tall , with a pleasant expression and manner , and The New York Times called him the " perfect type of well @-@ bred clubman " . He had thick hair , manicured nails , a well @-@ trimmed beard and an athletic figure . An opponent of antisemitism , he attended dinners publicizing the plight of Russian Jews and regularly addressed Jewish religious and social organizations avoided by others . He rented pews in many New York churches , supported about a dozen missionaries and was described as a generous donor to hospitals and charitable societies . Shepard was politically ambitious , and decided to build Woodlea as a symbol of power and influence . Shepard had horses and carriages which were ridden by the family in parks , and he prided himself on his equestrianism . 
 Shepard was a supporter of the Republican Party , contributing $ 75 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 98 million in 2015 ) to the 1888 Presidential campaign fund and $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 263 @,@ 400 in 2015 ) to the state committee for the Fassett campaign . He furnished Shepard Hall , at Sixth Avenue and 57th Street in New York City , offering it rent @-@ free to the Republican Club . Shepard belonged to a number of organizations : the New York State Bar Association , the American Museum of Natural History , the National Academy of Design , the Sons of the American Revolution , the New York Yacht Club , the New York Athletic Club , the New York Press Club , the Lawyers ' Club of New York , the Republican Club , the Manhattan Athletic Club , the Riding Club , the Twilight Club , the Union League Club of New York , the New England Society of New York , the Adirondack League and the Union League of Brooklyn . 
 = = Later life , death , and legacy = = 
 In 1892 , the City University of New York gave Shepard a Master of Laws degree and the University of Omaha gave him a Doctor of Laws degree . On January 11 , 1893 , Shepard addressed the House Committee on the Columbian Exposition in an effort to convince the committee not to open the exposition on a Sunday - the Sabbath . Shepard himself attended , having spent $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 658 thousand in 2015 ) on September 7 , 1891 in reserving sixteen rooms with board at the Auditorium Hotel for six months during the fair . 
 Shepard died unexpectedly during the afternoon of March 24 , 1893 at his Manhattan residence . Two doctors were attempting to remove a bladder stone from him ; they gave him ether at 12 : 45 p.m. For a few minutes Shepard did not seem to react , though soon afterward his color started changing and his respiration and pulse dimmed , so administration of ether was stopped , however not enough ether was given to continue with the operation . His condition started to worsen again ; the doctors suspected food or vomit was blocking his windpipe or bronchial tubes . The doctors then administered oxygen , which helped temporarily ; however , at 4 : 00 p.m. his pulse became steadily more feeble , he fell unconscious , and died at 4 : 10 p.m. His cause of death was edema and congestion of the lungs , after the administration of ether , but due to an unknown cause . Shepard was first buried in the Vanderbilt mausoleum in Moravian Cemetery . On November 17 , 1894 one of his daughters , his wife , and her brother George Vanderbilt oversaw the transfer of his remains and those of his daughter Florence to a new Shepard family tomb . 
 Shepard 's estate included the $ 100 @,@ 000 Tarsus American College endowment , $ 850 @,@ 000 in real estate and $ 500 @,@ 000 in personal property for a total of $ 1 @.@ 35 million ( $ 35 @.@ 6 million in 2015 ) . His will distributed money and property to his wife and children , his brother Augustus , and religious organizations . Shepard funded a number of scholarships and prizes , including one at the City University of New York and New York University 's annual Elliott F. Shepard Scholarship , and donated a large collection of books from lawyer Aaron J. <unk> 's library to the New York University School of Law . 
 When the wife of Chicago publisher Horace O 'Donoghue read him the news of Shepard 's death four days after the event , he picked up a razor and slit his throat . Although his suicide was first thought to be impulsive , it was later learned that the likely cause was O 'Donoghue 's large debts to Chicago publishing houses . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Shepard , Elliott Fitch ; Shafer , Ebenezer B. ( 1881 ) . Ordinances of the Mayor , Aldermen and Commonalty of the City of New York : In Force January 1 , 1881 . New York , New York . OCLC <unk> . 
 Shepard , Elliott Fitch ( 1886 ) . Labor and Capital are One ( 10th ed . ) . New York , New York : American Bank Note Company . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Whitney Dean = 
 Whitney Dean is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Shona McGarty . The character is the adoptive daughter of long @-@ running character Bianca Jackson ( Patsy Palmer ) , and was introduced in April 2008 when Palmer returned to the series after a six @-@ year absence . Whitney is described by executive producer Diederick Santer as both an equal to , and younger version of Bianca , and is the oldest of Bianca 's four children . Her storylines have revolved around her fractured family life , her sexual abuse by Bianca 's partner Tony King ( Chris Coghill ) , her sexual exploitation by Rob Grayson ( Jody Latham ) , her engagement to Lee Carter ( Danny @-@ Boy Hatchard ) and becoming pregnant with his baby . McGarty was temporarily written out of EastEnders for four weeks in July 2012 because of her repeated lateness to work . 
 The child sexual abuse storyline marks the first time the subject matter has been broached in a UK soap opera , and was researched and developed with advice and approval from the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children . The inappropriate nature of Tony and Whitney 's relationship resulted in over 200 complaints being made to the BBC and television regulatory body Ofcom by members of the public , with the storyline deemed " horrifying " by the Daily Mail 's Lizzie Smith , and " one of the darkest and most disturbing storylines EastEnders has ever attempted " by the Daily Mirror 's Beth Neil . The NSPCC however have praised the storyline for " helping to raise awareness of the hidden nature of sexual abuse " . The storyline also gained EastEnders a Royal Television Society Programme Award in March 2009 in the Soap and Continuing Drama category . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Whitney first appears when she and her family — mother figure Bianca Jackson ( Patsy Palmer ) , half @-@ sister Tiffany Dean ( Maisie Smith ) , and Bianca 's sons Liam Butcher ( James Forde ) and Morgan Jackson @-@ King ( Devon Higgs ) are evicted by their landlord . The children spend a week in care after Bianca is arrested for assaulting a police officer , returning to her custody a week later and moving into Pat Evans ' ( Pam St. Clement ) house . Over the next few months , Bianca becomes the beneficiary of a mystery " guardian angel " , who is revealed to be Whitney . Whitney tells Bianca she found a winning lottery ticket , but kept it secret as she knew that Bianca would spend the money . Bianca reluctantly agrees to deposit the money ; however Whitney hides some to be used in emergencies . It is revealed that Bianca 's imprisoned boyfriend Tony King ( Chris Coghill ) has been grooming Whitney since she was 12 and that they 've had a sexual relationship . Having served a year @-@ long sentence for assaulting a boy who apparently harassed Whitney , Tony is released on 12 September 2008 . He makes it clear to Whitney that they will resume their sexual relationship , and Whitney reveals that she has kept some of the lottery winnings so they can run away together . But when Bianca harangues him about the prospect of marriage , he gives her Whitney 's money to put a down @-@ payment on a flat . When Whitney and classmate Peter Beale ( Thomas Law ) are cast in a school play , Tony is jealous of them rehearsing in private and punches Peter . Whitney convinces Peter and his sister Lucy Beale ( Melissa Suffield ) not to report the attack to the police , but Tony blames her for the incident and ends their affair . Devastated when Tony accepts Bianca 's marriage proposal , Whitney locks herself in her bedroom . Not knowing what to do , Bianca accepts Dr Poppy Merritt 's ( Amy Darcy ) help and she refers Whitney to a psychiatrist . Bianca takes her away on holiday , attempting to mend their relationship . When they return on Halloween , Tony and Whitney share a passionate kiss , and Tony informs Whitney that their relationship is back on . 
 Whitney becomes jealous when Tony begins showing an interest in Lauren Branning ( Madeline Duggan ) . As her sixteenth birthday approaches , she buys tickets for them to travel abroad . Tony has lost interest in Whitney and hides her passport , but it is found and returned to her . On the day she turns sixteen , Whitney confesses everything to Bianca . Horrified , Bianca calls the police , and Tony is arrested . He is released on bail but Whitney decides to make a statement to the police . Whitney contacts her biological mother Debra Dean ( Ruth Gemmell ) and tries to discuss the past , but Debra isn 't interested and rejects her . She meets Todd Taylor ( Ashley Kumar ) and agrees to go on a date with him , which goes well until he asks about past relationships . Whitney runs away and Bianca 's ex @-@ husband Ricky Butcher ( Sid Owen ) finds her drunk . Todd returns and Whitney agrees to another date . When Whitney finds a condom in his wallet , she assumes he wants to have sex with her and runs away . 
 Debra turns up unexpectedly , claiming she is homeless , but reveals she is planning to move to Greece when she has enough money and says Whitney can come with her . Whitney accepts , but later realises that Debra is using her and she is only there to hide from someone . Debra later tells Whitney she has a half @-@ brother , Ryan Malloy ( Neil McDermott ) . Whitney then takes back her statement against Tony but after Whitney 's barrister sees her mobile phone containing the messages from Tony , he is sentenced to 13 years ' imprisonment . During the trial Whitney learns that Tiffany is Ricky 's daughter . She is initially distressed , but accepts that Tiffany is still her sister although they are not related . She repairs her friendship with Todd , and they kiss at Ricky and Bianca 's engagement party . Their reunion is short @-@ lived , and Whitney breaks up with him in favour of Bianca 's half @-@ brother Billie Jackson ( Devon Anderson ) . Whitney is attacked by Billie 's jealous friend Kylie ( <unk> Gallacher ) , and when his friends cause trouble at a grime night at The Queen Victoria pub ( The Vic ) , Whitney asks him to choose between her and his former gang . Billie chooses Whitney , and Kylie takes revenge by attempting to shoot him , shooting his uncle Jack Branning ( Scott Maslen ) instead . Jack is hospitalised with major injuries , and Whitney struggles to help Billie deal with his guilt and subsequent anger and rejection from the Branning and Jackson families . She is further deeply upset when Billie decides to join the army in an attempt to make Jack proud . At Billie 's birthday party , Whitney ends up kissing Peter . She spends the night with him and the next day is upset to learn that Billie has died in his sleep . She blames herself for leaving the party after she sees a text message from Billie saying he still loved her . She sends a reply and lays flowers and candles for him . However , she later goes back to Peter for comfort , and he comforts her again on the day of the funeral . The pair then begin a relationship . However Billie 's friend Connor Stanley ( <unk> <unk> ) , starts flirting with her , and asks her why she 'd date someone like Peter after dating Billie . He also asks her to sell some stolen jewellery for him and she agrees . 
 Whitney falls for Connor , but after it is revealed that Connor has been sleeping with Bianca 's mother Carol Jackson ( Lindsey Coulson ) and Whitney , Bianca attacks him and turns herself in to the police . Whitney and Carol argue over Connor , and Whitney feels she is not wanted by her family so decides to move out , and stays with Ryan 's estranged wife Janine Malloy ( Charlie Brooks ) . Kat Moon ( Jessie Wallace ) offers Whitney a work trial at The Vic for a job , but catches her giving free drinks to Janine . Despite this , she lets Whitney off , telling her she is a natural , and works well at the till . When Kat catches her stealing again , she sacks Whitney , leaving Janine angry with Whitney . After Whitney sees Janine successfully pickpocket someone , she decides to try it herself , but ends up being hit in the face . A man called Rob Grayson ( Jody Latham ) helps her , buys her food and returns her to Albert Square , giving her his phone number . Whitney tries to kiss Max , causing her to fall out with Lauren . She also argues with Carol , rejects Ricky and is rejected by Liam , Tiffany and Morgan for ruining Ricky 's birthday cake days earlier . Upset , Whitney contacts Rob and asks to stay with him , which he accepts . She throws her phone away and tells nobody that she is going . Janine lies about Whitney 's whereabouts but when she admits she does not know where Whitney is , Lauren and Janine attempt to find her , and Lauren sees her in Dartford going into a club . Lauren goes back with her to her bedsit , but Whitney does not want to go , saying she and Rob are in love . Lauren is then thrown out by Rob . Whitney has sex with a man called Chris ( Richard Simons ) and it is revealed that Whitney has been having sex with Rob 's friends to pay off his debts to them . Janine tries to get Whitney to come home but she refuses , and Rob ejects Janine . Rob then drags Whitney out of the house and into his car , while Janine and Lauren see them driving off . They go to a house where Whitney meets another woman Chloe ( Georgia Henshaw ) who is being exploited . Whitney tells Rob she wants to leave , but he says to either be nice to his friends or he will hurt her . He locks her in a room so she breaks the window and escapes , stopping a car and asking for help , while Rob shouts after her . 
 The following month , she sends Lauren a message and meets her outside the police station , looking rough , as she has been arrested for shoplifting . Whitney opts to live with Dot Branning ( June Brown ) instead of her close family , but Dot convinces her to move back to Ricky 's . When Ryan returns from a holiday , he learns of Whitney 's ordeal and urges her to go to the police and get tested for sexually transmitted infections . She says she is not ready to go to the police but agrees to the test , which shows she has a chlamydia infection . When Whitney starts a relationship with a man named Lee ( Mitchell Hunt ) , it is revealed that he is a friend of Rob 's , and when Whitney agrees to meet Lee by text , Rob takes control of Lee 's mobile phone . She allows Rob to take her home but then tells him to wait outside while she escapes through the back door and hitches a lift to Southend @-@ on @-@ Sea with friends . She leaves him a voicemail message not knowing that he has followed her . He finds her in her hotel room and tells her how much he loves her , but when Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) comes in , Rob attacks him , so Whitney tells him to leave . Fatboy calls Ryan , who comes to Southend to look for Rob . When he finds him , they fight and fall over the edge of the pier . The next day , a body is recovered from the sea , and is later revealed to be Rob who has died . Whitney thinks Ryan may also be dead until he appears . She tells him she has told the police everything about Rob , including Ryan 's fight with him , and Ryan tells Whitney he has to leave . They say an emotional farewell . 
 Whitney takes an interest in Tyler Moon ( Tony Discipline ) but refuses to date him . Whitney applies for a new work experience at the local nursery which she later gets . When Michael Moon ( Steve John Shepherd ) tells his brother Tyler about Whitney 's recent ordeal , he rejects her but later gives her his special Moon pendant to make up for it . Whitney agrees to go on a date with Tyler and they agree to have sex but Whitney is unsure as she remembers her past and runs out , telling Tyler she never wants to see him again . Tyler is hurt . He later tells Fatboy she needs a shrink which Whitney overhears . She runs out and kisses Fatboy and starts a relationship with him . Fatboy publicly declares his love for Whitney , but when he is unable to give her a driving lesson , Lucy ( now Hetti Bywater ) suggests that Tyler do it , because she knows that Tyler likes Whitney . Whitney starts to feel smothered by Fatboy 's affections . Lucy teases Tyler by telling him that Fatboy plans to publicly propose to Whitney , so Tyler tells Whitney he likes her but Whitney says it is too late . Tyler then surprises Whitney by kissing her . Whitney , feeling guilty , refuses to go on holiday with Fatboy , and tells him to kiss her . He does , but she says it is like kissing her best friend . She then admits she wants Tyler , and Fatboy is heartbroken . Whitney then goes to see Tyler but finds him with Lucy , kissing . She then tells Tyler to leave her alone . However , Tyler later tells Whitney that he cannot , as he loves her . Whitney admits to feeling the same way , and they begin a relationship . 
 Whitney believes she is pregnant , and when she tells Tyler , he seems reluctant to take on a child . However he comes round to the idea , but Whitney discovers she is not pregnant after all . Bianca is caught stealing money and returns to prison , but this time located in Suffolk . The rest of Whitney 's family move to Suffolk to be near her , but Whitney stays and looks after the house , along with Bianca 's uncle Derek Branning ( Jamie Foreman ) . Soon after , Tyler moves in . Whitney is angry when Joey Branning ( David Witts ) kisses her . Several months later , after Bianca and the rest of the family move back , Whitney and Tyler plan to get their own home . Whitney tells Tyler about the kiss with Joey , so he breaks up with her . However , he regrets it and proposes to Whitney ; she accepts . Bianca disapproves when she finds out . When Lauren kisses Tyler to make her ex @-@ boyfriend Joey jealous , Whitney ends her friendship with Lauren . After several weeks Lauren and Whitney make up . She receives a letter from a stranger , which the letter is from Tony , asking Whitney to come and see him in prison . Whitney then goes to the prison to visit Tony but is told that he has committed suicide . Trying to come to terms from Tony 's death , she goes out for lunch with Tyler at Scarlett 's , but they later argue which leads to Whitney ending their engagement and storming out . She then goes for a drink at R & R and Joey tries to comfort her which leads them to start flirting with one another . They then share a kiss and go back to Joey 's house to have sex . She tells Tyler , and they both realise that they will not work out , and Tyler leaves Walford . 
 Whitney gets a job as a teaching assistant at Walford Primary School . During one <unk> , she warns Dennis Rickman Jnr ( Harry <unk> ) not to run in the playground . He ignores her and falls over , grazing his arm . Whitney does not react in the professional manner she is supposed to , causing Dennis 's injury to be ignored . When Dennis 's mother , Sharon Rickman ( Letitia Dean ) questions Dennis about his injury , he lies that Whitney assaulted him . Sharon complains and Whitney is suspended , but appeals for her job and is allowed to keep it . Whitney later sets her sights on newcomer Johnny Carter ( Sam Strike ) , unaware that he is gay . Johnny 's parents , Mick Carter ( Danny Dyer ) and Linda Carter ( Kellie Bright ) , hope that Johnny and Whitney will become an item , but his sister Nancy Carter ( Maddy Hill ) reveals to them that he is gay . A few weeks later , Johnny comes out to Whitney , which hurts her as she feels that Johnny has been using her . They later become good friends and Whitney forgives Johnny . 
 When Johnny 's elder brother Lee Carter ( Danny @-@ Boy Hatchard ) returns from serving in Afghanistan , Whitney takes an instant liking to him and they share a kiss . She discovers that Lee had sex with Lucy , which upsets her greatly and she <unk> Lucy 's Facebook page with horrible comments . The next day , Lucy is found dead . At her funeral , Tamwar Masood ( Himesh Patel ) discovers a condolences card with " Rot in Hell " written on it , and realises the handwriting matches Whitney 's . When he confronts her , she tells him that Lucy was sending her abusive texts about her looks , and that she completely despised her . Feeling sorry for Whitney , Tamwar rips up the card , but it is later recovered by his suspicious sister , Shabnam Masood ( Rakhee Thakrar ) . 
 Upon Lee 's return from the army , Whitney gives the relationship another chance . She struggles with the prospect of making their romance sexual , but eventually agrees to when he talks about his feelings for her . Ryan 's young daughter Lily Branning ( <unk> Garvey ) comes to live in Walford when her mother Stacey Branning ( Lacey Turner ) is sent to prison , and Whitney babysits her . She puts a photo of herself and Lily online and is shocked when Ryan contacts her under the alias of ' Simon Parker ' . After speaking with Johnny and Lee , she decides to reply . Stacey is granted her appeal and freed but Whitney worries it will ruin her relationship with Lily . Whitney tells Lily about Ryan saying she could possibly meet him . When Stacey finds out , she argues with Whitney and says she will not be seeing Lily again . Whitney then messages Ryan saying she needs to see him urgently . Whitney then arranges to meet Ryan at the park . Stacey and Lily visit the park whilst Whitney is waiting for Ryan . Stacey apologises to Whitney and she accepts . Whitney thinks Ryan has stood her up , so leaves with Stacey and Lily . Ryan turns up late and hides on seeing Stacey , and remains unseen as a result . 
 Bianca tells Whitney she is moving to Milton Keynes with her partner Terry <unk> ( Terry Alderton ) , and wants her to move with them and the children . Although originally agreeing , Lee persuades her to stay and she moves into the pub with the Carters . Lee develops depression , and when Whitney finds out , she struggles to support him at his lowest points . At Mick 's stag party before his wedding to Linda , Lee knocks himself unconscious and is carried upstairs by Mick and Whitney . Whitney confesses to Mick that she intends to break up with Lee after the wedding , unable to handle his depression . However , she is unaware that Lee has overheard her via the baby monitor . On the day of the wedding , Lee goes missing and Whitney and Mick find him drunk at the park . Lee tells Whitney that he blames himself for her wanting to break up with him , and she promises him that they will work things out . Whitney later thanks Mick for helping her with Lee , but accidentally kisses him on the lips in the process . While Mick and Linda are on their honeymoon , Whitney invites Ryan back to Walford to see Lily , but while at the pub , he steals the cash from the safe , causing Whitney and Nancy to fight , just as Mick and Linda walk in on them . The next morning , Whitney contacts Ryan and he asks to meet in the park . Mick accompanies Whitney and assures a scared Ryan that he can trust him . It then emerges that Whitney told Mick that Ryan killed Rob , so Whitney and Mick convince Ryan to return the money and hand himself to the police , and Whitney will back him up in the hope of him being charged with manslaughter instead of murder , to which Ryan agrees . Whitney shares an emotional goodbye with Ryan as he heads into the police station . On the ride home from the police station , an upset Whitney tells Mick that she has feelings for him and kisses him again . Mick tells Linda what happened , so Linda tells her to stay away from Mick and not to give up on Lee . Whitney later visits Ryan in prison , stating that she is worried about Lee . When she accidentally says Mick 's name , he guesses that she has feelings for Mick , which she denies . He then urges Whitney to help Lee , so she gets him a job interview at a local pub , however this causes major grievances between Lee and Nancy . Whitney is forced by Babe to tell Lee about her kissing Mick , and although Nancy tells her to move out , Lee 's response is to propose marriage . 
 When discovers she is pregnant by Lee , but all her hints and attempts to tell him fail . Linda realises and is ecstatic when Whitney confirms it . Linda tells Mick , and when Whitney tells Lee , Mick and Linda rush into the room to celebrate before he has a chance to let the news sink in . 
 = = Creation = = 
 In October 2007 , it was announced that the character Bianca Jackson was returning to EastEnders after an absence of six years . Whitney was created as part of her new family ; the daughter of Bianca 's deceased partner Nathan Dean . She was described as " a teenage drama queen , unable to engage brain before mouth and constantly finding herself in and out of trouble " . Bianca sees Whitney as one of her own , and also as " a friend and confidante " . EastEnders ' executive producer Diederick Santer said that his vision for the character was someone " quite spiky , quite gobby , a bit of an equal to Bianca , and in a way a version of Bianca at that age " . Shona McGarty was cast in the role . 
 Considering the character 's role in the wider context of the show as a whole , it was decided that Whitney would be involved in a sexual relationship with Bianca 's partner Tony King . BBC News described the plot as an ongoing " predatory paedophile storyline " , noting that this was the first time this subject matter had been tackled by a UK soap opera . The storyline was conceived when EastEnders series consultant Simon Ashdown viewed a documentary about homelessness , featuring a mother and child at a bus stop with nowhere to go . Ashdown questioned what might happen if a paedophile were to befriend the mother in order to grow closer to the child , and related the scenario to Bianca 's return to the soap . BBC Head of Drama John Yorke explained that the idea when presented " drew a sharp intake of breath . Most EastEnders stories that have been good and successful have been the ones that caused the sharp intake of breath , so they 're always the kind of stories you look for . " 
 The idea that McGarty play a child groomed for sex was put to the actress on 9 January 2008 . Santer has stated that , had McGarty or her parents objected to the storyline , they would not have gone ahead with it . In the event , McGarty 's parents merely requested that their daughter not be asked to publicise the role , and the actress began filming her first scenes on 14 January 2008 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Sexual abuse = = = 
 In order to develop Whitney 's sexual abuse storyline , by March 2008 EastEnders researchers Libby Duplock and Cleo <unk> were in contact with the NSPCC 's Tom Narducci , Jude <unk> , who deals with abused children , and Yvonne Traynor , CEO of the Rape and Sexual Abuse Support Centre . Duplock has stated that : " One thing that was quite difficult for me to get right was the idea that she didn 't want sex . It 's Whitney 's way of keeping Tony happy . If she lets him do it , then he 's nicer to her and he makes her feel special . " Research highlighted the fact that 12 % of abused children go on to become abusers in turn , however Duplock explained : " We felt that to imply on TV that someone who has been abused is going to go on to abuse other people is not a message you want to give out . Those people have been through enough . " Narducci for the NSPCC stated that importance was placed on making children viewing the show " feel comfortable about asking for help if they felt they needed it [ and ] for the wider community - to recognise the signs and let them know that they can do something about it . [ ... ] We 're not trying to cause a national panic . This is a responsible effort to try to get over an important story . " 
 It had initially been decided that , alongside Tony 's sexual abuse , Whitney would be seen to self @-@ harm . This aspect of the storyline was discarded , after the NSPCC suggested that it may distract from the main issue of her abuse . Final approval for the storyline was sought from BBC Head of Fiction Jane Tranter on 2 June 2008 . Tranter explained : 
 " I thought it was a fantastically good idea . The big moments in EastEnders , those iconic pieces of television history , tend to be the things that are incredibly near the knuckle , and are actually quite difficult subjects to raise in the context of a family sitting room . [ ... ] Soaps are meant to hold up a mirror to our lives , and sometimes that mirror will show ugly bits , difficult bits , taboo bits . But if a soap doesn 't hold up that mirror , then actually , what is it ? It will have no depth . " 
 Chris Coghill was cast as Whitney 's abuser Tony on 20 June 2008 . Upon accepting the role , he commented : " Shona doesn 't act , or look , like a little child . Which helps . " He has added of their off @-@ screen relationship : " Shona 's fantastic to work with . She 's very natural , very instinctive and a natural actress . There isn 't any uncomfortable feeling at all . " Having undergone a thorough characterisation session , Coghill began shooting on 30 June 2008 , and first appeared on @-@ screen on 12 September 2008 . Coghill has explained that Tony began grooming Whitney as soon as he met Bianca , ingratiating himself so as to become the family 's " hero figure " and " saviour " . Discussing his character 's relationship with Whitney , Coghill explained that : " The lie that Tony has spun to Whitney is that as soon as she 's 16 they 'll run away together and start a new life . But Tony 's the type of paedophile who preys on younger children . Whitney is beginning to pass her sell @-@ by date with him . [ ... ] He feels like he 's losing his little girl but needs to keep Whitney under his control and not speak out . " Coghill stated that : " This is the most challenging role I have had to play . But I hope by EastEnders tackling the sensitive issue of child abuse it can raise awareness . " When asked how she felt about the abuse storyline , Palmer commented : " It would be brilliant if it helped somebody . If one person out there who 's been abused saw [ the legal system ] go out of their way to make it easier on the victim – Whitney 's evidence is given by video link – it will be worth it . " 
 = = = Sexual exploitation = = = 
 In January 2011 , it was announced that Whitney would be part of an upcoming storyline on sexual exploitation . Whitney is left alone and vulnerable , and falls for a man , Rob Grayson , played by Jody Latham , who exploits her for financial gain . EastEnders worked alongside charity Comic Relief on the storyline , which started planning in 2010 . The storyline culminated during Red Nose Day 2011 on 19 March 2011 , in a special ten @-@ minute episode . Gilly Green , Head of UK Grants at Comic Relief , said : " It is vital that we continue to alert young people to the dangers if we are to stop them being exploited and the opportunity to work with EastEnders will make a huge audience aware of this issue . We have been working with the EastEnders script writers and some of the young women from projects we support to ensure the story reflects the reality of young people caught up in sexual exploitation . " Kevin Cahill , Chief Executive of Comic Relief , added " We have worked over many years with EastEnders in all kinds of ways . It 's been a real pleasure this year to work together on a piece of serious drama , in the best traditions of public service , which will highlight an important issue and also , because it occurs on the night of Comic Relief , actually help raise crucial funds to help young women caught up in it . " The storyline begins when Bianca is sent to prison and Whitney rejects her family , moving in with Janine and attempting to make money by stealing from The Queen Victoria , causing her to get sacked , working for Max , whom she tries to kiss as she has a crush on him , and pickpocketing . When she is caught , Rob rescues her from the situation and offers her what McGarty called a " dream life " , which Whitney thinks is her chance to move up in the world as she feels lonely and has no friends . 
 McGarty told Inside Soap that she hoped the storyline would have a positive impact , saying that she had done some research herself before filming , meeting teenage girls who had been exploited and hearing their experiences . She said she felt honoured and privileged to be given the storyline . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Whitney makes a cameo appearance in episode eight of the second series of the Internet spin @-@ off series EastEnders : E20 , in which she buys some trainers from Asher Levi ( Heshima Thompson ) but later returns them as they are of different sizes . Jane Beale ( Laurie Brett ) joins the argument and snatches Asher 's wallet when he says he does not give refunds , but he snatches it back . Jane tells two police officers he is a thief and they chase after him . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The BBC and television regulatory body Ofcom received 70 complaints after Whitney 's first scenes with Tony aired . A BBC spokesman responded : " This is a difficult and challenging storyline , but one which keeps with the tradition of the show for tackling difficult social issues such as domestic abuse and mental health in the past . All the content on screen adheres to the BBC 's editorial guidelines . " The Guardian 's Aida <unk> said of the beginning of the storyline : " what is most disturbing , watching [ Tony and Whitney 's ] first scenes together , is not the sexuality of the situation per se , though that is uncomfortable - it 's the subtle blackmail with which he keeps her in line . As it 's combined with the emotional manipulation native to soaps , the viewer starts to feel a bit bullied , too . " Numbers of viewer complaints rose within days to over 200 . New Statesman journalist Jeremy Sare commented on the public outrage and defended EastEnders decision to air the storyline , writing : 
 " There may be some justification for the hundreds complaining about these distressing issues being presented in prime time : equally it is courageous for the Beeb to include a scenario which challenges the public ’ s perception of what is a ‘ typical paedophile ’ . The repellent Tony ’ s grooming and seduction of his stepdaughter , Whitney , is a much more familiar pattern of abuse than the more commonly held image of predators lurking in parks . [ ... ] The producers of <unk> , labouring under a welter of tabloid protest and viewers ’ complaints , are attempting to make people get past the initial revulsion of the act of abuse and accept the grim fact that ‘ paedophiles ’ are very often members of the same family . " 
 Sare quoted a BBC spokeswoman as saying : " we appreciate that for some viewers this storyline will have particular resonance and significance . In running it , it 's certainly not our intention to cause distress or upset , either to those who 've suffered from sexual abuse or their families . Our aim is instead to raise awareness of this very sensitive issue " , concluding his article with the summation : " The producers ' dilemma is instructive to children ’ s charities and Ministers alike on how to confront the issue in a digestible manner which can stimulate an objective debate . " 
 The Daily Mirror 's Beth Neil branded the plot strand " one of the darkest and most disturbing storylines EastEnders has ever attempted " , with critic Jim Shelley deeming it a " new low " for EastEnders . Shelley wrote of Whitney 's abuse : " You 've really got to hand it to EastEnders . Just when you thought the show couldn 't get any more miserable , the writers come up trumps and produce a new way of making us depressed - a paedophile storyline . Thanks for that ! I realise now this is what the family meal has been missing three nights a week : gathering the telly to watch a grubby , <unk> thug drooling over a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl who ( as luck would have it ) spends her entire life in her school uniform even when she 's not at school . And they say family entertainment 's dead . " Shelley refuted the BBC 's claims that the storyline had educational value as " totally bogus " , observing that " At 7 @.@ 30 or 8pm , the " action " has to be so coded as to be pointless " . Deborah Orr , writing for The Independent , similarly disagreed with the BBC 's statement that the storyline was part of EastEnders ' " rich heritage of tackling difficult social issues " , writing that : 
 " Actually , it 's part of its rich heritage of leaping in to some horrific subject without any background or build @-@ up at all . The implication is that Tony , the villain , had been grooming the child for some time before he went to prison , when she was only 12 . But such a thing really would be too real , and too controversial , so the viewer only gets to see the result of those hinted @-@ at dark machinations . 
 " It might be a public service to dramatise the manner in which a paedophile might worm his way into a vulnerable family . But such a storyline would have to be explored carefully and over a long period . All that this little adventure in broadcasting can possibly deliver is the message that a paedophile in the heart of the home is not a good thing . Who needs to be educated about this ? " 
 The Daily Mail 's Lizzie Smith deemed the storyline " horrifying " , while The Guardian 's Julie Raeside questioned : " Is this latest sexual abuse storyline a good thing to position in a pre @-@ watershed soap opera , or should the EastEnders storyliners stick to a less controversial brand of misery ? " However , in contrast to public and media dissent , the NSPCC 's director of communications , John Grounds , praised the storyline for " helping to raise awareness of the hidden nature of sexual abuse " , deeming it to be " vital in persuading people to take action to stop it and encouraging children to speak out . " 
 Episodes from Whitney 's storyline were submitted to the Royal Television Society Programme Awards 2008 for a panel to judge in the category Soap and Continuing Drama . EastEnders was presented with the award in March 2009 , beating Coronation Street and The Bill . Members of the judging panel described the submitted episodes as " the culmination of a particularly challenging and controversial storyline which the production team , writers and cast pulled off triumphantly . " 
 = Antonio Cárdenas Guillén = 
 Antonio Ezequiel Cárdenas Guillén ( 5 March 1962 – 5 November 2010 ) , commonly referred to by his alias Tony Tormenta ( " Tony Storm " ) , was a Mexican drug lord and co @-@ leader of the Gulf Cartel , a drug trafficking organization . He headed the criminal group along with Jorge Eduardo Costilla Sánchez . Antonio was considered by Mexican security forces as one of Mexico 's most @-@ wanted men . 
 Born in Matamoros , Tamaulipas , Antonio initially worked as a car washer at a local police station with his brother Osiel Cárdenas Guillén , former leader of the cartel . By the late 1980s , he entered the drug trade , and later became the crime boss of Matamoros , where he controlled the city 's drug trafficking shipments and all organized crime activities . Few details were known of Antonio 's criminal career prior to 1999 , when his brother Osiel confronted federal agents at gunpoint with several of his gunmen in Matamoros . In 1998 , Antonio avoided arrest after FBI and DEA agents tracked his whereabouts inside a domicile in Houston . Back in Mexico , his brother Osiel was the Gulf Cartel 's main leader and had created a paramilitary squad known as Los Zetas , formed by soldiers who left the Mexican military . 
 When Osiel was arrested in 2003 , Antonio and Costilla Sánchez took the lead of the criminal organization , and Los Zetas eventually broke apart from the Gulf Cartel in 2010 . However , Antonio was killed in an eight @-@ hour shootout between Gulf Cartel gunmen and soldiers of the Mexican Navy in Matamoros on 5 November 2010 . According to the Mexican government , ten people were killed that day in Matamoros , but local media outlets suggested that over 40 people were killed by gunfire . One anonymous law enforcement officer , witnesses , and several local newspapers indicated over 100 were killed in Matamoros . 
 = = Criminal career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Antonio Ezequiel Cárdenas Guillén was born on 5 March 1962 in El Mezquital ranch in the border city of Matamoros , Tamaulipas , Mexico . As a teenager , Antonio Ezequiel and his brother Osiel earned their living by washing cars at the headquarters of the Federal Judicial Police in their hometown . By the late 1980s , Cárdenas Guillén started his criminal career under the Gulf Cartel , where he became a high @-@ ranking leader and commanded organized crime activities and drug trafficking in Matamoros . His contact with the police in Matamoros marked the life of the Cárdenas Guillén clan ; federal reports of the <unk> General de la República ( PGR ) suggest that the drug lord had solid business relations with police and military men . Witnesses indicate that Antonio frequented public places in Matamoros , Reynosa , Ciudad Victoria , and other cities in the state of Tamaulipas surrounded by a number of municipal and state police officers , whose superiors have allegedly remained loyal to the Gulf Cartel for over half a century . His henchmen reportedly wore bullet @-@ proof vests with the Spanish insignias for the Gulf Cartel ( <unk> del Golfo – <unk> ) embellished across their chests . Although some of Antonio Ezequiel 's men were reported to have worn military garbs while on duty , their uniforms have also become more subtle with time . For example , some Gulf Cartel gunmen wear tennis shoes of the same color , caps with the logo " CDG – TT " ( Gulf Cartel – Tony Tormenta ) , or trucks emblazoned with the same logo to help them distinguish themselves from rival gangs . 
 A decade before ascending in the Gulf Cartel leadership rankings , Cárdenas Guillén avoided arrest by FBI and DEA agents in 1998 , after they raided his home in Houston , Texas . The federal agents saw the drug lord leave , but they decided to pursue a search warrant than to chase him , given the activity in the neighborhood , the amount of cars at the parking lot near his house , and the lack of sufficient agents in the operative . Inside the domicile , the US authorities discovered " cash , numerous vehicles , cocaine , marijuana , firearms and one 1996 Sea Doo Bombardier with expired Florida registration . " In 1998 , the federal agents knew little about Cárdenas Guillén and the criminal organization he worked for . The FBI later closed the investigation in February 1999 due to the drug lord 's fugitive status , his local indictments , and the lack of information available in the Houston jurisdiction . Ten months later on November 1999 , the Cárdenas Guillén surname started to gain momentum when Antonio Ezequiel 's brother Osiel and several of his gunmen stopped two US federal agents at gunpoint in the streets of Matamoros . After a tense standoff , the agents convinced Osiel to let them go . 
 Under orders of his brother Osiel , Antonio Ezequiel ordered the drug lord Gregorio <unk> Gamboa ( alias El Goyo ) and his henchmen to execute 6 prison guards in Matamoros on 20 January 2005 , reportedly as a reprisal for Osiel 's treatment at Altiplano prison . Their corpses were discovered inside a Ford Explorer near the Matamoros federal prison . On May 2005 , he commanded a battalion of over 100 Zeta members to fight off Los <unk> , an enforcer group working for the Beltrán Leyva Cartel , in the state of Guerrero . 
 = = = Rank <unk> = = = 
 In 2003 , Osiel was arrested in Matamoros following a shootout with the Mexican military , and was extradited to the United States in 2007 . In exchange for a life sentence , Osiel cooperated with the U.S. authorities by supplying information on the workings of the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas . When Osiel was arrested , Antonio Ezequiel inherited the Gulf Cartel along with Jorge Eduardo Costilla Sánchez , a former policeman in Matamoros . He and other Gulf Cartel leaders were responsible for trafficking multi @-@ ton drug shipments of cocaine and marijuana from Mexico to the United States . Antonio Ezequiel received a federal indictment in 2008 in the District of Columbia for drug trafficking violations . He also directed the flow of narcotics through land , sea , and air from Venezuela and Colombia to Guatemala and the U.S @-@ Mexico border . When Osiel was imprisoned , several high @-@ ranking lieutenants in the Gulf Cartel got together to appoint leaders and their turfs . According to the declarations of Zeta leader Mateo Díaz López ( alias Comandante Mateo ) , Antonio Ezequiel was given the turf of Matamoros , one of the leading smuggling routes for the cartel . But Antonio Ezequiel never had the edge ; one of his most trusted men , Ramiro García Hernández ( alias El Mati ) , was arrested in 2004 . Deemed inexperienced , Costilla Sánchez , Lazcano , and high @-@ ranking leader Víctor Manuel Vázquez Mireles ( alias El Meme Loco ) moved Antonio Ezequiel to command the Gulf Cartel in Cancún . But after failing to meet the Gulf Cartel 's demands , he was replaced . 
 With Osiel imprisoned , however , Costilla Sánchez was deemed more powerful than Antonio Ezequiel . According to the declaration of the imprisoned drug lord Jaime González Durán ( alias El Hummer ) , Osiel appointed Costilla Sánchez while still in prison , and left his brother Antonio as a representative of his clan . Heriberto Lazcano Lazcano , too , was part of the first tier circle , but he headed Los Zetas , while the other two commanded the Gulf Cartel directly . The triumvirate of Antonio Ezequiel , Costilla Sánchez , and Lazcano controlled the flow of narcotics from the southern state of Quintana Roo to the northern Tamaulipas state . Although initially part of a single command structure during the Osiel era , members within Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel began to follow orders of their respective commanders . During the 1990s and early 2000s , the Gulf Cartel " operated with a certain structure that allowed for rivalries among lieutenants to exist without affecting the organization as a whole " . But with Osiel 's absence , several top leaders within the cartel fought to take control of the leadership void . This eventually resulted in the split of the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas in early 2010 , prompting daily shootouts and killings from both fronts . The conflict between both groups triggered in Reynosa , Tamaulipas in January 2010 , when Samuel Flores Borrego of the Gulf Cartel killed a Zetas leader . When the fighting broke out in Reynosa , Antonio and Los Escorpiones , his private army , made their way into Valle Hermoso , Tamaulipas and took the city from Zetas 's control . Several municipal and transit police officers – who were on Los Zetas 's payroll – were hung from light poles as a message from Antonio to his rivals . 
 = = Death = = 
 For at least six months , the Mexican Armed Forces were trying to hunt down Antonio Ezequiel , nearly capturing him in two occasions . The drug lord managed to avoid capture in several occasions by relying on the armed squadron known as Los Escorpiones ( The Scorpions ) , which served as his private army . Among the first operations to capture the drug lord occurred on 31 March 2010 , when the Mexican military confronted Antonio Ezequiel 's bodyguards at Tres <unk> neighborhood in Matamoros . On 7 April 2010 , there were two shootouts in Matamoros between Mexican marines and members of the Gulf Cartel . The intelligence information collected in these shootouts allowed the Mexican Armed Forces to locate the domicile of Antonio Ezequiel on 14 September 2010 at <unk> Río in Matamoros . But heavily armed gunmen of the Gulf Cartel intercepted the raid and protected their leader , who escaped in an armored vehicle . Two military men were killed in the operation , but the government managed to gain more information on the logistics of the inner circle of Antonio Ezequiel . On 1 November 2010 , the Mexican authorities learned once again that Antonio Ezequiel was spending the night in a safe house at the Expo Fiesta Oriente neighborhood in Matamoros . But before the authorities got to the location , the drug lord left and avoided his capture . 
 Antonio Ezequiel was killed on 5 November 2010 following an eight @-@ hour shootout between gunmen of the Gulf Cartel and soldiers of the Mexican Navy in his hometown of Matamoros , Tamaulipas . Government sources claimed that this operation — where more than 660 marines , 17 vehicles , and 3 helicopters participated — left 10 dead : three marines , one soldier , four Gulf Cartel gunmen , journalist Carlos Alberto <unk> Romero , and the drug lord Antonio Ezequiel . The shootout began at around 10 : 00 a.m. and extended to 6 : 00 p.m. , when Antonio Ezequiel and gunmen of his inner circle were killed . The intensity of the shootout forced the temporary closure of the international bridges that connect Matamoros with the US border city of Brownsville , Texas , along with the University of Texas at Brownsville , which sits on the edge of the Rio Grande River . The day light clashes generated a wave of panic among the citizens of Matamoros , who turned to social networks like Twitter and Facebook to report the violence . " Shelter , everyone ! Don 't leave your houses please . Pass the word , " read one tweet . People hid inside their homes or in windowless offices , sometimes peaking to see the cartel mayhem . Witnesses reported seeing military men carrying guns , and armed Gulf Cartel members in their own military uniforms . Power went out in several parts of downtown Matamoros , where most of the heavy gun fight took place . Communication equipment , like cellphones and radios , were not working . Gulf Cartel gunmen hijacked several buses to block roads all across the city to prevent the mobilization of the Mexican Armed Forces . Hovering helicopters from the Navy shot down at Antonio Ezequiel 's henchmen . " The city was paralyzed , " said an office worker who hid for hours inside a building . " It was a nightmare . It went on and on . " News reports described 5 November 2010 as one of Matamoros 's bloodiest days . 
 When the military arrived at Antonio Ezequiel 's location in downtown Matamoros to arrest him at 3 : 30 p.m. , his gunmen tried to protect the drug lord by launching several grenades and shooting at the officers . At the scene , at least 300 grenades were detonated , and gunfire perforated the building where Antonio Ezequiel hid . Gulf Cartel snipers , who hid in the rooftops of the drug lord 's hiding place , shot at the Mexican marines , who later entered the building and killed Antonio Ezequiel and several bodyguards of his inner circle . Contrary to government reports , the newspapers The Brownsville Herald and The Monitor , which are based in the Rio Grande Valley , reported that at least 47 dead from the shootings that broke out on 5 November 2010 in Matamoros . According to an anonymous source inside of Mexican law enforcement , at least 30 people had been killed by noon ; by the afternoon , 17 had been gunned down near the Matamoros city hall in the downtown area by grenades and heavy @-@ calibre gunshots . Other sources varied in their countdown . Some local sources suggest that 55 or more people had been killed in the shootout . Comments left by readers at The Brownsville Herald and its sister page El Heraldo reported at least 70 dead . Although not officially confirmed , an anonymous law enforcement officer , <unk> @-@ TV , and several online sources and witnesses mentioned that the two @-@ day death toll in Matamoros may have " easily passed " 100 . However , the exact figures of those killed in Matamoros are virtually unknown . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 The corpse of Antonio Ezequiel was given to <unk> Rivera ( wife ) and Carla Elizabeth Cárdenas Rivera ( daughter ) by the PGR at the Servicio Médico forensic installations in Ciudad Victoria , Tamaulipas on 9 November 2010 . The family of the drug lord had plans to carry out a funeral in memory of him . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Antonio Ezequiel was killed by the Mexican Navy at around 6 : 00 p.m. in downtown Matamoros on 5 November 2010 , but the roadblocks set by organized crime continued throughout the rest of the day . The drug lord had reportedly called for backup when he was surrounded by the Navy , but when he was killed , his reinforcements from Reynosa , Tamaulipas ( which consisted of over 80 SUVs filled with gunmen ) dispersed . The international bridges in Matamoros were reopened by 7 : 00 p.m. after crowds of people had waited all afternoon . In Reynosa at around 9 : 15 p.m. , a grenade exploded inside a vehicle parked outside Plaza Real , the busiest shopping center in the city and just four miles away from the Hidalgo – Reynosa International Bridge . Reynosa also reported several shootings between the Mexican Army and organized crime on the highway that connects the city with the border town of Matamoros . In the municipalities of San Fernando , Río Bravo , <unk> , Díaz Ordaz , Nuevo Laredo , Ciudad Mier , Guerrero , Miguel Alemán , Valle Hermoso , and Ciudad Victoria , most of the daily city activities were cancelled throughout the whole day . Organized crime gunmen and risk situations were reported in these areas , too . 
 Early in the morning the next day , some of the residents in Matamoros went to the site where most of the heavy fighting took place . They stood at awe as they looked at the bullet @-@ ridden cement building and the shattered windows . Since the early morning , gossip started to surround the death of Antonio Ezequiel . Sporadic gunfire was reported in the city and in Valle Hermoso , Tamaulipas , a city south of Matamoros . Grenade attacks and armed confrontations reportedly resulted in several casualties throughout Matamoros ; in Valle Hermoso , only four deaths were unofficially confirmed . Law enforcement officials confirmed that an armed confrontation broke out between gunmen of Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel in <unk> Las <unk> neighborhood , and shootouts in the Lauro Villar and Roberto Guerra avenues in Matamoros . The casualties in these confrontations were difficult to calculate because both criminal organizations picked up the corpses of their fallen comrades and reportedly disposed them in clandestine graves . Roadblocks imposed by organized crime were set up in Reynosa following the death of Antonio Ezequiel , but it is unclear if they were directly related to his death . Phone services in the area continued to remain sporadic , with residents only able to use them at random hours of the day . With Antonio Ezequiel dead , Los Zetas celebrated the death of their rival 's leader by hanging banners at pedestrian bridges in several cities in northeastern Mexico , where they mocked his brother Osiel and the Gulf Cartel . Pamphlets written with " z " instead of " s " were distributed across Matamoros with a message by Los Zetas to the general population and to members of the rival Gulf Cartel . " The group of Loz <unk> is informing you and giving you the opportunity to join with no hard <unk> , " one of the pamphlets read . " Those who don 't <unk> their head and their <unk> . " Other banners with similar messages were put up in other states besides Tamaulipas . In the state of Veracruz , they were put up in the municipalities of Boca del Río , Medellín de Bravo , Poza Rica , <unk> , Coatzacoalcos , Martínez de la Torre , Pánuco , Pueblo Viejo , Tampico Alto and <unk> . In Nuevo León , most of the banners were put up in Monterrey , but the authorities also reported in the municipalities of <unk> , Juárez , Guadalupe and San Pedro Garza García . More banners were reported in San Luis Potosí , Oaxaca , and Quintana Roo . 
 On 6 November 2010 , U.S. President Barack Obama contacted former Mexican President Felipe Calderón by phone and expressed his full support to put an end to the impunity of Mexico 's organized crime syndicates . He expressed his condolences for the Mexican servicemen and the journalist that died in the operative . 
 Among the most intense battles between the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas following the death of Antonio Ezequiel occurred in Ciudad Mier , Tamaulipas , a small , <unk> town on the U.S.-Mexico border . Roughly five days after the drug lord 's death , over 300 people left the town to shelter in the nearby city of Miguel Alemán , while others left to seek refuge with family members that resided in Starr and Zapata County in Texas . Ciudad Mier experienced rounds of drug cartel violence because the area is a strategic route for drug traffickers . The highway that connects Ciudad Mier with Monterrey is a lucrative smuggling route for narcotics . The Mexican government responded to the citizens ' plea by sending reinforcements to restore order because the violence had been " non @-@ stop in Ciudad Mier since [ Antonio Ezequiel 's ] death . " But by the end of 2010 , around 95 % of the population in Ciudad Mier had left and relocated elsewhere due to the violence generated by Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel . In 2011 , President Calderón visited the border town and inaugurated a military barrack for the 105th battalion in the municipality . After long periods of sporadic violence , Ciudad Mier returned to normal in early 2013 . Residents credit the presence of the Mexican Armed Forces for returning peace to the border town . " Thanks to the army , families are coming back , " said a school principal from Ciudad Mier . 
 Antonio Ezequiel was succeeded by Costilla Sánchez and his brother Mario Cárdenas Guillén , arrested on 3 September 2012 . His nephew Rafael Cárdenas Vela became the regional leader of the Gulf Cartel in Matamoros but he was displaced by Costilla Sánchez and was arrested on 20 October 2011 . A month later on November 2011 , Antonio Ezequiel 's son Ezequiel Cárdenas Rivera was arrested by the Navy along with for other Gulf Cartel members in Matamoros . Since Antonio Ezequiel was killed , the Gulf Cartel separated into two different factions : Los Rojos , a group loyal to the Cárdenas Guillén family ; and Los Metros , a group started by Costilla Sánchez . 
 = = = Analysis of repercussions = = = 
 Shortly after Antonio Ezequiel was killed , a mood of uncertainty surrounded civilians and authorities . Most feared that his death would shake the criminal underworld in Tamaulipas and herald more violence from Los Zetas , who might look to carry out a full @-@ scale incursion in the Gulf Cartel territories and carry out kidnappings , extortions , and other violent acts in the state . Malcolm Beith , author of the book " The Last <unk> " , stated shortly after Antonio Ezequiel 's death that Zeta leader Heriberto Lazcano Lazcano was possibly going to move deep into Tamaulipas and try to fight the remaining forces of the Gulf Cartel , thereby creating more violence . Researcher Humberto Palomares said , " They [ the government ] cut off one head and many more grow back [ and create violence ] " , in reference to the fall of Antonio Ezequiel . Stratfor and border security expert Sylvia Longmire , however , believed that Antonio Ezequiel 's death was not going to drastically alter the dynamics of the criminal world , and that his absence may possibly bring some level of relative peace in the Tamaulipas area . The intelligence agency stated that Antonio Ezequiel was only a leader in the Gulf Cartel because of his brother Osiel ; Costilla Sánchez , on the other hand , was the one who actually controlled the day @-@ to @-@ day operations . Antonio Ezequiel was also known for his explosive personality and cocaine addiction . It was rumored that the drug lord was hot @-@ tempered and lived an outlandish lifestyle , and that many commanders within the Gulf Cartel believed in more than one occasion that his position as leader threatened the whole organization . Longmire believed that Los Zetas would move into Reynosa and Matamoros shortly after the drug lord 's death to " test the waters " , but she stated that the Gulf Cartel , under the command of Costilla Sánchez , stood a chance to fight them off and continue its illicit activities . 
 Former President Felipe Calderon made taking down drug kingpins a security priority of his political administration ( 2006 – 2012 ) . His aggressive campaign against organized crime successfully removed many drug cartel leaders from Mexico 's leading drug trafficking organizations . However , his strategy has also been criticized for sparking more violence . When a drug baron is arrested or killed , the criminal organization may experiences a leadership void , which leads to infighting for succession , possible fragmentation , and new competition from other crime syndicates . This practice , commonly referred to as the " kingpin strategy " , worked to bring down the hegemony of the Cali and the Medellín <unk> in Colombia in the 1990s . But its implementation in Mexico has brought more violence and has led to instability in the criminal underworld . However , the Mexican government provides a different interpretation of the strategy . They suggest that violence does not increase in Mexico 's already violent states , and that troops are sent when violence already exists in an area . Therefore , the strategy is a product , not the cause , of the violence . 
 = = Los Escorpiones = = 
 Antonio Ezequiel commanded an elite enforcer group known as Los Escorpiones ( The Scorpions ) , which served as his private army during the 5 November 2010 shootout in Matamoros that resulted in the drug lord 's death . Los Escorpiones reportedly set up roadblocks , rocket @-@ propelled grenade attacks , and snipers to prevent the capture of their leader . According to the PGR and the Mexican Armed Forces , the group was originally formed by Antonio Ezequiel in 2002 as a parallel to his brother 's personal army , Los Zetas . However , his brother Osiel never approved of the group 's creation and subsequently cut all communication with him , although he allowed him to work on his own . Known for their brutal tactics , Los Escorpiones is composed of at least 60 former state , judicial , and municipal police officers . The enforcer group served as the armed wing of the Gulf Cartel , and they were key in the territorial war against Los Zetas in Reynosa and Matamoros in the first half of 2010 . 
 Along with Antonio Ezequiel , the following members of Los Escorpiones were killed on 5 November 2010 in Matamoros : Sergio Antonio Fuentes ( alias El Tyson or Escorpión 1 ) ; Raúl <unk> Gómez ( alias Escorpión 18 ) Hugo Lira ( alias Escorpión 26 ) and Refugio Adalberto Vargas Cortés ( alias Escorpión 42 ) . The arrests of Marco Antonio Cortez Rodríguez ( alias Escorpión 37 ) and of Josué González Rodríguez ( alias Escorpión 43 ) allowed the authorities to understand the structure of Los Escorpiones . There are several music videos on YouTube that exalt the power of Los Escorpiones through <unk> , a Mexican drug ballad that tells stories of drug lords and their exploits . 
 = = Charges and bounty = = 
 Antonio Ezequiel was one of the eleven most @-@ wanted Mexican fugitives sought by the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) . He was charged in a 2008 federal indictment in the District of Columbia , and the United States Department of State was offering a reward of up to $ 5 million USD for information leading to his arrest and / or conviction . The Mexican government under the Attorney General of Mexico ( PGR ) was offering a $ 30 million pesos bounty ( about $ 2 @.@ 5 million USD ) . 
 According to the U.S. Department of State and the DEA , Antonio Ezequiel was 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) tall , and weighed approximately 215 lbs ( 97 @.@ 5 kilos ) . He had an alternative date of birth on 5 May 1962 . He had black @-@ colored hair and brown eyes , and his aliases were Marcos <unk> , El <unk> ( The Certified or The Lawyer ) , and Tony Tormenta ( Tony the Storm ) , which he earned for his explosive personality and for beheading and torturing his rivals . 
 = = = Kingpin Act sanction = = = 
 On 20 July 2009 , the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned Antonio Ezequiel under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act ( sometimes referred to simply as the " Kingpin Act " ) , for his involvement in drug trafficking along with three other international criminals . The act prohibited U.S. citizens and companies from doing any kind of business activity with him , and virtually froze all his assets in the U.S. 
 = Miikka Kiprusoff = 
 Miikka Sakari Kiprusoff ( Finnish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born October 26 , 1976 ) is a Finnish former professional ice hockey goaltender who played for the Calgary Flames and San Jose Sharks during his National Hockey League ( NHL ) career . He was selected in the fifth round , 116th overall , by the Sharks in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft , and has also played professionally for TPS of the Finnish SM @-@ liiga , as well as for both AIK IF and Timrå IK of the Swedish Elitserien . 
 Kiprusoff represented Finland several times on the international stage , earning silver medals at the World Ice Hockey Championships in 1999 and 2001 , as well as leading the Finns to a surprise second @-@ place finish at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey . He also helped the Finnish national hockey team win the bronze medal at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . 
 Kiprusoff began his professional career with TPS in 1994 , and was named the best goaltender and best player of the playoffs in 1999 as he led them to the SM @-@ liiga championship . He then moved to North America in 1999 , and after two All @-@ Star seasons in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , made his NHL debut with the San Jose Sharks , where he served primarily as the team 's backup . A trade to the Calgary Flames in 2003 – 04 brought Kiprusoff into a starting role , and he set a modern NHL record for lowest goals against average ( GAA ) at 1 @.@ 69 as he helped the Flames reach the 2004 Stanley Cup Final . He won the Vezina Trophy as the best goaltender in the NHL in 2006 along with the William M. Jennings Trophy for giving up the fewest goals in the League . He played in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game in 2007 and is the Flames ' franchise record holder in both wins and shutouts . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Kiprusoff was sponsored by his hometown team , TPS , playing two seasons in the Finnish junior league for them between 1993 and 1995 . He was then selected by the San Jose Sharks in the fifth round , 116th overall , at the 1995 NHL Entry Draft . He made his professional debut in 1994 – 95 , and won three of four games played for TPS . After playing 12 games for TPS in 1995 – 96 , he moved to AIK IF of the Swedish Elitserien , playing two seasons as their top goaltender before returning to TPS in 1998 – 99 . He dominated the SM @-@ liiga that year , finishing the season with a record of 26 – 6 – 6 and a GAA of 1 @.@ 85 , and led TPS to the Finnish championship . For his efforts , he was named the winner of the <unk> <unk> trophy as the best goaltender in 1998 – 99 and the Jari Kurri trophy as the best player of the playoffs . 
 = = = San Jose Sharks = = = 
 Kiprusoff moved to North America in 1999 , joining the Sharks ' AHL affiliate , the Kentucky <unk> . He finished fourth in the League with a 2 @.@ 48 GAA and was the starting goaltender for team PlanetUSA at the 2000 AHL All @-@ Star Game as he helped Kentucky win its first division title . He began the 2000 – 01 season with Kentucky , where he posted a record of 19 – 9 – 6 with two shutouts in 39 games . He then started his second @-@ consecutive AHL All @-@ Star Game before earning a call @-@ up to San Jose on March 5 , 2001 . He earned his first NHL win on March 29 , 7 – 4 over the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim , in relief of starting goaltender Evgeni Nabokov . He made his first start on April 8 , again against Anaheim , and earned his second win . 
 The flu sidelined Nabokov for Game 4 of the Sharks ' 2001 Stanley Cup playoff series against the St. Louis Blues . Making just his second career start , Kiprusoff made 39 saves in a 3 – 2 victory . In doing so , he became the first Finnish born goaltender to win an NHL playoff game . Kiprusoff struggled to start the 2001 – 02 season , however , and was sent to the Cleveland Barons on a conditioning assignment after playing in only four of the Sharks ' first 21 games . He was named the AHL Player of the Week during the assignment after winning all four games he played in Cleveland . He finished the season with a 7 – 6 – 1 record for the Sharks , and recorded his first NHL shutout in a 6 – 0 win over the Florida Panthers on January 5 , 2002 . 
 Nabokov entered the 2002 – 03 season as a holdout player without a contract , giving Kiprusoff a chance to become the starter . Despite the opportunity , Kiprusoff struggled , losing his first three games and posting a 5 @.@ 65 GAA in that time , forcing the Sharks ' hand , as they quickly agreed to terms with Nabokov on a new contract . Relegated to the backup role , Kiprusoff continued to struggle , winning just five of 22 games played before his season ended with a knee injury . Despite his poor season , the Sharks offered him a new contract for one year at US $ 800 @,@ 000 . 
 Kiprusoff began the 2003 – 04 season competing with Vesa Toskala for the backup spot behind Nabokov , leading to speculation of a trade . Ultimately relegated to third @-@ string status , Kiprusoff grew increasingly frustrated , as he did not play in any games through the first quarter of the season . He was then finally traded to the Calgary Flames in exchange for a second @-@ round draft pick on November 16 , 2003 , after Calgary starter Roman Turek suffered an injury . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 The trade provided immediate dividends for the Flames , as Kiprusoff recorded 22 saves in a 2 – 1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens in his first game with Calgary on November 20 . He won 12 of 17 starts between November 20 and December 29 , giving up one goal or fewer 11 times in that stretch . He was named the defensive player of the month for December by the League , but suffered a sprained medial collateral ligament ( MCL ) in his knee at the end of the month that forced him out of the lineup for four weeks . 
 Kiprusoff 's play remained strong upon his return , as he was counted on to lead the Flames to the playoffs for the first time in eight years . A 1 – 0 victory over the Phoenix Coyotes clinched a berth in the 2004 playoffs for the Flames , an achievement which earned Kiprusoff a standing ovation from the Calgary fans . He finished the regular season with a modern NHL record @-@ low GAA of 1 @.@ 69 . His stellar play continued into the playoffs , as he won 15 games , five of them via shutout , leading the Flames to within one victory of a Stanley Cup championship . He was named a finalist for the Vezina Trophy , awarded to the best goaltender in the League , and was given a one @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 95 million contract for 2004 – 05 by an arbitrator , an increase in salary of nearly four times his previous contract . 
 As the 2004 – 05 lockout led to the cancellation of the season , Kiprusoff chose to play in Sweden . He played 41 games for Timrå IK , recording five shutouts and a 2 @.@ 14 GAA . He remained a top goaltender for Calgary when NHL play resumed in 2005 – 06 , breaking Mike Vernon 's franchise record when he recorded his 40th win of the season against the Minnesota Wild on April 8 , 2006 . He was not only touted as the top goaltender in the League , but also argued to be a candidate for the Hart Memorial Trophy as the most valuable player in the NHL . Finishing the season with a 42 – 20 – 11 record and a team @-@ record 10 shutouts , he was named a first team all @-@ star and awarded the Vezina Trophy , as well as the William M. Jennings Trophy for being the goaltender on the team that gave up the fewest goals in during the season . He was also named a finalist for the Hart , though the award was won by Joe Thornton . 
 Kiprusoff struggled to begin the 2006 – 07 season , winning just four of his first 12 decisions , and giving up nearly three goals per game . He rebounded to finish the season with 40 wins , won his 100th career game , and played in his first All @-@ Star Game . He recorded his 21st shutout in a Flames uniform in a 1 – 0 win over the Wild on March 27 , 2007 , to break Dan Bouchard 's franchise record . Kiprusoff was outstanding in the 2007 playoffs , keeping the overmatched Flames close to the top @-@ seeded Detroit Red Wings despite the Flames giving up nearly 50 shots per game in their first two contests . He led them to consecutive wins in Games 3 and 4 to even the series , and gave the Flames hope they could win the series , but the Flames were unable to parlay his performance into a series win , losing the best @-@ of @-@ seven series 4 – 2 . In Game 5 , he was pulled after giving up five goals , but was forced to come back in only 18 seconds later when his backup , Jamie McLennan , was thrown out of the game for deliberately slashing the Red Wings ' Johan Franzén . Kiprusoff earned his third consecutive nomination for the Vezina Trophy , ultimately won by Martin Brodeur . 
 Nicknamed " Captain Hook " for the way he handled goaltenders , the Flames decision to hire Mike Keenan as head coach in 2007 – 08 created speculation that Kiprusoff might choose to leave Calgary when his contract expired at the end of the season . Nonetheless , he agreed to a six @-@ year extension worth $ 35 million that would keep him in Calgary until the end of the 2013 – 14 season . He struggled at times , as his GAA and save percentage fell outside of the top 30 goaltenders in the League by mid @-@ November . His play improved throughout the season , however , and he finished the season third in the NHL with 39 wins . 
 Hoping to rebound in 2008 – 09 , Kiprusoff arrived for the start of the season in better shape , but continued to struggle as he was questioned on whether his heavy workload the previous three seasons — he played 76 , 74 and 74 games of a possible 82 — were taking a toll on him . He won his 200th career game on March 18 , 2009 , in a 2 – 1 victory over the Dallas Stars , but questions about whether he was playing too many games continued throughout the season . Although he led the League with 45 wins , his statistical averages had deteriorated for the fourth consecutive season as he admitted he struggled . 
 New head coach Brent Sutter promised that Kiprusoff would face a lighter schedule in 2009 – 10 , he played 76 games in 2008 – 09 , while Kiprusoff hired a personal trainer and set aside his previously indifferent attitude towards off @-@ season training . His efforts appeared to pay dividends early in the season , as he lost only three of his first 17 decisions , leading his teammates to compare his early performance to his first years in Calgary . He finished in the top ten in the League in wins , save percentage and GAA and while considered a potential candidate for the Vezina Trophy , he was not named a finalist in part due to the fact the Flames failed to qualify for the 2010 playoffs . 
 Kiprusoff , as well as the entire Flames team , struggled early in the 2010 – 11 season , and during a period of struggle late in January , he became a target of the fans ' jeering . He admitted that he had struggled and was trying to focus on returning his play to where he felt it should be . Kiprusoff 's fortunes improved in February , as he won his 250th game as a member of the Flames in a 9 – 1 victory over the Colorado Avalanche on February 14 . Six nights later , he became the first goaltender in NHL history to record a shutout in an outdoor game with a 4 – 0 victory over the Montreal Canadiens at the 2011 Heritage Classic . In a March 4 game against the Columbus Blue Jackets , he became the first goaltender in 25 years to stop two penalty shots in one game to preserve a 4 – 3 victory . 
 On February 8 , 2012 , Kiprusoff became the 27th goalie to record his 300th career win . He reached the mark with a 4 – 3 victory over his former team , the San Jose Sharks . A knee injury forced Kiprusoff out of Calgary 's lineup for a month of the 2012 – 13 season , but a victory in his return — a 4 – 1 decision over the Sharks on March 6 , 2013 — marked his 300th win as a member of the Flames . 
 At the 2013 NHL trade deadline , the Toronto Maple Leafs reportedly attempted to acquire Kiprusoff , but he elected not to waive his no @-@ trade clause amid speculation that he intended to retire at season 's end . Finnish news agency STT @-@ <unk> reported in June that the goaltender had informed the Finnish national team that he had decided to end his playing career , and the Flames formally announced his retirement on September 9 , 2013 . He ended his career as the Flames ' franchise leader in wins ( 305 ) , shutouts ( 41 ) and games played by a goaltender ( 576 ) . 
 = = International career = = 
 Kiprusoff made his international debut with the Finnish junior team at the 1994 European Junior Ice Hockey Championships , where he played in three games . He was also a member of the team at the 1995 and 1996 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , where Finland finished fourth and sixth , respectively . 
 Kiprusoff first played with the senior team at the 1999 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships , where he recorded a 1 @.@ 16 GAA in four games to help Finland win the silver medal . He rejoined the team for the 2001 tournament , again leading the Finns to a silver medal . 
 Kiprusoff was offered a spot on the Finnish team for the 2002 Winter Olympics , but declined citing a desire to focus on his professional career in North America . Kiprusoff was named the starting goaltender for the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , and earned a shutout against the Czech Republic . He posted four wins and a tie , including a second shutout , and a 1 @.@ 18 GAA to lead the upstart Finns into the championship game against Canada . In spite of his 30 saves , the Finns were defeated by Canada 3 – 2 . Kiprusoff did not play his best game in the final , according to Finland Head Coach Raimo <unk> , though he expressed pride in his team 's effort . 
 Kiprusoff again declined an invitation to play at the 2006 Winter Olympics , citing the need to rest a hip injury . His announcement generated considerable controversy in Finland , where the fact that he did not miss a game with the Flames due to the injury led some to question if he was injured at all . Country @-@ mate Teemu Selänne questioned the goaltender 's lack of interest in playing for the national team , a comment that stung Kiprusoff . When considered to play for the Finns at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , Kiprusoff said he would join the team , but only if he felt healthy and if he was named the starting goaltender for the team . Kiprusoff was named the starter and allowed only four goals in his team 's first four games , leading the Finns to a semifinal game against the United States . The Americans blitzed Kiprusoff early in the game , as he gave up four goals on just seven shots in the first minutes of the game before being replaced in net by Niklas Bäckström . He returned to the net for the bronze medal game , however , leading Finland to a 5 – 3 victory . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kiprusoff and his wife <unk> have two sons , <unk> and Oskar , and call Calgary home . His older brother , Marko , is a defenceman who last played for TPS in 2009 , and previously played in the NHL with the Montreal Canadiens and New York Islanders . Kiprusoff is a spokesman for the Rainbow Society of Alberta , an organization that aims to grant wishes for children with chronic or life @-@ threatening conditions . He donated $ 10 for each save he made in an NHL game , which totalled $ 18 @,@ 720 in 2009 – 10 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Greylag goose = 
 The greylag goose ( Anser anser ) is a bird in the waterfowl family Anatidae . It has mottled and barred grey and white plumage and an orange beak and legs . A large bird , it measures between 74 and 91 centimetres ( 29 and 36 in ) in length , with an average weight of 3 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 3 lb ) . Its distribution is widespread , with birds from the north of its range in Europe and Asia migrating southwards to spend the winter in warmer places . It is the type species of the genus Anser and is the ancestor of the domestic goose , having been domesticated at least as early as 1360 BC . The genus name is from anser , the Latin for " goose " . 
 Greylag geese travel to their northerly breeding grounds in spring , nesting on moorlands , in marshes , around lakes and on coastal islands . They normally mate for life and nest on the ground among vegetation . A clutch of three to five eggs is laid ; the female incubates the eggs and both parents defend and rear the young . The birds stay together as a family group , migrating southwards in autumn as part of a flock , and separating the following year . During the winter they occupy semi @-@ aquatic habitats , estuaries , marshes and flooded fields , feeding on grass and often consuming agricultural crops . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Anser anser , the greylag goose , is a member of the waterfowl family Anatidae . It was first described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 as Anas anser , but was transferred two years later to the new genus Anser , erected by the French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson , where it is the type species . Two subspecies are recognised ; A. a. anser , the western greylag goose , breeds in Iceland and north and central Europe ; A. a. <unk> , the eastern greylag goose , breeds in Romania , Turkey and Russia eastwards to northeastern China . The two subspecies intergrade where their ranges meet . The greylag goose sometimes hybridises with other species of goose including the barnacle goose ( Branta leucopsis ) and the Canada goose ( Branta canadensis ) , and occasionally with the mute swan ( Cygnus olor ) . The greylag goose was one of the first animals to be domesticated ; this happened at least 3000 years ago in Ancient Egypt , the domestic breed being known as A. a. domesticus . As the domestic goose is a subspecies of the greylag goose they are able to interbreed , with the offspring sharing characteristics of both the wild and tame birds . 
 = = Description = = 
 The greylag is the largest and bulkiest of the grey geese of the genus Anser , but is more lightly built and agile than its domestic relative . It has a rotund , bulky body , a thick and long neck , and a large head and bill . It has pink legs and feet , and an orange or pink bill with a white or brown nail ( hard horny material at tip of upper mandible ) . It is 74 to 91 centimetres ( 29 to 36 in ) long with a wing length of 41 @.@ 2 to 48 centimetres ( 16 @.@ 2 to 18 @.@ 9 in ) . It has a tail 6 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 7 in ) , a bill of 6 @.@ 4 to 6 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 7 in ) long , and a tarsus of 7 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 7 in ) . It weighs 2 @.@ 16 to 4 @.@ 56 kilograms ( 4 @.@ 8 to 10 @.@ 1 lb ) , with a mean weight of around 3 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 3 lb ) . The wingspan is 147 to 180 centimetres ( 58 to 71 in ) . Males are generally larger than females , with the sexual dimorphism more pronounced in the eastern subspecies <unk> , which is larger than the nominate subspecies on average . 
 The plumage of the greylag goose is greyish @-@ brown , with a darker head and paler breast and belly with a variable amount of black spotting . It has a pale grey fore @-@ wing and rump which are noticeable when the bird is in flight or stretches its wings on the ground . It has a white line bordering its upper flanks , and its wing coverts are light @-@ coloured , contrasting with its darker flight feathers . Its plumage is patterned by the pale fringes of the feathers . Juveniles differ mostly in their lack of black @-@ speckling on the breast and belly and by their greyish legs . 
 The greylag goose has a loud cackling call similar to that of the domestic goose , " <unk> @-@ ung @-@ ung " , uttered on the ground or in flight . There are various subtle variations used under different circumstances , and individual geese seem to be able to identify other known geese by their voices . The sound made by a flock of geese resembles the <unk> of hounds . <unk> chirp or whistle lightly , and adults hiss if threatened or angered . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species has a Palearctic distribution . The nominate subspecies breeds in Iceland , Norway , Sweden , Finland , the Baltic States , northern Russia , Poland , eastern Hungary and Romania . It also breeds locally in the United Kingdom , Denmark , Germany , Austria , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Macedonia . The eastern race extends eastwards across a broad swathe of Asia to China . European birds migrate southwards to the Mediterranean region and North Africa . Asian birds migrate to Baluchistan , Azerbaijan , Iran , Pakistan , northern India , Bangladesh and eastward to China . > In North America , there are both feral domestic geese , which are similar to greylags , and occasional vagrant greylags . Greylag geese seen in the wild in New Zealand probably originated from the escape of farmyard geese , and a similar thing has happened in Australia where feral birds are now established in the east and southeast of the country . 
 In their breeding quarters , they are found on moors with scattered lochs , in marshes , fens and peat @-@ bogs , besides lakes and on little islands some way out to sea . They like dense ground cover of reeds , rushes , heather , bushes and willow thickets . In their winter quarters , they frequent salt marshes , estuaries , freshwater marshes , steppes , flooded fields , bogs and pasture near lakes , rivers and streams . They also visit agricultural land where they feed on winter cereals , rice , beans or other crops , moving at night to shoals and sand @-@ banks on the coast , mud @-@ banks in estuaries or secluded lakes . Large numbers of immature birds congregate each year to moult on the Rone Islands near Gotland in the Baltic Sea . 
 In Great Britain , their numbers had declined as a breeding bird , retreating north to breed wild only in the Outer Hebrides and the northern mainland of Scotland . However , during the 20th century , feral populations have been established elsewhere , and they have now re @-@ colonised much of England . These populations are increasingly coming into contact . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Greylag geese are herbivorous and feed chiefly on grasses . Short , actively growing grass is more nutritious and greylag geese are often found grazing in pastures with sheep or cows . Because of its low nutrient status , they need to feed for much of their time ; the herbage passes rapidly through the gut and is voided frequently . The tubers of sea clubrush ( <unk> maritimus ) are also taken as well as berries and water plants such as duckweed ( <unk> ) and floating sweetgrass ( <unk> fluitans ) . In wintertime they eat grass and leaves but also glean grain on cereal <unk> and sometimes feed on growing crops , especially during the night . They have been known to feed on oats , wheat , barley , buckwheat , lentils , peas and root crops . Acorns are sometimes consumed , and on the coast , seagrass ( Zostera sp . ) may be eaten . In the 1920s in Britain , the pink @-@ footed goose " discovered " that potatoes were edible and started feeding on waste potatoes . The greylag followed suit in the 1940s and now regularly searches for tubers on ploughed fields . 
 These geese normally pair for life , so courtship only occurs at the time of first maturity . The nest is on the ground among heather , rushes , dwarf shrubs or reeds , or on a raft of floating vegetation . It is built from pieces of reed , sprigs of heather , grasses and moss , mixed with small feathers and down . A typical clutch is four to six eggs , but fewer eggs or larger numbers are not unusual . The eggs are creamy @-@ white at first but soon become stained , and average 85 by 58 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 3 by 2 @.@ 3 in ) . They are mostly laid on successive days and incubation starts after the last one is laid . The female does the incubation , which lasts about twenty @-@ eight days , while the male remains on guard somewhere near . The chicks are precocial and able to leave the nest soon after hatching . Both parents are involved in their care and they soon learn to peck at food and become fully @-@ fledged at eight or nine weeks , about the same time as their parents regain their ability to fly after moulting their main wing and tail feathers a month earlier . Immature birds undergo a similar moult , and move to traditional , safe locations before doing so because of their vulnerability while flightless . 
 Greylag geese are gregarious birds and form flocks . This has the advantage for the birds that the vigilance of some individuals in the group allows the rest to feed without having to constantly be alert to the approach of predators . After the eggs hatch , some grouping of families occur , enabling the geese to defend their young by their joint actions , such as mobbing or attacking predators . After driving off a predator , a gander will return to its mate and give a " triumph call " , a resonant honk followed by a low @-@ pitched cackle , uttered with neck extended forward parallel with the ground . The mate and even unfledged young reciprocate in kind . 
 Young greylags stay with their parents as a family group , migrating with them in a larger flock , and only dispersing when the adults drive them away from their newly established breeding territory the following year . At least in Europe , patterns of migration are well understood and follow traditional routes with known staging sites and wintering sites . The young learn these locations from their parents which normally stay together for life . <unk> leave their northern breeding areas relatively late in the autumn , for example completing their departure from Iceland by November , and start their return migration as early as January . Birds that breed in Iceland overwinter in the British Isles ; those from Central Europe overwinter as far south as Spain and North Africa ; others migrate down to the Balkans , Turkey and Iraq for the winter . 
 = = In human culture = = 
 The greylag was once revered across Eurasia . It was linked with the goddess of healing , Gula , a forerunner of the Sumerian fertility goddess Ishtar , in the cities of the Tigris @-@ Euphrates delta over 5 @,@ 000 years ago . In Ancient Egypt , geese symbolised the sun god Ra . In Ancient Greece and Rome , they were associated with the goddess of love , Aphrodite , and goose fat was used as an aphrodisiac . Since they were sacred birds , they were kept on Rome 's Capitoline Hill , from where they raised the alarm when the Gauls attacked in 390 B.C. 
 The goose 's role in fertility survives in modern British tradition in the nursery rhyme <unk> <unk> Gander , which preserves its sexual overtones ( " And in my lady 's chamber " ) , while " to goose " still has a sexual meaning . The tradition of pulling a wishbone derives from the tradition of eating a roast goose at Michaelmas , where the goose bone was once believed to have the powers of an oracle . For that festival , in Thomas Bewick 's time , geese were driven in thousand @-@ strong flocks on foot from farms all over the East of England to London 's Cheapside market , covering some 8 or 9 miles ( 13 or 14 km ) per day . Some farmers painted the geese 's feet with tar and sand to protect them from road wear as they walked . 
 Greylag geese were domesticated by at least 1360 B.C. , when images of domesticated birds resembling the Eastern race , Anser anser <unk> ( which like modern farmyard geese , but unlike Western greylags , have a pink beak ) were painted in Ancient Egypt . Goose feathers were used as quill pens , the best being the primary feathers of the left wing , whose " curvature bent away from the eyes of right @-@ handed writers " . The feathers also served to <unk> arrows . In ethology , the greylag goose was the subject of Konrad Lorenz 's pioneering studies of imprinting behaviour . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Typewriter in the Sky = 
 Typewriter in the Sky is a science fiction novel written by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard . The protagonist Mike de Wolf finds himself inside the story of his friend Horace Hackett 's book . He must survive conflict on the high seas in the Caribbean during the 17th century , before eventually returning to his native New York . Each time a significant event occurs to the protagonist in the story he hears the sounds of a typewriter in the sky . At the story 's conclusion , de Wolf wonders if he is still a character in someone else 's story . The work was first published in a two @-@ part serial format in 1940 in Unknown Fantasy Fiction . It was twice published as a combined book with Hubbard 's work Fear . In 1995 Bridge Publications re @-@ released the work along with an audio edition . 
 Writers have placed the story within several different genres , including science fiction , a subgenre of science fiction called recursive science fiction , and fantasy . Masters of the Occult author Daniel Cohen noted the book contributed to Hubbard 's reception among influential science fiction authors of the 1940s . It is regarded as classic science fiction by The Houghton Mifflin Dictionary of Biography in its entry on Hubbard , as well as by writer James Gunn , and publications including the Daily News of Los Angeles , and Chicago Sun @-@ Times . Writers have placed Typewriter in the Sky within the Golden Age of Science Fiction . Authors Mike Resnick and Robert J. Sawyer classed the story within the science fiction subgenre recursive science fiction , and writer Gary Westfahl wrote that Hubbard may have been influenced by the 1921 Luigi Pirandello play within the recursive fantasy subgenre , Six Characters in Search of an Author . The book is listed in Fantasy : The 100 Best Books , and Rivals of Weird Tales : 30 Great Fantasy and Horror Stories from the Weird Fiction <unk> placed it among the best quality fantasy writing of the 20th century . Writers characterized the overarching theme within the book as dealing with an individual caught between two different worlds . 
 Typewriter in the Sky was generally well @-@ received , and regular readers of Hubbard 's stories at the time widely appreciated the work . Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas wrote in a 1951 review that the story was amusing though it could have used copy editing , and Groff Conklin described its concept as silly . The New York Times review the same year said it had a lively pace . Damon Knight was critical of the depiction of the protagonist 's fate , and concluded the ending of the book made up for this defect . Books including The Classic Era of American Pulp Magazines and Pulp Culture : The Art of Fiction Magazines characterized the work as one of Hubbard 's best stories . Adam Roberts pointed out Hubbard likely based the character of pulp fiction writer Horace Hackett on himself . 
 Subsequent to the story 's publication , commentators have speculated that its influence impacted themes in later science fiction works . Paul Di Filippo wrote that the 1949 book What Mad Universe by Fredric Brown may have drawn from Hubbard 's tale . Umberto Rossi asserted in a book on writer Philip K. Dick that Typewriter in the Sky likely influenced Dick 's first published short story " Beyond Lies the Wub " ( 1951 ) , in addition to his novel The Cosmic Puppets ( 1957 ) . Harlan Ellison compared it to the 1989 film The Purple Rose of Cairo . Gary Westfahl likened the Typewriter in the Sky to the 2006 film Stranger than Fiction , going so far as to suggest the two had virtually an identical narrative . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story begins in Greenwich Village , New York . The main character , Mike de Wolf , is a struggling pianist . His friend , Horace Hackett , is an author and popular pulp fiction writer . Hackett is portrayed in the book as a skilled writer able to quickly produce voluminous amounts of material for pulp magazines . Hackett writes under stress , as he is facing a deadline . Hackett attempts to persuade his book publisher that he has almost finished writing his latest novel , while in actuality he has already depleted his advance payment prior to coming up with an idea for a story . Hackett 's publisher pressures him and he rapidly decides to place his friend Mike as the central character in his story . 
 Hackett writes about Mike as the villain in his book , a swashbuckling adventure story . Mike enters the bathroom of Hackett 's basement @-@ level apartment , and hears the sound of someone typing on a typewriter . After electrocuting himself , Mike loses consciousness . He subsequently awakens to find himself on a beach in the year 1640 , as a character within his friend 's novel . He inspects himself to find he has a saber attached to his person , and is wearing strange attire . 
 Mike learns he is regarded in this world as the villain , Spanish Admiral Miguel de Lobo , a " pirate potboiler " . He knows that the villains in stories written by Hackett often do not come to a favorable end , and is therefore anxious to exit the situation safely . Mike recognizes the specific work into which he has been transported : a tale by his friend called " Blood and Loot " . Assuming the role of the villain , Mike realizes he must face off against a formidable opponent in the story , its protagonist named Tom Bristol . 
 The story takes place on the high seas in the Caribbean during the 17th century during a conflict among colonists . When a major event occurs , Mike hears the sound of a typewriter in the sky . Mike 's reality literally changes each time the author makes a change to the story . Mike realizes that during times when he hears the audible sounds of the typewriter , his actions and words are not of his own volition , and when such sounds are absent he is able to make decisions for himself . Mike falls in love with a woman in the story , and grows frustrated after realizing that she is just another of Hackett 's fictional creations . At the end of the work , Mike returns to New York , and is left with lingering doubts whether he is still a character in someone else 's story . He muses whether a " typewriter in the sky " is creating the world . Mike looks up into the sky in search of this mystical device or its controller : " Abruptly Mike de Wolfe stopped . His jaw slackened a trifle and his hand went up to his mouth to cover it . His eyes were fixed upon the <unk> clouds which <unk> across the moon . Up there – God ? In a dirty bathrobe ? " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Typewriter in the Sky was first published in 1940 as a two @-@ part serial in Unknown Fantasy Fiction . The first part of the serial initially sold in 1940 for US $ 0 @.@ 20 . Master Storyteller : An Illustrated Tour of the Fiction of L. Ron Hubbard author William J. Widder said in an interview with Publishers Weekly that 1940 became an annus mirabilis for Hubbard , " a kind of year every author wants " . Widder said in addition to Typewriter in the Sky , Hubbard 's successful 1940 fiction stories published in Unknown included Fear , Final Blackout , and Death 's Deputy . Hubbard first registered copyright for the book on May 15 , 1951 , and later renewed copyright on September 17 , 1979 . In 1951 it was published by Gnome Press as a combined work with Hubbard 's Fear , and again in 1977 as Fear & Typewriter in the Sky , published by Popular Library . In the UK , the combined work was first published in 1952 as number 409 in the Cherry Tree Book series by Kemsley Newspapers Limited . The title for this 1952 UK edition was Typewriter in the Sky : An Adventure in Time . 
 Typewriter in the Sky was republished in 1995 by Bridge Publications . Science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson wrote an introduction to the 1995 edition of the book . The same year Bridge Publications released an audio edition read by Jim Meskimen . The audio edition was an abridged version of the story and ran two hours thirty minutes in duration . L. Ron Hubbard 's literary agency Author Services Inc. announced that Typewriter in the Sky would be included in " a 12 @-@ volume series of 23 classic science fiction and fantasy novels and short stories " published by Easton Press of Norwalk , Connecticut in September 1995 . In 2008 Heritage Auctions , Inc. valued a rare combined copy of Typewriter in the Sky and Fear at between US $ 100 and $ 200 . 
 = = Genres = = 
 Daniel Cohen wrote in Masters of the Occult ( 1971 ) that works including Typewriter in the Sky , Fear , and Slaves of Sleep " moved Hubbard into the front rank of science fiction writers of the late 1940s . " Writing in Dream makers : The Uncommon Men and Women Who Write Science Fiction ( 1983 ) , Charles Platt called the book , " one of Hubbard 's most well @-@ known and playful pieces " . The St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture ( 2000 ) described Typewriter in the Sky and Fear as Hubbard 's " most famous stories " in the genre of science fiction . The Houghton Mifflin Dictionary of Biography ( 2003 ) in its biographical entry on L. Ron Hubbard characterized Typewriter in the Sky and Slaves of Sleep among classics in science fiction , as did The Riverside Dictionary of Biography ( 2004 ) . The book was similarly described as a science fiction classic by author James Gunn in his book The Witching Hour ( 2003 ) , and media publications including the Daily News of Los Angeles , and the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . Eric <unk> and Gregory <unk> placed the work within the Golden Age of Science Fiction . 
 In the book Resnick at Large ( 2003 ) , authors Mike Resnick and Robert J. Sawyer cited Typewriter in the Sky as an example of the subgenre of science fiction – recursive science fiction , described as " science fiction about science fiction " . In the work , The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy : Themes , Works , and Wonders ( 2005 ) , Gary Westfahl commented , " <unk> fantasy fiction – that is , a fantasy about writing fantasy – is scarce . Luigi Pirandello 's play Six Characters in Search of an Author ( 1921 ) offered a non @-@ genre model . " Westfahl noted that Hubbard 's book was " an early genre example , perhaps inspired by Pirandello " . Umberto Rossi wrote in The Twisted Worlds of Philip K. Dick ( 2011 ) that Typewriter in the Sky included a game in the form of metafiction within its plot development . 
 Typewriter in the Sky is well regarded within the genre of fantasy ; author David Wingrove noted in The Science Fiction Source Book ( 1984 ) , " His [ Hubbard 's ] best work is outstanding within the pulp tradition : " Typewriter in the Sky " is a fine fantasy about a man who gets trapped within a story written by a pulp writer " . The book is listed in Fantasy : The 100 Best Books ( 1988 ) , by James Cawthorn and Michael Moorcock . Robert E. Weinberg , Stefan R. Dziemianowicz , and Martin Harry Greenberg write in Rivals of Weird Tales : 30 Great Fantasy and Horror Stories from the Weird Fiction <unk> ( 1990 ) that Typewriter in the Sky is classed among stories published in Unknown which " still rank as some of the best fantasy produced in this century " . A review of the book upon its 1995 re @-@ release in the Spartanburg Herald @-@ Journal characterized the story as both fantasy and science fiction , calling it a " classic science fiction fantasy adventure " ; and placed it within the Golden Age of Science Fiction . St. James Guide to Science Fiction Writers ( 1996 ) called the story " Hubbard 's most successful fiction " . Marco Frenschkowski wrote in a 1999 article for the Marburg Journal of Religion in a bibliography of L. Ron Hubbard , and called Typewriter in the Sky : " Classic fantasy tale about a man who discovers he is part of someone else 's imagination . " Writing in A Short History of Fantasy ( 2009 ) , authors Farah <unk> and Edward James characterized the book as " The best of Hubbard 's stories " and noted that it " is better seen as a rationalized fantasy " . In a 2009 article on Hubbard 's writings , Booklist classed Typewriter in the Sky and Fear as among classics within science fiction and fantasy . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Alexei Panshin and Cory Panshin wrote in The World Beyond the Hill : Science Fiction and the Quest for Transcendence ( 1989 ) , " Typewriter in the Sky can be understood as an old @-@ fashioned alien exploration story , with a new basis of transfer from one world to another – the thoughts of an outside intelligence . " Writing in a 1992 article for the journal Science Fiction Studies , David N. Samuelson pointed out that the literary conceit of " assuming human beings are necessary for the universe we know " predated Typewriter in the Sky as well as What Mad Universe ( 1949 ) by Fredric Brown . Authors Lionel Fanthorpe and Patricia Fanthorpe wrote in The World 's Most Mysterious People ( 1998 ) that Hubbard accomplished a difficult task of writing about two different worlds at the same time , " even through the medium of fiction Hubbard succeeds in posing deep metaphysical questions about the mind 's interpretation of experiential data , and its response to the questions about the nature of being . " Writing in The Encyclopedia of Fantasy ( 1999 ) , John Clute and John Grant characterized the work as the best of Hubbard 's stories in the Arabian @-@ fantasy theme . In their book Mysteries and Secrets of Time ( 2007 ) , Fanthorpe and Fanthorpe place the book within the sub @-@ topic of " the idea of being caught inside someone else 's dream " . In his 2011 book The Twisted Worlds of Philip K. Dick , author Umberto Rossi analyzed Hubbard 's story and called it a parody intended to spoof the experiences of hack writers . 
 In her 1987 monograph work on Scientology Renunciation and <unk> : a Study of Conversion in an American Sect , Harriet Whitehead wrote that the book helped Hubbard build on experience writing about a theme of " a hidden reality <unk> to the apparent one " . Bent Corydon , author of L. Ron Hubbard , Messiah or Madman ? , named a chapter of the biography " Typewriter in the Sky " . In their work Encyclopedia of New Age Beliefs ( 1996 ) , authors John <unk> and John Weldon observed , " compare Scientology theory with L. Ron Hubbard 's science @-@ fiction works , e.g. , Ole Doc <unk> , Slaves of Sleep , Death 's Deputy , The Final Blackout , The Dangerous Dimension , The Tramp , Fear , King Slayer , and Typewriter in the Sky . " In his 2011 work The Church of Scientology : A History of a New Religion , Hugh B. Urban compared Typewriter in the Sky character Horace Hackett 's omnipotent abilities to Hubbard 's subsequent ideas developed in the powerful spirit in Scientology doctrine , the Operating Thetan . Urban wrote : " perhaps the most striking element in Hubbard 's early fiction that reappears in his later Scientology writings is his emphasis on the unlimited , even godlike power of the writer himself . For the writer has the all @-@ creative power to generate entire universes out of his own imagination , to populate them , and to destroy them . The clearest example of this divine power of the author appears in Typewriter in the Sky ( 1940 ) " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writing in the October 1951 issue of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas wrote favorably of Typewriter in the Sky , and characterized it as " an entertaining adventure @-@ farce badly in need of editing " . Reviewing the same edition , Groff Conklin termed it " a silly idea <unk> carried out " . The New York Times reviewer Villiers Gerson found Typewriter to be " an ironic and jaunty adventure story . " Damon Knight gave the book a mixed review , commenting , " The problem [ of how de Wolf can ' change the story and avert his doom ' ] is a tough one , and Hubbard does not so much solve it as slide around it .... This weakness is more than compensated for by the ending of the story itself – Three immortal lines " . 
 In a 1988 article for the Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts , Harlan Ellison called the work " great pulp fiction I can still reread with pleasure " . George Malko noted in Scientology : The Now Religion ( 1970 ) that Typewriter in the Sky was " eagerly welcomed by devoted fans " . Michael Ashley wrote in Who 's Who in Horror and Fantasy Fiction ( 1978 ) , " Typewriter in the Sky ( 1940 ) is a rollicking farce of a man written into another 's story " . Everett F. Bleiler found it to be " a routine adventure story carried through competently , with a good central idea " . <unk> Frank of The Washington Post commented , " Much of his best work of the ' 40s and ' 50s , Fear , Slaves of Sleep , Typewriter in the Sky , is written in exactly the same style and won reader polls at the time . " 
 In his biography of the author , Bare @-@ Faced Messiah ( 1987 ) , Russell Miller characterized Typewriter in the Sky as one of Hubbard 's works which " would come to be regarded as classics " , along with Fear and Final Blackout . In a biography of Hubbard written by Kent State University professor Donald M. Hassler in The New Encyclopedia of Science Fiction ( 1988 ) , he noted , " Typewriter in the Sky ( 1940 / 1951 ) , which anticipates plot gimmicks now popular among experimental <unk> , ought to be taken seriously by the critics who will evaluate his strange genius " . In a review upon the 1995 re @-@ release of the book , Ann Patterson @-@ Rabon of the Spartanburg Herald @-@ Journal concluded : " A short novel , ' Typewriter ' is a perfect afternoon read : quick , fun and only as deep as you care to go . " Sandy Bauers of Knight News Service called the 1995 audio publication of the work " swashbuckling fun " . 
 Peter Haining wrote in The Classic Era of American Pulp Magazines , " Typewriter in the Sky , which first appeared in Unknown in 1940 , is widely considered to be one of his best works . " Pulp Culture : The Art of Fiction Magazines by Frank M. Robinson and Lawrence Davidson , listed Typewriter in the Sky among Hubbard 's " best work " . A 2005 Publishers Weekly review of Hubbard 's novel The Ultimate Adventure wrote that it " may not measure up to the best of Hubbard 's work from the pulp era " , citing Typewriter in the Sky and Fear as higher quality novels . British writer Adam Roberts wrote of the book in his biography of Hubbard for the edited work Fifty Key Figures in Science Fiction , calling it a " neatly self @-@ reflexive " story . Roberts noted the character of pulp fiction writer Horace Hackett was " a <unk> self @-@ portrait " . 
 = = Influence = = 
 In a review of the book What Mad Universe ( 1949 ) , Paul Di Filippo of Sci Fi Weekly posited that the book 's author Fredric Brown may have been influenced by Hubbard 's story . Umberto Rossi wrote in The Twisted Worlds of Philip K. Dick ( 2011 ) that writer Philip K. Dick was likely influenced by Typewriter in the Sky . Rossi noted Typewriter in the Sky came out in a paperback format in 1951 , and a year later Dick succeeded in getting his first short story , the tale " Beyond Lies the Wub " published . Rossi said Typewriter in the Sky was " the text that admittedly inspired " The Cosmic Puppets ( 1957 ) by Philip K. Dick . In the book Harlan Ellison 's Watching ( 1989 ) , by Harlan Ellison , Typewriter in the Sky is compared to Purple Rose of Cairo , " I bet if L. Ron Hubbard had written Purple Rose of Cairo they 'd have given it a Hugo ... I mean , it is sort of a hip , updated version of Typewriter in the Sky . " Gary Westfahl quoted Hubbard 's work in a book of noteworthy science fiction quotations , Science Fiction Quotations : From the Inner Mind to the Outer Limits ( 2005 ) . 
 Writing for Locus Online , Gary Westfahl compared the screenplay of the 2006 film Stranger than Fiction to Hubbard 's story , and commented , " In taking its premise into this unlikely territory , the film provides a fascinating contrast to a classic fantasy novella with a similar theme , L. Ron Hubbard 's ' Typewriter in the Sky ' ( 1940 ) . A lawsuit alleging that screenwriter Zach Helm improperly stole his story from Hubbard could accurately state that both works have the same basic plot . " In a review of Stranger than Fiction for Cinematical , Jette <unk> similarly compared the film 's plot to Hubbard 's story , noting that the two stories share " some strikingly similar plot elements " . In a fictional recounting of Hubbard 's accomplishments , followers of Scientology cite Typewriter in the Sky among works which " inspired millions " , in the Obie Award @-@ winning 2007 satirical musical written by Kyle Jarrow , A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant . Westfahl subsequently likened the 2009 television series FlashForward to the story , writing : " one can even regard FlashForward as a form of <unk> involving characters in a work of fiction who discover that they are characters in a work of fiction being pushed toward a particular fate , with predecessors that include L. Ron Hubbard ’ s [ ' Typewriter in the Sky ( 1940 ) and the film Stranger Than Fiction ( 2006 ) " . 
 = Orange ( word ) = 
 The word orange is both a noun and an adjective in the English language . In both cases , it refers primarily to the orange fruit and the colour orange , but has many other derivative meanings . 
 The word is derived from a Dravidian language , and it passed through numerous other languages including Sanskrit and Old French before reaching the English language . The earliest uses of the word in English refer to the fruit , and the colour was later named after the fruit . Before the English @-@ speaking world was exposed to the fruit , the colour was referred to as " yellow @-@ red " ( <unk> in Old English ) or " red @-@ yellow " . 
 It is claimed that the word orange has no true rhyme . There are , however , several half rhymes or near @-@ rhymes , as well as some proper nouns and compound words or phrases that rhyme with it . This lack of rhymes has inspired many humorous poems and songs . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word orange entered Middle English from Old French and Anglo @-@ Norman orenge . The earliest recorded use of the word in English is from the 13th century and referred to the fruit . The earliest attested use of the word in reference to the colour is from the 16th century . It is generally thought that Old French borrowed the Italian <unk> ( " fruit of the orange tree " , with mela " fruit " ) as pume orenge ( with pume " fruit " ) . Although pume orenge is attested earlier than <unk> in available written sources , lexicographers believe that the Italian word is actually older . 
 The word ultimately derives from a Dravidian language — possibly Tamil <unk> ் <unk> or Telugu <unk> <unk> or Malayalam <unk> ് <unk> ‌ <unk> — via Sanskrit <unk> ् ग <unk> " orange tree " . From there the word entered Persian <unk> <unk> and then Arabic <unk> <unk> . The initial n was lost through <unk> in Italian and French , though some varieties of Arabic lost the n earlier . 
 The place name Orange has a separate etymology . The Roman @-@ Celtic settlement was founded in 36 or 35 BC and originally named Arausio , after a Celtic water god . The Principality of Orange was named for this place and not for the colour . Some time after the sixteenth century , though , the colour orange was adopted as a canting symbol of the House of Orange @-@ Nassau . The colour eventually came to be associated with Protestantism , due to participation by the House of Orange on the Protestant side in the French Wars of Religion and the Dutch Eighty Years ' War . 
 = = Rhyme = = 
 It is widely accepted that no single English word is a true rhyme for orange , though there are half rhymes such as hinge , lozenge , syringe , flange , Stonehenge , or porridge . Although this property is not unique to the word — one study of 5 @,@ 411 one @-@ syllable English words found 80 words with no rhymes — the lack of rhyme for orange has garnered significant attention , and inspired many humorous verses . 
 Although <unk> , a variant of sporangium , is an eye rhyme for orange , it is not a true rhyme as its second syllable is pronounced with an unreduced vowel [ <unk> ] , and often stressed . 
 There are a number of proper nouns which rhyme or nearly rhyme with orange , including The <unk> , a mountain in Wales , and Gorringe , a surname . US Naval Commander Henry <unk> Gorringe , the captain of the USS Gettysburg who discovered Gorringe Ridge in 1875 , led Arthur <unk> to quip in " Local Note " : 
 In <unk> buried lies that man of mark 
 Who brought the Obelisk to Central Park , 
 Redoubtable Commander H.H. Gorringe , 
 Whose name supplies the long @-@ sought rhyme for " orange . " 
 Various linguistic or poetic devices provide for rhymes in some accents . 
 Compound words or phrases may give true or near rhymes . Examples include door @-@ hinge , torn hinge , or inch , and a wrench . William Shepard Walsh attributes this verse featuring two multiple @-@ word rhymes for orange to W.W. Skeat . 
 I gave my darling child a lemon , 
 That lately grew its fragrant stem on ; 
 And next , to give her pleasure more range , 
 I offered her a juicy orange . 
 And nuts , she cracked them in the door @-@ hinge . 
 <unk> can also provide for rhymes . One example is Willard Espy 's poem , " The <unk> Word : Orange " . 
 The four <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Wore orange 
 brassieres . 
 Another example by Tom Lehrer relies on the way many Americans pronounce orange as / <unk> / , as opposed to / <unk> / : 
 Eating an orange 
 While making love 
 Makes for bizarre <unk> 
 <unk> thereof . 
 Rapper Eminem is noted for his ability to bend words so that they rhyme . In his song " Business " from the album The Eminem Show , he makes use of such word @-@ bending to rhyme orange . 
 Set to blow college dorm rooms doors off the hinges , 
 Oranges , peach , pears , plums , syringes , 
 <unk> <unk> ! Yeah , here I come , I 'm inches , 
 <unk> words are sometimes contrived to rhyme with orange . Composers Charles Fox and Norman Gimbel wrote the song " Oranges <unk> " to be sung by the <unk> character on the television programme H.R. Pufnstuf . 
 Oranges poranges , who says , 
 oranges poranges , who says , 
 oranges poranges , who says ? 
 there ain 't no rhyme for oranges ! 
 = LT vz . 34 = 
 The LT vz . 34 , formally designated as Lehký Tank vzor 34 ( " Light Tank Model 34 " ) was a Czechoslovak @-@ designed light tank used mainly by Slovakia during World War II . Its suspension was based on that of the Carden @-@ Loyd tankette , of which the Czechs had purchased three , plus a manufacturing license , in 1930 . Dissatisfied with the prototypes of the <unk> vz . 33 tankette , the Czech Army decided that it would be easier to design a light tank from scratch rather than modify a tankette 's chassis to carry a fully rotating armored turret . 50 were built , the last of which was delivered during 1936 , of which the Germans captured 23 when they occupied Bohemia @-@ Moravia in March 1939 , but they promptly scrapped them . The Slovaks seized the remaining 27 when they declared independence from Czechoslovakia at the same time . In Slovak service it only saw combat during the Slovak National Uprising . 
 = = Description = = 
 The LT vz . 34 was assembled from a framework of steel " angle iron " beams , to which armor plates were riveted . A 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) firewall separated the engine compartment from the crew . A door allowed access to the engine from the crew compartment . It also had ventilation openings that could be closed . The driver sat on the right side using a 300 by 75 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 8 in × 3 @.@ 0 in ) observation port protected by two flaps . The inner flap had an <unk> with a 25 ° field of view . It was connected to the armored outer flap so that opening one closed the other . The outer flap had a 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) slit . To his right was a vision slit 120 by 3 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 72 in × 0 @.@ 12 in ) protected by 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of bulletproof glass . The inner flap was padded so that the driver could rest his head on it when driving . The radio operator sat on the left and had his own 120 by 50 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in × 2 @.@ 0 in ) vision port with 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of bulletproof glass and an armored shutter . His radios were mounted on the left wall of the hull . The hull machine gun was between the driver and radio operator in a ball mount with 30 ° of traverse . It could elevate 25 ° and depress 10 ° . Most of the machine gun 's barrel protruded from the mount and was protected by an armored trough . The mount had a spotting telescope or open sights could be used if the plug at the top of the ball mount was removed . If necessary the driver could lock the mount into position and fire it himself using a Bowden cable . 
 The turret ring had a diameter of 1 @.@ 265 metres ( 49 @.@ 8 in ) . The turret sides were 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick and its roof had a thickness of 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) . The turret was manually traversed ( 3 ° per rotation of the handle ) , but the gearing could be disengaged to allow the commander to shoulder the turret around as desired . The turret had a flat face in the center of which was mounted the 3 @.@ 72 cm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) main armament . On the right side was another 7 @.@ 92 mm ( 0 @.@ 312 in ) machine gun in a ball mount . The commander had four episcopes in his cupola and a monocular mirror , 1 @.@ 3 x 35 ° periscope which he could extend once he removed its armored cover in his hatch for vision while " buttoned @-@ up " . This meant that the commander was responsible for loading , aiming and firing the main gun and the turret machine gun while simultaneously commanding the tank . 
 The vertical front and side armor was 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick , the slanted plates had a thickness of 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) , the engine hatch was 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) thick and the top and bottom plates were 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) in thickness . This was deemed enough to deflect armor @-@ piercing 7 @.@ 92 mm ( 0 @.@ 312 in ) bullets fired from distances greater than 75 metres ( 82 yd ) . 
 The 6 @.@ 08 litres ( 371 cu in ) , water @-@ cooled , 62 @.@ 5 horsepower ( 46 @.@ 6 kW ) , inline 4 @-@ cylinder Praga engine used a gasoline @-@ alcohol mix . It had a top speed on the road of 30 kilometres per hour ( 19 mph ) and about 15 kilometres per hour ( 9 @.@ 3 mph ) cross @-@ country . One 64 @.@ 5 litres ( 17 @.@ 0 US gal ) fuel tank was located on each side of the engine . The transmission had four forward gears and one reverse gear to drive the front @-@ mounted drive sprockets . 
 The suspension was an enlarged and modified version of that used in the Carden @-@ Loyd tankettes . It consisted of two small road wheels fastened together on a frame , two frames paired and sprung by leaf springs that made a wheel carrier , two wheel carriers per side . The track was guided by two return rollers and wooden , metal @-@ lined frames . The rear @-@ mounted idler wheel was used to adjust track tension . It had a ground pressure of only 0 @.@ 5 kg / cm2 . It could cross a ditch 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , climb an obstacle .8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) high and ford a stream .8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) deep . It could uproot trees .18 metres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick and breach a wall .5 metres ( 20 in ) thick . 
 The main armament was a Škoda <unk> vz . 34 ( A3 ) gun with a pepperpot muzzle brake and a prominent armored recoil cylinder above the barrel . It fired a .815 kilograms ( 1 @.@ 80 lb ) armor @-@ piercing shell at 690 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) . It was credited with penetrating a plate inclined at 30 ° from the vertical 37 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick at 100 metres ( 110 yd ) , 31 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick at 500 metres ( 550 yd ) , 26 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick at 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) , and 22 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) thick at 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) . Another source quotes penetration of a vertical plate 45 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) thick at 500 metres ( 550 yd ) . The machine gun 's ball mount could be coupled to the main gun or used independently . Both weapons could elevate 25 ° and depress 10 ° . They both used <unk> power sights with a 25 ° field of view . The tank used Zbrojovka Brno ZB vz . 35 heavy machine guns in both ball mounts . 
 = = Development = = 
 One prototype was ordered from <unk> Kolben @-@ <unk> in 1931 , but development was slow and it was accepted only in November 1932 . Its evaluations were very positive and an order for fifty was placed on 19 April 1933 . The first six of these were to serve as pre @-@ production models and were to be delivered by 30 September 1933 . The delivery date for the next batch of twenty @-@ four was a year after that and the final batch of twenty was due by 30 July 1935 . Production was delayed by quality problems with the initial batch of armor plates from <unk> and delivery of the pre @-@ production series did not occur until 23 April 1934 . A bigger problem was that the Army had rejected ČKD 's proposed armament of a 4 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Vickers 44 / 60 gun and two ZB vz . 26 machine guns so the contract was signed with no design work on the desired armament configuration . ČKD did not finalize its design until December 1933 and the first six tanks were delivered with only a pair of ZB vz . 26 machine guns . The last tanks were delivered on 14 January 1936 , but the six pre @-@ production models had to be returned to the factory to be upgraded with the proper armament and otherwise modified up to the latest standards . The last one was delivered on 17 August 1936 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Czechoslovakia = = = 
 The Czech Army realized that the 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) armor on its LT vz . 34 tanks was too thin and a program to replace it was quickly mounted which resulted in the LT vz . 35 . In the meantime they offered the Army an opportunity to train with more modern tanks than its few surviving World War I @-@ era Renault FTs . Each of the three armored regiments received between nine and twenty @-@ four until replaced by the LT vz . 35 from 1937 . After the Munich Agreement in October 1938 the army tried to sell them , but could find no takers . In November 1938 it decided to concentrate all of them in the Third Armored Regiment in Slovakia , but only eighteen had been transferred before the German occupation of Czechoslovakia and the Slovak declaration of independence in March 1939 . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 The Germans captured twenty @-@ three LT vz . 34s and the prototype when they occupied Czechoslovakia , but there is no record of their use so they were presumably quickly scrapped . Ten LT vz . 34s were captured after they were abandoned by the insurgents during the Slovak National Uprising in 1944 . They were shipped to Skoda for repairs , but the local military representative ordered them scrapped because of their poor condition and obsolescence . The Waffen @-@ SS tried to overturn this order as it planned to transfer them to Nazi puppet state of Croatia . Two were saved from the scrapyard , but by March 1945 the others had their turrets salvaged to be rearmed with two machine guns and mounted in fixed fortifications . 
 = = = Slovakia = = = 
 The twenty @-@ seven LT vz . 34s formed one company in the Armored Battalion " Martin " formed by the Slovak Army in mid @-@ 1939 , which was later expanded into the Armored Regiment , but they were relegated to training duties once the Slovaks began to receive more modern tanks from Germany in 1941 . Ten were abandoned by the insurgents when the Slovak National Uprising began in September 1944 and were quickly captured by the Germans . The others were dug in on the approaches to Zvolen . 
 = Battle of Yongsan = 
 The Battle of Yongsan was an engagement between United Nations ( UN ) and North Korean ( NK ) forces early in the Korean War from September 1 – 5 , 1950 , at Yongsan in South Korea . It was part of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter and was one of several large engagements fought simultaneously . The battle ended in a victory for the United Nations after large numbers of United States ( US ) and South Korean troops repelled a strong North Korean attack . 
 During the nearby Second Battle of Naktong Bulge , the North Korean People 's Army broke through the US Army 's 2nd Infantry Division lines along the Naktong River . Exploiting this weakness , the NK 9th Division and NK 4th Division attacked to Yongsan , a village east of the river and the gateway to the UN lines of supply and reinforcement for the Pusan Perimeter . What followed was a fight between North Korean and US forces for Yongsan . 
 The North Koreans were able to briefly capture Yongsan from the 2nd Infantry Division , which had been split in half from the penetrations at Naktong Bulge . Lieutenant General Walton Walker , seeing the danger of the attack , brought in the US Marine Corps 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to counterattack . In three days of fierce fighting , the Army and Marine forces were able to push the North Koreans out of the town and destroy the two attacking divisions . The win was a key step toward victory in the fight at the Naktong Bulge . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Pusan Perimeter = = = 
 From the outbreak of the Korean War and the invasion of South Korea by the North , the North Korean People 's Army had enjoyed superiority in both manpower and equipment over both the Republic of Korea Army and the United Nations forces dispatched to South Korea to prevent it from collapsing . The North Korean strategy was to aggressively pursue UN and ROK forces on all avenues of approach south and to engage them aggressively , attacking from the front and initiating a double envelopment of both flanks of the unit , which allowed the North Koreans to surround and cut off the opposing force , which would then be forced to retreat in disarray , often leaving behind much of its equipment . From their initial June 25 offensive to fights in July and early August , the North Koreans used this strategy to effectively defeat any UN force and push it south . However , when the UN forces , under the Eighth United States Army , established the Pusan Perimeter in August , the UN troops held a continuous line along the peninsula which North Korean troops could not flank , and their advantages in numbers decreased daily as the superior UN logistical system brought in more troops and supplies to the UN army . 
 When the North Koreans approached the Pusan Perimeter on August 5 , they attempted the same frontal assault technique on the four main avenues of approach into the perimeter . Throughout August , the NK 6th Division , and later the NK 7th Division , engaged the US 25th Infantry Division at the Battle of Masan , initially repelling a UN counteroffensive before countering with battles at Komam @-@ ni and Battle Mountain . These attacks stalled as UN forces , well equipped and with plenty of reserves , repeatedly repelled North Korean attacks . North of Masan , the NK 4th Division and the US 24th Infantry Division sparred in the Naktong Bulge area . In the First Battle of Naktong Bulge , the North Korean division was unable to hold its bridgehead across the river as large numbers of US reserve forces were brought in to repel it , and on August 19 , the NK 4th Division was forced back across the river with 50 percent casualties . In the Taegu region , five North Korean divisions were repulsed by three UN divisions in several attempts to attack the city during the Battle of Taegu . Particularly heavy fighting took place at the Battle of the Bowling Alley where the NK 13th Division was almost completely destroyed in the attack . On the east coast , three more North Korean divisions were repulsed by the South Koreans at P 'ohang @-@ dong during the Battle of P 'ohang @-@ dong . All along the front , the North Korean troops were reeling from these defeats , the first time in the war their strategies were not working . 
 = = = September push = = = 
 In planning its new offensive , the North Korean command decided any attempt to flank the UN force was impossible thanks to the support of the UN navy . Instead , they opted to use frontal attack to breach the perimeter and collapse it ; this was considered to be the only hope of achieving success in the battle . Fed by intelligence from the Soviet Union , the North Koreans were aware of the UN forces building up along the Pusan Perimeter and that they must conduct an offensive soon or they could not win the battle . A secondary objective was to surround Taegu and destroy the UN and ROK units in that city . As part of this mission , the North Korean units would first cut the supply lines to Taegu . 
 On August 20 , the North Korean commands distributed operations orders to their subordinate units . The North Koreans called for a simultaneous five @-@ prong attack against the UN lines . These attacks would overwhelm the UN defenders and allow the North Koreans to break through the lines in at least one place to force the UN forces back . Five battle groupings were ordered . The center attack called for the NK 9th Division , NK 4th Division , NK 2nd Division , and NK 10th Division break through the US 2nd Infantry Division at the Naktong Bulge to Miryang and Yongsan . 
