 = = Battle = = 
 On the morning of September 1 the 1st and 2nd Regiments of the NK 9th Division , in their first offensive of the war , stood only a few miles short of Yongsan after a successful river crossing and penetration of the American line . The 3rd Regiment had been left at Inch 'on , but division commander Major General Pak Kyo Sam felt the chances of capturing Yongsan were strong . 
 As the NK 9th Division approached Yongsan , its 1st Regiment was on the north and its 2nd Regiment on the south . The division 's attached support , consisting of one 76 mm artillery battalion from the NK I Corps , an antiaircraft battalion of artillery , two tank battalions of the NK 16th Armored Brigade , and a battalion of artillery from the NK 4th Division , gave it unusually heavy support . Crossing the river behind it came the 4th Division , a greatly weakened organization , far understrength , short of weapons , and made up mostly of untrained replacements . A captured North Korean document referred to this grouping of units that attacked from the Sinban @-@ ni area into the Naktong Bulge as the main force of NK I Corps . Elements of the 9th Division reached the hills just west of Yongsan during the afternoon of September 1 . 
 On the morning of September 1 , with only the shattered remnants of E Company at hand , the US 9th Infantry Regiment , US 2nd Infantry Division had virtually no troops to defend Yongsan . Division commander Major General Laurence B. Keiser in this emergency attached the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion to the regiment . The US 72nd Tank Battalion and the 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company also were assigned positions close to Yongsan . The regimental commander planned to place the engineers on the chain of low hills that arched around Yongsan on the northwest . 
 = = = North Korean attack = = = 
 A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , moved to the south side of the Yongsan @-@ Naktong River road ; D Company of the 2nd Engineer Battalion was on the north side of the road . Approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan an estimated 300 North Korean troops engaged A Company in a fire fight . M19 Gun Motor Carriages of the 82nd AAA Battalion supported the engineers in this action , which lasted several hours . Meanwhile , with the approval of General Bradley , D Company moved to the hill immediately south of and overlooking Yongsan . A platoon of infantry went into position behind it . A Company was now ordered to fall back to the southeast edge of Yongsan on the left flank of D Company . There , A Company went into position along the road ; on its left was C Company of the Engineer battalion , and beyond C Company was the 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company . The hill occupied by D Company was in reality the western tip of a large mountain mass that lay southeast of the town . The road to Miryang came south out of Yongsan , bent around the western tip of this mountain , and then ran eastward along its southern base . In its position , D Company not only commanded the town but also its exit , the road to Miryang . 
 North Koreans had also approached Yongsan from the south . The US 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company and tanks of the 72nd Tank Battalion opposed them in an intense fight . In this action , Sergeant First Class Charles W. Turner of the Reconnaissance Company particularly distinguished himself . He mounted a tank , operated its exposed turret machine gun , and directed tank fire which reportedly destroyed seven North Korean machine guns . Turner and this tank came under heavy North Korean fire which shot away the tank 's periscope and antennae and scored more than 50 hits on it . Turner , although wounded , remained on the tank until he was killed . That night North Korean soldiers crossed the low ground around Yongsan and entered the town from the south . 
 The North Koreans now attempted a breakthrough of the Engineer position . After daylight , they were unable to get reinforcements into the fight since D Company commanded the town and its approaches . In this fight , which raged until 11 : 00 , the engineers had neither artillery nor mortar support . D Company remedied this by using its new 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch and old 2 @.@ 36 @-@ inch rocket launchers against the North Korean infantry . The fire of the 18 bazookas plus that from machine guns and the small arms of the company inflicted very heavy casualties on the North Koreans , who desperately tried to clear the way for a push eastward to Miryang . Tanks of A and B Companies , 72nd Tank Battalion , at the southern and eastern edge of Yongsan shared equally with the engineers in the intensity of this battle . The company commander was the only officer of D Company not killed or wounded in this melee , which cost the company 12 men killed and 18 wounded . The edge of Yongsan and the slopes of the hill south of the town became covered with North Korean dead and destroyed equipment . 
 = = = Reinforcements = = = 
 While this battle raged during the morning at Yongsan , commanders reorganized about 800 men of the 9th Infantry who had arrived in that vicinity from the overrun river line positions . Among them were F and G Companies , which were not in the path of major North Korean crossings and had succeeded in withdrawing eastward . They had no crew @-@ served weapons or heavy equipment . In midafternoon September 2 , tanks and the reorganized US 2nd Battalion , 9th Infantry , attacked through A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , into Yongsan , and regained possession of the town at 15 : 00 . Later , two bazooka teams from A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , knocked out three T @-@ 34 tanks just west of Yongsan . American ground and air action destroyed other North Korean tanks during the day southwest of the town . By evening the North Koreans had been driven into the hills westward . In the evening , the 2nd Battalion and A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , occupied the first chain of low hills 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) beyond Yongsan , the engineers west and the 2nd Battalion northwest of the town . For the time being at least , the North Korean drive toward Miryang had been halted . In this time , the desperately undermanned US units began to be reinforced with Korean <unk> ( KATUSAs . ) However , the cultural divide between the KATUSAs and the US troops caused tensions . 
 At 09 : 35 September 2 , while the North Koreans were attempting to destroy the engineer troops at the southern edge of Yongsan and clear the road to Miryang , Eighth United States Army commander Lieutenant General Walton Walker spoke by telephone with Major General Doyle O. Hickey , Deputy Chief of Staff , Far East Command in Tokyo . He described the situation around the Perimeter and said the most serious threat was along the boundary between the US 2nd and US 25th Infantry Divisions . He described the location of his reserve forces and his plans for using them . He said he had started the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade , under Brigadier General Edward A. Craig , toward Yongsan but had not yet released them for commitment there and he wanted to be sure that General of the Army Douglas MacArthur approved his use of them , since he knew that this would interfere with other plans of the Far East Command . Walker said he did not think he could restore the 2nd Division lines without using them . Hickey replied that MacArthur had the day before approved the use of the US Marines if and when Walker considered it necessary . A few hours after this conversation , at 13 : 15 , Walker attached the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to the US 2nd Division and ordered a co @-@ ordinated attack by all available elements of the division and the marines , with the mission of destroying the North Koreans east of the Naktong River in the 2nd Division sector and restoring the river line . The marines were to be released from 2nd Division control as soon as this mission was accomplished . 
 = = = September 3 counterattack = = = 
 A conference was held that afternoon at the US 2nd Division command post attended by leaders of the Eighth Army , US 2nd Division , and 1st Marine Brigade . A decision was reached that the marines would attack west at 08 : 00 on September 3 astride the Yongsan @-@ Naktong River road ; the 9th Infantry , B Company of the 72nd Tank Battalion , and D Battery of the 82d AAA Battalion would attack northwest above the marines and attempt to re @-@ establish contact with the US 23rd Infantry ; the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , remnants of the 1st Battalion , 9th Infantry , and elements of the 72nd Tank Battalion would attack on the left flank , or south , of the marines to reestablish contact with the 25th Division . Eighth Army now ordered the US 24th Infantry Division headquarters and the US 19th Infantry Regiment to move to the Susan @-@ ni area , 8 miles ( 13 km ) south of Miryang and 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of the confluence of the Nam River and the Naktong River . There it was to prepare to enter the battle in either the 2nd or 25th Division zone . 
 The troops holding this line on the first hills west of Yongsan were G Company , 9th Infantry , north of the road running west through Kogan @-@ ni to the Naktong ; A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , southward across the road ; and , below the engineers , F Company , 9th Infantry . Between 03 : 00 and 04 : 30 September 3 , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade moved to forward assembly areas . The 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines assembled north of Yongsan , the 1st Battalion , 5th Marines south of it . The 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines established security positions southwest of Yongsan along the approaches into the regimental sector from that direction . 
 During the night , A Company of the engineers had considerable fighting with North Koreans and never reached its objective . At dawn September 3 , A Company attacked to gain the high ground which was part of the designated Marine line of departure . The company fought its way up the slope to within 100 yards ( 91 m ) of the top , which was held by the firmly entrenched North Koreans . At this point the company commander caught a North Korean @-@ thrown grenade and was wounded by its fragments as he tried to throw it away from his men . The company with help from Marine tank fire eventually gained its objective , but this early morning battle for the line of departure delayed the planned attack . 
 The Marine attack started at 08 : 55 across the rice paddy land toward North Korean @-@ held high ground 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) westward . The 1st Battalion , 5th Marines , south of the east @-@ west road , gained its objective when North Korean soldiers broke under air attack and ran down the northern slope and crossed the road to Hill 116 in the 2nd Battalion zone . Air strikes , artillery concentrations , and machine gun and rifle fire of the 1st Battalion now caught North Korean reinforcements in open rice paddies moving up from the second ridge and killed most of them . In the afternoon , the 1st Battalion advanced to Hill 91 . 
 North of the road the 2nd Battalion had a harder time , encountering heavy North Korean fire when it reached the northern tip of Hill 116 , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan . The North Koreans held the hill during the day , and at night D Company of the 5th Marines was isolated there . In the fighting west of Yongsan Marine armor knocked out four T @-@ 34 tanks , and North Korean crew members abandoned a fifth . That night the marines dug in on a line 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan . The 2nd Battalion had lost 18 killed and 77 wounded during the day , most of them in D Company . Total Marine casualties for September 3 were 34 killed and 157 wounded . Coordinating its attack with that of the marines , the 9th Infantry advanced abreast of them on the north . 
 = = = September 4 counterattack = = = 
 Just before midnight , the 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines , received orders to pass through the 2nd Battalion and continue the attack in the morning . That night torrential rains made the troops miserable and lowered morale . The North Koreans were unusually quiet and launched few patrols or attacks . The morning of September 4 , the weather was clear . 
 The counterattack continued at 08 : 00 September 4 , at first against little opposition . North of the road the 2nd Battalion quickly completed occupation of Hill 116 , from which the North Koreans had withdrawn during the night . South of the road the 1st Battalion occupied what appeared to be a command post of the NK 9th Division . Tents were still up and equipment lay scattered about . Two abandoned T @-@ 34 tanks in excellent condition stood there . Tanks and ground troops advancing along the road found it littered with North Korean dead and destroyed and abandoned equipment . By nightfall the counterattack had gained another 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 That night was quiet until just before dawn . The North Koreans then launched an attack against the 9th Infantry on the right of the marines , the heaviest blow striking G Company . It had begun to rain again and the attack came in the midst of a downpour . In bringing his platoon from an outpost position to the relief of the company , Sergeant First Class Loren R. Kaufman encountered an encircling North Korean force on the ridge line . He bayoneted the lead scout and engaged those following with grenades and rifle fire . His sudden attack confused and dispersed this group . Kaufman led his platoon on and succeeded in joining hard @-@ pressed G Company . In the ensuing action Kaufman led assaults against close @-@ up North Korean positions and , in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting , he bayoneted four more North Korean soldiers , destroyed a machine gun position , and killed the crew members of a North Korean mortar . American artillery fire concentrated in front of the 9th Infantry helped greatly in repelling the North Koreans in this night and day battle . 
 = = = September 5 counterattack = = = 
 That morning , September 5 , after a 10 @-@ minute artillery preparation , the American troops moved out in their third day of counterattack . It was a day of rain . As the attack progressed , the marines approached Obong @-@ ni Ridge and the 9th Infantry neared Cloverleaf Hill where they had fought tenaciously during the First Battle of Naktong Bulge the month before . There , at midmorning , on the high ground ahead , they could see North Korean troops digging in . The marines approached the pass between the two hills and took positions in front of the North Korean @-@ held high ground . 
 At 14 : 30 approximately 300 North Korean infantry came from the village of Tugok and concealed positions , striking B Company on Hill 125 just north of the road and east of Tugok . Two T @-@ 34 tanks surprised and knocked out the two leading Marine M26 Pershing tanks . Since the destroyed Pershing tanks blocked fields of fire , four others withdrew to better positions . Assault teams of B Company and the 1st Battalion with 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch rocket launchers rushed into action , took the tanks under fire , and destroyed both of them , as well as an armored personnel carrier following behind . The North Korean infantry attack was brutal and inflicted 25 casualties on B Company before reinforcements from A Company and supporting Army artillery and the Marine 81 mm mortars helped repel it . 
 September 5 was a day of heavy casualties everywhere on the Pusan Perimeter . Army units had 102 killed , 430 wounded , and 587 missing in action for a total of 1 @,@ 119 casualties . Marine units had 35 killed , 91 wounded , and none missing in action , for a total of 126 battle casualties . Total American battle casualties for the day were 1 @,@ 245 men . It is unknown how many North Koreans were killed or wounded on that day , but they likely suffered heavy casualties . 
 = = = North Koreans repulsed = = = 
 During the previous night , at 20 : 00 September 4 , General Walker had ordered the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade released from operational control of the 2nd Division effective at midnight , September 5 . He had vainly protested against releasing the brigade , believing he needed it and all the troops then in Korea if he were to stop the North Korean offensive against the Pusan Perimeter . At 00 : 15 , September 6 , the marines began leaving their lines at Obong @-@ ni Ridge and headed for Pusan . They would join the 1st Marine Regiment and 7th Marine Regiment in forming the new 1st Marine Division . 
 The American counteroffensive of September 3 – 5 west of Yongsan , according to prisoner statements , resulted in one of the bloodiest debacles of the war for a North Korean division . Even though remnants of the NK 9th Division , supported by the low strength NK 4th Division , still held Obong @-@ ni Ridge , Cloverleaf Hill , and the intervening ground back to the Naktong on September 6 , the division 's offensive strength had been spent at the end of the American counterattack . The NK 9th and 4th divisions were not able to resume the offensive . 
 Just after midnight on September 6 , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was ordered back to Pusan in order to travel to Japan and merge with other Marine units to form the 1st Marine Division . This was done after a heated disagreement between Walker 's command and MacArthur 's command . Walker said he could not hold the Pusan Perimeter without the Marines in reserve , while MacArthur said he could not conduct the Inchon landings without the Marines . MacArthur responded by assigning the 17th Infantry Regiment , and later the 65th Infantry Regiment , would be added to Walker 's reserves , but Walker did not feel the inexperienced troops would be effective . Walker felt the transition endangered the Perimeter at a time when it was unclear if it would hold . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The North Korean 4th and 9th Divisions were almost completely destroyed in the battles at Naktong Bulge . The 9th Division had numbered 9 @,@ 350 men at the beginning of the offensive on September 1 . The 4th Division numbered 5 @,@ 500 . Only a few hundred from each division returned to North Korea after the Second Battle of Naktong Bulge . The majority of the North Korean troops had been killed , captured or deserted . The exact number of North Korean casualties at Yongsan is impossible to determine , but a substantial amount of the attacking force was lost there . All of NK II Corps was in a similar state , and the North Korean army , exhausted at Pusan Perimeter and cut off after Inchon , was on the brink of defeat . 
 The US casualty count at Yongsan is also difficult to know , as the division 's scattered units were engaged all along the Naktong Bulge without communication and total casualty counts in each area could not be ascertained . The US 2nd Infantry Division suffered 1 @,@ 120 killed , 2 @,@ 563 wounded , 67 captured and 69 missing during its time at the Second Battle of Naktong Bulge . This included about 180 casualties it suffered during the First Battle of Naktong Bulge the previous month . American forces were continually repulsed but able to prevent the North Koreans from breaking the Pusan Perimeter . The division had numbered 17 @,@ 498 on September 1 , but was in excellent position to attack despite its casualties . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade suffered 185 killed and around 500 wounded during the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , most of which probably occurred at Yongsan . 
 Once again the fatal weakness of the North Korean Army had cost it victory after an impressive initial success @-@ its communications and supply were not capable of exploiting a breakthrough and of supporting a continuing attack in the face of massive air , armor , and artillery fire that could be concentrated against its troops at critical points . By September 8 , the North Korean attacks in the area had been repulsed . 
 = Snowflake = 
 A snowflake is either a single ice crystal or an aggregation of ice crystals which falls through the Earth 's atmosphere . They begin as snow crystals which develop when microscopic supercooled cloud droplets freeze . Snowflakes come in a variety of sizes and shapes . Complex shapes emerge as the flake moves through differing temperature and humidity regions , such that individual snowflakes are almost always unique in structure . Snowflakes encapsulated in rime form balls known as graupel . Snowflakes appear white in color despite being made of clear ice . This is due to diffuse reflection of the whole spectrum of light by the small crystal facets . 
 = = Formation = = 
 In warmer clouds an aerosol particle or " ice nucleus " must be present in ( or in contact with ) the droplet to act as a nucleus . The particles that make ice nuclei are very rare compared to nuclei upon which liquid cloud droplets form ; however , it is not understood what makes them efficient . Clays , desert dust and biological particles may be effective , although to what extent is unclear . Artificial nuclei include particles of silver iodide and dry ice , and these are used to stimulate precipitation in cloud seeding . 
 Once a droplet has frozen , it grows in the supersaturated environment , which is one where air is saturated with respect to ice when the temperature is below the freezing point . The droplet then grows by deposition of water molecules in the air ( vapor ) onto the ice crystal surface where they are collected . Because water droplets are so much more numerous than the ice crystals due to their sheer abundance , the crystals are able to grow to hundreds of micrometers or millimeters in size at the expense of the water droplets . This process is known as the Wegener – Bergeron – Findeisen process . The corresponding depletion of water vapor causes the droplets to evaporate , meaning that the ice crystals grow at the droplets ' expense . These large crystals are an efficient source of precipitation , since they fall through the atmosphere due to their mass , and may collide and stick together in clusters , or aggregates . These aggregates are usually the type of ice particle that falls to the ground . Guinness World Records list the world 's largest ( aggregate ) snowflakes as those of January 1887 at Fort Keogh , Montana ; allegedly one measured 15 inches ( 38 cm ) wide . Although this report by a farmer is doubtful , aggregates of three or four inches width have been observed . Single crystals the size of a dime ( 17 @.@ 91 mm in diameter ) have been observed . 
 The exact details of the sticking mechanism remain controversial . Possibilities include mechanical interlocking , sintering , electrostatic attraction as well as the existence of a " sticky " liquid @-@ like layer on the crystal surface . The individual ice crystals often have hexagonal symmetry . Although the ice is clear , scattering of light by the crystal facets and hollows / imperfections mean that the crystals often appear white in color due to diffuse reflection of the whole spectrum of light by the small ice particles . The shape of the snowflake is determined broadly by the temperature and humidity at which it is formed . Rarely , at a temperature of around − 2 ° C ( 28 ° F ) , snowflakes can form in threefold symmetry — triangular snowflakes . The most common snow particles are visibly irregular , although near @-@ perfect snowflakes may be more common in pictures because they are more visually appealing . It is unlikely that any two snowflakes are alike due to the estimated 1019 ( 10 quintillion ) water molecules which make up a typical snowflake , which grow at different rates and in different patterns depending on the changing temperature and humidity within the atmosphere that the snowflake falls through on its way to the ground . 
 = = = Symmetry = = = 
 A non @-@ aggregated snowflake often exhibits six @-@ fold radial symmetry . The initial symmetry can occur because the crystalline structure of ice is six @-@ fold . The six " arms " of the snowflake , or dendrites , then grow independently , and each side of each arm grows independently . Most snowflakes are not completely symmetric . The micro @-@ environment in which the snowflake grows changes dynamically as the snowflake falls through the cloud , and tiny changes in temperature and humidity affect the way in which water molecules attach to the snowflake . Since the micro @-@ environment ( and its changes ) are very nearly identical around the snowflake , each arm can grow in nearly the same way . However , being in the same micro @-@ environment does not guarantee that each arm grow the same ; indeed , for some crystal forms it does not because the underlying crystal growth mechanism also affects how fast each surface region of a crystal grows . Empirical studies suggest less than 0 @.@ 1 % of snowflakes exhibit the ideal six @-@ fold symmetric shape . 
 = = Uniqueness = = 
 Snowflakes form in a wide variety of intricate shapes , leading to the popular expression that " no two are alike " . Although possible , it is very unlikely . Initial attempts to find identical snowflakes by photographing thousands of them with a microscope from 1885 onward by Wilson Alwyn Bentley found the wide variety of snowflakes we know about today . In 1988 , Nancy Knight was documenting snowflakes for the National Center for Atmospheric Research and found two identical snowflakes of the hollow column type . It can have many sides from 5- ( a number on beyond ) 
 = = Use as a symbol = = 
 The snowflake is often a traditional seasonal image or motif used around the Christmas period , especially in Europe , the United States and Canada . It represents the traditional White Christmas . During this period , it is quite popular to make paper snowflakes by folding a piece of paper several times , cutting out a pattern with scissors and then unfolding it . 
 Snowflakes are also often used as symbols representing winter or cold conditions . For example , snow tires which enhance traction during harsh winter driving conditions are labelled with a snowflake on the mountain symbol . A stylized snowflake has been part of the emblem of the 1968 Winter Olympics , 1972 Winter Olympics , 1988 Winter Olympics , 1998 Winter Olympics and 2002 Winter Olympics . 
 In heraldry , the snowflake is a stylized charge , often used to represent winter or winter sports . 
 Three different snowflake symbols are encoded in Unicode : " snowflake " at U + <unk> ( <unk> ) ; " tight <unk> snowflake " at U + <unk> ( <unk> ) ; and " heavy chevron snowflake " at U + <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 A selection of photographs taken by Wilson Bentley ( 1865 – 1931 ) : 
 = Memento Mori ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Memento Mori " is the fourteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 9 , 1997 . It was directed by Rob Bowman , and written by series creator Chris Carter , Vince Gilligan , John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz . " Memento Mori " featured guest appearances by Sheila Larken , David Lovgren and Morris Panych . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Memento Mori " earned a Nielsen household rating of 15 @.@ 5 , being watched by 19 @.@ 1 million people in its initial broadcast . The title translates from Latin as " remember that you will die . " 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When Scully is diagnosed with an inoperable nasopharyngeal tumor , Mulder attempts to discover what happened to her during her abduction experience , believing the two events to be related . 
 " Memento Mori " was written in only two days , when previous series writer Darin Morgan did not contribute a script for the season . Discussion between the writing staff led to the " obligatory " decision to have Scully diagnosed with cancer , although the decision was not unanimous . Guest actor Lovgren portrayed multiple clones of his character using post @-@ production techniques to merge several shots together ; while actor Pat Skipper had a scene cut from the final episode for time restraints , later appearing in the season finale . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) learns that she has a cancerous tumor between her sinus and cerebrum . She initially tells only Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) of the diagnosis , and is determined to continue to work . The agents head to Allentown , Pennsylvania to see Betsy <unk> , a Mutual UFO Network member who was previously discovered to be suffering from similar symptoms . The agents learn that Betsy has died , yet find someone using her phone line . They trace the call to Kurt Crawford ( David Lovgren ) , a fellow MUFON member . Crawford tells them that all but one of the MUFON members Scully previously met have died of cancer . Scully is skeptical of Mulder and Crawford 's claims that a government conspiracy and her abduction are behind her illness . 
 Scully visits the last surviving MUFON member , Penny Northern , who is being treated for cancer at a medical centre . Meanwhile , Mulder discovers that all the abductees were childless but had been treated at a nearby fertility clinic . When Mulder is called away by Scully , an assassin , the Gray @-@ Haired Man ( Morris Panych ) arrives and kills Crawford with a stiletto weapon , revealing him to be an alien @-@ human hybrid . After meeting Penny 's physician , Dr. Scanlon , Scully elects to begin chemotherapy . Mulder sneaks into the clinic and finds Crawford there , seemingly alive . Mulder and " Crawford " hack into the clinic 's computer database and find information revealing Scully has a file there . Mulder sees Skinner and asks to deal with The Smoking Man to save Scully , but Skinner convinces him not to do so . 
 Mulder recruits The Lone Gunmen to help him break into a high security research facility where he thinks he may be able to find more information on how to save Scully . Meanwhile , Skinner tries to deal directly with The Smoking Man for Scully 's life , who tells him he will get back to him . Inside the facility , Mulder discovers that Dr. Scanlon works alongside several clones of Kurt Crawford . The clones show him Scully 's harvested ova and tell him they are trying to save the abducted women 's lives , since they acted as their birth mothers . They also hope to subvert the colonization project as an inside job . Mulder takes Scully 's ova and leaves , being pursued by the Gray @-@ Haired Man as he escapes . He returns to the hospital to see Scully , who tells him that Penny has died but that she intends to fight the disease . Afterward , Mulder thanks Skinner for advising him not to negotiate with the Smoking Man , after which Skinner and the Smoking Man come to terms on their deal in seclusion . 
 = = Production = = 
 The show 's producers decided to give Gillian Anderson 's character Dana Scully cancer early in the fourth season . Series creator Chris Carter initially discussed giving Scully 's mother cancer but decided to have Scully suffer from it instead . Carter felt the move would give the show an interesting platform on which to discuss things such as faith , science , health care and a certain element of the paranormal . Some of the writing staff felt that the decision was a poor one to make , citing it as " a cheap TV thing " . However , Frank Spotnitz felt that , given the appearances of cancer @-@ stricken abductees in previous episodes , it was an " obligatory " move to have Scully follow suit . 
 The episode was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz three days after another script idea fell through . Spotnitz noted that " Darin Morgan had left the show but was going to contribute an episode . And we realized at the eleventh hour that it wasn 't going to happen , and we were stuck with nothing . John , Vince and I broke that story in maybe two days . We split up the acts , wrote it in probably another two days , and gave the crew something to prep before Christmas break . That was the worst ever . " Carter ended up rewriting the script over the holiday . The initial cut ended up being too long , resulting in a scene introducing Scully 's older brother Bill Scully , played by Pat Skipper , being removed . The character , still played by Skipper , would eventually make his first appearance in the fourth season finale " Gethsemane " . The scene which would have established the character was intended to echo a similar scene in the second season episode " One Breath " , which featured Don S. Davis as Scully 's father . Both scenes featured the actors standing over a supine Scully , wearing white United States Navy dress uniforms . Also deleted from the episode was a kiss between Mulder and Scully , which would have been the first in the series ' run . This was an ad @-@ lib on Anderson and Duchovny 's part , and was removed from the episode as it was something Chris Carter felt he wanted to make use of in the series ' film adaptation . Such a kiss was eventually deferred to season six 's " Triangle " . 
 The episode 's opening scene , featuring a camera moving slowly towards Scully in a harsh white light , was achieved by constructing a long narrow set covered in aluminium foil , which amplified the light being used and downplayed any colors . This shot was drained of color entirely , and was combined with a series of blurring and framing effects in post @-@ production to further enhance the intended image — to create the impression of waking from a dream . 
 A scene featuring multiple clones of the character Kurt Crawford was achieved with motion control photography , allowing actor David Lovgren to portray all of the clones — multiple takes were recorded with the actor in different positions within the scene , and by using a camera controlled by a computer to follow exactly the same motions for each take , these could be seamlessly composited together . Producer Paul Rabwin has noted that achieving these shots was difficult due to the mixture of green and blue light sources in the scene . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Memento Mori " premiered on the Fox network on February 9 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on December 10 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 5 with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 19 @.@ 10 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an A , calling it " an occasionally beautiful , occasionally haunting , often overwritten story " . He felt that the episode took the uncommon route of tying together several previously @-@ mentioned aspects of the series ' mythology , making it " easy to believe the pieces might come together at this point " . However , VanDerWerff also noted that the episode 's two main plot threads — Scully 's cancer and Mulder 's investigation — seemed " clumsily grafted " together , and did not explore the theme of living with the fear of death as well as the previous episode , " Never Again " , had done . Frank Spotnitz praised the episode , saying , " I think that was the best mythology episode we ever did . It 's my favorite one " . Chris Carter has stated that he feels " Memento Mori " ranks " among the best mythology episodes of all nine seasons " . 
 This episode was submitted to the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences to represent The X @-@ Files in that year 's Primetime Emmy Awards . Episode writers Chris Carter , Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz were nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . Art directors Graeme Murray and Gary Allen and set decorator Shirley <unk> won the Creative Emmy Award for Best Art Direction in a Series , while actress Gillian Anderson also won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her work in this episode and the fourth season as a whole . 
 = Tyler Clippard = 
 Tyler Lee Clippard ( born February 14 , 1985 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher for the Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He previously played for New York Yankees , Washington Nationals , Oakland Athletics , and New York Mets . 
 After playing baseball at J. W. Mitchell High School in New Port Richey , Florida , the Yankees drafted Clippard in the ninth round of the 2003 MLB draft . He debuted with the Yankees as a starting pitcher in 2007 . The Yankees traded him to the Nationals before the 2008 season , and the Nationals converted him into a relief pitcher in 2009 . The Nationals traded Clippard to the Athletics before the 2015 season , who traded him to the Mets during the 2015 season . He signed as a free agent with the Diamondbacks before the 2016 season . 
 Clippard led the major leagues in holds in 2014 . He was named to the MLB All @-@ Star Game in 2011 and 2014 , and won the MLB Delivery Man of the Month Award in June 2012 . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Clippard was born in Lexington , Kentucky . His family moved to Florida when he was a toddler . Clippard played baseball in Little League ; in eleven years , he won seven district titles , but was never able to reach the Little League World Series . He learned to pitch when he was eight years old . In 2001 , he was a member of the Palm Harbor team that won the Senior League World Series . 
 Clippard began his high school career at Palm Harbor University High School in Palm Harbor , Florida . After failing to make the varsity baseball team in his first two seasons , he transferred to J. W. Mitchell High School in New Port Richey , Florida , where he played for the school 's baseball team . As a junior , in 2002 , he won six games . He was named to the All @-@ Conference first team . 
 In 2003 , his senior season , Clippard had a 1 – 1 record with an 0 @.@ 81 ERA and 31 strikeouts in 17 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . However , he was dismissed from the school 's baseball team after being charged with driving under the influence of alcohol . Clippard transferred to Dunedin High School in Dunedin , Florida , which had a nationally ranked baseball team . Clippard attempted to play for their team , but the move was blocked by the Florida High School Athletic Association , as players are not allowed to transfer during the course of a season , nor are they allowed to transfer to avoid sanctions given for disciplinary reasons . After taking classes at Dunedin for a month , Clippard transferred back to Mitchell in order to graduate from high school with his friends . 
 Clippard competed for the Central Florida Renegades in Connie Mack Baseball , an amateur 18 @-@ and @-@ under competition organized by the American Amateur Baseball Congress . He earned pitcher of the week honors in the Florida State Elite Baseball League in June 2003 . 
 Clippard also played golf at Mitchell . As a sophomore , in 2001 , Clippard was named one of the ten best golfers in Pasco County . He registered the best individual score in the Sunshine Athletic Conference tournament that year . He was named to the All @-@ Conference first team as a junior and to the All @-@ County as a senior , and helped lead Mitchell to victory in the Sunshine Athletic Conference tournament during his senior year . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 Without the benefit of a full senior season to show himself off to scouts , Clippard proactively sent scouts a schedule of when he was throwing and attended as many showcases as he could . He trained with Roy Silver , a retired professional baseball player , who worked with Clippard on his mechanics and his maturity . Clippard 's father , Bob , teamed up with Tom Kotchman , father of Florida high school player Casey Kotchman , to form showcases with past teammates of Clippard . 
 Clippard was drafted in the ninth round of the 2003 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft , with the 274th overall selection , by the New York Yankees . Though he had signed a National Letter of Intent in the fall of 2002 to attend the University of South Florida on a baseball scholarship , allowing him to play college baseball for the South Florida Bulls , he chose to turn professional due to his draft position and the opportunity to play for the Yankees . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Clippard made his professional debut that year in the Rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast League ( GCL ) with the GCL Yankees , pitching to a 3 – 3 win – loss record with a 2 @.@ 89 ERA . In 43 2 ⁄ 3 innings , he allowed 33 hits and five walks while striking out 56 . Moving up to the Battle Creek Yankees of the Class A Midwest League for the 2004 season , Clippard had a 10 – 10 record with a 3 @.@ 44 ERA and a strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratio of 4 @.@ 53 : 1 in 25 starts . 
 Clippard was 10 – 9 with a 3 @.@ 18 ERA for the Tampa Yankees of the Class A @-@ Advanced Florida State League ( FSL ) in 2005 . He was named to the West team in the FSL All @-@ Star Game . However , he did not appear in the game , as the Charleston RiverDogs of the Class A South Atlantic League needed another pitcher that day . Clippard was named FSL pitcher of the week for the week of July 10 through 17 . For the season , opponents batted .219 against him and he struck out 169 batters in 147 1 ⁄ 3 innings , while walking 34 . He led Yankees farmhands in strikeouts and finished fifth in the affiliated minor leagues , behind Francisco Liriano , Joel Zumaya , Rich Hill and Chuck James . He also led the FSL in strikeouts and was seventh in ERA . However , he did not make the FSL post @-@ season All @-@ Star team and Baseball America did not rank him as one of the league 's top prospects . 
 Baseball America ranked Clippard as the Yankees ' tenth best prospect heading into the 2006 season . Promoted to the Trenton Thunder of the Class AA Eastern League in 2006 , Clippard again led Yankee farmhands in strikeouts ( 175 ) . He allowed just a .200 batting average and had three times as many strikeouts as walks . Clippard was 12 – 10 with a 3 @.@ 35 ERA for the Trenton Thunder . He threw the first no @-@ hitter in franchise history on August 17 , shutting down the Harrisburg Senators . He was named the Eastern League 's pitcher of the week for his accomplishment . Earlier in the season , Clippard flirted with a perfect game , retiring the first 21 batters in a game against the Binghamton Mets . Clippard also won nine straight games at one point , breaking the club record of eight shared by Tomo Ohka and Carl Pavano . He teamed with Phil Hughes to form one of the best pitching duos in minor league baseball . Clippard again was fifth in the affiliated minors in strikeouts , trailing Yovani Gallardo , Francisco <unk> , Matt Maloney and Franklin Morales . He led the Eastern League in strikeouts and was seventh in ERA . Baseball America ranked him as the tenth @-@ best prospect in the Eastern League . 
 Clippard began 2007 with the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees of the Class AAA International League . He was 3 – 2 with a 2 @.@ 72 ERA in his first eight starts , striking out 41 in 39 2 / 3 innings but allowing 40 hits and 17 walks . Though the Yankees experienced injuries in the starting rotation , they called on Matt DeSalvo and Chase Wright before Clippard . When Darrell Rasner broke his finger in May , Clippard was called up to New York . He became the seventh rookie to start a game for the 2007 New York Yankees , following Hughes , DeSalvo , Rasner , Wright , Kei Igawa and Jeff Karstens . 
 Making his MLB debut on May 20 , 2007 , in an interleague game against the New York Mets , Clippard recorded his first MLB win . He pitched six innings , giving up one run off the bat of David Wright and three hits . He struck out his first major league batter , José Reyes , on three pitches . He recorded his first career hit in his second at @-@ bat off Mets pitcher Scott Schoeneweis , a double to right center in the sixth inning . Clippard was optioned back to the minor leagues in June . He struggled in his return to the minor leagues for Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre , and was demoted to Trenton in July . Though he was a member of the Trenton team as they won the Eastern League championship , Clippard struggled in the playoffs . The Yankees recalled him in September . Overall with , he had a 3 – 1 record and a 6 @.@ 33 ERA with the Yankees . 
 = = = Washington Nationals = = = 
 Clippard was traded on December 4 , 2007 , to the Washington Nationals for relief pitcher Jonathan Albaladejo . The Nationals viewed him as a contender for a spot in the starting rotation . However , he began the season with the Columbus Clippers , Washington 's Class AAA affiliate . He pitched his first game for the Nationals on June 9 , 2008 , after <unk> Pérez was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list . He was optioned to the minor leagues after this start , but was given a second start a few days later , as Pérez was not yet ready to return . The Nationals then optioned Clippard to Columbus after his second start , in which Clippard pitched to a 1 – 1 record and 4 @.@ 35 ERA . He was recalled later in June as Shawn Hill was placed on the disabled list . He spent most of the season with Columbus , going 6 – 13 with a 4 @.@ 66 ERA . He tied <unk> <unk> and Charlie <unk> for the most losses in the International League that season . 
 During spring training in 2009 , the Nationals optioned Clippard to the Syracuse Chiefs , Washington 's new Class AAA affiliate . Despite starting six games with the Yankees in 2007 and two for the Nationals in 2008 , he was converted to a relief pitcher for the 2009 campaign . Nationals ' pitching coach Steve <unk> told Clippard that his future was pitching in relief , because his pitch count tended to get too high in starts , and opposing batters hit Clippard well by the third time the lineup turned over in a game . Clippard at first resisted the transition to the bullpen , but conversations with his father and agent , Casey Close , reassured him to continue pursuing his dream . Clippard appeared in 20 games for Syracuse in 2009 , posting a 4 – 1 record , 0 @.@ 92 ERA , and 42 strikeouts in 39 innings . Clippard pitched in 14 consecutive scoreless appearances before being promoted to the Nationals on June 21 , 2009 , replacing Kip Wells in the Nationals ' bullpen . Used sparingly in the first weeks after his promotion , he posted a 2 @.@ 69 ERA through 60 1 ⁄ 3 innings , with 67 strikeouts . 
 Since 2010 , Clippard has pitched exclusively out of the bullpen ; primarily in the eighth inning . That season , Clippard and Drew Storen served as setup pitchers to Matt Capps . After pitching effectively in the first half of the season , Clippard and Capps earned the nickname " Clip and Save " . Clippard finished eighth in the National League in appearances , with 78 . He won eleven games on the season , which led the team . 
 In the first half of the 2011 season , Clippard had a 1 – 0 record and 1 @.@ 73 ERA . He struck out 63 batters and allowed only 26 hits in 51 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , and allowed only six of 32 inherited runners to score . For his achievements , Clippard was selected to appear in the All @-@ Star Game . He earned the victory for the National League as the game 's winning pitcher , despite not retiring a batter . Adrián Beltré , the only batter Clippard faced , singled , but Hunter Pence threw out José Bautista at home plate , and the NL took the lead in the next inning . Clippard finished the season with a 3 – 0 record , a 1 @.@ 83 ERA , and 104 strikeouts in 88 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched across 72 appearances . He led the National League in win probability added . 
 Before the 2012 season , Clippard and the Nationals agreed to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 1 @.@ 65 million , avoiding salary arbitration . Clippard became the de facto closer for the Nationals in the first half of the 2012 season . After injuries to Storen and Brad Lidge , Henry Rodríguez became the closer , but Rodriguez lost the job to Clippard due to his struggles . The Nationals kept Clippard as their closer even after Storen returned to the team . He was named the Major League Baseball Delivery Man of the Month for his performance in June 2012 , recording ten saves in ten opportunities , and allowing zero runs in 11 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 Clippard earned $ 4 million in 2013 . He had a 6 – 3 record with a 2 @.@ 41 ERA and 73 strikeouts in 71 innings pitched . Clippard and the Nationals agreed on a $ 5 @.@ 875 million salary for the 2014 season . He appeared in 20 of the Nationals ' first 40 games , and struggled with poor command of his pitches . His command improved as his workload decreased , and he was named to the appear in the 2014 All @-@ Star Game . He ended the season with a 2 @.@ 18 ERA , and led MLB with 40 holds . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics and New York Mets = = = 
 The Nationals traded Clippard to the Oakland Athletics for Yunel Escobar on January 14 , 2015 . Clippard and the Athletics agreed on an $ 8 @.@ 3 million salary for the 2015 season . With Athletics ' closer Sean Doolittle beginning the season on the disabled list , Clippard served as the team 's closer . Clippard saved 17 games for the Athletics , pitching to a 2 @.@ 79 ERA in 38 2 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 On July 27 , 2015 , the Athletics traded Clippard to the New York Mets for pitching prospect Casey Meisner . Clippard returned to a setup role , with Jeurys Familia remaining the Mets ' closer . In 32 1 ⁄ 3 innings with the Mets , Clippard pitched to a 3 @.@ 06 ERA . In the 2015 MLB postseason , Clippard allowed five earned runs in 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 = = = Arizona Diamondbacks = = = 
 After receiving fewer contract offers than he had expected , Clippard signed a two @-@ year , $ 12 @.@ 25 million contract with the Arizona Diamondbacks on February 8 , 2016 . 
 = = Scouting report = = 
 Clippard is listed at 6 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) and 170 pounds ( 77 kg ) . He has an unorthodox pitching delivery , rocking forward while sticking his gloved hand high in the air , which creates an unusual arm angle while pitching , making it difficult for hitters to pick up the ball in their line of vision . Clippard 's father taught him to pitch this way when Clippard was eight years old by having him throw his baseball glove . <unk> nicknamed Clippard 's delivery " The Funk " . 
 Clippard primarily throws a fastball and a changeup . His hard , straight four @-@ seam fastball averages about 92 – 93 miles per hour ( 148 – 150 km / h ) , topping out at 96 miles per hour ( 154 km / h ) , and sets up a deceptive changeup in the high 70s to low 80s . Periodically , he throws a cutter early in the count to right @-@ handed hitters and a curveball in the mid 70s . Nardi Contreras , who worked with Clippard as the Yankees ' minor league pitching coordinator , indicated that Clippard 's greatest success comes from his curveball and changeup . 
 Clippard has compiled a strikeout rate of greater than 10 per 9 innings over his career . According to Clippard , " I don 't try to strike out everyone that I face . Strikeouts just kind of happen with the way I pitch . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Clippard was raised by his parents , Bob and Debbie Clippard . He has a brother named Colin , who played Little League baseball with Tyler . He is from Tampa , Florida . 
 = Maryland Route 291 = 
 Maryland Route 291 ( MD 291 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 18 @.@ 34 miles ( 29 @.@ 52 km ) from MD 20 in Chestertown east to the Delaware state line east of Millington , where the highway continues east as Delaware Route 6 ( DE 6 ) . MD 291 parallels the Chester River along the southern edge of Kent County , connecting Chestertown with U.S. Route 301 ( US 301 ) . The state highway follows much of what was originally MD 447 , which was constructed between US 213 in Chestertown and MD 290 at Chesterville around 1930 . MD 291 itself was built east of Millington around 1930 . The state highway was extended west toward Chesterville in the early 1930s , but was not complete to MD 290 until the late 1940s . MD 291 was extended west to US 213 along a partially new alignment in the early 1960s , superseding MD 447 . MD 291 reached its present western terminus at MD 20 in 1969 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 291 begins at a roundabout with the eastern terminus of MD 20 ( Chestertown Road ) and High Street in the town of Chestertown . The state highway heads east as two @-@ lane Morgnec Road . After intersecting the Chestertown Branch of the Northern Line of the Maryland and Delaware Railroad , MD 291 passes along the northern edge of the campus of Washington College before intersecting MD 213 ( Washington Avenue ) and leaving Chestertown . The state highway crosses Morgan Creek on a steel truss bridge and passes through the hamlet of Morgnec , where Morgnec Road turns north and MD 291 continues east as River Road . 
 MD 291 crosses <unk> Creek and Norris Creek and intersects the eastern terminus of MD 298 ( Cherry Lane ) . The highway crosses Chesterville Branch before joining MD 290 ( Crumpton Road ) for a short concurrency south of Chesterville . East of MD 290 , MD 291 passes through a forested area and crosses Mill Branch before passing through two roundabouts with Edge Road and Howard Johnson Road , which are unsigned MD 701A and MD 701 , respectively . The two roads lead to interchange ramps to and from US 301 ( Blue Star Memorial Highway ) , over which MD 291 crosses between the roundabouts . MD 291 parallels the Chester River east to the town of Millington , where the highway 's name changes to Cypress Street . The state highway intersects MD 313 ( Sassafras Street ) and the Centreville Branch of the Northern Line of the Maryland and Delaware Railroad before leaving the town by crossing Cypress Branch . MD 291 continues east as Cypress Road to its eastern terminus at the Delaware state line . The highway continues east as DE 6 ( Millington Road ) toward Smyrna . 
 = = History = = 
 Much of what is now MD 291 was constructed as two different highways . MD 291 ran from MD 290 near Chesterville through Millington to the Delaware state line . MD 447 connected US 213 in Chestertown and MD 290 in Chesterville , much of which was on an alignment further north from the Chester River than modern MD 291 . MD 291 was constructed from Millington to the Delaware state line in 1929 and 1930 . The highway was extended west to Mills Branch just west of present day US 301 in two sections built in 1933 and 1935 . The gap from Mills Branch to MD 290 was filled around 1946 . 
 MD 447 was constructed from US 213 to just west of Morgnec as well as from Kennedyville Road to MD 290 in Chesterville in 1929 and 1930 . MD 447 was completed between Morgnec and Kennedyville Road by 1933 . The steel truss bridge over Morgan Creek , which replaced an old timber bridge on a more curvaceous alignment , was also completed in 1933 . River Road between Morgnec and MD 290 was reconstructed beginning in 1958 . MD 291 was extended west of MD 290 along River Road to Morgnec and assumed MD 447 west to Chestertown in 1963 . MD 447 between Morgnec and Chesterville was removed from the state highway system the same year . MD 291 was extended west to its present terminus at MD 20 along a new road within Chestertown in 1969 . MD 291 's interchange with US 301 , including MD 291 's bridge over US 301 and the roundabouts with MD 701 and MD 701A , was constructed in 1999 . In 2014 , a roundabout was constructed at the western terminus at MD 20 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Utah State Route 128 = 
 State Route 128 ( SR @-@ 128 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Utah . The entire length of the highway has been designated the Upper Colorado River Scenic Byway , as part of the Utah Scenic Byways program . This road also forms part of the Dinosaur Diamond Prehistoric Highway , a National Scenic Byway . Residents of Moab frequently refer to SR @-@ 128 as " the river road " , after the Colorado River , which the highway follows . 
 The highway was originally constructed to connect rural cities in eastern Utah with Grand Junction , Colorado , the largest city in the region . Part of the highway was merged into the Utah state highway system in 1931 ; the rest was taken over by the state and assigned route number 128 in 1933 . Today , the highway is used as a scenic drive for visitors to the area . 
 The highway crosses the Colorado River at the site of the Dewey Bridge , listed on the National Register of Historic Places . This bridge was the longest suspension bridge in Utah until April 2008 when it was destroyed by a fire started by a child playing with matches . The future of the bridge is uncertain , with Grand County conducting a study to determine the feasibility of reconstructing it . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 128 begins just north of Moab , where it is commonly known as " the river road " . The highway follows the southern bank of the Colorado River through a narrow , steep gorge , described as spectacular by National Geographic . The sheer sandstone walls of the gorge along Route 128 are recommended for their beauty on vacation guides from as far away as France and Germany . 
 As parts of the road are very narrow , with blind corners and no shoulders , the Utah Department of Transportation has prohibited trucks and vehicles over 55 @,@ 000 pounds ( 24 @,@ 948 kg ) from the entire highway . In addition , a restriction at the junction with U.S. Route 191 requires vehicles over 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide to have two police escorts . 
 Between Moab and Castle Valley , the Colorado River , and indirectly , Route 128 , form the southern boundary of Arches National Park . Arches National Park is so named because of over 2000 natural arches inside park boundaries . While the highway does offer views of several features in the park , there is no park access along the highway . Popular attractions along this portion include Negro Bill Canyon , with hiking trails to Morning Glory Arch , campgrounds and boat docks at a curve in the river called Big Bend . 
 The gorge widens where the highway passes by Castle Valley and Professor Valley , which have been the shooting locations for many western films ( including Wagon Master and Rio Grande ) and television commercials . Near the east end of the valley the highway crosses Onion Creek , a stream sourced by springs that contain naturally occurring minerals that produce a strong odor in the water . At the east end of the valley the highway has a view of the Fisher Towers , a set of dark red spires . After leaving the valley , the road winds farther up the river gorge until arriving at the Dewey Bridge , named for Dewey , a nearby ghost town . 
 After the bridge , the road follows the northern bank of the river for a few miles then exits the Colorado River gorge . At this point the highway proceeds across desert towards the Book Cliffs to terminate at Interstate 70 near Cisco . Cisco is a ghost town along the main line of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad , founded as a water re @-@ filling station for steam locomotives . The last 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of the road parallel the railroad and is an old routing of U.S. Route 6 / U.S. Route 50 , in use before the construction of I @-@ 70 . 
 = = History = = 
 Access between Moab and Castle Valley was originally via a pack trail called the Heavenly Stairway . This trail , named for a dramatic descent of over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) , was described as beautiful , but difficult to navigate . Isolated from Utah 's population centers , this area depended on Grand Junction and other cities in Colorado for both everyday supplies and a market for agricultural products . Moab residents pushed for a road to be built along the riverbank . By 1902 , the trail was replaced with a toll road , called King 's Toll Road , after Samuel King . King was an early settler who also operated the toll ferry used prior to the construction of the Dewey Bridge . Rocks inscribed with " Kings Toll Road " can still be found along the roadway . While the road did improve travel , it was not built high enough above the river level and was often flooded . 
 = = = Dewey Bridge = = = 
 The Dewey Bridge , built in 1916 , originally carried SR @-@ 128 across the Colorado River . The bridge featured an all wood deck measuring 502 feet ( 153 m ) long , 10 @.@ 2 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 m ) wide from support to support and 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide from rail to rail . The bridge also consisted of two metal towers , a run of seven cables on each side of the bridge deck , and cable anchors . 
 In 1912 Grand County unsuccessfully petitioned the state to finance the construction of a bridge . In 1913 , the ferry was out of service for a time because ice in the river struck the ferry , causing it to sink . This raised the level of urgency for a more reliable river crossing . Grand County held a municipal bond election , and was able to raise $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1913 , approximately equivalent to $ 550 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) to finance the construction of a bridge . The county employed the Midland Bridge Company of Kansas City , Missouri , to build it . Plans originally called for the bridge deck to be 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , but with the bonds not producing the expected yields , the deck width was scaled down to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . In 1916 , the bridge was dedicated with a strength test by having approximately 70 attendees attempt to cross the bridge at once . The total was seven wagons , two people on horseback and several on foot . The bridge was designed to support the weight of six horses , three wagons , and 9 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 100 kg ) of freight . 
 On the day of its completion , it was the second @-@ longest suspension bridge west of the Mississippi River . The longest was the Cameron Suspension Bridge , also built by the Midland Bridge Company , who used the same base plans for both bridges . The Dewey Bridge remained the longest suspension bridge in Utah until it was destroyed by fire in 2008 . 
 As part of a tribute , a reporter for The Daily Sentinel interviewed locals and visitors about their first experience crossing the bridge . Many recalled how nervous they felt as the bridge would creak and sway under load . One stated , " A lot of people lost a lot of mirrors on that bridge " . Drivers with wide vehicles had to fold in their side mirrors to safely cross , as the bridge deck was only 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide . 
 An agreement was reached in 1984 between the Grand County Commission and the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) to balance the conflicting public demands to retire and preserve the aging bridge . As part of this agreement , UDOT would commission a new bridge and once finished , transfer ownership of the original bridge back to Grand County . Grand County agreed to petition to have the bridge be included in the National Register of Historic Places , assume maintenance and guarantee the bridge would be preserved . The nomination was approved and the bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places on July 12 , 1984 . In 1988 , the replacement bridge was completed , and the title deed to the Dewey Bridge was handed over to the county in 1989 . Grand County completed a restoration project in 2000 . 
 After being replaced for automobile use , the Dewey Bridge was used by the <unk> trail , a bicycle trail , and a pedestrian trail . The east approach to the bridge features an abandoned gas station and the ghost town of Dewey . The west approach has been converted to a rest area and park . 
 On April 6 , 2008 , a seven @-@ year @-@ old boy accidentally started a fire in a nearby campground while playing with matches . The fire moved up the riverbank and destroyed the bridge 's wooden deck and rails . The county funded a study to determine the feasibility and cost of reconstructing the bridge . The engineers determined that the steel cables and towers most likely did not suffer structural damage and could be reused . The study estimated reconstruction costs at $ 850 @,@ 000 . The engineers determined the original blueprints , preserved in a museum , were of sufficient quality that only minimal engineering work would be required . The county agreed to direct the effort , but will not fund it with taxpayer money . As replicas do not qualify for historical status , historians are debating if using the original towers and cable is enough for the structure to qualify as historical . Grand County has set up an account for interested parties to donate to the reconstruction effort . 
 Though the Colorado River runs for over 400 miles ( 640 km ) in Utah , there are only three sites with bridges to cross it . One is the Dewey Bridge site where SR @-@ 128 traverses the waterway ; the other two are an unnamed bridge that carries US @-@ 191 ( built in 1911 , replaced in 1955 and again in 2010 ) and the Hite Crossing Bridge ( built in 1966 ) used by SR @-@ 95 . 
 = = = From trail to highway = = = 
 With the bridge finished in 1916 , by the 1920s the toll road was reconstructed above the ordinary high water mark so it could be used year @-@ round . The road was briefly used for the route of the Midland Trail across eastern Utah . However , by 1923 the trail had been moved to a more direct routing , similar to modern I @-@ 70 . The road from Moab along the river to Castleton was added to the state highway network in 1931 , as SR @-@ 129 . In 1933 , the route was redesignated SR @-@ 128 and extended to Cisco . The highway was gradually upgraded to a two @-@ lane paved roadway . 
 The state legislature extended SR @-@ 128 about 3 miles ( 5 km ) at its east end in 1969 , due to the pending construction of Interstate 70 . Plans called for the freeway to bypass the Cisco area , including the terminus of SR @-@ 128 . The legislature transferred a portion of SR @-@ 4 ( the legislative designation for what was then signed US @-@ 6 / US @-@ 50 ) near Cisco to the proposed junction with I @-@ 70 . When that part of I @-@ 70 was completed in 1971 , signs were changed to SR @-@ 128 on its portion of the old road , while the remainder of the bypassed road through Cisco was relinquished to the county . 
 The highway was recognized by the Utah Scenic Byways program for its scenic value and given the name Upper Colorado River Scenic Byway . The highway was recognized as a National Scenic Byway and named as part of the Dinosaur Diamond Scenic Byway in 1998 . A petition is currently before the Federal Highway Administration to recognize Route 128 as an All @-@ American Road . To meet this criterion the highway must be deemed by the administration to have enough scenic value to be a " destination unto itself " . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is located within Grand County . 
 = James Balfour ( died 1845 ) = 
 James Balfour ( c . 1775 – 19 April 1845 ) was a Scottish nabob who became a landowner and politician . The son of a prosperous and influential gentry descent , he became a trader in India . Having made a fortune supplying the Royal Navy , he returned to Scotland to buy several landed estates , including Whittingehame in East Lothian where he built a classical mansion . 
 Balfour became a Tory Member of Parliament ( MP ) from 1826 to 1834 , but never achieved ministerial office . However , many of his descendants found fame and success , including his grandson Arthur Balfour , who served as prime minister from 1902 to 1905 . 
 At his death , Balfour 's estates in Scotland alone were estimated to be worth over £ 1 million ( equivalent to £ 89 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Balfour was born in about 1775 . He was the second son of John Balfour ( 1739 – 1813 ) , an advocate who owned Balbirnie House , near the town of Glenrothes in Fife . His elder brother Robert Balfour , who inherited Balbirnie , became a Lieutenant @-@ General in the British Army . 
 His ancestor George Balfour had purchased Balbirnie in the late 16th or early 17th century , and by the late 18th century its land included profitable mines in the Fife Coalfield . 
 Balfours had fought with Robert the Bruce at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 , and a pedigree written under the authority of the Lord Lyon King of Arms traced James Balfour 's descent in a direct line from King Robert II , son @-@ in @-@ law of Robert the Bruce . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = India = = = 
 After studying book @-@ keeping and accountancy in Edinburgh , Balfour went to Madras in March 1795 as a writer ( junior clerk ) for the British East India Company . He held several posts in the following years , before being sent back to Britain after a disciplinary issue . 
 Balfour returned to India in 1802 , where he became a merchant in partnership with James Baker . His breakthrough came in 1806 , when the partners obtained the contract with the Victualling Commissioners of the Royal Navy to supply their needs throughout the East Indies . 
 The contract had been held since 1796 by the Hon. Basil Cochrane , who had built his own flour mills and bakeries in Madras . Cochrane returned to England in 1806 due to ill @-@ health , and had intended to appoint Balfour and Baker as his agents . However , before leaving , Cochrane was notified that the Navy was reviewing his accounts dating back to 1794 , and that the Navy had lost much of the paperwork . He then returned to England permanently to settle the accounts , which took until 1820 . 
 Instead of engaging agents , Cochrane passed the contract to Balfour and Baker , who held it until at least 1815 . At some point the partnership was dissolved , and the contract held by Balfour alone . When he left India , he had accumulated a fortune of £ 300 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 24 @.@ 6 million in 2016 ) . 
 The Indian business did not end with Balfour 's return home . It was run on his behalf by agents , and within a few decades the family 's assets had grown ten @-@ fold to £ 3 million ( equivalent to £ 246 million in 2016 ) . 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 On his return to Scotland in 1815 , Balfour married Lady Eleanor Maitland ( 1790 – 1869 ) , daughter of the Tory politician James Maitland , 8th Earl of Lauderdale . They had five children , one of whom died in a fire in infancy . 
 Within two years of their marriage , Balfour had bought two large county estates . The first was a sporting estate with shooting lodge in the Highlands , at Strathconan in Ross @-@ shire . In 1817 , he purchased the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ; 16 sq mi ) Whittingehame estate in Haddingtonshire from Colonel William Hay of Duns Castle , which provided a net rental income of £ 11 @,@ 000 per year ( equivalent to £ 981 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . He also bought a town house in London , No. 3 Grosvenor Square . 
 In the 1820s the Balfours employed the architect Robert Smirke , designer of the British Museum , to build a large classical mansion at Whittingehame , along with a stable block and gate lodges . They equipped their home with French furniture and Sèvres china . Built of pale <unk> stone , the house was expanded and altered in 1827 to the designs of William Burn , which were not entirely successful . Colin McWilliam and Christopher Wilson describe them as having changed " a dry composition into a boring one " . 
 They then rebuilt the local church , and created a new model village to the north @-@ west of the old one . Built in about 1840 of red sandstone , it consists of a row of cottages and a school . 
 Established as a country gentleman , though known locally as " the nabob " , Balfour became a justice of the peace , and in 1822 was appointed as a Deputy Lieutenant of Haddingtonshire . 
 In about 1823 or 1824 he paid £ 104 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 8 @.@ 25 million in 2016 ) to buy from the 10th Earl of Leven a large estate in his native Fife , including Balgonie Castle . Adjacent to his native Balbirnie , the Balgonie estate included coal mines which worked seams described as " inexhaustible " and iron workings . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 In November 1820 , the death of Henry St Paul MP triggered a by @-@ election for the borough of Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , where Balfour 's father @-@ in @-@ law Lord Lauderdale had great influence . Balfour was also supported by Admiral Sir David Milne , who had defeated St Paul at the general election in March 1820 but was unseated on petition in July . 
 However , Lauderdale was disliked for his opposition to the popular Queen Caroline , which became a significant issue in the campaign . His agents claimed that Balfour would have opposed her trial for alleged adultery , but he was portrayed as too close to Liverpool 's Tory ministry to properly represent interests of the borough . After four days of polling , Balfour lost by 9 votes ( 374 — 363 ) to the Whig baronet Sir Francis Blake . 
 A further vacancy occurred in Berwick in 1822 , but Balfour did not contest the seat . Instead , he turned his attentions to the Anstruther Burghs , a set of five burghs which were located only 15 miles from his newly purchased estate at Balgonie in Fife . At the 1826 general election he won the support of three burghs of Pittenweem , Anstruther Easter and Crail , whereas the sitting MP and Lord Advocate of Scotland Sir William Rae won only Anstruther Wester and <unk> . With three out of five votes Balfour was declared elected , and a petition lodged by Rae was rejected in March 1827 . 
 In 1829 , several groups of his constituents submitted petitions against the Roman Catholic Relief Bill . Balfour presented all the petitions to Parliament , but in April he voted with the majority in favour of the Bill . 
 Balfour was opposed at the 1830 general election by Robert Marsham , the Warden of Merton College , Oxford . However , he won the seat , taking three of the four boroughs remaining after <unk> 's disenfranchisement in 1829 . 
 At the 1831 general election , Balfour was drafted to stand instead in the county seat of Haddingtonshire , the area which included Whittingehame . The sitting MP Lord John Hay had been an advocate of Parliamentary reform , a view which was supported by the county 's voteless tenant farmers but opposed by the existing voters . Lord John 's position looked untenable , so Balfour was drafted by Lord Lauderdale and Hay 's brother Lord Tweeddale . Describing himself as an opponent of the current reform proposals , but a supporter of a " wise and prudent amendment to the representative system " , he won the seat by a margin of 40 votes to the 11 of his opponent Sir David Baird , Bt . However , a crowd of non @-@ voting residents of Haddington shouted down his attempts to make a speech of thanks . 
 The new Parliament was dominated by the Reform Bills , and in the last Parliament of the <unk> House of Commons Balfour voted against them at most opportunities . At the general election in December 1832 , with the franchise expanded under the Scottish Reform Act , Balfour was re @-@ elected but with a much narrower majority of 271 votes to 232 . 
 His health had been declining , and he cited that as his reason for retiring at the dissolution of Parliament in December 1834 . At the general election in January 1835 , the Haddingtonshire seat was won by the Whig Robert Ferguson . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Balfour died at Whittingehame in April 1845 , aged about 70 . He was survived by his wife , two sons , and two daughters . One daughter had died in infancy . 
 James Maitland Balfour ( 1820 – 56 ) , MP for Haddington Burghs 1841 – 47 , father of five sons and three daughters 
 Charles Balfour ( 1823 – 72 ) , who married Adelaide Barrington , daughter and 8th child of the 6th Viscount Barrington . 
 Mary Balfour ( 1817 – 93 ) , a noted watercolour artist who married Henry Arthur Herbert , owner of the <unk> estate in County Kerry , and Chief Secretary for Ireland 1857 – 58 
 Anna Balfour ( 1825 – 57 ) , who married Lord Augustus Fitzroy , later 7th Duke of Grafton 
 On his death , Balfour 's estate was valued at over £ 1 million . His widow Eleanor ( who survived him by 24 years ) was left a legacy of £ 31 @,@ 000 and a life annuity of £ 3 @,@ 760 . 
 The rest was divided between his children . The estates at Whittingehame and Strathconan were left to his eldest son , along with a house in Grosvenor Square , London . His property in Fife , including Balgonie Castle , was left to his second son Charles , while his daughters Mary and Anna had each been given a dowry of £ 40 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 3 @.@ 28 million in 2016 ) . 
 Until the Reform Act in 1832 , political power in Britain had been dominated for centuries by a land @-@ owning oligarchy , and for another century they shared power with the rising bourgeoisie . The Balfour family straddled both groups . James Balfour 's new wealth brought new vigour to the ancient family , with many of his grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren achieving notability . They include : 
 James Maitland Balfour 's children : 
 Arthur Balfour , the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1902 to 1905 
 Eleanor Mildred Sidgwick ( 1845 – 1936 ) , Principal of Newnham College , Cambridge 
 Alice Blanche Balfour ( 1850 – 1936 ) , amateur entomologist 
 Francis Maitland Balfour ( 1851 – 1882 ) , one of the greatest biologists of his day 
 Gerald Balfour , 2nd Earl of Balfour ( 1853 – 1945 ) , a cabinet minister from 1895 to 1905 . His daughter Lady Eve Balfour ( 1899 – 1990 ) was an early advocate of organic farming , and co @-@ founder of the Soil Association 
 Colonel Eustace James Anthony Balfour ( 1854 – 1911 ) , an architect who served as ADC to King Edward VII . 
 Charles Balfour 's son Charles Barrington Balfour became an army officer and an MP . One of his sons was knighted for his work as a diplomat 
 Mary 's son Henry Arthur Herbert , was MP for Kerry from 1866 to 1880 
 Two of Anna 's sons became Dukes of Grafton 
 As with many other estate houses in Scotland , Balfour family ownership of Whittingehame House ended in the 20th century . Arthur and Gerald lost a lot of money in a series of poor investments , particularly in their efforts to develop peat processing as a green alternative to coal @-@ mining . In the 1930s , death duties forced the mothballing of the house and sale of its contents . The building was leased for various purposes before being sold in 1963 to become a residential school , and has since been converted into apartments . The older Whittingehame Tower has been restored and remains the residence of the Earls of Balfour , descendants of James Balfour . 
 = Keith Miller in the 1946 – 47 Australian cricket season = 
 During the 1946 – 47 Australian cricket season , all rounder Keith Miller represented Victoria and Australia . A 27 @-@ year @-@ old right @-@ handed batsman and fast bowler , Miller played in all five Tests against England , performing well with both bat and ball . He finished top of the Australian Test bowling averages , taking 16 wickets at 20 @.@ 88 , and was second in the batting averages , scoring 384 runs at 76 @.@ 80 . On his Ashes debut in the First Test in Brisbane , Miller scored 79 before taking match bowling figures of 9 wickets for 77 runs ( 9 / 77 ) in Australia 's innings victory . In the Fourth Test , played at the Adelaide Oval , Miller broke through for his first Test century , scoring an unbeaten 141 . A middle @-@ order batsman and right @-@ arm opening bowler , Miller finished the Test series as Australia 's joint leading wicket @-@ taker , along with his new ball partner Ray Lindwall , as Australia won the series 3 – 0 . 
 Miller also played a key role in Victoria 's Sheffield Shield triumph , scoring 667 runs for the State in four matches , all of which were won , at an average of 133 @.@ 40 . Miller scored 188 against South Australia , before making 153 and 206 not out , both at high tempo as Victoria twice defeated arch @-@ rivals New South Wales . 
 Off the field , Miller was dogged by speculation as to whether he would honour a contract he had signed with Rawtenstall Cricket Club in the English Lancashire League , which would have ended his Test career . Miller resolved that he would remain in Australia , and accepted a job offer in New South Wales , but kept his decision private . 
 = = Background = = 
 Miller had made his first @-@ class debut for Victoria before World War II as a specialist batsman not known for aggressive play . After the outbreak of war , Miller was deployed to England as a Royal Australian Air Force fighter pilot , flying in combat missions . While playing for military teams , he began to bowl more often , and was selected for Australian Services cricket team , a military outfit , to play in the Victory Tests against a full @-@ strength England . During this series , Miller gained prominence with a series of hard @-@ hitting displays and some rapid fast bowling against established Test batsmen such as Len Hutton . Miller topped the batting averages and took ten wickets and was hailed for his attacking play . He went on to make his Test debut in March 1946 in a one @-@ off match against New Zealand , but this fixture was not given Test status until 1948 . The 1946 – 47 Test series against the touring Englishmen would be his first against a major team , and Miller was expected to play a prominent role with both bat and ball , especially in countering the visitors ' powerful batting . 
 = = Early season = = 
 During the southern hemisphere winter of 1946 , Miller had travelled to Boston , Massachusetts to marry Peg Wagner , whom he met during a stopover early in 1943 on the way to military service in the United Kingdom . After the wedding , the couple travelled back to Melbourne to start their married life . 
 Miller had only been back in Australia for a week when he faced Wally Hammond 's visiting English team in the touring side 's match against Victoria . His fielding and batting were rusty after the long layoff , and the media constantly probed him about the contract he had signed with Rawtenstall Cricket Club in the Lancashire League a few months earlier , to start in 1947 . Miller said nothing in the press , but the Victorian Cricket Association made public appeals for an employer to give Miller a job so that he would not leave the state and become a professional sportsman in England . In the match against Hammond 's men , Miller struggled while scoring 32 in the first innings before being dismissed by leg spinner Doug Wright . In the Victorian second innings he was bowled by James Langridge for eight . Victorian captain Lindsay Hassett was not willing to ask Miller to bowl , given his lack of thorough preparation for the season ; the tourists won the match by 244 runs . 
 Miller was selected for an Australian XI — a team comprising a mix of established international representatives and fringe players — fixture against the tourists prior to the Test series , but made only five runs with the bat and bowled only four overs , taking 0 / 8 in a rain @-@ affected match that did not reach the second innings . In a Shield match against South Australia — led by national captain Don Bradman — at the Adelaide Oval , Miller had a chance to push for selection by performing well in front of the Australian captain , who was also a member of the three @-@ man national selection panel . 
 Miller took 2 / 32 in 11 overs , bowling both of his victims as the hosts were dismissed for 270 on the first day . The Victorian paceman also had a chance to bowl at Bradman — who made a hundred — for a period . On the second day , Miller came to the crease at 2 / 171 to join Ken Meuleman after the openers had laid the platform with an opening stand of 158 runs . The pair added 26 runs before Meuleman fell at 3 / 197 and was replaced by Hassett . The pair batted until the end of the day as Victoria reached 3 / 285 at stumps to take first innings points , with Miller on 56 and Hassett 43 . The next day , they continued to 188 and 114 respectively , their 224 @-@ run partnership ending when Phil Ridings bowled Hassett . This precipitated a collapse of 7 / 39 as Victoria finished at 548 . Amid the visitors ' faltering innings , it had taken a run out to remove Miller . 
 Miller used a wide array of strokes , leading The Advertiser of Adelaide to describe his innings as " dashing and colourful " . Wisden said Miller 's innings was " one of the finest batting displays ever seen at Adelaide " . Due to the presence of Bradman , who was known for his ruthless and calculated attitude , Miller suppressed his carefree nature and played in a conservative and measured way , hoping to impress his prospective captain . After his long innings , Hassett asked Miller to only bowl two overs in the second innings , and Victoria were left needing 79 runs in 35 minutes for victory after the hosts were dismissed for 356 . With a series of fours and quick singles , Miller and Hassett guided the visitors to the target in just 63 balls , with five minutes to spare . Miller was dismissed for 33 in the final over , just before the Victorians completed the chase . 
 Bradman saw Miller as a top @-@ order batsman and as his new ball partner for Lindwall , although the Victorian allrounder was a reluctant bowler . The Australian captain felt that Miller was crucial to his strategy of attacking England 's strong batting line @-@ up — which boasted the likes of Hammond , Denis Compton , Len Hutton , Bill Edrich and Cyril Washbrook — with high pace . Miller was duly selected for the Australian team for the First Test . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Miller made his Ashes debut in the First Test in Brisbane the day after his 27th birthday . Miller was slated to bat at No. 5 and Bradman fielded six front @-@ line bowlers , but this did not weaken the batting , as four of the bowlers , Miller , Lindwall , Colin McCool and Ian Johnson , had all scored centuries in first @-@ class cricket . Australia batted first but Miller was not needed until day two , coming in to join Hassett after Bradman was dismissed for 187 with the score at 3 / 322 . Miller was asleep when Bradman fell , but roused himself and played aggressively to reach his half @-@ century in just 80 minutes before lunch . He struck one six onto the roof of the members ' stand at long @-@ on , the biggest hit at the ground at the time . Miller 's 106 @-@ run partnership with Hassett ended when Alec Bedser removed the latter caught at mid @-@ on , having already been dropped four times . After the lunch break , Miller slowed down and was eventually trapped leg before wicket ( lbw ) by leg spinner Doug Wright , ending his first Ashes innings at 79 , having taken 80 minutes to score his last 29 runs . During the course of his innings , which Australian cricket writer Johnnie Moyes described as " attractive and stately " , Miller passed 3 @,@ 000 runs at first @-@ class level . Australia reached 645 on the third day , a national record against England at home , before a tropical storm hit , complete with hailstones as large as golf balls . The tourists were very unaccustomed to such weather and were extremely disturbed by the noisy downpour . Miller was given the new ball along with Lindwall and he took his first Ashes wicket , bowling Hutton after testing him with a series of bouncers as England closed at 1 / 21 . 
 During that first Test , an incident occurred , coloured by Miller 's wartime service , that soured his relationship with Bradman and his feelings towards Test cricket . Michael Parkinson described it as follows : 
 Keith Miller was deeply affected by the Second World War . It changed him ... In the first post @-@ war Ashes Test ... England were caught on a sticky ... [ and ] Bill Edrich came in . He 'd had a serious war and he survived and Miller thought , ' He 's my old Services mate . The last thing he wants after five years ' war is to be flattened by a cricket ball , so I eased up . Bradman came up to me and said , ' Don 't slow down , Keith . Bowl quicker . ' That remark put me off Test cricket . Never felt the same way about it after that.' 
 The following day , the pitch dried out under the hot sun and turned into a sticky wicket . Miller bowled at a mixture of pace and off breaks and added a large amount of bouncers , leading former Australian Test batsmen and journalist Jack Fingleton to compare the amount of high @-@ paced short @-@ pitched bowling by the Australian pair to that during Bodyline . On the uneven surface , Edrich was struck around 40 times on the body . Miller cut down the English top @-@ order , removing Washbrook , Compton , Edrich and Jack Ikin on the fourth morning to leave England at 5 / 56 . After removing Washbrook , caught by Sid Barnes with only four more runs added to the overnight total , Miller trapped Compton lbw for 17 , leaving England at 3 / 49 . After having Edrich caught in the slips by Colin McCool , Miller removed Ikin first @-@ ball , caught behind by wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon to be on a hat @-@ trick , but Norman Yardley prevented him from taking a third wicket in as many balls . After Hammond and Yardley stabilised the innings with a 61 @-@ run partnership , Miller later returned to remove wicket @-@ keeper Paul Gibb and his replacement Bedser in consecutive balls , but last man Wright successfully thwarted Miller 's second hat @-@ trick attempt . The Victorian paceman finished with 7 / 60 , his first five @-@ wicket haul at first @-@ class level . 
 England made 141 and Bradman forced them to follow on . Miller removed Hutton again , this time caught by Sid Barnes from the first ball of the innings . He combined with Barnes 45 minutes later to remove Hutton 's opening partner Washbrook to leave England at 3 / 33 . The pitch , still rain @-@ affected , hastened England 's defeat by an innings and 332 runs within 44 overs . Miller finished with 2 / 17 from 11 overs in the second innings to end with match figures of 9 / 77 . England had fallen to their heaviest Test defeat on Australian soil , losing 15 wickets in the space of 210 minutes on the fifth day . Miller 's highly productive Ashes debut led to further speculation as to whether he was willing to end his Test career to turn professional in England . Miller continued to ignore Rawtenstall 's requests for confirmation and refused to comment on the issue to the media , hoping that he would get a better job offer in Australia in the meantime . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 A fortnight later , Miller proceeded to the Second Test in Sydney , where he had a quiet match without his partner Lindwall , who was sidelined with chickenpox . England batted first and Miller opened the bowling with Victorian teammate and debutant Fred Freer . Miller bowled nine overs without success , conceding 24 runs as Hammond 's tourists amassed 270 . On a turning surface , nine of the English wickets fell to the spinners Johnson and McCool . In the hosts ' reply , Miller contributed 40 with seven fours in a 63 @-@ run stand with Barnes as Australia reached 4 / 159 . Bradman — who had dropped himself down the order — and Barnes then both scored 234 and put together a world record fifth @-@ wicket partnership of 405 to propel Australia to 8 / 659 declared . Miller bowled 11 overs in the second innings , taking the wicket of Hutton who was out hit wicket after going on a short @-@ lived attack that yielded 37 runs from 39 balls in 24 minutes . Hutton shaped to drive the last ball before lunch , and successfully made contact , but in following through , his bat slipped from his hand and clipped the stumps . Miller had a light bowling workload as Johnson and McCool took seven wickets between them for the innings and eight wickets each for the match as Australia completed another innings victory . 
 Miller saved his best batting for the Shield clash with arch @-@ rivals New South Wales , which started on Boxing Day at the Melbourne Cricket Ground ( MCG ) . The visitors batted first and made 205 , Miller taking 2 / 22 from ten overs . He then came to the crease on the first afternoon with Victoria at 1 / 31 after Meuleman was dismissed . Miller hammered three sixes from one over against Test team @-@ mate Ernie Toshack , having started the over on three runs . After measuring up Toshack 's bowling for the first two balls , Miller hooked the third ball over fine leg for six . He then lifted the sixth ball over square leg , was dropped by the bowler on the seventh ball , before driving the last ball into the crowd at long on . Miller reached his fifty in 41 minutes and was 79 at the close of play , with Victoria on 1 / 154 . The next day , he fell for 153 , ending a 271 @-@ run partnership with Merv Harvey that took just over three hours . It took another run out to terminate Miller 's innings at 2 / 302 . Miller 's childhood hero Bill Ponsford said that Miller 's display was the hardest hitting he had ever seen . The Sun @-@ Pictorial opined that " the <unk> seemed to shrink in size . It was reported that each time Keith shaped to Toshack the crowd in the boundary seats ducked . " Victoria declared at 8 / 560 , Test teammates Lindwall and Toshack taking the most punishment with figures of 1 / 100 and 0 / 133 from 18 and 21 overs respectively . Miller then took 1 / 41 — his 50th first @-@ class wicket — and a catch as Victoria won by an innings and 114 runs . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 The Third Test was Miller 's first in his home town , and he produced a quiet performance in a drawn match . He scored 33 before being caught behind by Godfrey Evans from the bowling of Wright as Australia stumbled and lost three wickets in four runs to be 6 / 192 ; the hosts recovered to reach 365 in the first innings . Miller then bowled ten wicketless overs for 34 and caught Ikin from the leg spin of Bruce Dooland in England 's reply of 351 . Miller then scored 34 as Australia set England 551 to win in seven hours . Miller then took 2 / 41 in the second innings , removing Ikin and Bedser during a spell in tandem with Lindwall late on the final day that was punctuated by frequent bouncers . Miller also ran out Compton , but England held on for a draw with three wickets intact . 
 Miller then played for Tasmania Combined XI — which consisted mainly of Victorians — against Hammond 's tourists in Hobart . He scored 70 and 30 , opening in the second innings , and took a wicket in each innings , removing Evans and Ikin as the match ended in a draw . This was followed by a match against Queensland in Brisbane in which Miller scored 81 batting at No. 3 , featuring in a 93 @-@ run stand with Meuleman as Victoria amassed 466 . He then took 3 / 21 in the hosts ' first innings , removing opener Geoff Cook before returning late in the innings to take two of the last three wickets . Hassett asked the Queenslanders to follow on and Miller took 1 / 20 and two catches as the hosts were defeated by an innings and 13 runs . Miller had a light workload with the ball as Hassett asked him to deliver only 15 @.@ 4 eight @-@ ball overs . 
 Miller made another famous century in the return Sheffield Shield match against arch @-@ rivals New South Wales at the Sydney Cricket Ground . Miller had a lean time with the bat in the first innings , being dismissed for six as Hassett 's tourists made 356 . He was then punished as the New South Welshmen amassed 79 runs from his 14 overs , taking only the wicket of <unk> Lush as the hosts replied with 329 . Miller came to the crease at 2 / 118 after 100 minutes on the third morning , with brothers Merv and Neil Harvey back in the pavilion . Miller combined with Ian Johnson ( 82 ) in a 126 @-@ run partnership , before sharing an unbroken 206 @-@ run stand with Meuleman . By stumps , 232 minutes after he came to the crease , Miller had reached 206 not out , and Victoria declared at 3 / 450 . Miller struck 15 fours and three sixes in a strident attack on the bowling . His first six was struck from the leg spin of Fred Johnston and landed on the roof of the Members Stand . The second , from the occasional left arm unorthodox spin of Test teammate Arthur Morris , was a lofted drive that went straight back over the bowler 's head and over the sightscreen at the Paddington End ; the ball was still rising when it hit the upper deck of the MA Noble Stand around 100 m away . His third six sent a delivery from Test bowling colleague Toshack over the square leg fence . 
 At one stage , Toshack had a long @-@ on , long @-@ off and a man directly behind the bowler to stop Miller 's powerful drives . One such shot from the bowling of Morris was hit with such power that it rebounded from the <unk> almost to the bowler . Lindwall , the fastest bowler in the world , was delivering to Miller at one stage with a solitary slip and nine men in the outfield . After his long innings , Miller was only required to bowl two wicketless overs for six runs as New South Wales were bowled out for 189 and suffered a 288 @-@ run loss . These two decisive victories played a large part in Victoria 's winning of the Sheffield Shield . 
 Miller 's uncertain future continued to dog him , and Rawtenstall expressed their displeasure at their recruit 's apparent refusal to fulfil his contract . Miller had privately decided that he would not go through with the deal , but was refusing to inform the Lancastrian club . In the meantime , he had various job proposals , which he spurned until privately receiving a contract offer from the manager of North Sydney Cricket Club . The proposed deal would give him a subsidy for the costs of his relocation to Sydney to work as a liquor salesman , and gave him generous leave conditions so that he could play sport . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 Having resolved the issue of his playing future , Miller was back in a good frame of mind for the Fourth Test in Adelaide . In a high @-@ scoring match , Miller took a wicket in each innings , but he shone with the bat . England batted first and had reached a strong position of 4 / 320 on the second day when Miller bowled Joe Hardstaff junior , who edged a bouncer into his stumps for 67 , ending a partnership of 118 with centurion Compton ; the hosts lost wickets steadily thereafter to be dismissed for 460 , and Miller ended with 1 / 45 from 16 overs in extreme heat . After Morris and Hassett put on 179 runs for the third wicket , Miller came in at 3 / 207 late on the third day and reached 33 by the time stumps were drawn with Australia at 4 / 293 , while his partner Johnson was unbeaten on 35 . 
 On the first ball of the third morning , Miller hooked the ball into the crowd , landing just in front of the governor 's VIP box to move to 39 . He quickly accumulated another 61 runs in 71 minutes to reach his maiden Test century . Miller and Johnson added a further 79 runs in the morning , of which the latter contributed only 17 before being dismissed for 52 , such was Miller 's rate of scoring . Miller did not play more expansively after reaching triple figures , as three wickets fell at the other end for 24 runs and the Englishmen , particularly Yardley , utilised leg theory to stifle the scoring . As the English bowlers continued to regularly take tail @-@ end wickets , Miller accelerated again , launching drives into the crowd as England stationed four men on the fence waiting in vain to catch one of his lofted strokes . Miller ended unbeaten on 141 from 198 balls as Australia took a first innings lead , but the match petered into a high @-@ scoring draw . In the second innings , Miller and Lindwall unsuccessfully tried to attack Hutton and Washbrook with bouncers as the English openers registered a century partnership . Miller took Bedser 's wicket to end with 1 / 34 from 11 overs as England reached 8 / 340 before declaring . Miller was not required to bat after Australia were set 314 runs to win in 195 minutes ; they reached 1 / 215 when time ran out . 
 Before the last Test , Miller played for Victoria against England in his final match for his native state before moving to New South Wales . He scored six before being stumped from the medium pace of Bedser and took 4 / 63 in the first innings , his best bowling since the First Test , as England scored 355 before Victoria replied with 327 . His victims included Gibb , Yardley and Compton for 93 , thereby preventing the English batsman from scoring his fifth century in as many innings . The match ended in a draw when England were bowled out for 118 in their second innings ; Miller bowled two overs in his final actions for Victoria , conceding two runs without taking a wicket . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 The Fifth Test saw Miller take a wicket in each innings , his victims being Wright and Evans . He also caught Yardley and Compton in the first and second innings respectively . After Miller scored 23 to help Australia make 253 in reply to England 's 280 , the tourists fell for 186 in their second innings , leaving the hosts with a target of 214 runs on a wearing wicket that was increasingly aiding spin . Miller came to the crease when Bradman fell with the score at 3 / 149 . McCool joined Miller after the loss of Hassett and Ron Hamence in quick succession left Australia at 5 / 180 . Wright then beat Miller with three consecutive leg breaks , before the batsman struck back against Bedser with consecutive boundaries for four . Together with McCool , Miller saw Australia to the target without further loss . 
 Australia had taken the series 3 – 0 , Miller scoring 384 runs at 76 @.@ 80 and taking 16 wickets at 20 @.@ 88 , which placed him second in both batting and bowling averages behind Bradman and Lindwall respectively . Nevertheless , Miller did not enjoy himself as much as during the Victory Tests of 1945 and became disillusioned with Bradman 's relentless pursuit of victory and ruthless mentality . Miller was impulsive and cared little for records or mercilessly dominating his opponents ; he loved to play in a flamboyant manner with early declarations to keep the match alive and less concern for winning or losing . Hassett had outlined after the Victory Tests that the post @-@ war era should be about " cricket , not war " . Miller 's Services team @-@ mate and biographer Richard Whitington said that Miller " did not enjoy the humiliation of men who had proved themselves champions before the war " . 
 However , Test cricket had always been fought fiercely , and the ruthless Bradman was not about to change this . The Australian skipper repeatedly shut England out of the game with massive totals , relentlessly <unk> out any prospects of an opposition win rather than maximising the chances of an Australian victory with enterprising declarations . On reflection , Miller said " It was inevitable that The Don and I should have clashed . Our temperaments are so different . " 
 Overall , Miller played in 13 first @-@ class matches during the Australian summer , scoring 1 @,@ 202 runs at 75 @.@ 12 and taking 32 wickets at 22 @.@ 65 . In matches for Victoria , where he played under Hassett 's captaincy , Miller scored 713 runs at 89 @.@ 13 and took 14 wickets at 21 @.@ 14 . In all , he took 14 catches . Of the six matches in the victorious Sheffield Shield campaign , five were won and the other was drawn , Miller averaging 133 @.@ 40 . 
 = = Playing role = = 
 As England had a strong batting lineup , Bradman wanted a large range of specialist bowlers in the Tests , and this was made possible as his preferred bowlers were skillful with the bat . Australia 's bowling line @-@ up consisted of Miller , McCool ( leg spin ) , Johnson ( off spin ) , Lindwall , George Tribe ( both left arm orthodox and unorthodox ) and Toshack . The only deviations were Lindwall missing one Test due to chickenpox , and leg spinner Dooland replacing left @-@ arm spinner Tribe in two Tests . 
 Of the First Test team , all bar Toshack scored multiple first @-@ class centuries in their careers , and all averaged under 27 @.@ 50 with the ball . As Bradman wanted all four spin techniques covered , as well as both left and right @-@ arm seamers , this also meant that he could only have two fast bowlers — Lindwall and Miller — as three positions were occupied by spinners and a fourth by Toshack , who was of medium pace . 
 While Miller was a reluctant bowler , Bradman used him heavily because of his desire to have every possible spin option . Miller thus played as a middle @-@ order batsman batting at No. 5 ahead of the wicket @-@ keeper and the other bowlers , and an opening fast bowler , partnering Lindwall . For Victoria , Miller often batted higher at No. 3 or No. 4 and bowled less . For his state , Miller averaged more with the bat , which he felt was because he was able to concentrate more on his batting , as Hassett gave him a smaller workload with the ball . 
 = Tropical Storm Arthur ( 2008 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Arthur was the first Atlantic tropical storm that formed during the month of May since 1981 . The first tropical cyclone of the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season , the storm formed on May 30 , 2008 from the interaction of two tropical waves and the remnants of the eastern Pacific Tropical Storm Alma , which had crossed into the western Caribbean Sea . The system quickly organized and was named Tropical Storm Arthur on May 31 , while crossing the shore of Belize . It dissipated two days later over the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico . Arthur and its remnants triggered severe flooding which killed a reported nine people and affected 100 @,@ 000 more in Belize . Damage was light to moderate , estimated at $ 78 million ( 2008 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 By May 29 , 2008 , the western Caribbean Sea became <unk> active due to the presence of two tropical waves and Tropical Storm Alma , which was located in the east Pacific Ocean . The system generated a broad surface low pressure system , as well as clusters of convection . The next day , Alma made landfall on Nicaragua , pulling deep tropical moisture into the region . Upper level outflow was spreading outwards from the tropical storm with a high pressure system over the Caribbean . A surface trough developed and extended from inland Honduras to just south of the Cayman Islands , which sparked further development of strong convection . 
 On May 31 , the remnants of Alma were situated along the coast of Belize as a 1004 mbar low pressure system . A broad upper @-@ level ridge was anchored over the Gulf of Honduras , which covered the entire region and maintained deep tropical moisture . Satellite imagery and a NOAA buoy reported sustained tropical storm @-@ force winds . Despite moving ashore , the system was named Tropical Storm Arthur about 45 mi ( 72 km ) north @-@ northwest of Belize City . In post @-@ analysis , it was determined that Arthur had developed more than 12 hours earlier , late on May 30 , and made landfall early on May 31 with 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds in northeastern Belize . While over land , Arthur maintained minimal tropical storm force winds , concentrated primarily over open waters to the east and northeast . Despite being over land for several hours , the storm maintained a fairly organized structure . The storm contained a large low @-@ level center , accompanied by convective banding , and was developing new convective cells . Initially , it was thought Arthur would continue generally westward due to a ridge to its north , and later re @-@ intensify in the Bay of Campeche . 
 The associated thunderstorm activity became separated from the center of circulation , and early on June 1 , the center became difficult to locate due to becoming disorganized . It remained a tropical storm over land for nearly 24 hours before weakening to a tropical depression later that day . While drifting southwestward over land , Arthur weakened further , and the National Hurricane Center issued its last advisory on the system late on June 1 . By June 4 , the remnants of Arthur were diminishing over southeastern Mexico without any redevelopment . Thunderstorms briefly redeveloped two days later , as its associated circulation crossed over the Bay of Campeche into Veracruz , although it dissipated soon after . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 In preparation for the storm , ports were closed in the Mexican state of Quintana Roo , while residents and tourists were encouraged to take precautions in coastal areas . Also , ports were closed on the islands of Cozumel , Isla Mujeres and in Chetumal . Small boats were restricted from leaving some ports , but evacuations were deemed unnecessary . Tropical storm warnings were issued as soon as the storm was first classified for the coast of Belize and the coast of Mexico south of Cabo Catoche , and remained in effect until Arthur weakened to a tropical depression . 
 While crossing Belize , Arthur dropped heavy rainfall , estimated as high as 15 in ( 380 mm ) . The storm produced rainfall as far south as Belize City and kicked up strong surf on the island of Ambergris Caye . Winds from Arthur forced the closure of two of Mexico 's three main oil exporting ports in the Gulf of Mexico due to rough seas . The storm 's remnants , combined with recent heavy rains from Tropical Storm Alma , triggered flash flooding and caused rivers in southern and northern Belize to overflow . The flooding damaged one bridge and one highway , and several other bridges were under water . One village was evacuated , and shelters in Corozal and Orange Walk were opened . In rural areas the electricity was cut off due to safety issues . Dozens were stranded on their roof due to high water , and work to repair an important highway was halted when flood waters washed away the repaired section . Papaya plantations , shrimp farms and rice crops were also affected by the unsettled weather . 
 In all , about 100 @,@ 000 people were affected by the flooding , and nine fatalities were reported ; five of which were directly attributed to Arthur . A total of 714 houses were damaged , and damage in Belize was estimated at $ 78 million ( 2008 USD ) . British helicopters helped rescue stranded people following the storm , and Mexico provided a helicopter to help carry supplies to areas affected by the flooding . Prime Minister Dean Barrow declared a disaster area in southern Belize 's Stann Creek Valley . Additionally , the government rushed food , water and clothing to about 13 @,@ 000 people . 
 When Arthur later moved over Mexico , it dropped heavy rainfall , with a maximum 24 @-@ hour total of 8 @.@ 34 in ( 212 mm ) in Pijijiapan , Chiapas . There were no reports of damage or deaths in the country . Arthur was the first tropical storm to form in May in the Atlantic since Tropical Storm Arlene in 1981 , and the last until Tropical Storm Alberto in May 2012 . 
 = Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet = 
 Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet is a children 's literature book by science writer June A. English and astronaut Thomas David Jones that was published in 1996 by Scholastic . Jones was among the crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour during an eleven @-@ day mission in space , which was launched in April 1994 to study the ecological well @-@ being of Earth using specialized radar technology . The book , which is illustrated with radar images and picturesque photographs , chronicles the mission and Jones ' experiences of it . 
 Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet received a generally favorable reception in media coverage and book reviewers . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said , " The authors convey the awe and wonderment of seeing Earth from space and the intricate delicacy of the Earth 's ecology " . The Dallas Morning News said , " The astronaut 's descriptions are vivid " . A review in Booklist was more critical ; it said , " The authors try to cover too much in so few pages , and the narrative , with several focal points , becomes simplified at times " . School Library Journal wrote , " It provides a unique look at a new method of research and an opportunity for youngsters to read one scientist 's account of what it 's like to engage in this exciting field of endeavor " . The book was selected for inclusion in books Best Books for Children , and Adventuring With Books , or educating youths about history by using children 's literature works . 
 = = Background = = 
 June A. English is an author who specializes in science writing . She has published works within the genre of children 's literature . 
 Thomas David Jones was a member of the United States Air Force prior to working for NASA . As Jones was a United States federal employee at the time of the book 's publication , he did not receive profits from sales of the work . English and Jones later produced another collaborative work , Scholastic Encyclopedia of the United States at War , which was published in 1998 . Jones wrote another book about his experiences in space , Sky Walking : An Astronaut 's Memoir , which was published in 2006 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 In Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet , astronaut Thomas David Jones recounts his experiences studying the Earth during his first mission with the United States space agency NASA . Jones ' space mission lasted eleven days . Jones was a member of the crew of the Space Shuttle Endeavour , which left Earth in April 1994 . The mission was intended to provide the Space Radar Lab with a view of the planet . By using three separate radar echoes , scientists were able to analyze a full image of the planet . The radar technology could penetrate obstructions , including clouds and thick outgrowth of trees . Another purpose of the mission was to analyze the ecological state of the planet and to take measurements of pollution caused by carbon monoxide . 
 The book is based upon journal entries written by Jones during the mission . He presents a typical NASA mission member 's day @-@ to @-@ day experiences while living on the space shuttle . Jones illustrates his account with photographs from his mission and pictures from the radar capture . He describes his observations while looking at the Earth from space , for example he says , " Maybe more than any other sight from space , lightning gives the decided impression that the Earth is alive , a living organism " . He described aurora phenomena as , " shimmering fingers of green light reaching up from the dark ocean , an arc of light around the South Magnetic Pole " . June English provides contextual information about Jones ' mission . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet received a positive review from journalist Rebecca O 'Connell , who wrote in the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , " The authors convey the awe and wonderment of seeing Earth from space and the intricate delicacy of the Earth 's ecology " . She said of the descriptive nature of the text , " Their descriptions of scientific phenomena read like revelations of mystic wonders . But this is not to say it is ponderous , not at all . " O 'Connell 's review concluded , " The text is packed with fascinating information and humorous touches . Even children who are not ordinarily interested in space or ecology will be interested in this book , and aficionados will go ga @-@ ga . " Leigh <unk> of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune recommended the book , and said , " Science writer June English tracked the launch and adds perspective on how the mission will help scientists understand Earth , including its atmosphere , geology , ecology — and future " . Nita Thurman wrote for The Dallas Morning News , " Mission : Earth , A Journey to the Home Planet has dozens of color photos taken inside the shuttle and through its windows . The astronaut 's descriptions are vivid . " Publishers Weekly wrote favorably of the book , saying , " Astronaut Jones 's enthusiasm for his work is contagious ; it shines through the text , making for a roundly enjoyable and informative read " . Publishers Weekly recommended the book and said it is , " [ w ] ell @-@ conceived and thoughtfully executed , this book deserves a wide audience . " 
 A review of the book by Ilana <unk> in Booklist was more critical . <unk> said , " The authors try to cover too much in so few pages , and the narrative , with several focal points , becomes simplified at times ... Still , the account is interesting , and the many high @-@ quality , often breathtaking color photographs and radar images complement the text nicely " . Elaine Fort <unk> reviewed the book for School Library Journal , and recommended it for teaching specific subject matter . She wrote , " Pollution patterns , shifting ocean currents , destruction of rain forests , and other environmental changes were the heart of Jones 's project , and this book might be used more successfully to supplement the curriculum in those areas than in units on space flight per se " . <unk> said the book " provides a unique look at a new method of research and an opportunity for youngsters to read one scientist 's account of what it 's like to engage in this exciting field of endeavor " . Horn Book Review called the book " a uniquely personal account " , and said it " features a crowded design , but the many color photographs throughout the text are fascinating " . 
 Mission : Earth , Voyage to the Home Planet is listed in the book Teaching U.S. history through children 's literature : post @-@ World War II by Wanda J. Miller as a resource for educating youth about history by using children 's literature works . It is used in other such books , including Strategies That Work : Teaching Comprehension for Understanding and Engagement by Stephanie Harvey and Anne <unk> , Reading Comprehension : Books and Strategies for the Elementary Curriculum by Kathryn K. Matthew and Kimberly Kimbell @-@ Lopez , and An Integrated Language Perspective in the Elementary School : An Action Approach by Christine Pappas , Barbara <unk> Kiefer , and Linda S. <unk> . It was selected for inclusion in Best Books for Children by John Thomas Gillespie , and Adventuring With Books by Kathryn Mitchell Pierce . 
 = No. 30 Transport Unit RAAF = 
 No. 30 Transport Unit was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) unit that operated during the Korean War . It was formed in November 1950 as No. 30 Communications Unit and based at Iwakuni , Japan , as part of No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing . The unit was initially equipped with four Douglas C – 47 Dakotas and two Austers , one of the Dakotas being the personal transport of Lieutenant General Sir Horace Robertson , commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) . Another four Dakotas were sent to Japan due to operational demands . The unit 's role in Korea was to support No. 77 ( Fighter ) Squadron by transporting supplies and equipment . It also delivered materials and stores to Australian and Commonwealth ground forces , and transported VIPs of the United Nations Command . Return journeys to Japan were often used to evacuate wounded personnel from the theatre . No. 30 Communications Unit was redesignated No. 30 Transport Unit in November 1951 , and re @-@ formed as No. 36 ( Transport ) Squadron in March 1953 . The squadron remained in Korea following the armistice , and returned to Australia in June 1955 . 
 = = History = = 
 When the Korean War broke out on 25 June 1950 , No. 77 ( Fighter ) Squadron of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was based at Iwakuni , Japan , having served with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) for four years . Equipped primarily with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs , the squadron also operated a communications flight of two Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas and two Austers . Personnel were preparing to return to Australia when they were placed on standby for action over Korea ; the Mustangs began flying missions as part of United Nations Command ( UNC ) forces a week later . Following the landing at Inchon and the consequent advance northward of UNC troops , No. 77 Squadron relocated to Pohang , South Korea , on 12 October 1950 . It left behind its main support elements at Iwakuni . No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing was established at the base on 20 October and given administrative responsibility for all RAAF units operating during the conflict . As well as No. 77 Squadron , this included the newly formed No. 391 ( Base ) Squadron and No. 491 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , and No. 30 Communications Flight , formerly the No. 77 Squadron Communications Flight . The flight 's original complement of two Dakotas and two Austers had been augmented in September 1950 by two more Dakotas from Australia . On 1 November , the flight was designated No. 30 Communications Unit . 
 No. 30 Communications Unit was headquartered at Iwakuni , along with the rest of No. 91 Wing 's components except No. 77 Squadron , which was based on the Korean peninsula . It was initially commanded , unofficially , by Flight Lieutenant ( later Air Commodore ) Dave Hitchens . According to Hitchens , " Having commanded the communications flight in No. 77 Squadron , I assumed control but had no formal authority to do so , but nobody told me to stop . " The transport aircraft included the personal Dakota of the BCOF commander , Lieutenant General Sir Horace Robertson , operating under his direction . During November 1950 , the unit received another four Dakotas from No. 38 Squadron ( of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing in Malaya ) , giving it a total strength of eight Dakotas and two Austers . It supported all Australian forces in Korea . One of its key functions was medical evacuation , but it was also responsible for supply drops , search and rescue , reconnaissance , and mail delivery , as well as transporting cargo , troops , and VIPs . Unlike No. 77 Squadron , it was not tasked by the US Fifth Air Force but instead operated under Australian control , exercised through BCOF headquarters in Japan . In December 1950 the unit undertook " Operation Haggis " , the delivery of 180 pounds ( 82 kg ) of haggis to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders based in Suwon , Korea . The same month , a United States Air Force Mustang taking off from Suwon smashed into the cockpit of one of the Dakotas ; none of the Australian crew was injured but the aircraft had to be written off and stripped for components by No. 491 Squadron . 
 The first official commanding officer of No. 30 Communications Unit , Squadron Leader John Gerber , took over from Hitchens on 28 January 1951 . As of 31 March , the unit 's strength was eight Dakotas and two Austers , and fifty @-@ seven personnel including twelve officers . According to the RAAF Historical Section , a " typical month " ( May 1951 ) involved carrying over 1 @,@ 000 troops , 180 @,@ 000 pounds ( 82 @,@ 000 kg ) of cargo and 95 @,@ 000 pounds ( 43 @,@ 000 kg ) of mail from Iwakuni to Korea , and over 1 @,@ 000 troops , 380 medical evacuees , 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) of cargo and 32 @,@ 000 pounds ( 15 @,@ 000 kg ) of mail from Korea to Iwakuni . No. 30 Communications Unit was redesignated No. 30 Transport Unit on 5 November 1951 . One of its aircraft dropped a wreath over Hiroshima on 6 August 1952 , the seventh anniversary of the atomic bombing . As of 31 December 1952 , its strength was eight Dakotas and one CAC Wirraway , and fifty @-@ nine personnel including eight officers . 
 On 10 March 1953 , No. 30 Transport Unit re @-@ formed as No. 36 ( Transport ) Squadron , which had disbanded the previous day at RAAF Base Richmond , New South Wales . Between the armistice in July and the end of August 1953 , the squadron repatriated over 900 Commonwealth prisoners of war . As of 30 November 1954 , its strength was seven Dakotas and one Wirraway , and eighty @-@ seven personnel including seven officers . Elements of No. 36 Squadron began returning to Australia in January 1955 , and by the end of the month its strength was four Dakotas and one Wirraway , and fifty @-@ eight personnel including five officers . Nominal operational control of the squadron was transferred to Fifth Air Force on 1 February 1955 , though its purpose continued to be the support of Commonwealth forces . No. 36 Squadron ceased flying on 13 March , after which its remaining elements departed Iwakuni for Australia , leaving three Dakotas and a Wirraway that formed RAAF Transport Flight ( Japan ) ; the flight operated until July 1956 and was disbanded two months later . 
 The transportation unit suffered two fatal accidents . One of the Austers crashed on takeoff in April 1951 , killing all three occupants . A Wirraway came down in a river after striking telephone wires in June 1952 ; the pilot and passenger survived the impact but the latter subsequently died of his injuries . During the war the Dakotas carried around 100 @,@ 000 passengers and over 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 kg ) of cargo . No. 91 Wing 's records listed 12 @,@ 762 medical evacuations from Korea to Japan . Reflecting on the nature of transport work in Korea , Hitchens stated : 
 Most of our flying was not very exciting ; but there was a lot of it . Lots of late dark nights . Lots of crowded airfields . Lots of plain hard work . [ ... ] We all shed a lot of weight . 
 = Javan rhinoceros = 
 The Javan rhinoceros ( Rhinoceros sondaicus ) , also known as the Sunda rhinoceros or lesser one @-@ horned rhinoceros , is a very rare member of the family Rhinocerotidae and one of five extant rhinoceroses . It belongs to the same genus as the Indian rhinoceros , and has similar <unk> , armour @-@ like skin , but at 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 – 10 ft ) in length and 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 7 m ( 4 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in height , it is smaller ( in fact , it is closer in size to the black rhinoceros of the genus <unk> ) . Its horn is usually less than 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) , smaller than those of the other rhino species . Only adult males have horns ; females lack them altogether . 
 Once the most widespread of Asian rhinoceroses , the Javan rhinoceros ranged from the islands of Java and Sumatra , throughout Southeast Asia , and into India and China . The species is critically endangered , with only one known population in the wild , and no individuals in captivity . It is possibly the rarest large mammal on earth , with a population of as few as 58 to 61 in Ujung Kulon National Park at the western tip of Java in Indonesia . A second population in Cat Tien National Park in Vietnam was confirmed as extinct in 2011 . The decline of the Javan rhinoceros is attributed to poaching , primarily for their horns , which are highly valued in traditional Chinese medicine , fetching as much as US $ 30 @,@ 000 per kg on the black market . As European presence in their range increased , trophy hunting also became a serious threat . Loss of habitat , especially as the result of wars , such as the Vietnam War , in Southeast Asia , has also contributed to the species ' decline and hindered recovery . The remaining range is within one nationally protected area , but the rhinos are still at risk from poachers , disease , and loss of genetic diversity leading to inbreeding depression . 
 The Javan rhino can live around 30 – 45 years in the wild . It historically inhabited lowland rain forest , wet grasslands , and large floodplains . It is mostly solitary , except for courtship and offspring @-@ rearing , though groups may occasionally congregate near wallows and salt licks . Aside from humans , adults have no predators in their range . The Javan rhino usually avoids humans , but will attack when it feels threatened . Scientists and conservationists rarely study the animals directly due to their extreme rarity and the danger of interfering with such an endangered species . Researchers rely on camera traps and fecal samples to gauge health and behavior . Consequently , the Javan rhino is the least studied of all rhino species . Two adult rhinos with their calves were filmed in a motion @-@ triggered video released on February 28 , 2011 , by WWF and Indonesia 's National Park Authority , which proved it is still breeding in the wild . In April 2012 , the National Parks Authority released video showing 35 individual Javan rhinos , including mother / offspring pairs and courting adults . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The first studies of the Javan rhinoceros by naturalists from outside of its region took place in 1787 , when two animals were shot in Java . The skulls were sent to the renowned Dutch naturalist Petrus Camper , who died in 1789 before he was able to publish his discovery that the rhinos of Java were a distinct species . Another Javan rhinoceros was shot on the island of Sumatra by Alfred <unk> , who sent the specimen to his stepfather Georges Cuvier , the famous French scientist . Cuvier recognized the animal as a distinct species in 1822 , and in the same year it was identified by Anselme Gaëtan Desmarest as Rhinoceros sondaicus . It was the last species of rhinoceros to be identified . Desmarest initially identified the rhino as being from Sumatra , but later amended this to say his specimen was from Java . 
 The genus name Rhinoceros , which also includes the Indian rhinoceros , is derived from the ancient Greek words <unk> ( <unk> ) , which means " nose " , and κέρας ( <unk> ) , which means " horn " ; sondaicus is derived from <unk> , the biogeographical region that comprises the islands of Sumatra , Java , Borneo , and surrounding smaller islands . The Javan rhino is also known as the lesser one @-@ horned rhinoceros ( in contrast with the greater one @-@ horned rhinoceros , another name for the Indian rhino ) . 
 Of the three distinct subspecies , only one still exists : 
 R. s. sondaicus , the nominate subspecies , known as the Indonesian Javan rhinoceros , once lived on Java and Sumatra . The population is now confined to as more than 50 animals in the wild , Ujung Kulon National Park on the western tip of the island of Java . One researcher has suggested that the Javan rhino on Sumatra belonged to a distinct subspecies , R. s. <unk> , but this is not widely accepted . 
 R. s. <unk> , known as the Vietnamese Javan rhinoceros or Vietnamese rhinoceros , once lived across South China , Vietnam , Cambodia , Laos , Thailand , and Malaysia . The subspecific <unk> is derived from the Annamite Mountain Range in Southeast Asia , part of this subspecies ' range . In 2006 , a single population , estimated at fewer than 12 remaining rhinos , lived in an area of lowland forest in the Cat Tien National Park in Vietnam . Genetic analysis suggested this subspecies and the Indonesian Javan rhinoceros last shared a common ancestor between 300 @,@ 000 and 2 million years ago . The last individual of this population was shot by a poacher in 2010 . 
 R. s. inermis , known as the Indian Javan rhinoceros or Lesser Indian rhinoceros , once ranged from Bengal to Burma , but is presumed to have gone extinct before 1925 . The subspecific inermis means " unarmed " , as the most distinctive characteristic of this subspecies is the small horns in males , and evident lack of horns in females . The original specimen of this species was a hornless female . The political situation in Burma has prevented an assessment of the species in that country , but its survival is considered unlikely . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Ancestral rhinoceroses are held to have first diverged from other perissodactyls in the Early Eocene . Mitochondrial DNA comparison suggests the ancestors of modern rhinos split from the ancestors of Equidae around 50 million years ago . The extant family , the Rhinocerotidae , first appeared in the Late Eocene in Eurasia , and the ancestors of the extant rhino species dispersed from Asia beginning in the Miocene . 
 The Indian and Javan rhinoceros , the only members of the genus Rhinoceros , first appear in the fossil record in Asia around 1 @.@ 6 million – 3 @.@ 3 million years ago . Molecular estimates , however , suggest the two species diverged from each other much earlier , around 11 @.@ 7 million years ago . Although belonging to the type genus , the Indian and Javan rhinoceroses are not believed to be closely related to other rhino species . Different studies have hypothesized that they may be closely related to the extinct <unk> or <unk> . A detailed cladistic analysis of the Rhinocerotidae placed Rhinoceros and the extinct <unk> in a clade with Dicerorhinus , the Sumatran rhino . Other studies have suggested the Sumatran rhinoceros is more closely related to the two African species . The Sumatran rhino may have diverged from the other Asian rhinos 15 million years ago , or as far back as 25 @.@ 9 million years ago based on mitochondrial data . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Javan rhino is smaller than the Indian rhinoceros , and is close in size to the black rhinoceros . It is the largest animal in Java and the second @-@ largest animal in Indonesia after the Asian elephant . The body length of the Javan rhino ( including its head ) can be up to 2 to 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) , and it can reach a height of 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 7 m ( 4 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 6 ft ) . Adults are variously reported to weigh between 900 and 2 @,@ 300 kg ( 2 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 100 lb ) , although a study to collect accurate measurements of the animals has never been conducted and is not a priority because of their extreme conservation status . No substantial size difference is seen between genders , but females may be slightly bigger . The rhinos in Vietnam appeared to be significantly smaller than those in Java , based on studies of photographic evidence and measurements of their footprints . 
 Like the Indian rhino , the Javan rhinoceros has a single horn ( the other extant species have two horns ) . Its horn is the smallest of all extant rhinos , usually less than 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) with the longest recorded only 27 cm ( 11 in ) . Only males have horns . Female Javan rhinos are the only extant rhinos that remain hornless into adulthood , though they may develop a tiny bump of an inch or two in height . The Javan rhinoceros does not appear to often use its horn for fighting , but instead uses it to scrape mud away in wallows , to pull down plants for eating , and to open paths through thick vegetation . Similar to the other browsing species of rhino ( the black , Sumatran , and Indian ) , the Javan rhino has long , pointed , upper lips which help in grabbing food . Its lower incisors are long and sharp ; when the Javan rhino fights , it uses these teeth . Behind the incisors , two rows of six low @-@ crowned molars are used for chewing coarse plants . Like all rhinos , the Javan rhino smells and hears well , but has very poor vision . They are estimated to live for 30 to 45 years . 
 Its hairless , <unk> gray or gray @-@ brown skin falls in folds to the shoulder , back and rump . The skin has a natural mosaic pattern , which lends the rhino an armored appearance . The neck folds of the Javan rhinoceros are smaller than those of the Indian rhinoceros , but still form a saddle shape over the shoulder . Because of the risks of interfering with such an endangered species , however , the Javan rhinoceros is primarily studied through fecal sampling and camera traps . They are rarely encountered , observed or measured directly . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Even the most optimistic estimate suggests fewer than 100 Javan rhinos remain in the wild . They are considered one of the most endangered species in the world . The Javan rhinoceros is known to survive in only one place , the Ujung Kulon National Park on the western tip of Java . 
 The animal was once widespread from Assam and Bengal ( where their range would have overlapped with both the Sumatran and Indian rhinos ) eastward to Myanmar , Thailand , Cambodia , Laos , Vietnam , and southwards to the Malay Peninsula and the islands of Sumatra , Java , and possibly Borneo . The Javan rhino primarily inhabits dense , lowland rain forests , grasslands , and reed beds with abundant rivers , large floodplains , or wet areas with many mud wallows . Although it historically preferred low @-@ lying areas , the subspecies in Vietnam was pushed onto much higher ground ( up to 2 @,@ 000 m or 6 @,@ 561 ft ) , probably because of human encroachment and poaching . 
 The range of the Javan rhinoceros has been shrinking for at least 3 @,@ 000 years . Starting around 1000 BC , the northern range of the rhinoceros extended into China , but began moving southward at roughly 0 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) per year , as human settlements increased in the region . It likely became locally extinct in India in the first decade of the 20th century . The Javan rhino was hunted to extinction on the Malay Peninsula by 1932 . The last ones on Sumatra died out during World War II . They were extinct from Chittagong and the <unk> by the middle of the 20th century . By the end of the Vietnam War , the Vietnamese rhinoceros was believed extinct across all of mainland Asia . Local hunters and woodcutters in Cambodia claim to have seen Javan rhinos in the Cardamom Mountains , but surveys of the area have failed to find any evidence of them . In the late 1980s , a small population was found in the Cat Tien area of Vietnam . However , the last individual of that population was shot in 2010 . A population may have existed on the island of Borneo , as well , though these specimens could have been the Sumatran rhinoceros , a small population of which still lives there . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The Javan rhinoceros is a solitary animal with the exception of breeding pairs and mothers with calves . They sometimes congregate in small groups at salt licks and mud wallows . <unk> in mud is a common behavior for all rhinos ; the activity allows them to maintain cool body temperatures and helps prevent disease and parasite infestation . The Javan rhinoceros does not generally dig its own mud wallows , preferring to use other animals ' wallows or naturally occurring pits , which it will use its horn to enlarge . Salt licks are also very important because of the essential nutrients the rhino receives from the salt . Male home ranges are larger at 12 – 20 km ( 7 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 4 mi ) ² ) compared to the female , which are around 3 – 14 km ( 1 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 7 mi ) ² ) . Male territories overlap each other less than those of the female . It is not known if there are territorial fights . 
 Males mark their territories with dung piles and by urine spraying . Scrapes made by the feet in the ground and twisted saplings also seem to be used for communication . Members of other rhino species have a peculiar habit of defecating in massive rhino dung piles and then scraping their back feet in the dung . The Sumatran and Javan rhinos , while defecating in piles , do not engage in the scraping . This adaptation in behavior is thought to be ecological ; in the wet forests of Java and Sumatra , the method may not be useful for spreading odors . 
 The Javan rhino is much less vocal than the Sumatran ; very few Javan rhino vocalizations have ever been recorded . Adults have no known predators other than humans . The species , particularly in Vietnam , is skittish and retreats into dense forests whenever humans are near . Though a valuable trait from a survival standpoint , it has made the rhinos difficult to study . Nevertheless , when humans approach too closely , the Javan rhino becomes aggressive and will attack , stabbing with the incisors of its lower jaw while thrusting upward with its head . Its comparatively antisocial behavior may be a recent adaptation to population stresses ; historical evidence suggests they , like other rhinos , were once more gregarious . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The Javan rhinoceros is herbivorous , eating diverse plant species , especially their shoots , twigs , young foliage and fallen fruit . Most of the plants favored by the species grow in sunny areas in forest clearings , shrubland and other vegetation types with no large trees . The rhino knocks down saplings to reach its food and grabs it with its prehensile upper lip . It is the most adaptable feeder of all the rhino species . Currently , it is a pure browser , but probably once both browsed and grazed in its historical range . The rhino eats an estimated 50 kg ( 110 lb ) of food daily . Like the Sumatran rhino , it needs salt in its diet . The salt licks common in its historical range do not exist in Ujung Kulon , but the rhinos there have been observed drinking seawater , likely for the same nutritional need . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The main factor in the continued decline of the Javan rhinoceros population has been poaching for horns , a problem that affects all rhino species . The horns have been a traded commodity for more than 2 @,@ 000 years in China , where they are believed to have healing properties . Historically , the rhinoceros ' hide was used to make armor for Chinese soldiers , and some local tribes in Vietnam believed the hide could be used to make an antidote for snake venom . Because the rhinoceros ' range encompasses many areas of poverty , it has been difficult to convince local people not to kill a seemingly ( otherwise ) useless animal which could be sold for a large sum of money . When the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora first went into effect in 1975 , the Javan rhinoceros was placed under complete Appendix 1 protection ; all international trade in the Javan rhinoceros and products derived from it is illegal . Surveys of the rhinoceros horn black market have determined that Asian rhinoceros horn fetches a price as high as $ 30 @,@ 000 per kg , three times the value of African rhinoceros horn . 
 As with many types Asian and African megafauna , the Javan rhino was relentlessly hunted by trophy and big @-@ game hunters for decades following the arrival of Europeans in its range . The rhinos being easy targets , this was as severe a contributor to its decline as was poaching for its horns . Such was the toll of big @-@ game hunting that by the time the rhino 's plight was made known to the world , only the Javan and the ( then unknown ) Vietnamese populations remained . 
 Loss of habitat because of agriculture has also contributed to its decline , though this is no longer as significant a factor because the rhinoceros only lives in one nationally protected park . Deteriorating habitats have hindered the recovery of rhino populations that fell victim to poaching . Even with all the conservation efforts , the prospects for their survival are grim . Because the population is restricted to one small area , they are very susceptible to disease and inbreeding depression . Conservation geneticists estimate a population of 100 rhinos would be needed to preserve the genetic diversity of this conservation @-@ reliant species . 
 = = = Ujung Kulon = = = 
 The Ujung Kulon peninsula of Java was devastated by the eruption of Krakatoa in 1883 . The Javan rhinoceros recolonized the peninsula after the event , but humans never returned in large numbers , thus creating a haven for wildlife . In 1931 , as the Javan rhinoceros was on the brink of extinction in Sumatra , the government of the Dutch Indies declared the rhino a legally protected species , which it has remained ever since . A census of the rhinos in Ujung Kulon was first conducted in 1967 ; only 25 animals were recorded . By 1980 , that population had doubled , and has remained steady , at about 50 , ever since . Although the rhinos in Ujung Kulon have no natural predators , they have to compete for scarce resources with wild cattle , which may keep their numbers below the peninsula 's carrying capacity . Ujung Kulon is managed by the Indonesian Ministry of Forestry . Evidence of at least four baby rhinos was discovered in 2006 , the most ever documented for the species . 
 In March 2011 , hidden @-@ camera video was published showing adults and juveniles , indicating recent matings and breeding . During the period from January to October 2011 , the cameras had captured images of 35 rhinos . As of December 2011 , a rhino breeding sanctuary in an area of 38 @,@ 000 hectares is being finalized to help reach the target of 70 to 80 Javan rhinos by 2015 . 
 In April 2012 , the WWF and International Rhino Foundation added 120 video cameras to the existing 40 to better monitor rhino movements and judge the size of the animals ' population . A recent survey has found far fewer females than males . Only four females among 17 rhinos were recorded in the eastern half of Ujung Kulon , which is a potential setback in efforts to save the species . 
 With Ujung Kulon as the last resort of this species , all the Javan rhinos are in one location , an advantage over the Sumatran rhino which is dispersed in different , unconnected areas . However , this may also be disadvantageous to the Javan rhino population , because any catastrophic diseases or tsunamis could wipe them all out at once . Poaching for their horns is no longer as serious a threat as in the past , due to stricter international regulations on rhino horn , active protection efforts by local authorities , the rhinos ' elusiveness and Ujung Kulon 's remoteness . However , there are still obstacles to the species recovery . In 2012 , the Asian Rhino Project was working out the best eradication programme for the <unk> palm , which was blanketing the park and crowding out the rhinos ' food sources . The banteng cattle also compete with the rhinos for food , so the authorities were considering plans to fence off the western part of the park to keep the livestock out . 
 = = = Cat Tien = = = 
 Once widespread in Southeast Asia , the Javan rhinoceros was presumed extinct in Vietnam in the mid @-@ 1970s , at the end of the Vietnam War . The combat wrought havoc on the ecosystems of the region through use of napalm , extensive defoliation from Agent Orange , aerial bombing , use of landmines , and overhunting by local poachers . 
 In 1988 , the assumption of the subspecies ' extinction was challenged when a hunter shot an adult female , proving the species had somehow survived the war . In 1989 , scientists surveyed Vietnam 's southern forests to search for evidence of other survivors . Fresh tracks belonging to up to 15 rhinos were found along the Dong Nai River . Largely because of the rhinoceros , the region they inhabited became part of the Cat Tien National Park in 1992 . 
 By the early 2000s , their population was feared to have declined past the point of recovery in Vietnam , with some conservationists estimating as few as three to eight rhinos , and possibly no males , survived . Conservationists debated whether or not the Vietnamese rhinoceros had any chance of survival , with some arguing that rhinos from Indonesia should be introduced in an attempt to save the population , with others arguing that the population could recover . 
 Genetic analysis of dung samples collected in Cat Tien National Park in a survey from October 2009 to March 2010 showed only a single individual Javan rhinoceros remained in the park . In early May 2010 , the body of a Javan rhino was found in the park . The animal had been shot and its horn removed by poachers . In October 2011 , the International Rhino Foundation confirmed the Javan rhinoceros was extinct in Vietnam , leaving only the rhinos in Ujung Kulon . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 A Javan rhinoceros has not been exhibited in a zoo for over a century . In the 19th century , at least four rhinos were exhibited in Adelaide , Calcutta , and London . At least 22 Javan rhinos have been documented as having been kept in captivity ; the true number is possibly greater , as the species was sometimes confused with the Indian rhinoceros . 
 The Javan rhinoceros never fared well in captivity . The oldest lived to be 20 , about half the age that the rhinos can reach in the wild . No records are known of a captive rhino giving birth . The last captive Javan rhino died at the Adelaide Zoo in Australia in 1907 , where the species was so little known that it had been exhibited as an Indian rhinoceros . 
 = Heinrich Bär = 
 Oskar @-@ Heinz ( Heinrich ) " <unk> " Bär ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̯ ] ; 25 May 1913 – 28 April 1957 ) was a German Luftwaffe flying ace who served throughout World War II in Europe . Bär flew more than one thousand combat missions , and fought in all major German theaters of the war , including the Western , Eastern and Mediterranean fronts . On 18 occasions he survived being shot down , and he was credited with 220 or 221 aerial victories , around 16 of which were in a Messerschmitt Me @-@ 262 jet fighter . 
 Bär , a Saxon with a strong accent , joined the Reichswehr in 1934 and transferred to the Luftwaffe in 1935 . Serving first as a mechanic , then as a pilot on transport aircraft , he was informally trained as a fighter pilot . He claimed his first aerial victory in September 1939 on the French border . By the end of the Battle of Britain , his tally of victories had increased to 17 . Transferred to the Eastern Front to participate in Operation Barbarossa , he quickly accumulated further kills , a feat that earned him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords for 90 aerial victories in February 1942 . 
 During the remainder of World War II , Bär was credited with 130 other aerial victories , including 16 while flying one of the first jet fighters , the Me 262 , an achievement which would normally have earned him the coveted Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds . Hermann Göring 's personal dislike of Bär , coupled with Bär 's insubordinate character and lack of military discipline , deprived him of this award . After World War II , Bär continued his career as an aviator . He was killed in a flying accident on 28 April 1957 near Braunschweig . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bär was born on 25 May 1913 in Sommerfeld near Leipzig in the Kingdom of Saxony , a federated state of the German Empire . His parents were farmers , and in 1916 , his father was killed in action on the Western Front of World War I. Bär attended the Volksschule , a combined primary and lower secondary school , in Sommerfeld . Initially , he planned on taking over the family farm in <unk> and following graduation attended the agriculture school in <unk> . Aged 15 , he became a glider pilot , joining the glider club on the " Schwarzer Berg " ( Black Mountain ) at <unk> . Bär then wanted to become a forester , for everything associated with wildlife and forests interested him . His first sight of a Junkers transport aircraft changed his mind and convinced him that he should become an aviator . As a teenager , he had ambitions to become an airline pilot with Deutsche Luft Hansa . 
 The Great Depression prevented Bär from gaining a civil pilot license . In 1934 , he joined the Reichswehr and was assigned to the 3 . Kompanie of <unk> 4 ( 3rd Company of the 4th Motor Vehicle Battalion ) as a mechanic . He served in this position until the following year , when he was transferred to a combat wing of the Luftwaffe . A few months later , he was accepted for pilot training , receiving his transport aircraft pilot 's training . From 1 November 1937 to 31 March 1938 , Bär attended the flight school at Oldenburg and was then transferred to the flight school at Hildesheim . He was transferred again , attending the flight school at <unk> where he attained his Luftwaffe Advanced Pilot 's Certificate ( Erweiterter Luftwaffen @-@ Flugzeugführerschein ) , also known as ' C ' -Certificate , confirming proficiency on multi @-@ engine aircraft , on 16 May 1938 . Bär then attended the blind flying school Blindflugschule 2 ( BFS 2 — 2nd blind flying school ) at Neuburg an der Donau from 7 July to 14 August 1938 . He was transferred to I. / Jagdgeschwader 135 , the core of the future Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) , on 1 September 1938 , usually flying the Junkers Ju 86 . The Squadron Leader ( Staffelkapitän ) Douglas Pitcairn noticed Bär 's flying talents and tried to convince Bär to become a fighter pilot . Initially Bär refused , but after he illegally conducted some aerobatics in the Ju 86 leading to an engine failure , he reluctantly accepted and became a fighter pilot . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Stationed on the border with France , Bär achieved his first victory — a Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk — on 25 September 1939 during the Phoney War air skirmishes with the Armée de l 'Air ( French air force ) , earning him the Iron Cross 2nd Class on 27 September 1939 . During the Battle of France , he was credited with two more aerial victories before adding a further 10 during the Battle of Britain . During this time , he had several emergency landings with badly damaged planes and was shot down over the English Channel on 2 September 1940 by a Spitfire . Bär was summoned to appear before Hermann Göring and report on this battle . When Göring asked him what he was thinking about while in the water , Bär immediately replied , " Your speech , Herr Reichsmarschall , in which you said that England is no longer an island ! " , alluding to an address that Göring had made before the German fighter pilots . Incidents like this are testimony to his often blatant disregard for higher authority , a trait that frequently landed him in trouble . In early 1941 , he was credited with an additional four aerial victories against the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , bringing his total to 17 . 
 = = = Eastern Front = = = 
 In June 1941 , JG 51 was transferred East to take part in Operation Barbarossa . JG 51 at the time was part of the 2nd Air Corps , operating in the central sector of the Eastern Front . Bär claimed five aerial victories on 30 June 1941 , bringing his total to 22 . On this day JG 51 was credited with 113 aerial victories in total , among them their 1,000th aerial victory — the first unit to reach this figure — and Oberst Werner Mölders , with 82 aerial victories , surpassed Manfred von Richthofen in number of victories . Within two weeks of combat against the Soviet Air Force , Bär 's tally rose to 27 , which earned him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 2 July , followed by his promotion to Oberleutnant on 1 August 1941 . On 14 August , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves for 60 victories , and on 30 August he became an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " by shooting down six Soviet aircraft . On 31 August , Bär was shot down by an Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 some 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) behind Soviet lines , near Novgorod @-@ Seversky . He suffered injuries to his back and feet while bailing out , but was able to walk back to the German lines ; his wounds necessitated a lengthy hospital treatment . 
 Bär was promoted to Hauptmann in late 1941 and appointed Squadron Leader of 12 . / JG 51 in early 1942 . His longtime wingman at the time was Heinrich Hoffmann . He received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords on 16 February as his tally rose to 90 . This achievement was mentioned in the daily Wehrmachtbericht ( the propaganda report by the OKW ) on 12 February 1942 , his first of three references during the course of the war . On 11 May , Bär was transferred from IV . / JG 51 on the Moscow front to take command of I. Gruppe of Gordon Gollob 's Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 ) flying wing . Bär replaced Herbert Ihlefeld who had been transferred . JG 77 was tasked with supporting the hard fighting in the Crimean Campaign over the Kerch Strait on the Crimean Peninsula . Led by the flying aces ( Experten ) Gollob and Bär , JG 77 took over the air space above Kerch @-@ Taman as Gollob and Bär shot down two and three LaGG @-@ 3s respectively , raising Bär 's victory total to 93 . Mutual animosity between the two men , Gollob , a disciplinarian pro @-@ Nazi , and Bär , an anti @-@ authoritarian , ensured an intense rivalry . On 19 May 1942 , Bär claimed five further aerial victories ; his victory total now stood at 103 . He was the 9th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . That same day , Inspector of Fighters ( General der Jagdflieger ) Adolf Galland arrived to inspect Bär 's I. / JG 77 and JG 77 surpassed 2 @,@ 000 victories . This flying achievement earned Bär a second mention in the daily Wehrmachtbericht on 20 May 1942 . 
 = = = Mediterranean theater = = = 
 In June 1942 , JG 77 was moved to the Mediterranean theater and took part in the air battles over Malta before relocating to Tunisia and participating in the North African Campaign . On 25 January 1943 , Bär claimed two Curtiss P @-@ 40 Warhawk fighters shot down , taking his total to 149 aerial victories . After Bär achieved his 149th aerial victory , General Hans @-@ Jürgen von Arnim submitted him for the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds . Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring ignored this request , denying Bär the " Diamonds " . The reason for this remains uncertain , but it is believed that Göring disliked Bär for his insubordinate character and strong Saxon dialect , which Göring was known to detest . On 27 January 1943 , Bär surpassed the 150 aerial victory mark after he claimed three more P @-@ 40s shot down . 
 Bär and his I. Gruppe of JG 77 operated from <unk> , Tunisia , in early March 1943 . On 1 March , Bär claimed a Spitfire shot down , then in the evening met Galland , who was making a surprise visit to I. / JG 77 . Galland was greeted by Major Joachim Müncheberg , who introduced Bär to Galland . Thus began a comradeship which outlasted World War II . 
 Over North Africa and the Mediterranean theater , Bär had increased his tally to 179 , but , fighting a losing battle against ever @-@ increasing Allied air superiority , Bär lost his fighting spirit , and suffered severe mental and physical exhaustion . After several arguments with JG 77 's new Commander Colonel Johannes Steinhoff and Hermann Göring , in mid @-@ 1943 Bär was transferred to France " for cowardice before the enemy " and demoted to Squadron Leader . He took over command of an operational training unit , Jagdgruppe Süd . 
 = = = Defense of the Reich = = = 
 His combat skills were hard to overlook and hence Bär was transferred to II . / Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 ) on 21 January 1944 as an ordinary pilot . He was assigned to 6 . / JG 1 . Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 ) Wing Commander ( Geschwaderkommodore ) Colonel Walter Oesau welcomed him with a reminder that he had promised Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( OKL ) Göring that Bär would not be given any command responsibilities . Although Bär accepted this with humor , he later commented to others that in the air he was the " Kommodore of his own crate " . 
 On 15 March 1944 , Bär , now a Major and rehabilitated from the demotion , was given command of II . / Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 ) . This was after the death of Hauptmann Hermann Segatz on 8 March 1944 . JG 1 was tasked with Reichsverteidigung ( Defense of the Reich ) and equipped with the Focke Wulf 190 A @-@ 7 fighter . Morale of the group soared following his appointment . He was considered the unofficial leader of the group and the best officer in the entire Geschwader . On 11 April 1944 , Bär achieved his 199th aerial victory over a B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress near Fallersleben . His 200th aerial victory , a B @-@ 24 Liberator , was claimed on 22 April accompanied by his regular wingman Warrant Officer ( Oberfeldwebel ) Leo <unk> , who would be awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 1 March 1945 as a fighter pilot in II . / JG 1 . Bär had just landed at Störmede airfield from a II . / JG 1 intercept when a smoking United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) B @-@ 24 of the 458th Bombardment Group passed overhead . Bär and his wingman quickly got into their aircraft and intercepted the B @-@ 24 . The bomber 's gunners had already bailed out of the aircraft , making it an easy aerial victory . Bär returned to Störmede airfield to the congratulations of his men . This double century victory earned Bär his third and final reference in the Wehrmachtbericht on 24 April 1944 . After Oesau 's death on 11 May 1944 , Bär was made acting Wing Commander of JG 1 . In June , he was appointed Wing Commander of Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 ) following the death of Friedrich @-@ Karl Müller . By the end of 1944 , Bär 's score had risen to 203 . 
 Bär 's 204th and 205th victories , against two Hawker Typhoons , were achieved on 1 January 1945 during Unternehmen Bodenplatte , a Luftwaffe mass attack against Allied airfields in the Benelux area . The operation resulted in hundreds of aircraft losses on both sides . Bär 's JG 3 contributed by raiding Eindhoven in the Netherlands , shooting down about six RAF fighters and destroying many aircraft on the ground . One of Bär 's ' aerial kills ' may not have been airborne . Historian Norman Franks states both aircraft , from No. 438 Squadron RAF , were taxiing when hit . Flight Lieutenant Pete Wilson was wounded and later died from his injuries after Bär 's strafing attack . The second Typhoon did get airborne . Its pilot , Flight Officer Ross Keller was killed . This version of events is contradicted by a witness , Pilot Officer ' Bill ' Harle , who thought both aircraft were airborne . 
 = = = Combat in the Me 262 = = = 
 In February , Bär was transferred to command the jet fighter training unit III . / Ergänzungs @-@ Jagdgeschwader 2 ( <unk> 2 ) . In March , the unit was equipped with the Messerschmitt Me 262 fighter and sent into battle . Bär shot down 13 enemy aircraft , many of them heavy bombers like the B @-@ 17 and the B @-@ 24 , bringing his score to 217 . On 23 April , Bär transferred to the elite Jet Experten unit Jagdverband 44 ( JV 44 ) , led by Adolf Galland . On 26 April , he assumed command of the unit when Galland was wounded . Bär possibly flew his first operational sortie with JV 44 on 27 April 1945 . Flying the Me 262 A @-@ 1 / U5 , a six MK 108 cannon prototype , he was accompanied by Major Wilhelm Herget and the non @-@ commissioned officer NCO ( Unteroffizier ) Franz Köster when the trio engaged American fighters over Riem ; Bär claimed one aerial victory . While not flying operationally , Bär spent most of his time giving hasty instruction to the new pilots still being assigned to JV 44 . With JV 44 , he achieved his final four aerial victories ( 3 P @-@ 47s and 1 Mosquito ) on 28 April , bringing his total to 220 . All told , he had achieved 16 victories in the Me 262 , making him the second most successful Jet Expert of the war , which he finished as a Lieutenant Colonel ( Oberstleutnant ) . 
 During the final days of the Second World War in Europe , Lieutenant General ( Generalleutnant ) Adolf Galland attempted to surrender JV 44 to American forces from his hospital bed . At the same time Air General ( General der Flieger ) Karl Koller had ordered JV 44 to relocate to Prague and continue fighting . Bär , as a Galland loyalist , attempted to ignore the order . Bär was further pressured to relocate JV 44 when Major General ( Generalmajor ) Dietrich Peltz , commander of IX . Fliegerkorps , and Colonel <unk> Herrmann , commander of 9 . Flieger @-@ Division ( J ) , unexpectedly emerged at the control room in <unk> on 2 May 1945 . A heated and violent dispute erupted between Bär , Peltz and Herrmann , witnessed by Walter Krupinski . He later recalled that Bär responded with " Yes , sir , but we are under the command of Generalleutnant Galland , and I will only follow orders of Generalleutnant Galland ! " — a final act of disobedience that Krupinski believed could have led to Bär being shot for insubordination . 
 In the early morning hours of 4 May 1945 , Bär gathered the pilots of JV 44 for a final briefing . Bär ordered the remaining Me 262 destroyed before going into captivity and interrogation by US Intelligence officers of the 1st Tactical Air Force 's Air Prisoner of War Interrogation Unit , based at Heidelberg . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Bär did not return to his home in Sommerfeld after World War II . He settled in Braunschweig , where he continued his career in aviation , including a lead position for motor @-@ powered flight with the Deutscher Aero Club . He also worked as a consultant and test pilot in the field of sport aviation , testing aircraft before they went on the market . On 28 April 1957 , while conducting a routine flight @-@ check in a light aircraft , a LF @-@ 1 <unk> , Bär put the aircraft into a flat spin , the final manoeuvre in the test process . The aircraft spun down to 50 meters ( 160 ft ) then , unable to regain control , Bär was killed in the resulting crash at Braunschweig @-@ Waggum . 
 = = Summary of career = = 
 Heinrich Bär , call sign " Bussard 1 " , flew more than 1 @,@ 000 combat missions . His 220 confirmed aerial victories place him eighth on the overall list of Experten . His claim of 124 aerial victories over Western @-@ flown aircraft is second only to Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille 's total of 158 ; almost all of the latter 's victories occurred in Africa . He achieved four victories during the Battle of France , 13 during the Battle of Britain and 61 over Libya and Tunisia . On the Eastern Front he had claimed 96 aerial victories . At least 75 of his victories had been claimed against <unk> and American @-@ flown aircraft over Europe , 16 of these while flying the Me 262 jet fighter . Also among these 75 aerial victories are 21 US heavy bombers and one Mosquito . Bär crash @-@ landed or bailed out 18 times and was wounded three times in combat . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Wound Badge ( 1939 ) in <unk> Black ( 26 November 1941 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 27 May 1942 as Hauptmann in the I. / JG 77 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold with Pennant " 1000 " in Gold ( 25 May 1942 ) 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge 
 Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe on 8 June 1942 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur 
 Eastern Front Medal ( 23 August 1943 ) 
 " Africa " Cuffband 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 29 September 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 6 July 1940 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 2 July 1941 as pilot and Leutnant in the 1 . / JG 51 after 27 aerial victories 
 31st Oak Leaves on 14 August 1941 as Leutnant and pilot in the 1 . / JG 51 after 60 aerial victories 
 7th Swords on 16 February 1942 as Hauptmann and Staffelkapitän of the 1 . / JG 51 after 90 aerial victories 
 Mentioned three times in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 Three times Heinz Bär was recommended for the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds . All three commendations were denied by Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring . Bär shot down a further 130 enemy aircraft after he had received the Swords . 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 = Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 – 2000 = 
 Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 - 2000 is a greatest hits album by Australian alternative rock band Powderfinger , released on 30 October 2004 in Australia . 
 The album contained tracks from the Powderfinger 's first four albums , as well as two previously unreleased songs , " Bless My Soul " and " Process This " . " Bless My Soul " was also released as a single . On 17 February 2009 , Fingerprints was released in the United States with an alternate track listing including more recent songs and discarding older songs to align with releases that had previously been released in the US . The album was released on the back of the band 's success on the TV show , Grey 's Anatomy , which featured two songs from the album " Dream Days at the Hotel Existence " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Prior to the release of Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 , there was some talk of the idea that a best of album would be a mistake by the band , as they were generally seen as the " end of an artist 's creative haul " . Australian Music Online , publishing a Universal Music Australia press release , said these fears were not justified , and that the album would be " a Powderfinger biography that really tells the story better than anyone can on paper " . 
 MTV Scene writer Craig <unk> also commented on fears about the " death " of the band , stating that he spoke to Bernard Fanning about the band 's death as " it 's inevitable to talk when someone releases a best of album " . Fanning denied that the band was finished , instead claiming that Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 was spawned due to a deal with the band 's record label . He also assured readers that the band had another album planned . 
 Ciao reviewer <unk> agreed with Universal 's assessment , stating that " If there ever was a band , in my opinion , that needed a greatest hits album , it 's Powderfinger " . However , he noted another issue which had some influence on the production of the album - the issue of which songs to include . As the band had only released five albums , they were forced to mostly include the singles they had previously released . 
 Throughout production stages , the album was not referred to as Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 - 2000 , but rather by its alternative title ; From Heavy Metal to Centenary Medal . It is unknown when the band decided on the final title of the album . 
 = = Album and single releases = = 
 Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 was released on 30 October 2004 in Australia , and entered the ARIA chart on 14 November that year . It spent 17 weeks , peaking at # 2 for one week . The album was certified double platinum . " Bless My Soul " , the only single released from the album , failed to chart . It did , however , appear on the Triple J Hottest 100 in 2004 , at position # 9 . " Process This " , which was not released as a single , appeared at # 68 . 
 = = Response = = 
 Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 was received well by reviewers . Sputnikmusic contributor <unk> gave the album a perfect five , describing it as " perfect way to introduce you " to the band . New song " Bless My Soul " was seen in a positive light , with the comment " it has a great opening , with neat little guitar fills popping up all over the place " . However , the reviewer dislike " Process This " , stating the song had " a try @-@ hard feel about it " . 
 <unk> reviewer Dave Hardwick gave the album three stars , stating that " the cynic in me can 't help asking whether that is the point " ; alluding to the overbearing presence of industry politics regarding the release of a Best Of collection , and complaining of a lack of surprises in the choice of tracks . However , he agreed that the album was a good starting point for " those new to the band " . 
 Ciao reviewer <unk> rated the album positively . The new songs on the album were praised , with the comment " both of which are stunning " , and stating that none of the songs were disappointing . The review highly recommended the album , and again stated that it was an excellent introduction to the band . <unk> commentator Elissa said the album contained an excellent selection of songs that represented " essence of the band from its signature melodies " , and said that " Bless My Soul " was set " to become a Powderfinger favourite " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Unlike many ' Greatest Hits ' projects , Powderfinger did not include notable singles Good @-@ Day Ray , The Metre , Take Me In or any single from their first album , Parables for Wooden Ears , including instead fan favorites , Thrilloilogy , Belter and Sink Low . 
 " Bless My Soul " – 4 : 06 ( Previously unreleased ) 
 " My Happiness " – 4 : 36 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Waiting for the Sun " – 3 : 54 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Pick You Up " – 4 : 19 ( Double Allergic ) 
 " Passenger " – 4 : 20 ( Internationalist ) 
 " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " – 2 : 12 ( Internationalist ) 
 " These Days " – 4 : 36 ( Two Hands version ) 
 " The Day You Come " – 3 : 58 ( Internationalist ) 
 " D.A.F. " – 3 : 30 ( Double Allergic ) 
 " My Kind of Scene " – 4 : 37 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Like a Dog " – 4 : 20 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Already Gone " – 3 : 28 ( Internationalist ) 
 " Process This " – 3 : 22 ( Previously unreleased ) 
 " Belter " – 4 : 13 ( Internationalist ) 
 " Living Type " – 3 : 25 ( Double Allergic ) 
 " Thrilloilogy " – 6 : 10 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Sink Low " – 2 : 12 ( Parables for Wooden Ears ) 
 = = US track listing = = 
 " My Happiness " – 4 : 36 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Lost and Running " - 3 : 42 ( Dream Days at the Hotel Existence ) 
 " Love Your Way " - 4 : 31 ( Vulture Street ) 
 " These Days " – 4 : 36 ( Two Hands version ) 
 " Waiting for the Sun " – 3 : 54 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " - 3 : 20 ( Vulture Street ) 
 " Sunsets " - 3 : 49 ( Vulture Street ) 
 " My Kind of Scene " – 4 : 37 ( Odyssey Number Five ) 
 " Stumblin ' " - 3 : 46 ( Vulture Street ) 
 " Drifting Further Away " - 3 : 40 ( Dream Days at the Hotel Existence ) 
 " Passenger " – 4 : 20 ( Internationalist ) 
 " Nobody Sees " - 4 : 14 ( Dream Days at the Hotel Existence ) 
 = Battle of Brunanburh ( poem ) = 
 The Battle of Brunanburh is an Old English poem . It is preserved in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , a historical record of events in Anglo @-@ Saxon England which was kept from the late ninth to the mid @-@ twelfth century . The poem records the Battle of Brunanburh , a battle fought in 937 between an English army and a combined army of Scots , Vikings , and Britons . The battle resulted in an English victory , celebrated by the poem in style and language like that of traditional Old English battle poetry . The poem is notable because of those traditional elements and has been praised for its authentic tone , but it is also remarkable for its fiercely nationalistic tone , which documents the development of a unified England ruled by the House of Wessex . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 The Battle of Brunanburh was a culmination of the conflict between King Æthelstan and the northern kings . After Æthelstan had defeated the Vikings at York in 928 , Constantine II , the Scottish King , recognised the threat posed by the House of Wessex to his own position , and began forging alliances with neighbouring kingdoms to attempt a pre @-@ emptive strike against Æthelstan . He married his daughter to Amlaíb mac Gofraid ( also called Olaf <unk> , and Anlaf in the poem ) , the Norse @-@ Gael King of Dublin . Amlaíb had a claim to the throne of Northumbria , from which Æthelstan expelled his father in 927 . Thus , the invading army combined " Vikings , Scots , and Strathclyde Britons . " On the English side , Æthelstan was joined by his brother , the later King Edmund . In the ensuing battle , the combined forces of Wessex and Mercia won a decisive victory . 
 = = The poem = = 
 The poem is preserved in four of the nine surviving manuscripts of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . In the Parker Chronicle , its verse lines are written out as poetry , following common Anglo @-@ Saxon scribal practice . The 73 @-@ line long poem is written in " indeterminate Saxon , " that is , the regular West @-@ Saxon dialect in which most surviving Old English poetry is copied . It is referred to as a panegyric celebrating the victory of Æthelstan and Edmund I. 
 The text begins by praising King Æthelstan and his brother Edmund I for their victory . It mentions the fall of " Scots and seafarers " in a battle that lasted an entire day , while " the battlefield flowed / with dark blood . " " Norse seafarer [ s ] " and " weary Scot [ s ] " were killed by " West Saxons [ who ] / pursued those hateful people " , killing them from behind with their swords ; neither did " the Mercians ... stint / hard <unk> " . " Five young kings " are killed in battle along with " seven / of Anlaf 's earls " . Amlaíb mac Gofraid ( " Anlaf " ) flees by boat , and Constantine flees to the north , leaving " his son / savaged by weapons on that field of slaughter , / a mere boy in battle . " The poem concludes by comparing the battle to those fought in earlier stages of English history : 
 Never , before this , 
 were more men in this island slain 
 by the sword 's <unk> books and aged sages 
 <unk> Angles and Saxons sailed here 
 from the east , sought the Britons over the wide seas , 
 since those <unk> hammered the Welsh , 
 and earls , eager for glory , overran the land . 
 = = Style and tone = = 
 The style of the poem has been described as " <unk> in its sparse use of language combined with ample specific detail . " According to George Anderson , since the poem comes so late in the Old English period , it gives evidence of the continuing attraction of the " warrior tradition " : it is " clear and convincing testimony to the vitality of the Old English battle @-@ epic tradition ; the authentic ring sounds out years after the Beowulf Poet , Caedmon , and Cynewulf have been laid to rest . " Donald Fry compares passages from Beowulf and Brunanburh ( concerning the boarding of ships ) and remarks on the " similar diction and imagery " . According to Malcolm Godden , the language resembles that of the Old English Genesis A. The poem is not without its detractors : an early critic , Walter J. Sedgefield , in a 1904 study of the poems in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , said " even the longest and best written of their number , the Battle of Brunanburh , is but a simulacrum , a ghost of the older epos " . That the poem should not be treated as a historical text , and that panegyric was the appropriate genre , was argued by Alistair Campbell : " The poet 's subjects are the praise of heroes and the glory of victory . When this is realised , the oft @-@ repeated criticism , that he does not greatly add to our knowledge of the battle , falls to the ground . It was not his object to do so . He was not writing an epic or a ' ballad . ' He was writing a panegyric . " Townend agrees , and notes that praise @-@ poems on contemporary men are completely missing from the Anglo @-@ Saxon period until a cluster of four panegyrics including Brunanburh in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . 
 Compared to The Battle of Maldon , an Old English poem that commemorates a battle between English and Vikings half a century later , Brunanburh is notable for its nationalist overtones , whereas Maldon celebrates Christian over non @-@ Christian values . Indeed , the poem is seen as celebrating a logical progression in the development of England as a unified nation ruled by the House of Wessex ; the battle reports " the dawning of a sense of nationality , .... a crisis in which a nation is involved " . In this respect , Brunanburh is closer to the Anglo @-@ Saxon poem The Taking of the Five Boroughs , also found in the Chronicle under the year 942 , celebrating King Edmund 's recapture of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw . But while the poet claims veracity , Michael Swanton notes , " it is ironic in view of his primarily historic concerns that he is in fact more successful than the Maldon @-@ poet in transmitting the traditional poetic style . " Peter <unk> argues in Interactions of Thought and Language in Old English Poetry that Brunanburh , as opposed to Maldon , relies on " uncomplicated patriotic triumphalism " . The poem does not treat " personal responsibility " as Maldon does , but leans on an expansive view of history which sees the battle , in line with the Chronicle 's view of contemporary history as the " epitome of Anglo @-@ Saxon , especially West Saxon , history with antecedents in the history of Britain " , as " straightforwardly traditional " . According to Patrick Wormald , the poem builds on the " sense of ideological identity that the English had been given by Bede . " 
 Accompanying the combatants are the usual " beasts of battle " found in other Old English poems — the wolf , the raven , and the eagle . The Battle of Brunanburh , however , seems to include a fourth animal , the <unk> , or " war @-@ hawk , " in line 64 . However , editors and scholars of the poem have suggested that <unk> <unk> , " greedy war @-@ hawk " , is actually a kenning for the <unk> @-@ <unk> , / earn <unk> <unk> , the " dusky coated , white @-@ tailed eagle " of lines <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Editions , adaptations , and translations = = 
 The poem is included in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Poetic Records . The now @-@ accepted standard edition of the poem is the 1938 edition by Alistair Campbell . The Battle of Brunanburh : A Casebook , edited by Michael Livingston , was published by the University of Exeter Press in 2011 ; it includes two alternative translations of the poem and essays on the battle and the poem . 
 The twelfth @-@ century Anglo @-@ Norman chronicler Geoffrey Gaimar likely used the account in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle for his treatment of Æthelstan in his L <unk> des Engles . English poet Alfred , Lord Tennyson translated ( or " modernized " ) the poem in 1880 , publishing it as part of his Ballads and Other Poems ( and his son Hallam Tennyson published a prose translation of the poem ) . In contrast to many other translations of poetry , Tennyson 's is still praised as " a faithful , sensitive , even eloquent recreation of its source . " The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges wrote a short poem , " Brunanburh 937 AD , " a translation of which was published in The New Yorker . In a 1968 lecture at Harvard University , Borges praised Tennyson 's translation , stating that in some <unk> Tennyson sounds " more Saxon than the original . " A translation by Burton Raffel is included in Alexandra Hennessey Olsen 's anthology Poems and prose from the Old English . 
 = Phasmatodea = 
 The Phasmatodea ( also known as Phasmida or <unk> ) are an order of insects , whose members are variously known as stick insects ( in Europe and Australasia ) , stick @-@ bugs or walking sticks ( in the United States and Canada ) , phasmids , ghost insects and leaf insects ( generally the family <unk> ) . The group 's name is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> , meaning an apparition or phantom , referring to the resemblance of many species to sticks or leaves . Their natural camouflage makes them difficult for predators to detect , but many species have a secondary line of defence in the form of startle displays , spines or toxic secretions . The genus Phobaeticus includes the world 's longest insects . 
 Members of the order are found all over the world except for the Antarctic and Patagonia , but they are most abundant in the tropics and subtropics . They are herbivorous with many species living unobtrusively in the tree canopy . They have a hemimetabolous life cycle with three stages : eggs , nymphs and adults . Many phasmids are <unk> , and do not require fertilised eggs for female offspring to be produced . In hotter climates , they may breed all year round ; in more temperate regions , the females lay eggs in the autumn before dying , and the new generation hatches out in the spring . Some species have wings and can disperse by flying , while others are more restricted . 
 = = Description = = 
 Phasmids can be relatively large , ranging from 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) to over 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) in length . Females of the genus Phobaeticus are the world 's longest insects , measuring up to 56 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 22 @.@ 3 in ) in total length in the case of Phobaeticus <unk> , including the outstretched legs . The heaviest species of phasmid is likely to be <unk> <unk> , the females of which may weigh as much as 65 g ( 2 @.@ 3 oz ) . 
 Some phasmids have cylindrical stick @-@ like bodies , while others have flattened , leaflike shapes . Many species are wingless , or have reduced wings . The thorax is long in the winged species , since it houses the flight muscles , and is typically much shorter in the wingless forms . Where present , the first pair of wings is narrow and cornified ( hardened ) , while the hind wings are broad , with straight veins along their length and multiple cross @-@ veins . The body is often further modified to resemble vegetation , with ridges resembling leaf veins , bark @-@ like tubercles , and other forms of camouflage . A few species , such as Carausius morosus , are even able to change their pigmentation to match their surroundings . The mouthparts project out from the head . Chewing mandibles are uniform across species . The legs are typically long and slender , and some species are capable of limb autotomy ( shedding ) . Phasmids have long , slender antennae , as long as or longer than the rest of the body in some species . 
 All phasmids possess compound eyes , but ocelli ( light @-@ sensitive organs ) are only found in some winged males . Phasmids have an impressive visual system that allows them to perceive significant detail even in dim conditions , which suits their typically nocturnal lifestyle . They are born equipped with tiny compound eyes with a limited number of facets . As phasmids grow through successive molts , the number of facets in each eye is increased along with the number of photoreceptor cells . The sensitivity of the adult eye is at least tenfold that of the nymph in its first instar ( developmental stage ) . As the eye grows more complex , the mechanisms to adapt to dark / light changes is also enhanced : eyes in dark conditions evidence less screening pigments , which would block light , than during the daytime , and changes in the width of the retinal layer to adapt to changes in available light are significantly more pronounced in adults . However , the larger size of the adult insects ' eyes makes them more prone to radiation damage . This explains why fully grown individuals are mostly nocturnal . <unk> sensitivity to light in the newly emerged insects helps them to escape from the leaf litter wherein they are hatched and move upward into the more brightly illuminated foliage . Young stick insects are diurnal ( daytime ) feeders and move around freely , expanding their foraging range . 
 Stick insects have two types of pad on their legs : sticky " toe pads " and non @-@ stick " heel pads " a little further up their legs . The heel pads are covered in microscopic hairs which create strong friction at low pressure , enabling them to grip without having to be peeled energetically from the surface at each step . The sticky toe pads are used to provide additional grip when climbing but are not used on a level surface . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Phasmatodea can be found all over the world except for the Antarctic and Patagonia . They are most numerous in the tropics and subtropics . The greatest diversity is found in Southeast Asia and South America , followed by Australia , Central America , and the southern United States . Over 300 species are known from the island of Borneo , making it the richest place in the world for Phasmatodea . 
 = = Antipredator adaptations = = 
 Phasmatodea species exhibit mechanisms for defense from predators that prevent an attack from happening in the first place ( primary defense ) , and defenses that are deployed after an attack has been initiated ( secondary defense ) . 
 The defense mechanism most readily identifiable with Phasmatodea is camouflage , in the form of plant mimicry . Most phasmids are known for effectively replicating the forms of sticks and leaves , and the bodies of some species ( such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) are covered in mossy or <unk> outgrowths that supplement their disguise . Remaining absolutely stationary enhances their disguise . Some species have the ability to change color as their surroundings shift ( Bostra <unk> , Timema californica ) . In a further behavioral adaptation to supplement crypsis , a number of species perform a rocking motion where the body is swayed from side to side ; this is thought to mimic the movement of leaves or twigs swaying in the breeze . Another method by which stick insects avoid predation and resemble twigs is by entering a <unk> state , where the insect adopts a rigid , motionless posture that can be maintained for a long period . The nocturnal feeding habits of adults also help Phasmatodea to remain concealed from predators . 
 In a seemingly opposite method of defense , many species of Phasmatodea seek to startle the encroaching predator by flashing bright colors that are normally hidden , and making a loud noise . When disturbed on a branch or foliage , some species , while dropping to the undergrowth to escape , will open their wings momentarily during free fall to display bright colors that disappear when the insect lands . Others will maintain their display for up to 20 minutes , hoping to frighten the predator and convey the appearance of a larger size . Some accompany the visual display with noise made by rubbing together parts of the wings or antennae . 
 Some species , such as the young nymphs of <unk> <unk> , have been observed to curl the abdomen upwards over the body and head to resemble ants or scorpions in an act of mimicry , another defense mechanism by which the insects avoid becoming prey . The eggs of some species such as Diapheromera femorata have fleshy projections resembling elaiosomes ( fleshy structures sometimes attached to seeds ) that attract ants . When the egg has been carried to the colony , the ant feeds the elaiosome to a larva and the phasmid egg develops in the recesses of the nest in a protected environment . 
 When threatened , some phasmids that are equipped with femoral spines on the metathoracic legs ( <unk> martini , <unk> <unk> , <unk> horrida , Diapheromera <unk> , Diapheromera covilleae ) respond by curling the abdomen upward and repeatedly swinging the legs together , grasping at the threat . If the menace is caught , the spines can draw blood and inflict considerable pain . 
 Some species are equipped with a pair of glands at the anterior ( front ) edge of the prothorax that enables the insect to release defensive secretions , including chemical compounds of varying effect : some produce distinct odors , and others cause a stinging , burning sensation in the eyes and mouth of a predator . The spray often contains pungent @-@ smelling volatile metabolites , previously thought to be concentrated in the insect from its plant food sources . However , it now seems more likely that the insect manufactures its own defensive chemicals . Additionally , the chemistry of the defense spray from at least one species , <unk> <unk> , has been shown to vary based on the insect 's life stage or the particular population it is part of . This chemical spray variation also corresponds with regionally specific color forms in populations in Florida , with the different variants having distinct behaviors . The spray from one species , <unk> <unk> , is used as a treatment for skin infections by a tribe in Papua New Guinea because of its antibacterial constituents . Some species employ a shorter @-@ range defensive secretion , where individuals bleed reflexively through the joints of their legs and the seams of the exoskeleton when bothered , allowing the blood ( hemolymph ) , which contains distasteful additives , to discourage predators . Another ploy is to regurgitate their stomach contents when harassed , repelling potential predators . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The life cycle of the stick insect begins when the female deposits her eggs through one of these methods of oviposition : she will either flick her egg to the ground by a movement of the ovipositor or her entire abdomen , carefully place the eggs in the axils of the host plant , bury them in small pits in the soil , or stick the eggs to a substrate , usually a stem or leaf of the food plant . A single female lays from 100 to 1 @,@ 200 eggs after mating , depending on the species . 
 Many species of phasmids are <unk> , meaning the females lay eggs without needing to mate with males to produce offspring . Eggs from virgin mothers are entirely female and hatch into nymphs that are exact copies of their mothers . Stick insect species that are the product of hybridisation are usually obligate <unk> , but non @-@ hybrids are facultative <unk> , meaning they retain the ability to mate and their sexual behavior depends on the presence and abundance of males . 
 Phasmatodea eggs resemble seeds in shape and size , and have hard shells . They have a lid @-@ like structure called an operculum at the anterior pole , from which the nymph emerges during hatching . The eggs vary in the length of time before they hatch which varies from 13 to more than 70 days , with the average around 20 to 30 days . Some species , particularly those from temperate regions , undergo diapause , where development is delayed during the winter months . Diapause is initiated by the effect of short day lengths on the egg @-@ laying adults or can be genetically determined . Diapause is broken by exposure to the cold of winter , causing the eggs to hatch during the following spring . Among species of economic importance such as Diapheromera femorata , diapause results in the development of two @-@ year cycles of outbreaks . 
 Many species ' eggs bear a fatty , <unk> capitulum that caps the operculum . This structure attracts ants because of its resemblance to the elaiosome of some plant seeds that are sought @-@ after food sources for ant larvae , and usually contribute to ensuring seed dispersal by ants , a form of ant @-@ plant mutualism called myrmecochory . The ants take the egg into their nest underground and can remove the capitulum to feed to their larvae without harming the phasmid embryo . There , the egg hatches and the young nymph , which initially resembles an ant ( another instance of mimicry among Phasmatodea ) , eventually emerges from the nest and climbs the nearest tree to safety in the foliage . 
 The Phasmatodea life cycle is hemimetabolous , proceeding through a series of several nymphal instars . As is the case with hatching , if the nymph is caught in the encasing of a cast skin or egg capsule , it will likely die because it cannot free itself . Once emerged , the nymphs will eat the cast skin . Adulthood is reached for most species after several months and many molts . The lifespan of Phasmatodea varies by species , but ranges from a few months to up to three years . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Phasmids are herbivorous , feeding mostly on the leaves of trees and shrubs , and a conspicuous component of many neotropical ( South American ) systems . Phasmatodea have been postulated as dominant light @-@ gap herbivores there . Their role in the forest ecosystem is considered important by many scientists , who stress the significance of light gaps in maintaining succession and resilience in climax forests . The presence of phasmids lowers the net production of early successional plants by consuming them and then enriches the soil by defecation . This enables the late succession plants to become established and encourages the recycling of the tropical forest . 
 Phasmatodea are recognized as injurious to forest and shade trees by defoliation . <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> in Australia , Diapheromera femorata in North America and <unk> <unk> in coconut plantations in the South Pacific all occur in outbreaks of economic importance . Indeed , in the American South , as well as in Michigan and Wisconsin , the walking stick is a significant problem in parks and recreation sites where it consumes the foliage of oaks and other hardwoods . Severe outbreaks of the walking stick , Diapheromera femorata , have occurred in the Ouachita Mountains of Arkansas and Oklahoma . The insects eat the entire leaf blade . In the event of heavy outbreaks , entire stands of trees can be completely ravaged . Continuous defoliation over several years often results in the death of the tree . Fortunately for control efforts , because the insects cannot fly , infestations are typically contained to a radius of a few hundred yards . Nevertheless , the damage incurred to parks in the region is often costly . Control efforts in the case of infestations have typically involved chemical pesticides ; ground fires are effective at killing eggs but have obvious disadvantages . In New South Wales , research has been done into the feasibility of controlling stick insects using natural enemies such as parasitic wasps ( <unk> spp . ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The classification of the Phasmatodea is complex and the relationships between its members are poorly understood . Furthermore , there is much confusion over the ordinal name . Phasmida is preferred by many authors , though it is incorrectly formed ; Phasmatodea is correctly formed , and is widely accepted . 
 The order Phasmatodea is sometimes considered related to other orders , including the Blattodea , Mantodea , <unk> and Dermaptera , but the affiliations are uncertain and the grouping ( sometimes referred to as " <unk> " ) may be paraphyletic ( not have a common ancestor ) and hence invalid in the traditional circumscription ( set of attributes that all members have ) . Phasmatodea , once considered a suborder of Orthoptera , is now treated as an order of its own . Anatomical features separate them as a monophyletic ( descended from a common ancestor ) group from the Orthoptera . One is the instance among all species of Phasmatodea of a pair of exocrine glands inside the prothorax used for defense . Another is the presence of a specially formed sclerite ( hardened plate ) called a vomer that allows the male to clasp the female during mating . 
 The order is divided into two , or sometimes three , suborders . The most common division is into the suborder groups <unk> and <unk> , which are distinguished according to whether the insect has sunken areola , or circular areas , on the underside of the apices of the middle and hind tibiae ( <unk> ) or not ( <unk> ) . However the phylogenetic ( evolutionary ) relationships between the different groups is poorly resolved . The monophyly of <unk> has been questioned and the morphology of the eggs may be a better basis for classification . An alternative is to divide the Phasmatodea into three suborders <unk> ( 1 genus and 8 species ) , Timematodea ( 1 genus and 21 species ) and <unk> for the remaining taxa . This division is , however , not fully supported by the molecular studies , which recover <unk> as nested within <unk> rather than being the sister group of the latter group . Over 3 @,@ 000 species have been described , with many more yet to be described both in museum collections and in the wild . 
 Phasmatodea fossils are rare , whether as adults or as eggs ; isolated wings are the parts most commonly found . The modern group is monophyletic . Several Mesozoic families appear to be related to the phasmids , and are generally but not universally agreed to be stem group stick insects . One species is known ( as a forewing ) from the productive Crato Formation fossil beds of Brazil , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) . Other members of the <unk> are known from the Jurassic of England , Germany and Kazakhstan . Phasmids are rare in amber , but <unk> <unk> was found in 2010 in the Early Eocene of France . Engel , Wang and <unk> ( 2016 ) described a member of the family <unk> sensu lato from the Cretaceous ( Cenomanian ) Burmese amber , <unk> <unk> . According to the authors , the discovery of E. <unk> provides the first reliable evidence for Euphasmatodea ( the clade containing all living <unk> except members of the genus Timema ) and even <unk> ( the clade containing all living members of Euphasmatodea except <unk> ) in the Cenomanian . 
 The earliest leaf insect ( <unk> ) fossil is <unk> <unk> from the 47 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old Eocene of Messel , Germany . In size and cryptic ( leaflike ) body form , it closely resembles extant species , suggesting that the behavior of the group has changed little since that time . 
 = = Notable species = = 
 One Australian species , the Lord Howe Island stick insect , is now listed as critically endangered . It was believed extinct until its rediscovery on the rock known as Ball 's Pyramid . An effort is underway in Australia to rear this species in captivity . 
 The best known of the stick insects is the Indian or laboratory stick insect ( Carausius morosus ) . This insect grows to roughly 10 cm ( 4 in ) and reproduces <unk> , and although males have been recorded , they are rare . 
 Fossils of the extinct genus and species <unk> <unk> have been recovered from Ypresian age sediments in Washington state USA and British Columbia Canada . The species is one of the youngest members of the stem <unk> group <unk> . 
 = = Phasmids in Europe = = 
 In Europe there are 17 species of stick insect described , belonging to the genera Bacillus , <unk> , <unk> y <unk> . There are also a few other species that live in Europe but are introduced , as for example with a couple of species of <unk> , which are native to Madagascar but are present in southern England . 
 In the Iberian Peninsula there are currently described 13 species and several subspecies . Its life cycle is annual , living only during the hottest months ( especially gender <unk> and <unk> ) , which usually comprise of late spring to early autumn . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Stick insects , like praying mantises , show rocking behavior in which the insect makes rhythmic , repetitive , side @-@ to @-@ side movements . The common interpretation of this behavior 's function is it enhances crypsis by mimicking vegetation moving in the wind . However , these movements may be most important in allowing the insects to discriminate objects from the background by relative motion . Rocking movements by these generally sedentary insects may replace flying or running as a source of relative motion to help them discern objects in the foreground . 
 Mating behavior in Phasmatodea is impressive because of the extraordinarily long duration of some pairings . A record among insects , the stick insect <unk> <unk> , found in India , is sometimes coupled for 79 days at a time . It is not uncommon for this species to assume the mating posture for days or weeks on end , and among some species ( Diapheromera <unk> and D. covilleae ) , pairing can last three to 136 hours in captivity . 
 Overt displays of aggression between males over mates suggests that extended pairing may have evolved to guard females from sperm competition . Fighting between competing males has been observed in the species D. <unk> and D. covilleae . During these encounters , the approach of a challenger causes the existing mate to manipulate the female 's abdomen , which he has clasped by means of the clasping organ , or vomer , down upon itself to block the site of attachment . Occasionally , the consort will strike out at the competitor with the mid femora , which are equipped with an enlarged and hooked spine in both sexes that can draw the blood of the opponent when they are flexed against the body to puncture the integument . Usually , a strong hold on the female 's abdomen and blows to the intruder are enough to deter the unwanted competition , but occasionally the competitor has been observed to employ a sneaky tactic to inseminate the female . While the first mate is engaged in feeding and is forced to vacate the dorsal position , the intruder can clasp the female 's abdomen and insert his genitalia . If he is discovered , the males will enter into combat wherein they lean backward , both clasped to the female 's abdomen , and freely suspended , engage in rapid , sweeping blows with their forelegs in a manner similar to boxing . Usually , when the intruder gains attachment to the female 's abdomen , these conflicts result in the displacement of the original mate . 
 Lengthy pairings have also been described in terms of a defensive alliance . When cleaved together , the pair is more unwieldy for predators to handle . Also , the chemical defenses ( secretions , reflex bleeding , regurgitation ) of the individual stick insect are enhanced when two are paired . Females survive attacks by predators significantly better when pairing , largely because the dorsal position of the male functions well as a shield . This could indicate that manipulation by females is taking place : if females accept ejaculate at a slow rate , for instance , the males are forced to remain in <unk> for longer and the female 's chances of survival are enhanced . Also , evolution could have simply favored males that remained attached to their females longer , since females are often less abundant than males and represent a valuable prize , so for the lucky male , even the sacrifice of his own life to preserve his offspring with the female may be worthwhile . Sexual dimorphism in the species , where females are usually significantly larger than the males , may have evolved due to the fitness advantage accrued to males that can remain attached to the female , thereby blocking competitors , without severely impeding her movement . 
 Certain Phasmatodea , such as <unk> <unk> , sometimes form aggregations . These insects have been observed to congregate during the day in a concealed location , going their separate ways at nightfall to forage , and returning to their refuge before dawn . Such behavior has been little studied , and how the insects find their way back is unknown . 
 = = In human culture = = 
 Stick insects are often kept in captivity : almost 300 species have been reared in laboratories or as pets . The most commonly kept is the Indian ( or laboratory ) stick insect , Carausius morosus , which eats vegetables such as lettuce . 
 The botanical illustrator Marianne North ( 1830 – 1890 ) painted leaf and stick insects that she saw on her travels in the 1870s . 
 <unk> in Sarawak eat phasmids and their eggs . 
 Research has been conducted to analyze the stick insect method of walking and apply this to the engineering of six @-@ legged walking robots . Instead of one centralized control system , it seems each leg of a phasmid operates independently . 
 In Australia many kinds of stick insects are kept as pets including the Strong , Goliath , Spiny and Children 's . 
 = Titan Clydebank = 
 Titan Clydebank is a 150 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 46 m ) cantilever crane at Clydebank , West Dunbartonshire , Scotland . It was designed to be used in the lifting of heavy equipment , such as engines and boilers , during the fitting @-@ out of battleships and ocean liners at the John Brown & Company shipyard . It was also the world 's first electrically powered cantilever crane , and the largest crane of its type at the time of its completion . 
 Situated at the end of a U @-@ shaped fitting out basin , the crane was used to construct some of the largest ships of the 20th century , including the Queen Mary , Queen Elizabeth and Queen Elizabeth 2 . The Category A Listed historical structure was refurbished in 2007 as a tourist attraction and shipbuilding museum . 
 = = History = = 
 The shipyard at Clydebank was created in 1871 after the company James & George Thomson moved from the Graving Docks in Govan . John Brown & Company purchased the yard in 1899 , and in 1905 , a £ 24 @,@ 600 order for the crane was placed with <unk> based engineering company Sir William Arrol & Co . Titan was completed two years later in 1907 . It was constructed by the Scottish engineer Adam Hunter , who was working as Chief Engineer for Arrol & Co . , having served his apprenticeship on the construction of the Forth Bridge . Stothert & Pitt of Bath , England , fabricated and installed most of the machinery for the Titan , including electric motors built by Lancashire Dynamo and Motor Co . 
 The dock was used for fitting out vessels , and the crane would lift engines and boilers into ships . The lifting capacity of the Titan , and the location of the yard at the confluence of the River Clyde and River Cart , contributed to the success of the yard as it could build extremely large ships . 
 When tested on 24 April 1907 , Titan was the largest cantilever crane ever built with a capacity of 160 tonnes ( 160 long tons ; 180 short tons ) at a radius of 85 feet ( 26 m ) . The original lift capacity was uprated to 203 long tons ( 206 t ) in 1938 , when it became apparent that the original specification would be insufficient to install the new long range gun 's turrets into ships such as the Duke of York . 
 On the nights of the 13 and 14 of March 1941 , the Clydebank Blitz virtually destroyed the town . 528 civilians were killed , over 617 people were seriously injured , and 48 @,@ 000 civilians lost their homes . Only seven properties in Clydebank were undamaged , in one of the worst bombing raids in Britain . The raids , involving 260 Luftwaffe bombers on the first night and 200 on the second , targeted the industry of Clydeside , but the Titan crane was undamaged . 
 In 1968 , the yard was amalgamated into Upper Clyde Shipbuilders along with four others , in an attempt to increase competitiveness . The general elections in 1970 saw a change of government , and funding for the yard was withheld , resulting in the closure of John Brown 's . It was bought from the receivers by the Houston , Texas @-@ based Marathon Manufacturing Company for oil rig construction . In 1980 Marathon sold the yard to the French company Union Industrielle et d ’ <unk> ( <unk> ) . <unk> 's owners , Bouygues Offshore closed the yard in 2001 and the site was earmarked for redevelopment . 
 Ships constructed by the crane include HMS Hood , the Queen Mary , Queen Elizabeth , Queen Elizabeth 2 , and the Royal Yacht Britannia . 
 = = = Refurbishment = = = 
 The crane fell into disuse in 1980s , and in the intervening period of neglect , the crane suffered vandalism to the wheelhouse and corrosion to the structure . In 1988 the crane was recognised as a Category A Listed historical structure . 
 The urban regeneration company Clydebank Re @-@ Built started a £ <unk> restoration project in 2005 , and the crane opened to the public in August 2007 . The structure was shot @-@ blasted to remove old paint and rust , allowing repairs to be undertaken before repainting . A lift for visitors to ascend to the jib and an emergency evacuation stair were installed , along with a wire mesh around the viewing area and floodlights to illuminate the crane at night . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Titan used a fixed counterweight and electrically operated hoists all mounted on a rotated beam , making it faster and more responsive than its steam powered predecessors . For lifting smaller assemblies that did not require the full lifting capacity of 150 tonnes ( 150 long tons ; 170 short tons ) , a 30 tonnes ( 30 long tons ; 33 short tons ) auxiliary hoist was used , as large loads were comparatively rare . 
 Titan is 49 metres ( 161 ft ) high , weighs about 800 tonnes ( 790 long tons ; 880 short tons ) and sits on four concrete piles sunk to a depth of 23 metres ( 75 ft ) deep . The arms of the cantilever are 45 @.@ 7 metres ( 150 ft ) and 27 @.@ 4 metres ( 90 ft ) long . The tower is 12 metres ( 39 ft ) square , and its centre sits just 10 @.@ 7 metres ( 35 ft ) from the edge of the quay . 
 Following the removal of the Beardmore Crane in the 1970s and the Fairfield Titan in 2007 , there are now four giant cantilever cranes on the River Clyde . The others are at Stobcross ( Finnieston Crane ) , Scotstoun ( Barclay Curle Crane ) and Greenock ( James Watt Dock Crane ) . Fewer than sixty giant cantilever cranes were built worldwide , six of them on the Clyde , and as of May 2011 , it is believed only eleven remained , four of those on the Clyde . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The crane was awarded the 2012 Engineering Heritage Award by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , and described as " a magnificent example of mechanical engineering , which forms an integral part of the local landscape " . Titan was designated as an International Historic Civil and Mechanical Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Civil Engineers in 2013 , the fifth such award given to a Scottish structure . 
 For the restoration of the structure , recognition was accorded by Chicago Athenaeum Award for Architecture in 2008 and by the Civic Trust in 2009 . 
 = Borders Railway = 
 The Borders Railway connects the city of Edinburgh with Galashiels and Tweedbank in the Scottish Borders . The railway follows most of the alignment of the northern part of the Waverley Route , a former double @-@ track line in southern Scotland and northern England that ran between Edinburgh and Carlisle . That line was controversially closed in 1969 , as part of the Beeching cuts , leaving the Borders region without any access to the National Rail network . Following the closure , a campaign to revive the Waverley Route emerged . Discussion on reopening the northern part of the line came to a head during the early 2000s . Following deliberations in the Scottish Parliament , the Waverley Railway ( Scotland ) Act 2006 received Royal Assent in June 2006 . The project was renamed the " Borders Railway " in August 2008 , and building works began in November 2012 . Passenger service on the line began on 6 September 2015 , whilst an official opening by Queen Elizabeth II took place on 9 September . 
 The railway was rebuilt as a non @-@ electrified , largely single @-@ track line . Several surviving Waverley Route structures , including viaducts and tunnels , were rehabilitated and reused for the reopened railway . Passenger services run half @-@ hourly on weekdays until 20 : 00 , and hourly until 23 : 54 and on Sundays . The timetable also allows charter train promoters to run special excursion services , and for the weeks following the line opening scheduled steam trains were run . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Closure of the Waverley Route = = = 
 In 1849 , the North British Railway opened a line from Edinburgh through Midlothian as far as Hawick in the Scottish Borders ; a further extension in 1862 brought the line to Carlisle in England . The line , known as the Waverley Route after the novels of the same name by Sir Walter Scott whose stories were set in the surrounding countryside , was controversially closed in January 1969 following the recommendation for its closure in the 1963 Beeching Report as an <unk> line . According to information released by the Ministry of Transport , the potential savings to British Railways from the line 's closure were at least £ 536 @,@ 000 . In addition , an estimated grant of £ 700 @,@ 000 would have been required to maintain a full service on the line . The last passenger train over the Waverley Route was the Edinburgh @-@ St Pancras sleeper on 5 January 1969 worked by Class 45 <unk> Lytham St Anne 's which arrived two hours late into Carlisle due to anti @-@ closure protesters blocking the line . 
 = = = Campaign to revive Borders rail = = = 
 In 1992 , Borders architect Simon Longland conducted a motorbike survey of the route which led him to set up the company Borders Transport Futures to evaluate the possibility of reopening . Having carried out feasibility work , in 1997 the company came close to lodging Parliamentary plans to reopen the Kielder @-@ Riccarton Junction @-@ Longtown section for timber traffic . Based on the company 's groundwork , the Campaign for Borders Rail , founded in 1999 , was able to advance a project to reopen a section between Galashiels and Tweedbank to passengers . The first moves came in 1999 when the Scottish Parliament supported a motion by Christine Grahame MSP which called for the reinstatement of the line as a means of reversing the economic decline of the Borders region . This was followed by a £ 400 @,@ 000 feasibility study conducted by Scott Wilson and commissioned by the Scottish Office which reported in February 2000 that there were " no insurmountable planning or environmental constraints " to reinstatement as much of the original line could be reused , although several major obstacles would need to be overcome which would entail substantial costs . > 
 A number of blockages were identified in the 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) section between Edinburgh and Gorebridge . The first was the breach of the former line by the Edinburgh City Bypass which intersected the trackbed at a shallow angle resulting in more than 220 yards ( 200 m ) of the alignment being buried . Two further breaches were reported as a result of improvements to the A7 road between Eskbank and Gorebridge . A small housing estate had been built on the line in Gorebridge . Even more encroachments were found on the line south of Tweedbank which would take infrastructure costs over £ 100 million . The Scott Wilson report also indicated that patronage projections for a new line were not encouraging , with none of the route options examined producing a positive cost @-@ benefit value . The option which came closest to a neutral cost @-@ benefit assessment was a reopening only as far as Gorebridge . Nevertheless , Scott Wilson did indicate that the reopening of the line would benefit the Borders region by providing better links with Edinburgh and creating up to 900 new jobs . Wilson also suggested that part of the Border Counties Railway as far as Kielder Forest could be reinstated at a cost of £ 26 million to allow timber traffic to be carried on the southern part of the new Borders line . Furthermore , line speeds of 70 – 90 mph could be achieved on a single line , resulting in a journey time from the Borders to Edinburgh of 45 minutes compared to 55 minutes by car . 
 Despite the recommendations in the Scott Wilson report , political pressure on the Scottish Government to reconnect the Borders region eventually resulted in it giving support to the extension of the Edinburgh commuter network by 30 miles ( 48 km ) as far as the Galashiels area . Pressure came in particular from the Campaign for Borders Rail on behalf of which Petra <unk> in February 2000 presented a petition with 17 @,@ 261 signatures to the Public Petitions Committee of the Scottish Parliament . The petition received the unanimous support of the Parliament 's Rural Affairs Committee which submitted it to the Parliamentary Chamber for debate . The Scottish Borders Council , Midlothian Council , City of Edinburgh Council , Scottish Enterprise Borders , Borders Transport Futures , Railtrack and ScotRail bid for £ 1 @.@ 9 million from the Scottish Executive 's Public Transport Fund to allow a Parliamentary Order for reopening as far as Tweedbank to be taken forward . Once funding had been obtained , the three local authorities created the Waverley Railway Joint Committee to promote the scheme . 
 = = = Edinburgh Crossrail = = = 
 In July 2005 , the committee gave approval to a reopening to as far as Galashiels . During a lengthy period of consultation for the proposed line , passenger services were reintroduced on the surviving freight @-@ only section of the Waverley Route between Portobello Junction and Millerhill . Brunstane and Newcraighall stations opened on 3 June 2002 , the latter being 4 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) from Edinburgh , providing a park @-@ and @-@ ride service to the city . The new service was termed Edinburgh Crossrail , and extended from Newcraighall through to Edinburgh Waverley , and continued either onto the North Clyde Line or the Fife Circle Line . Initially operated with diesel multiple units , the service from Newcraighall through to the North Clyde Line was electrified as a byproduct of the Airdrie @-@ Bathgate Rail Link . The service from Newcraighall to Dalmeny and through to the Fife Circle Line continued to use diesel trains . Crossrail was a success , and provided forward momentum for the Borders Railway project . 
 = = = Business case = = = 
 The full business case for the line was published in mid @-@ 2004 , showing a modest benefit to cost ratio of 1 @.@ 01 to 1 . The case was in some part built on projected housing developments – 700 in the Borders and 1 @,@ 100 in Midlothian – that led to an anti @-@ rail backlash in local elections with the success of the Borders Party . Representing the party , Councillor Nicholas Watson described the scheme as " a colossal waste of money " and called for the funds to be used instead on the Glasgow Airport Rail Link . The Campaign for Borders Rail indicated that the low ratio followed from the choice to build a single @-@ track line for half @-@ hourly commuter services with no capacity for freight or specials . 
 In February 2013 , the final business case was released by the Scottish Government , which showed a benefit @-@ cost ratio of just 0 @.@ 5 : 1 . This led the journal Local Transport Today to comment that the line was " one of the worst @-@ performing major transport projects to be funded in recent times . " The Campaign for Borders Rail responded stating that the ratio was based on modelling that underestimated the route 's potential patronage , predicting only 23 @,@ 431 yearly return trips from Galashiels equivalent to only 70 passengers a day or three per train , which would be less than the number using the existing bus service . 
 = = = Parliamentary approval = = = 
 The Borders Railway bill was debated in September 2005 and a motion supporting it was passed with 102 in favour , none against and one abstention . On 9 May 2006 , the bill committee published its final report supporting the project with two recommendations : a station had to be provided at Stow and the line had to be completed to its full extent , i.e. as far as Tweedbank . These recommendations were accepted by the Scottish Parliament in the final debate on the bill on 14 June 2006 . The bill was carried by 114 votes to one . 
 The Waverley Railway ( Scotland ) Act 2006 received Royal Assent on 24 June 2006 and sanctioned the construction of around 30 miles ( 48 km ) of new railway as far as Tweedbank with seven new stations . In total , the Act had taken three full Parliamentary years to be passed , with 29 committee meetings , 108 witnesses and a quantity of paper 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in height . 
 The line is the longest stretch of railway to be reopened in modern British history , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) longer than the Robin Hood Line project , as well as the longest line in Scotland since the opening of the West Highland Line in 1901 . On 6 August 2008 , the Waverley Railway project was renamed the Borders Railway project and put under the control of Transport Scotland as statutory undertaker . 
 = = = Building works = = = 
 = = = = <unk> process = = = = 
 In October 2009 , the launch of a call for tenders stalled following discussions between the Scottish Executive and HM Treasury over new regulations that required public – private partnerships to be recorded as public expenditure . A project timetable was announced by Finance Secretary John Swinney on 4 November 2009 , whereby he stated that construction of the line would not begin prior to the 2011 elections to the Scottish Parliament . The tendering process finally began on 16 December 2009 , when a contract notice was published in the Official Journal of the European Union . 
 Transport Scotland announced in June 2010 that three <unk> that had submitted expressions of interest in the project were to be invited to participate in a competitive dialogue ; these were BAM UK , <unk> ( Sir Robert McAlpine , Iridium <unk> de Infraestructuras and Carillion ) and New Borders Railway ( Fluor , Miller and <unk> Infrastructure Investments ) . In mid @-@ November 2010 , the withdrawal of Fluor resulted in the third consortium pulling out of the bidding process . The second consortium withdrew in June 2011 following the decision by Carillion not to continue . This led to the cancellation of the tender procedure by Scottish transport minister Keith Brown . Network Rail was chosen by Transport Scotland to undertake the project and , following months of negotiations , a Transfer of Responsibility was signed at a ceremony held on 6 November 2012 at the Scottish Mining Museum in Newtongrange . Network Rail agreed to build the line by mid @-@ 2015 for £ 294 million , an increase on the estimated £ 230 million that the line was expected to cost and the £ 100 million that it was originally costed at in 2000 . This figure is also substantially more than the £ 189 million which Network Rail Chief Executive Iain <unk> agreed to build the line in late 2007 or early 2008 . 
 In December 2012 , Network Rail appointed BAM Nuttall as its main contractor . The Network Rail team which worked on the line was essentially the same as the one which delivered the Airdrie @-@ Bathgate Rail Link in 2009 . A Network Rail spokesman confirmed that lessons learned from the previous project had been applied to the Borders project , such as better coordination between the different teams by having them together in one office in Newtongrange . In June 2013 , the design contract for the line was awarded to URS which agreed to design new bridges , stations and roads , as well as the refurbishment of existing bridges and the provision of engineering support , for £ 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = = Project specifications = = = = 
 The line comprises 40 miles ( 65 km ) of single @-@ line track over a distance of 31 miles ( 50 km ) , plus 42 new bridges , 95 refurbished bridges and two refurbished tunnels , and required 1 @.@ 5 million tonnes of earth to be moved . Stations are provided at Stow , Galashiels , Tweedbank , Newtongrange , Shawfair , Eskbank and Gorebridge . According to Network Rail , the line was not suitable for double track and , in any event , there was no business case for doubling the line from the outset . As a result , 21 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 34 @.@ 2 km ) of the line are single @-@ track with three " dynamic " passing loops providing 9 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) of double @-@ track to allow for half @-@ hourly services . The route is not electrified but provision has been made to install overhead line if required as bridges have been built to <unk> gauge . Although certain sections of the line are designed for speeds of up to 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) , average speeds over the whole line are in the region of 35 – 39 miles per hour ( 56 – 63 km / h ) . 
 Amongst the line 's 27 substantial structures , the greatest engineering challenge was posed by the point where the track met the Edinburgh City Bypass . At that point , a tunnel had to be constructed under the <unk> road while it had been temporarily diverted ; in total , the project incorporated five new associated road schemes . Major challenges were also posed by abandoned mine shafts to the north of the route , some of which dated to the 16th century and had not been mapped . More than 200 bridges were involved in the scheme , as the route crosses the Gala Water and River Tweed nineteen times . One of the most vital bridges on the line carries the track over <unk> roundabout on the A7 , and required extensive works throughout 2013 . Other works included digging out an infilled cutting on the outskirts of Galashiels and reconstructing a nearby bridge to allow the line to pass under power lines . 
 = = = = Works commence = = = = 
 The first sod was turned at Galashiels on 3 March 2010 , when Scottish transport minister Stewart Stevenson attended a ceremony in the presence of campaigner Madge Elliot . This triggered a clause in the 2006 Waverley Railway Act , which committed the Scottish Government to complete the line to Tweedbank once works had been commenced . 
 Construction began in earnest on 18 April 2013 after completion of remedial and preparatory works such as land acquisition , removal of vegetation , demolition of certain structures and remedial works on old mines in Midlothian , for which over £ 54 million was spent by Network Rail . The first task was the excavation of the track alignment through <unk> and the clearing of the site for Shawfair station . Construction of the line 's first bridge , Rye Haugh Bridge at <unk> , were underway on 6 August 2013 as part of works to deviate the line out of Edinburgh from Newcraighall before it returns to the original alignment . The 23 @-@ arch Newbattle Viaduct ( or <unk> Viaduct ) was used by lorries removing spoil from the construction site which eased traffic on local roads . 
 The first track was laid in the Bowshank Tunnel on 4 April 2014 . On 30 September 2014 , the first train on the Waverley Route for 45 years – a works train – ran to Newcraighall . <unk> began in earnest on 6 October 2014 , although preliminary works had resulted in a section of slab track laid through Bowshank Tunnel , south of Stow , as well as ballasting along large sections of the route and pre @-@ cast switch and crossing units for the passing loops . The first part of the route to be ballasted was the section through <unk> Viaduct to which structural repairs had to be carried out . By the end of October , more than 11 miles ( 18 km ) of track had been laid as far as Tynehead and the double @-@ track on the Shawfair loop had been completed plus 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the second track on the Borthwick loop . Work was halted in late November 2014 after a contractor working for BAM Nuttall in the Gala area was injured when a sleeper came loose when being lifted into position and landed on his leg . Work restarted on 12 January 2015 following a review by BAM of their track installation methodology . By 3 February , the track was complete through Galashiels and hundreds of spectators turned out to welcome the first train into the station since 1969 , which was hauled by <unk> Class <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = = Completion = = = = 
 On 5 February 2015 , Network Rail 's <unk> machine reached the end of the line at Tweedbank station where a large crowd had gathered . As there was not enough track for the train to complete <unk> into the second platform , it had to return the next day . The formal completion took place on 12 February when Keith Brown clipped the final length of rail into place . During the period of construction , more than 1 @,@ 000 rails were laid across 90 @,@ 000 sleepers . With the infrastructure complete , attention was turned to the installation of signalling and communications equipment as well as finalising the stations . A GSM @-@ R system controlled from the <unk> next to Edinburgh Waverley was in place by April 2015 . 
 On 13 May 2015 , the first test train , DRS Class 37 604 with <unk> <unk> , worked the <unk> Tweedbank @-@ Millerhill . On 4 June 2015 , a ceremony was held at Edinburgh Waverley to mark the final stages of the completion of works during which Madge Elliot , a veteran campaigner and founder member of the Campaign for Borders Rail , had Class 66 528 renamed in her honour . Official completion and handover of the line to the ScotRail Alliance , a group formed by Network Rail and Abellio ScotRail , took place on 14 June 2015 . A 12 @-@ week period of driver training for 64 drivers and 64 guards began on 7 June 2015 , with Abellio ScotRail Class 170 <unk> in livery promoting the new line undertaking a proving run to measure stepping distances from platforms to trains . The train , which carried a large number of Network Rail staff , stopped at all stations from Newcraighall to Tweedbank in the presence of large crowds of spectators . The following day Class 158 <unk> was used for the first driver @-@ training runs . On 26 July 2015 , a driver @-@ training train carried Borders rail campaigner Madge Elliot . 
 = = = = Opening = = = = 
 Passenger services began on 6 September 2015 , and the railway was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 9 September 2015 . Her Majesty travelled with the Duke of Edinburgh and First Minister Nicola Sturgeon on LNER Class A4 4488 Union of South Africa in the presence of its owner , John Cameron . The locomotive hauled a rake of Mark 1s provided by the <unk> as well as Pullman car No. 310 Pegasus . Due to bad weather , the Queen 's helicopter journey from Balmoral was delayed which resulted in the late departure of the train and a delay at Newcraighall while a ScotRail service cleared the single @-@ line section to the south . Her Majesty alighted at Newtongrange to unveil a plaque marking the opening of the railway ; a second plaque was unveiled at Tweedbank . The following day the LNER Class A4 commenced a six @-@ week programme of Borders steam specials promoted by ScotRail which saw services run to Tweedbank for three days each week . Around 6 @,@ 200 passengers were carried on the 17 fully booked services . 
 During its first month of operations , 125 @,@ 971 passengers travelled on the Borders Railway . Demand was far in excess of what ScotRail had expected , with the line carrying 19 @.@ 4 % of its predicted annual patronage of 650 @,@ 000 in one month . The unexpected level of patronage resulted in overcrowding on services and passengers unable to board at intermediate stations , leading ScotRail to run four or six carriages with morning and peak trains . ScotRail also leased additional parking space near Tweedbank station as the 235 @-@ space car park provided was generally full before 9am . The National Mining Museum near Newtongrange station reported a hike in visitor numbers , while the nearby towns of Melrose and St <unk> confirmed a rise in business and tourism . 
 = = Route details = = 
 = = = Line characteristics = = = 
 The line begins to the south of the existing Newcraighall terminus , veering off the former Waverley Route to a parallel alignment just to the west which crosses over the former <unk> Colliery , part of the Midlothian Coalfield . The line 's first section of double @-@ track starts here and continues for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to a point beyond the Edinburgh Bypass . The new alignment passes through Shawfair under the bypass some 660 yards ( 600 m ) to the south @-@ west of the original route . A new bridge carries the bypass across the double @-@ track . The Waverley Route is rejoined at the southern end of the first double @-@ track loop at King 's Gate where it becomes single @-@ track for 5 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) through Eskbank , Newtongrange and Gorebridge . The River North Esk is crossed at King 's Gate on the Glenesk Viaduct , a single @-@ arch span built for the Edinburgh and Dalkeith Railway between 1829 and 1831 and which is one of Scotland 's oldest railway bridges . 
 To the south of Eskbank , an 87 @-@ yard ( 80 m ) concrete span bridge carries the line over the A7 road at <unk> , thereby correcting the damage caused by the Dalkeith Western Bypass , soon followed by the 23 @-@ arch Newbattle Viaduct between Eskbank and Newtongrange , where the single @-@ track runs down the centre of the structure as is the case for the <unk> Viaduct on the Settle @-@ Carlisle Line . The second double @-@ track section begins at <unk> and continues to just beyond the former Tynehead station . A 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) single @-@ track section then extends as far as Falahill where a 110 @-@ yard ( 100 m ) reinforced concrete box takes the line under the A7 , the original alignment having been lost to allow the road to be straightened across the trackbed . 
 The final section of double @-@ track begins on the approach to Stow and continues southwards for 3 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km ) through several reverse curves and the 220 @-@ yard ( 200 m ) Bowshank Tunnel before reaching Bowland Points . The last 5 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) stretch to Galashiels and Tweedbank is entirely single @-@ track save for the approach to Tweedbank . The 110 @-@ yard ( 100 m ) <unk> Tunnel is traversed just before Galashiels and four river crossings are made in under 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) which required new bridge spans . At Galashiels , due to trackbed encroachment , the line deviates eastwards between a steep bank and the side wall of a supermarket which occupies the former station site . For the final 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to Tweedbank , the line follows its original alignment over a reconstructed embankment and through an excavated cutting before crossing the River Tweed on the Category B listed Redbridge Viaduct . 
 In terms of gradients , the line proceeds on the level until Eskbank where it climbs to the summit at Falahill ( 880 feet above sea level ) at a ruling gradient of 1 in 70 and then descends at a typical gradient of 1 in 150 into Galashiels and Tweedbank . Falahill is the tenth highest standard gauge railway summit in Britain , just 35 feet ( 11 m ) lower than Shap summit . The <unk> loop is on a 1 in 70 gradient and climbs southwards up the Borthwick Bank which had posed a challenge in the past for steam locomotives pulling heavy loads . 
 Potential for further doubling exists around Newtongrange where passive provision has been made . The line has seven sets of points , two for each of the three dynamic loops , and one at the Tweedbank terminus . 
 = = = Places served = = = 
 The 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) long route serves Tweedbank , Galashiels , Stow , Gorebridge , Newtongrange , Eskbank , Shawfair , Newcraighall , Brunstane and Edinburgh Waverley stations , with a total running time of 55 minutes for most services . Certain services are slowed due to conflicts with other operators ' services in the Edinburgh area . None of the new stations are staffed , but ticket machines and train information have been provided . All stations other than Galashiels have park and ride facilities ; at Galashiels , the local council built a £ 5 @.@ 2 million bus / rail interchange . The station at Stow was a late addition to the scheme after lobbying by the Campaign for Borders Rail . Campaigning also resulted in platforms at the line 's Tweedbank terminus being extended to 312 yards ( 285 m ) , so as to accommodate tourist charter trains of up to 10 – 12 carriages in length . Passive provision has been made for the extension of all other station platforms from 170 yards ( 160 m ) to 257 yards ( 235 m ) . Eskbank station is convenient for an Edinburgh College campus , as well as the Midlothian Community Hospital . 
 = = = Naming of the line = = = 
 The first recorded use of the term Borders Railway to describe the reopened line was in a paper by the Corus Rail Consultancy in January 2004 , entitled Delivering an innovative Borders Railway , which had been commissioned by the Waverley Route Trust . Previously , the Edinburgh – Tweedbank line had been variously described as the Waverley Railway and the Borders Rail Link . In mid @-@ 2014 , Transport Scotland considered launching a competition for the public to submit their ideas for a name but the Scottish Borders Council was strongly opposed on the basis that Borders Railway had developed a strong brand identity . The use of Waverley Line or Waverley Route for the line was considered historically inaccurate by the Council and the Campaign for Borders Rail since these names were only ever used for the whole of the original line as far as Carlisle . 
 = = = Predicted station usage = = = 
 In 2012 , it was predicted that the total passenger return journeys made for the first year of operation of the Borders Railway would be 647 @,@ 136 . In some cases these included extra journeys . This was broken down into Edinburgh Park ( 4 @,@ 071 ) , Haymarket ( 35 @,@ 329 ) , Edinburgh Waverley ( 220 @,@ 533 ) , Brunstane and Newcraighall combined ( 986 ) , Shawfair ( 61 @,@ 860 ) , Eskbank ( 130 @,@ 525 ) , Newtongrange ( 52 @,@ 918 ) , Gorebridge ( 90 @,@ 019 ) , Stow ( 5 @,@ 843 ) , Galashiels ( 23 @,@ 431 ) and Tweedbank ( 21 @,@ 621 ) . After the first month , the actual number of passengers was 125 @,@ 971 , compared to the predicted annual total of around 650 @,@ 000 return journeys , i.e. <unk> single journeys . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 Monday to Saturday services are half @-@ hourly in each direction until 20 : 00 , with an hourly service provided after 20 : 00 and on Sundays . The first weekday service departs at 05 : 20 from Tweedbank with the last service leaving Edinburgh at 23 : 54 . Departure times from Edinburgh are usually at 24 and 54 minutes past the hour , while from Tweedbank trains depart at 28 and 58 minutes past the hour ; individual timings may vary by a minute or so . The trains starting close to on the hour do not call at Stow except in the peaks and evenings ; the Sunday service stops at Stow . Most services operate between Edinburgh and Tweedbank except for a few morning peak services that continue to Glenrothes with Thornton via the Fife Circle Line and a few evening peak services that originate at Glenrothes with Thornton . 
 The route is operated by the new ScotRail franchisee , Abellio ScotRail , which took control in April 2015 . Class 158 DMUs are used on the line , one of which bears special livery advertising the tourist attractions of the Borders . Network Rail indicated that three @-@ car trains run initially , with the possibility of six @-@ car formations using Class <unk> cascaded from the Glasgow to Edinburgh via Falkirk Line once that route has been electrified . When , in 2013 , vacancies were published for 18 trainee train driver positions at the planned Tweedbank depot , interest was substantial with 2 @,@ 229 applications made for the posts . 
 According to the Scottish transport minister Keith Brown , the timetable allows charter train promoters to run special excursion services within the hourly evening and Sunday services . Trains with 10 : 54 , 12 : 54 and 14 : 24 departures from Edinburgh and 11 : 59 , 13 : 59 and 15 : 28 departures from Tweedbank may be affected by scheduled steam trains . 
 = = = Fares = = = 
 Initial plans announced in February 2014 indicated an end @-@ to @-@ end fare of less than £ 10 and stipulated an average fare across the Borders Railway working out at just £ 3 @.@ 50 . According to the fare structure published by Abellio ScotRail in June 2015 , the adult single fare between Edinburgh and Tweedbank was given as £ 10 @.@ 00 , while the adult anytime day return is £ 16 or £ 11 @.@ 20 off @-@ peak . In early 2014 , the new fares were published as follows . 
 = = = Community rail partnership = = = 
 With the launching of the railway , a community rail partnership was formed . 
 = = Project benefits = = 
 Speaking in November 2012 , Scottish transport minister Keith Brown predicted that the Borders Railway would bring inward investment into local communities as well as £ 33 million of benefits for the wider Scottish economy . The construction phase itself would support 400 jobs and would act as a catalyst to increased business development and housing as the area became within commuting distance of Edinburgh . Car journeys would be reduced by 60 @,@ 000 peak trips per year , which would reduce carbon emissions and alleviate traffic and accidents on the A7 and <unk> roads . The housing prediction came to pass when , as reported in the Edinburgh Evening News on 5 August 2013 , a housing boom had been triggered along the line , with the number of new houses in Midlothian having doubled in the previous year , many of which were located in proximity to the line 's stations . It is expected that 4 @,@ 000 houses will be built in the Shawfair area in the next 25 years . On 20 August 2014 , Alex Salmond , then First Minister of Scotland , announced to a meeting with members of the Scottish Borders Council that he expected the railway to benefit the Scottish economy by millions of pounds and that a feasibility study would be conducted to identify ways in which the line could boost tourism in the Borders region . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Infrastructure capability = = = 
 The line 's construction has been described as resembling a " basic railway " built to a tight budget and incorporating a number of cost @-@ saving features . This is in contrast to the reopened Airdrie @-@ Bathgate Rail Link , which was built as a double @-@ track electrified railway from the outset . The difference between the two lines has been claimed by commentators to reflect scepticism toward the Borders Railway , which has existed since proposals were first made in the 1990s , as well as a reluctance to allow the project to become too ambitious . In particular , a 2011 cost @-@ cutting exercise by Transport Scotland resulted in a new project specification which reduced the dynamic passing loops from their planned length of 16 miles ( 26 km ) , and failed to future @-@ proof the line by providing for all eight road bridges to be built to single @-@ track width only , including the five bridges on the section between Tynehead and Stow where there were otherwise no other obstacles to doubling of the line . 
 Similarly , key <unk> on the section as far as Gorebridge were also built to single @-@ track only , notably Bridges <unk> and <unk> over the A7 at <unk> and Gore Glen . This was in contrast to the quality of local roads built over the new line , including the <unk> , which is wider than required to accommodate possible extra road lanes . A press release by BAM Nuttall indicated that , in addition to the 30 miles ( 49 km ) of new line , the Borders Railway project was funding 6 1 ⁄ 5 miles ( 10 km ) of new roads . It was later revealed that these late changes to the rail infrastructure were insisted upon by Network Rail to ensure that the project remained on budget and on time . 
 In addition , the lack of a siding anywhere on the line could make it difficult for rescue locomotives to recover a broken @-@ down train without causing widespread disruption . 
 These fears were to prove justified as , during the line 's first month of operation , there were a number of well @-@ publicised problems ranging from overcrowding resulting in passengers standing for the whole journey to timekeeping difficulties due to excessive dwell times at stations . Furthermore , signalling problems led to disruption on the line nearly a month after opening . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Whilst the Campaign for Borders Rail acknowledged that the half @-@ hourly weekday stopping service would be useful for commuters , it questions whether this is the best use of a line , which could carry other types of traffic . The organisation had proposed a two @-@ tier service , whereby both a half @-@ hourly stopping train and an hourly limited express service would continue north of Gorebridge . 
 = = = Failure to continue to Melrose = = = 
 The Scott Wilson Report did not consider extending the line beyond Tweedbank due to the increased capital and operating costs of continuing further without a corresponding increase in passenger demand . The Campaign for Borders Rail consider nevertheless that there would have been a strong case for reaching Melrose on the basis of the town 's role in Borders tourism . 
 = = = Overcrowding = = = 
 Since the opening of the Borders Railway , there have been many complaints about lack of seats , provision of ticket machines and lack of parking , especially at Tweedbank . The high demand has led ScotRail to increase some services to three or four carriage trains . However this and the general opening of the line have also contributed to there being a general shortage of train carriages across the ScotRail network , leading to them hiring extra trains . 
 = = Proposed extensions = = 
 The Campaign for Borders Rail has called for the continuation of the line to Melrose and Hawick , and eventually to Carlisle . According to the group , Hawick suffered more than any other town in the Borders from the closure of the Waverley Route , and only the return of the railway could halt the area 's economic decline . At the time of the closure of the Waverley Route , Hawick was a 70 @-@ minute journey from Edinburgh . At Melrose , the southbound station platform and building exist alongside the Melrose Bypass . Network Rail has confirmed that there is nothing to prevent the extension of the line beyond Tweedbank , although commentators have remarked that the Bypass could pose problems . A major realignment of the road would be required , as well as the reinstatement of embankments and bridges . 
 Support for the reconstruction of the 70 miles ( 110 km ) to Carlisle was given by Alex Salmond , then First Minister of Scotland , in April 2014 . The comment was given as part of a speech in Carlisle in the run @-@ up to the Scottish independence referendum . <unk> the line would not only provide an opportunity to access the vast areas of forestry land around Kielder , but also provide a strategic diversionary route in the event of closure of the East Coast or West Coast Main Lines . Calls for the line 's reopening have also come from the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Select Committee . Transport Scotland has ruled out a 17 @-@ mile ( 27 km ) extension of the line from Tweedbank to Hawick in favour of connecting bus services and improved cycling and walking routes . In June 2015 , the Scottish Infrastructure Minister Keith Brown confirmed that talks were underway on the commissioning of a feasibility study for an extension to Hawick and Carlisle . Fergus Ewing , Tourism Minister , stated in July 2015 that he would not rule out a further extension , describing the line as " one of the most exciting and most effective events and transport services that there has ever been for tourism " . 
 In May 2013 , it was reported that Heriot @-@ Watt University had been asked by Midlothian Council to carry out a feasibility study on a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) rail link connecting Penicuik with the Borders Railway . At least 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of the new line would follow the Edinburgh , Loanhead and Roslin Railway , the alignment of which is generally intact between Millerhill and Straiton . 
 = Warriors ( novel series ) = 
 Warriors is a series of juvenile fantasy novels published by HarperCollins ; it is written by authors Kate Cary , Cherith Baldry , Tui Sutherland , with the plot developed by editor Victoria Holmes , who collectively use the pseudonym Erin Hunter . The series follows the adventures of four Clans of wild cats — ThunderClan , ShadowClan , WindClan , and RiverClan — in their forest and lake homes . SkyClan , the long @-@ forgotten fifth Clan of the forest , is later introduced in the stand @-@ alone novel Firestar 's Quest . It receives additional focus in the novel SkyClan 's Destiny , the manga trilogy SkyClan and the Stranger , and the 2013 novella Cloudstar 's Journey . A few cats in the series are Firestar and Graystripe , though there are quite a few more , such as Bluestar , the leader of ThunderClan , and Brambleclaw . 
 There are currently six sub @-@ series , each containing six books . The first , Warriors ( later re @-@ titled as Warriors : The Prophecies Begin ) , was published from 2003 to 2004 . Warriors : The New Prophecy , published from 2005 to 2006 , follows the first sub @-@ series , chronicling the Clans as they move to a new home . The third story arc , Warriors : Power of Three , was published from 2007 to 2009 . The fourth sub @-@ series , Warriors : Omen of the Stars , was published from 2009 to 2012 and continued where the third story arc left off . The fifth sub @-@ series is Warriors : Dawn of the Clans , and the first book , The Sun Trail , was released 5 March 2013 . The 6th and last book of the Dawn of the Clans arc called Path of Stars was released 8 October 2015 . The sub @-@ series acts as a prequel series , detailing the formation of the Clans . The sixth and most recent sub @-@ series , Warriors : A Vision of Shadows , is not yet complete and is still being written and published . The first book of the sixth series , The Apprentice 's Quest , was released on March 15 , 2016 , and the second book , Thunder and Shadow , will be released on September 6 , 2016 . Warriors : A Vision of Shadows immediately follows Warriors : Omen of the Stars , and Bramblestar 's Storm . 
 Other books have been released in addition to the main series , including eight lengthier stand @-@ alone " Super Edition " novels entitled Firestar 's Quest , Bluestar 's Prophecy , SkyClan 's Destiny , Crookedstar 's Promise , Yellowfang 's Secret , Tallstar 's Revenge , Bramblestar 's Storm and Moth Flight 's Vision ; an unreleased super edition novel , titled Warriors Super Edition : Hawkwing 's Journey , has been announced and will be released on November 1 , 2016 . There are also a few other books that were published as e @-@ book novels : Hollyleaf 's Story , Mistystar 's Omen , Cloudstar 's Journey , Tigerclaw 's Fury , Leafpool 's Wish , Dovewing 's Silence , Mapleshade 's Vengeance and Goosefeather 's Curse . Another novel , titled Ravenpaw 's Farewell is confirmed . These e @-@ book novels have also been published in two print compilations , with three stories each : Warriors : Tales from the Clans and Warriors : The Untold Stories . Six guides and several volumes of original English @-@ language manga , produced as a collaboration between HarperCollins and TOKYOPOP , have been published as well . Manga published after TOKYOPOP 's shutdown is published by HarperCollins on its own . In addition to the books , the authors have also written several short stories and two plays . The Warriors series , with the exception of the manga , has been released in e @-@ book format for popular e @-@ readers such as the Barnes & Noble Nook and Amazon Kindle . The series has also been translated into several languages . In addition , the series has a website featuring games , promotional videos , quizzes , a message board , and news . 
 Major themes in the series deal with adventure , forbidden love , the concept of nature vs. nurture , the reactions of different faiths meeting each other , and characters being a mix of good and bad . The authors draw inspiration from several natural locations and other authors such as J. R. R. Tolkien , J. K. Rowling , and William Shakespeare . 
 Warriors has received mostly positive reviews , but it has also been criticized for being confusing due to its large number of characters . Critics have compared it to the Redwall series , though one reviewer commented that the series is less elegantly written . Although nominated for several awards , Warriors has yet to receive any major literary prizes . The series has reached the New York Times Bestseller List and has found popularity in many countries , including Trinidad and China . 
 = = Setting and characters = = 
 In the Warriors universe , there are four Clans of feral cats that live in a forest : ThunderClan , RiverClan , WindClan , and ShadowClan . A fifth Clan , SkyClan , is driven out by the other Clans when its territory is destroyed by humans building a town , and it scatters shortly after arriving at a new home in a gorge . SkyClan is later rebuilt during the events of Firestar 's Quest . Cats in each Clan live and hunt in their own territory , which they defend from other cats . Each Clan is adapted to its own types of prey and members usually possess ( or are taught ) special skills which suit the territory 's terrain . BloodClan is a group of stray city cats introduced in The Darkest Hour . However , they are not considered to be a true Clan because they do not believe in the warriors ' spiritual ancestors , StarClan , or the warrior code , a set of rules followed by all Clan cats . BloodClan is considered to be a group of rogues ( non @-@ Clan cats who do not respect the Clan cats ' rules ) and was defeated in The Darkest Hour by the four warrior Clans . 
 StarClan is a group of the Clans ' deceased ancestors who give guidance to the Clans . After death , most Clan cats join StarClan . StarClan is said to be represented by <unk> ( the Milky Way ) , and each individual star represents the spirit of a single dead warrior . Upon joining StarClan , the cats ' spirits take the form in which they were most happy while living ( i.e. blindness and deafness can be cured ) . StarClan warriors keep watch over the Clans , usually watching the Clan they lived in while alive . They provide guidance to the Clans , often through dreams and other signs like omens . Often , this occurs when medicine cats go to the Moonstone , a large piece of quartz in an abandoned mine , which is used in the forest territory to communicate with the medicine cats ' ancestors every half @-@ moon . When the Clans move to live by a lake because humans destroy their forest , the medicine cats gather at the Moonpool , a pool used as the replacement for the Moonstone . In an author chat , Hunter said that StarClan can " just get glimpses of " the future , which they occasionally pass on . In addition to StarClan , there exists the Dark Forest , also known as The Place of No Stars . The spirits of cats who cause great pain and suffering to others during their lives reside there instead of in StarClan . Dark Forest cats eventually gain the ability to walk in dreams like StarClan . Both Dark Forest and StarClan cats eventually fade away as they are forgotten . In addition , both Dark Forest and StarClan cats fade away before they are forgotten if they are " killed " . 
 Beyond the Clans ' territories lies a mountain range , inhabited by the Tribe of Rushing Water . The Tribe is shown to be similar to the Clans , yet follows a different set of ancestors : the Tribe of Endless Hunting . The Tribe has a Healer , cave @-@ guards , and prey @-@ hunters , who each serve a different function in the Tribe . The Healer leads the Tribe , heals the ill and wounded , and communicates with the Tribe of Endless Hunting ; the cave @-@ guards defend the Tribe , and the prey @-@ hunters hunt . The Tribe was formed by the Ancients when they left the lake to live in the mountains . In turn , cats from the Tribe moved to the forest of the original series and formed the Clans . 
 The Clans ' origin is described in Secrets of the Clans . Originally , many small groups of wild cats from the Tribe of Rushing Water live in the forest . Without a code of honour to follow or ancestors to provide guidance , they fight constantly for food and territory . One night , a large battle occurs , and many cats die . The spirits of the cats killed in battle return and tell the remaining cats to " unite or die " . In this way , the Clans are formed from the previous multitude of small groups . This idea is expanded on in the fifth sub @-@ series " Warriors : Dawn of the clans " . The dead spirits become StarClan , and the code of honour that the cats follow is gradually created , as described in Code of the Clans . 
 The main character in the first series is Firestar , a young kittypet who decides to join the Clans as a kittypet . In the second series , it wavers between the cats who journey to a young badger , Midnight , who tells them that the forest will be destroyed . 
 = = = Clan hierarchy = = = 
 The Clans have a hierarchical system , with different cats having different positions within the Clan . The leader receives his or her nine lives and leader name ending with the suffix <unk> from StarClan after he or she goes to the Moonstone / Moonpool . The leader makes all major decisions for the Clan , such as deciding when to wage a battle or promote a warrior . The leader 's word is law , according to the warrior code , and must be followed . The deputy is second in command and succeeds the leader when the leader loses his or her last life . The deputy 's job is mainly to organize patrols and other everyday tasks . In order to be appointed deputy by the leader , a cat must already be a warrior and have mentored at least one apprentice . There is also a medicine cat in each Clan , who receives messages from StarClan and is trained extensively in the uses of herbs to heal sick or injured cats . Medicine cats are not allowed to have kits or mates , as it would distract them from their duties . At each half @-@ moon , the medicine cats from each Clan meet at the Moonstone / Moonpool to talk with StarClan . 
 In a Clan , there is never more than one medicine cat apprentice at any one time : a medicine cat apprentice helps gather herbs and learns medical knowledge , but he or she is considered an apprentice until the current medicine cat dies or retires , even if he or she has already received a full medicine cat name . There are also warrior apprentices ( usually referred to simply as apprentices ) , who train to hunt for and defend their Clan , the duties of a warrior . All apprentices ' names end with the suffix <unk> . These apprentices are mentored by warriors , who pass down knowledge and skills they have learned from their own mentors . <unk> usually last approximately six months . Apprentices occasionally undergo assessments to determine their progress , and they become warriors when their mentors deem them ready and the clan leader approves it . Warrior name suffixes ( e.g. <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , etc . ) are selected by the leader during the warrior ceremony . 
 Another important event after the warrior ceremony is the silent vigil that the new warriors lead the night after the ceremony . They must watch over the sleeping camp in silence until sunrise , when the Clan leader tells them their vigil is over . When a cat becomes old , permanently ill , or disabled , he or she retires to become an elder . Elders share their knowledge with the Clan and are cared for by the apprentices . The only task they carry out is burying dead Clanmates . Clans also have queens , who are she @-@ cats expecting or caring for their kits . Queens return to warrior duties when no longer expecting or nursing kits . A queen is not obligated to reveal the identity of her mate . A kit 's name always ends with the suffix <unk> ; kits become apprentices after they are six months old . 
 = = = Clan terminology = = = 
 The feline characters of the Warriors series use different words for certain concepts and objects in the natural world . These can range from terms referring to other animals , such as <unk> ( human ) , or kittypet ( house cat ) , to referring to human objects such as a monster ( car ) or <unk> ( stable ) . The animals also have specific terms for time and measurement , such as sundown or <unk> representing different times of day according to the positions of the moon , sun , and stars overhead . The seasons are given names according to the trees and foliage in the forest , with <unk> meaning spring , <unk> meaning summer , leaf @-@ fall meaning autumn , and leaf @-@ bare meaning winter . 
 = = Warriors : The Prophecies Begin = = 
 The original Warriors series , later re @-@ titled Warriors : The Prophecies Begin , was released from 2003 to 2004 and consists of six books : Into the Wild , Fire and Ice , Forest of Secrets , Rising Storm , A Dangerous Path , and The Darkest Hour . The series was subtitled The Prophecies Begin for its planned re @-@ release in paperback with new covers in 2015 . The series details the experiences of a pet cat named Rusty who ventures into the forest and is invited to join ThunderClan , one of four groups of wild cats in the forest . He accepts the invitation and receives the apprentice name <unk> while he trains to become a warrior . Later , <unk> receives his warrior name , Fireheart and discovers that Tigerclaw , the deputy of ThunderClan , wishes to kill ThunderClan leader Bluestar in order to succeed her and become leader himself . Ravenpaw , his apprentice , is forced to flee due to his witnessing of Tigerclaw killing <unk> , the former ThunderClan deputy . Fireheart eventually becomes deputy of the Clan after Tigerclaw tries to kill Bluestar , fails , and is banished from ThunderClan . After his banishment , Tigerclaw takes over another Clan , ShadowClan , and lures a pack of dogs into ThunderClan camp in attempt at vengeance . Bluestar dies sacrificing her last life to protect the Clan from the dogs , and Fireheart succeeds her as leader , receiving nine lives and the name Firestar from the Clans ' spiritual ancestors , StarClan . Tigerstar then attempts to take over all four Clans , telling them that the leaders will rule together . <unk> , leader of RiverClan , agrees , but Firestar and Tallstar , leader of WindClan , refuse . Tigerstar then enlists the aid of BloodClan , a vicious group of city cats , to take over the Clans , but BloodClan leader Scourge kills Tigerstar ( taking all nine of Tigerstar 's lives at once by slicing him from neck to tail ) and decides to take over the forest for himself . The four Clans unite to fight BloodClan , and Firestar loses the first of his nine lives in battle against Scourge , but Firestar kills Scourge after he returns to life , defeating BloodClan and saving the forest . 
 = = Warriors : The New Prophecy = = 
 The second series , Warriors : The New Prophecy , was released from 2005 to 2006 , and contains six books : Midnight , Moonrise , Dawn , Starlight , Twilight , and Sunset . In the series , four cats , Brambleclaw , Tawnypelt , Crowpaw , and Feathertail , are sent on a mission by StarClan to the ocean , with Feathertail 's brother Stormfur and ThunderClan apprentice Squirrelpaw accompanying them . There , a badger named Midnight tells the six cats that all four of the Clans are in danger from humans and must leave for a new home . On the way back to the forest , the traveling cats meet a group of cats called the Tribe of Rushing Water who are being terrorized by a mountain lion called Sharptooth . Feathertail sacrifices her life to kill Sharptooth and save the Tribe . The remaining cats return to their Clans and relay the message . Together , the four Clans travel to a new territory by a lake , encountering the Tribe once again on the journey . Once at the lake , ThunderClan medicine cat apprentice Leafpool and Crowfeather ( formerly Crowpaw ) fall in love with each other . However , the warrior code says that Leafpool , as a medicine cat , cannot have a mate . In addition , Clan cats may not be mates with cats from other Clans . They eventually abscond , but return when Midnight warns them that a group of badgers plans to attack ThunderClan . Upon returning , they find that a badger has killed <unk> , the ThunderClan medicine cat , while she is helping <unk> give birth . <unk> is then reborn as <unk> , to fulfill her destiny of being a ThunderClan warrior . 
 The series then centers around the prophecy " before there is peace , blood will spill blood , and the lake will run red " . Hawkfrost and Brambleclaw have been meeting with the spirit of their dead father Tigerstar in dreams , in which he is teaching them how to become Clan leader by force . Hawkfrost follows Tigerstar every step of the way , but Brambleclaw is split between loyalty to his leader and his own ambition . Firestar appoints Brambleclaw as deputy after finally accepting the possibility that Graystripe might never return ( he was abducted by humans prior to the Clans ' journey to the new territory ) . The series reaches its climax when Hawkfrost traps Firestar and tells Brambleclaw to kill him . Brambleclaw decides that he does not want to become leader by force and refuses . Instead , he frees Firestar . Hawkfrost attacks Brambleclaw , intending to kill him for his knowledge of his and Tigerstar 's plans , but Brambleclaw manages to kill Hawkfrost instead . Hawkfrost 's blood runs into the lake , turning it red , explaining the " blood will spill blood " prophecy as Brambleclaw is Hawkfrost 's kin . 
 = = Warriors : Power of Three = = 
 The third series , titled Warriors : Power of Three , was released from 2007 to 2009 and consists of The Sight , Dark River , Outcast , Eclipse , Long Shadows , and Sunrise . The plot is centered on the prophecy , " there will be three , kin of your kin , who hold the power of the stars in their paws " , which was given to Firestar in Firestar 's Quest by <unk> . The series details the experiences of Hollyleaf , Jayfeather , and Lionblaze , Firestar 's grand kits , and thus kin of his kin . Jayfeather is blind , but has the unique ability to feel emotions and memories coming off of other cats and to enter their dreams , where he is then able to see . Lionblaze has the power to never get hurt in a fight . Hollyleaf found her power in being completely loyal . A loner cat called Sol warns Jayfeather and Leafpool that the sun will disappear . During a battle involving all four Clans , the sun disappears in an eclipse . Sol then persuades ShadowClan to lose faith in StarClan , using his warning as evidence that he knows more than StarClan . Jayfeather , Lionblaze , and Hollyleaf fake a sign from StarClan to convince Blackstar , leader of ShadowClan , that StarClan is real and should be followed , but StarClan cats come , making it a true sign . Sol is banished . Ashfur tries to kill Hollyleaf , Lionblaze , and Jayfeather during a fire because he is angry with Squirrelflight , whom he had wanted as a mate in Sunset , but Squirrelflight reveals that they are not her kits . Ashfur threatens to reveal this deception , but Hollyleaf kills Ashfur to keep him quiet . Jayfeather , Hollyleaf , and Lionblaze learn that their true parents are Leafpool and Crowfeather , not Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw ; this makes their birth against the warrior code and medicine cat code , codes of honour followed by Clan cats and medicine cats , respectively . During a Gathering , Hollyleaf reveals the truth about their parents to all the Clans , then runs away into a set of tunnels under the Clans ' territories because she can not stand the fact that her birth is against the warrior code , which means a lot to her . The tunnels then collapse on Hollyleaf , and she is presumed dead . Jayfeather realizes that Hollyleaf was never meant to be part of the Three and that either <unk> or <unk> , <unk> of Firestar 's nephew <unk> , is meant to be the third cat of the prophecy . 
 = = Warriors : Omen of the Stars = = 
 The fourth series , entitled Warriors : Omen of the Stars , was released from 2009 to 2012 and comprises The Fourth Apprentice , Fading Echoes , Night Whispers , Sign of the Moon , The Forgotten Warrior , and The Last Hope . It is a direct continuation of Warriors : Power of Three . ThunderClan apprentice Dovepaw has the special ability to hear and see extremely distant things . When Dovepaw reveals that the cause of a drought to be a beaver dam upstream , Jayfeather and Lionblaze realize that she is the third cat in the prophecy from Power of Three . After Dovepaw saves ThunderClan from a falling tree with her powers , she receives special attention from Firestar that makes her sister , Ivypaw , jealous . Hawkfrost 's spirit exploits her jealousy and befriends Ivypaw ; he begins giving her battle training in her dreams as Tigerstar did in The New Prophecy . Jayfeather , Yellowfang , and Spottedleaf discover that the Dark Forest cats are training for battle . Jayfeather finds out about Ivypaw 's Dark Forest training ; he suggests asking Ivypaw to act as a spy , and Ivypaw learns that Tigerstar is training her and training " under @-@ recognized " cats to fight against the Clans , though they do not know it . Ivypaw and Dovepaw then receive the warrior names Ivypool and Dovewing . Jayfeather then visits the Tribe of Rushing Water , where he goes back in time to the Ancients and helps Half Moon become the first <unk> . He is then given a new prophecy : " The end of the stars draws near ; three must become four , to battle the darkness that lasts forever " . When a fox chases two apprentices , a mysterious cat scares away the fox ; in searching for this cat , ThunderClan finds Sol . Dovewing and Ivypool spy on Sol as he plots with WindClan to attack ThunderClan and are almost discovered , but Hollyleaf , who has been living in the tunnels since the events of Sunrise , ' reveals ' herself and leads the two to safety . Returning to ThunderClan , she shows them how to fight in the tunnels in preparation for a battle with WindClan . During the battle , she traps Sol , but releases him , warning him never to return to the Clans . In " The Last Hope " , at the Moonpool , Yellowfang and <unk> — a former RiverClan medicine cat — tell Jayfeather that he must tell Lionblaze and Dovewing about the new prophecy he received while in the mountains , and unite all the Clans . They discover that Firestar is the fourth cat of the prophecy , and when the Dark Forest attacks the Clans , Firestar kills Tigerstar , Firestar loses his last life , and Brambleclaw becomes leader and names Squirrelflight his deputy . 
 = = Warriors : Dawn of the Clans = = 
 The fifth series , Warriors : Dawn of the Clans , details the formation of the Clans . The first book , The Sun Trail , has been published , as has Thunder Rising which was released on November 5 , 2013 . The First Battle was released on April 8 , 2014 . The fourth book , The Blazing Star , was released on November 4 , 2014 , and the fifth book , A Forest Divided , was released on April 7 , 2015 . The Path of the Stars , the sixth and last book in the Dawn of the Clans , was released September 1 , 2015 along with Goosefeather 's Curse . 
 In The Sun Trail , prey is scarce in the mountain home of the Tribe of Rushing Water , so a cat named Gray Wing and his companions must leave to find more food and a better home . Once they reach their new forest home Gray Wing falls in love with a cat there named Storm . The Tribe cats start to live in the forest and take in rogue cats . When Gray Wing sees Storm again , he invites her to visit Clear Sky , another former Tribe cat and Gray Wing 's brother . Once she meets Clear Sky , however , she falls in love with him . Gray Wing discovers that Storm is pregnant by Clear Sky and that she is going to live with him for a while , breaking Gray Wing 's heart . When Turtle Tail , another one of the Tribe cats , who becomes a kittypet later in The Sun Trail tells Gray Wing that Storm is in trouble , Gray Wing does not believe her . When he finds Storm , she is dead along with two of her three kits . Storm had left Clear Sky after he banished his own brother Jagged Peak who was hardly a kit because he had fallen out of a tree and broken his leg . Clear Sky banished all cats who couldn 't look after themselves . Gray Wing , Tall Shadow , and the Tribe cats who live on the moor name the surviving kit Thunder . When Gray Wing shows Thunder his father , Clear Sky rejects Thunder . Sad and angry with his brother , Gray Wing adopts Thunder . 
 The second book , Thunder Rising , takes place a couple of months after The Sun Trail . Turtle Tail returns to Gray Wing 's group pregnant by an aggressive kittypet named Tom , and becomes Gray Wing 's mate . A fire breaks out in the forest , forcing Clear Sky 's group to take shelter with Gray Wing . While taking shelter with Gray Wing , Clear Sky realizes that he was wrong about Thunder and invites him to join his group . Thunder quickly accepts the offer but soon realizes that his father is too power @-@ hungry and concentrated on the needs of the group over the individual and leaves . 
 In the third book , " The First Battle " , Clear Sky declares war upon Gray Wing 's group . Gray Wing tries to make peace , but Clear Sky is ambitious and wants more territory . Tom arrives to look for Bumble ( another housecat ) and Turtle Tail . He steals Turtle Tail 's kits and brings them to live with him . Cats from Gray Wing 's group go to look for and bring them back , but they find Turtle Tail dead by a road . The cats manage to rescue the kittens from Tom , who swears revenge . At the end , Gray Wing 's cats fight Clear Sky 's . Many cats die , and the battle ends in a stalemate . The ghosts of the fallen cats return to tell the fighting cats to " unite or die " . Clear Sky is struck with guilt and grief . 
 In the fourth book , rogues ( non @-@ Clan cats ) join the groups and a one @-@ eyed cat tries to take control of the forest . The groups meet again at the full moon , where they are greeted again by the fallen cats . This time , they bring a new message : " To tame the Claw that blights the forest , grow and spread like the Blazing Star " . No cat can understand what it means ; however , during the meeting , Thunder meets a she @-@ cat named Star Flower . After the meeting , the cats notice that a strange sickness is starting to infect the prey , giving them sores and bloated bellies . Wind Runner 's kit falls ill with the disease and eventually dies . Struck by sadness , Wind Runner , Gorse Fur , and their kits leave the hollow to live on their own . 
 = = Warriors : A Vision of Shadows = = 
 Warriors : A Vision of Shadows is the sixth sub @-@ series . The series was originally titled , Warriors : StarClan 's Promise . The first book , The Apprentice 's Quest , which takes place approximately eight months after Bramblestar 's Storm , was released on March 15 , 2016 . The books ' main characters are <unk> and Alderpaw who are Bramblestar 's and Squirrelflight 's children . 
 The first book , The Apprentice 's Quest , starts with each Clan 's medicine cats receiving a prophecy from StarClan together , telling them to " Embrace what you find in the shadows , for only they can clear the sky " . This is the titular prophecy of the series ( A Vision of Shadows ) . When receiving this prophecy , Jayfeather sees <unk> ( Alderpaw 's former name ) in his dream , as well as the other medicine cats . Later him , Leafpool , and Bramblestar decide that Alderpaw should become a medicine cat apprentice . Further into the book , Alderpaw has a vision of the far @-@ off SkyClan . After deciding that Alderpaw 's vision relates to the prophecy , Bramblestar sends Alderpaw on a quest to help SkyClan along with his ex @-@ mentor , <unk> , Sandstorm , his sister <unk> , and her mentor <unk> . While on the quest , they 're joined by ShadowClan apprentice Needlepaw . Sandstorm dies along the way . When they reach the gorge where <unk> lives , they find that they have been run out of their territory by a group of rogues . They decide that they arrived too late to help SkyClan and return back to the lake . On the way back Alderpaw and Needlepaw find two female kits ( <unk> and <unk> ) who lost their mother . Needlepaw suggests that the kits could be " what you find in the shadows " . They then take the kits back to the lake and at a full moon Gathering , the clan leaders decide that ShadowClan should take one kit and ThunderClan should take the other . ThunderClan takes <unk> and ShadowClan takes <unk> . 
 The second book , Thunder and Shadow , will be released on September 6 , 2016 . 
 = = Other books = = 
 = = = Super Editions = = = 
 Super Editions are stand alone books in the Warriors series that are approximately double the length of a normal Warriors book . There are eight Super Editions as of November 2015 : Firestar 's Quest , Bluestar 's Prophecy , SkyClan 's Destiny , Crookedstar 's Promise , Yellowfang 's Secret , Tallstar 's Revenge , Bramblestar 's Storm , and Moth Flight 's Vision . Each Super Edition Novel also includes an exclusive manga except for Firestar 's Quest . 
 = = = = Firestar 's Quest = = = = 
 Firestar 's Quest , the first Warriors Super Edition , was released on 25 August 2007 . It is set between The Darkest Hour and Midnight and details Firestar and his mate Sandstorm 's journey to restore SkyClan , the fifth Clan of the forest that is driven out when a town is built and scattered when it is attacked by rats in its new home . Firestar and Sandstorm find rogues and house cats , some of whom are descendants of the former SkyClan and teach them how to hunt , fight , and follow the warrior code . When a house cat named Echo dreams of starry cats , Firestar realizes that the dream was sent by StarClan , indicating that Echo should be SkyClan 's medicine cat . Echo is taught all that Sandstorm was taught before leaving ThunderClan with Firestar on their quest . She is named <unk> . While SkyClan is rebuilding its ranks , rats attack as they did when SkyClan first came to the gorge . SkyClan defeats them by joining together under the direction of Firestar , <unk> ( later Leafstar ) , and <unk> , her deputy later on . Firestar manages to kill the leader of the rats , after which the rats leave . During the rat attack , Firestar loses a life , leaving him with only seven , and a warrior called <unk> is killed . Towards the end , <unk> dreams of dappled leaves , indicating that <unk> should be the new leader . She is named Leafstar and receives her nine lives , meeting <unk> . The former leaders that drove the ancient <unk> out apologize in <unk> . <unk> and <unk> are then made warriors ( <unk> and <unk> ) and <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> become apprentices ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) . The epilogue describes the birth of <unk> and <unk> , Firestar and Sandstorm 's only kits . 
 = = = = Bluestar 's Prophecy = = = = 
 Bluestar 's Prophecy was released on 28 July 2009 . It covers Bluestar 's life from her birth to the beginning of Into the Wild . The novel begins on the day of Bluestar 's death as she saves Fireheart and ThunderClan from the dog pack , a scene from A Dangerous Path . The novel then returns to when Bluestar was still a kit , <unk> . <unk> is apprenticed to <unk> as Bluepaw , and proves to be an excellent hunter , catching a squirrel " almost as big as her " on her first day of hunting . The next day , Goosefeather sees a sign in the vole Snowpaw ( Bluepaw 's sister ) brings back to camp and proclaims that ThunderClan must attack WindClan . Later , he tells them that they must destroy WindClan 's medicine supply in order to keep them at bay during winter . Pinestar is reluctant but agrees to attack at dawn . Bluepaw and Snowpaw are ordered to stay out of the fight , but they help <unk> , the medicine cat apprentice , tend to the wounded . During the battle , Bluepaw 's mother , <unk> , destroys WindClan 's medicine supplies , but is killed by <unk> , the WindClan medicine cat . Bluepaw enters a state of grief which lasts until <unk> , the deputy and her new mentor since <unk> was injured during the WindClan battle and never healed , talks her out of it , telling her that she must honor <unk> by doing well . She attends the Gathering that night , where she meets and becomes friendly with <unk> and Oakheart of RiverClan . 
 A while later , Bluepaw receives her warrior name , Bluefur , and Snowpaw receives hers , <unk> . Bluefur finds out that a <unk> , <unk> , is in love with her , but she dismisses it , deciding that she is too young to have a mate . However , <unk> wants a <unk> named <unk> as a mate . A few moons later , Pinestar announces that he wants no more of the warrior life and goes off to live his last life as a housecat . <unk> becomes Sunstar and Tawnyspots becomes the new deputy . On a patrol to RiverClan , Bluefur is pulled aside by Oakheart , who tells her to meet him that night at <unk> . She does , and the two warriors spend the night together , having fallen in love . About a month later , Tawnyspots falls ill with an incurable illness , so he is unable to be deputy for much longer . <unk> , now Thistleclaw , wishes to become deputy in his place . Bluefur discovers that she is pregnant with Oakheart 's kits . ThunderClan believes her kits are with <unk> and are overjoyed . After Goosefeather convinces her that she must become deputy , and not Thistleclaw due to his violence and ambition , Bluefur reluctantly brings her three kits ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) , to RiverClan to live as RiverClan cats . <unk> dies along the way . Bluefur then convinces ThunderClan that a fox or other creature took her kits . Once <unk> deems Tawnyspots incurable and unfit for <unk> , Sunstar appoints Bluefur as the new deputy . After Sunstar dies , Bluefur becomes Bluestar and receives nine lives . Thistleclaw is outraged by this and continues to be bitter towards Bluestar until he was killed later on . 
 Many months later , she is seen sitting with Spottedleaf , the medicine cat , and hears the " Fire will save our Clan " prophecy . The manga at the end of the novel depicts Bluestar 's decision to accept Rusty ( later Firestar ) to the Clan . 
 = = = = SkyClan 's Destiny = = = = 
 SkyClan 's Destiny was released on 3 August 2010 . The book follows Leafstar and her struggle to rebuild the once @-@ lost Clan . The book takes place several months after Firestar 's Quest . The Clan 's members are split over whether or not " daylight @-@ warriors " , housecats who join the Clan in the day and return to their owners at night , should be allowed to be part of the Clan . Leafstar struggles with the decision , as she wants to take <unk> , one of the daylight @-@ warriors , as a mate , but wants what is best for the Clan . SkyClan then faces a series of challenges caused by visiting rogues . 
 = = = = Crookedstar 's Promise = = = = 
 Crookedstar 's Promise was released on 5 July 2011 . It takes place at the same time as Bluestar 's Prophecy and details the life of Crookedstar , initially Stormkit . As a kit , Stormkit falls into the river after he sneaks out of camp and attempts to chase ThunderClan medicine cat Goosefeather away from <unk> , a part of RiverClan territory ( at the time ) . This leads him to break his jaw on a rock . <unk> , Stormkit 's mother , rejects Stormkit due to his disfigured appearance and demands that RiverClan leader Hailstar perform a renaming ceremony to rename Stormkit to Crookedkit . Feeling rejected , Crookedkit is visited in a dream by Mapleshade , a Dark Forest cat who allows Crookedkit to believe that she is from StarClan . She tells him that she can give him anything he wants as long as he is faithful to his Clan and puts all other things aside . Crookedkit quickly accepts this promise , believing it not to be a difficult promise , as he was already loyal to his Clan , and believes that Mapleshade can help him become leader . Mapleshade then uses Crookedkit 's promise to seemingly bring about the deaths of Crookedkit 's loved ones . When Crookedjaw is chasing away a dog , the dog knocks his mother , <unk> , into a river , and she hits her head on rocks . Mapleshade urges Crookedjaw to focus on the dog instead of bringing his mother to the medicine cat , and she dies . Crookedjaw then becomes deputy upon his father <unk> 's retirement ; shortly after , <unk> dies of a lump in his stomach . Not long after , Hailstar loses his last life while fighting rats in a barn : although Mapleshade urges him to not protect Hailstar so he can become leader , Crookedjaw ignores her , having discovered that she is actually from the Dark Forest . Nonetheless , Hailstar is killed . Despite his insistence that she stay away from him , Mapleshade continues to haunt Crookedstar : his mate , <unk> , dies of a respiratory infection days after giving birth to his three kits , and two of the kits die as well . When Crookedstar confronts Mapleshade , she reveals that she had once been the mate of Crookedstar 's great @-@ grandfather . Mapleshade had been a ThunderClan cat , while her mate had been from RiverClan : Mapleshade is rejected by her Clan for taking a forbidden mate , then loses the kits in the river when she attempts to bring them to RiverClan . Her mate blames her for letting the kits drown in the river , and RiverClan , too , rejects Mapleshade . As a result , Mapleshade vows revenge on her mates descendants , one of whom is Crookedstar . When Crookedstar finally reveals his promise and his belief that it caused the deaths of his loved ones , to his medicine cat <unk> , she argues that the deaths were not in fact Mapleshade 's fault . Following the conclusion of the novel , Oakheart is killed , then in the manga feature , Silverstream , Crookedstar 's only remaining kit , dies after giving birth to Graystripe of ThunderClan 's kits . Mapleshade asserts that these deaths were her doing as well , but Crookedstar tells Mapleshade that she has failed to punish him , as his loved ones live on in StarClan , while she has no one . Finally , Crookedstar dies as well . 
 = = = = Yellowfang 's Secret = = = = 
 Yellowfang 's Secret was released on 9 October 2012 . It is a Super Edition about the former ThunderClan medicine cat Yellowfang and her life in ShadowClan . It follows Yellowfang as she first trains to be a warrior , then later realizes her paws are not meant for shedding blood and her decision to switch to the role of medicine cat instead . However , she breaks the code of medicine cats when she gives birth ; as a result , she and her whole Clan are punished by her disloyalty to the code . In the end , she herself is cast out of ShadowClan by her own kit <unk> . 
 = = = = Tallstar 's Revenge = = = = 
 Tallstar 's Revenge was released on 2 July 2013 . It tells the story of Tallstar , whose father dies when he is an apprentice during a tunnel collapse . As a result , he attempts to avenge his father <unk> 's death by killing the cat ( a rogue named Sparrow ) whom he believes did not help his father escape the tunnel and is therefore responsible . Tallstar leaves his Clan to track down Sparrow and briefly travels with a house cat named Jake , who is later revealed to be the father of Firestar ( the main protagonist of the original six books ) . When he meets up with Sparrow , Tallstar discovers that his father actually sacrificed himself to allow the other cat to escape and does not carry through with his intended vengeance , instead saving Sparrow 's life when Sparrow slides down a cliff and near a road . 
 = = = = Bramblestar 's Storm = = = = 
 Bramblestar 's Storm , the seventh volume in the Super Edition arc , features Bramblestar , the leader of ThunderClan . The book takes place after the Clans ' victory over the Dark Forest cats . This book was released on 26 August 2014 . All Clans are struggling due to the lake flooding ; however , ThunderClan and ShadowClan appear to be suffering most . Deaths of Clanmates leads to tension and grief between those in ThunderClan as they simultaneously also try to survive outside of their usual territory , having been displaced by the flooding . On a border patrol , Bramblestar encounters some housecats that are taken into the Clan until they can return home . Bramblestar becomes close to one of the housecats , Jessy , which upsets Bramblestar 's deputy ( and former mate ) Squirrelflight causing many quarrels between them . Ultimately , two of the housecats , Minty and Jessy , decide to leave , leaving only Frankie ( later named <unk> ) with ThunderClan . Jessy leaves because she feels that it would be better if Bramblestar and herself do not become mates because Bramblestar ’ s heart belongs with Squirrelflight . In the short manga chapter included at the book 's end , it is revealed that Squirrelflight is pregnant with Bramblestar 's kits . 
 = = = = Moth Flight 's Vision = = = = 
 Moth Flight 's Vision is the 8th Super Edition novel that was released on November 3 , 2015 . It features a cat named Moth Flight , who becomes WindClan 's first medicine cat . Moth Flight was also the one who discovered the Moonstone , and that all leaders shall be granted nine lives . It takes place a few moons after the last book in the Dawn of the Clans series . In this book , Moth Flight , an easily <unk> she @-@ cat , kit of Wind Runner ( later <unk> ) , leaves her Clan , following a unexpected guide , and meets an unexpected friend , who is vital to her journey . She finds an object , and is told something important . She goes home , and reveals the secret information . Her friend stays with her , and she gives birth to four kits after his death . She lives happily for moons after , until she dies a sad , peaceful death . 
 = = = = Hawkwing 's Journey = = = = 
 Hawkwing 's Journey is the ninth Super Edition novel , and will be published on 1 November 2016 . 
 = = = Field guides = = = 
 Four field guides have also been published . They offer extra information , usually in the form of short stories , and are usually about 150 pages long . Secrets of the Clans is the first field guide in the series . It gives more details about the Clans previously unrevealed in the main series . Cats of the Clans , featuring illustrations and descriptions of the cats , was released on 24 June 2008 . Code of the Clans , which describes the origins of the cats ' code of honour , the warrior code , was released on 9 June 2009 . Battles of the Clans , released on 1 June 2010 , is about past battles and each Clan 's special battle tactics . Enter the Clans is an omnibus field guide released on 26 June 2012 . It is a collective work of the field guides Secrets of the Clans and Code of the Clans , although four pages of color artwork and the double foldout map inserts in the middle of Secrets of the Clans , as well as five pieces of color artwork in Code of the Clans , are not included in Enter the Clans . 
 = = = = Warriors : The Ultimate Guide = = = = 
 On 5 November 2013 , a field guide titled Warriors : The Ultimate Guide was released . HarperCollins held a contest in which ten fans would have their names appear on the dedication page . 
 The guide contains descriptions of forty characters , including Goosefeather , Dovewing , <unk> , Lionblaze , and Ivypool . It also has various short stories , including the leadership ceremonies of both Tigerstar and Bramblestar , as well as maps of Clan territories . The first printing of the book featured a timeline of the Warriors universe on the reverse of the cover jacket . 
 = = = Original English @-@ language manga = = = 
 Several series of original English @-@ language manga have been produced by HarperCollins with TOKYOPOP . With the shutdown of TOKYOPOP , subsequent manga volumes have been published under the HarperCollins name alone . Four of the manga series consist of three volumes , though The Rise of Scourge is a standalone book . 
 = = = = Graystripe 's trilogy = = = = 
 Graystripe 's trilogy is a three @-@ volume series following Graystripe from the time that he was taken by humans in Dawn until he returns to ThunderClan in The Sight . It was published as the first part of a partnership between TOKYOPOP and HarperCollins . These books tell how Graystripe and Millie , a housecat Graystripe meets during his captivity , find their way to ThunderClan from a faraway town . It consists of 3 books : The Lost Warrior , Warrior 's Refuge , and Warrior 's Return . The final volume was published on 22 April 2008 . 
 = = = = The Rise of Scourge = = = = 
 The Rise of Scourge was released on 24 June 2008 and , unlike the other manga which form trilogies , is a standalone volume . The story details the early life of BloodClan leader Scourge , one of the antagonists in The Darkest Hour , who is bullied in his youth for being small . The book chronicles his story up to the point when he kills Tigerstar , who once attacked Scourge when he ventured into the forest as a kitten . 
 = = = = Tigerstar and Sasha = = = = 
 Tigerstar and Sasha is a manga trilogy detailing how Tigerstar and the rogue cat Sasha meet and the events that occur after Sasha leaves Tigerstar and ShadowClan . The books are Into the Woods , Escape from the Forest , and Return to the Clans . 
