 Batavian control of the Dutch Cape Colony was a serious risk to British shipping rounding the Cape of Good Hope , and a substantial force under Sir George Keith Elphinstone was sent from Britain to eliminate it . Arriving in early August , Elphinstone initially attempted to intimidate the governor into surrender , but eventually authorised a landing at Simon 's Town . On 7 August the expeditionary force fought a skirmish at Muizenberg and clashes continued throughout August . A major Dutch attack on 3 September was forestalled by the arrival of a large fleet of Indiamen carrying British reinforcements , and as these troops came ashore the outnumbered Dutch surrendered . A much @-@ delayed Batavian expeditionary force , sent to retake control of the Cape , arrived in August 1796 , but was out @-@ manoeuvered and forced to surrender by Elphinstone at the Capitulation of Saldanha Bay . 
 = = British consolidation = = 
 Elphinstone 's arrival at the Cape officially placed him in overall command of the East Indies squadron , but the great distances involved meant that immediate operational control remained with Rainier . In July 1795 Prudente and Cybèle sailed from Île de France and attacked shipping in the Sunda Strait , seizing a number of merchant ships . When reports of this attack reached Rainier he took most of his squadron eastwards to the Dutch East Indies , leaving only Gardner 's squadron to watch Colombo . Elphinstone assumed command of the Western Indian Ocean , sending HMS Stately and HMS Victorious to restore the blockade of Île de France and taking HMS Monarch , HMS Arrogant and sloops HMS Echo and HMS Rattlesnake to Madras , where he arrived on 15 January 1796 . In France , an operation to reinforce the Indian Ocean with a squadron of razee frigates or ships of the line under Contre @-@ amiral Kerguelen had been planned in 1794 but repeatedly delayed due to lack of suitable ships and commitments elsewhere . In the summer of 1795 these plans were abandoned completely following losses at the Battle of Groix and French intervention in the East Indies was not attempted until the spring of 1796 . 
 The renewed blockade of Île de France was lifted in December 1795 , and Elphinstone deployed most of his forces in the continued blockade of Colombo . In February a small squadron under Captain Alan Hyde Gardner attacked city and secured the total surrender of the remaining Batavian garrison on the island . In March word arrived at Madras of the Batavian attempt to recapture the Cape Colony and Elphinstone returned westwards with Monarch , followed by Stately , Echo and Rattlesnake . In the east , Rainier 's force had some success , seizing the considerable clove stores at Amboyna on 16 February 1796 and the nutmeg and mace supplies of Banda <unk> on 8 March . The value of these captures was significant : the captains involved each received £ 15 @,@ 000 . However , these successes were offset by the complicated political position Rainier discovered in the Dutch East Indies ; he spent the entirety of the remainder of the year diffusing or defeating a series of uprisings by local <unk> and did not return to India until February 1797 . 
 Alarmed at the distance Elphinstone had been forced to travel to defend the Cape , the Admiralty separated command of the Cape and the East Indies in Spring 1796 . In October 1796 , Elphinstone was recalled to Britain , sending a squadron comprising HMS Jupiter , HMS <unk> , HMS Sceptre , HMS Sybille and HMS Sphynx to again renew the blockade of Île de France and HMS Trident and HMS Fox sent to augment Rainier 's squadron , which had been damaged by a storm in the Bay of Bengal . On 2 December a detachment from the blockade squadron , led by Captain John William Spranger in HMS Crescent with <unk> and Sphynx attacked and destroyed the French port at Foul Point on Madagascar , seizing five French merchant ships . 
 = = Sercey 's squadron = = 
 Until 1796 there had been no reaction from the French Convention to the operations in the East Indies , and they were eventually inspired to reinforce the region not by British actions but by French ones . In 1795 orders had arrived at Île de France formally abolishing slavery . The Colonial Assembly on the island , whose wealth relied on slave labour , simply ignored the order . The matter was taken up by the Committee of Public Safety , who ordered two agents , Baco and Burnel , to enforce the ruling . These agents were escorted by a squadron of frigates sailing from Rochefort on 4 March under the command of Île de France @-@ born Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey , comprising Régénérée , Cocarde , Forte and Seine with corvettes Bonne Citoyenne and Mutine . On board were 800 soldiers and two companies of artillery under General François @-@ Louis Magallon . 
 Sercey 's voyage started badly , losing Cocarde to an accident on the French coast and Bonne Citoyenne and Mutine to British frigate patrols in the Bay of Biscay . Once out of European waters , however , his passage was unchallenged , watering at La Palma , where Vertu joined the squadron , and capturing the whaler Lord Hawkesbury in the South Atlantic . Baco and Burnel proved a bigger problem : at one stage the squabbling pair attempted to kill one another and had to be pulled apart by Sercey . The squadron took a Portuguese Indiaman off Cape Agulhas on 24 May and the following day encountered and unsuccessfully pursued HMS Sphynx . On 3 June Sercey seized a British Indiaman and his squadron arrived at Île de France unopposed on 18 June , the blockade squadron having departed the coast a few days earlier . The Colonial Assembly had been forewarned of the arrival of the government agents , possibly by Sercey , and they were met with armed troops . The agents demanded Magallon attack the colonial troops , but he refused to do so , and Baco and Burnel were forced onto the corvette Moineau . Moineau was instructed to take the agents to Manila , but once at sea they overruled the captain and ordered him to take them back to France . 
 Sercey refitted his squadron at Île de France , dividing it into two forces . The largest , comprising Forte , Prudente , Seine , Régénérée , Vertu and Cybèle was to sail eastwards under his command . The second , comprising the recently arrived Preneuse and the corvette Brûle @-@ Gueule was ordered westwards to operate in the Mozambique Channel . Sercey sailed on 14 July 1796 , reaching Ceylon by 14 August . He was unaware at this stage that the ports of eastern India were undefended , Rainier 's prolonged stay in the East Indies leaving no warships to protect Madras and Calcutta , and Sercey consequently sent the privateer Alerte to scout the Bay of Bengal . Alerte was subsequently captured by the British frigate HMS Carysfort , and documents detailing Sercey 's strength found aboard . This information was used to surreptitiously supply Sercey with false information that a British battle squadron was at anchor in Madras . <unk> from further operations in the region , Sercey raided Tranquebar and then sailed for the East Indies . 
 After attacking Banda Aceh , Sercey sought to raid the British trading post of George Town at Penang , but on 9 September his squadron was intercepted off northwest Sumatra by two British ships of the line , HMS Arrogant and HMS Victorious , which had been hastily detached from commerce protection duties at Penang . The forces fought an inconclusive action after which both retired with damage , the British to Madras and Sercey to Batavia , where he remained until January 1797 . On emerging from Batavia , Sercey cruised in the Java Sea in search of the annual EIC convoy from Macau . Rainier had escorted half of the convoy safely through the Straits of Malacca during his return to India , but the other half sailed unescorted through the Bali Strait , where Sercey ambushed it on 28 January . Captain Charles Lennox saved his convoy by disguising his ships as a Royal Navy squadron and making aggressive moves towards Sercey 's ships , intimidating the French admiral into withdrawing without combat . Sercey subsequently returned to Île de France , where he learned of his error . 
 = = French dispersal = = 
 Sercey 's campaign had ended in failure , with little disruption to British trade or naval operations in the East Indies . The East India Company had however taken more serious losses from the depredations of privateers . Most active was Robert Surcouf , whose small ship Emilie captured the timber ship Penguin off Pegu in October 1795 and country ships Russell , <unk> and Diana off the mouth of the Hooghly River in January 1796 . More seriously , he also captured the pilot boat Cartier , which he used to seize the large East Indiaman Triton . 
 No French reinforcements reached the East Indies in 1797 . A complex strategy had been developed to land an army in Ireland and then use the invasion fleet to attack India as a secondary objective . This ambitious plan collapsed completely during the failed Expédition d 'Irlande in December 1796 in which thousands of French troops were drowned . The strategic situation in Europe had however shifted once more during 1796 when France and Spain signed the Treaty of San Ildefonso , transferring Spain from an ally of Britain to an ally of France . British attention in the East Indies therefore shifted from the French island territories to the Spanish Philippines , where the defence squadron had been badly damaged in a hurricane in April 1797 and was in dock for extensive repairs . British forces were once again in the ascendant , Rainier commanding five ships of the line , one fourth rate ship and six frigates . Extensive plans were developed by Rainier in conjunction with Sir John Shore , Governor @-@ General of India , and Colonel Arthur Wellesley for a major attack on Manila , to be led by Sir James Craig . The Treaty of Campo Formio and the consequent end of the War of the First Coalition in Europe caused the cancellation of these plans ; Britain now fought France and its allies alone and fears were raised that the Tipu Sultan of Mysore might once again attack British colonies in India . To ensure the safety of the 1798 China Fleet from Spanish attack , in July 1797 Rainier deployed Centurion , HMS Sybille and HMS Fox to escort a convoy of East Indiamen to Macau . After seeing his charges into harbour in December , Captain Edward Cooke investigated Manila himself in Sybille , accompanied by Fox . There he discovered the weak state of the Spanish squadron . 
 Other British ships were operating in the East Indies : in July 1797 , Resistance and a force of EIC troops captured Kupang on Timor but were subsequently driven off by an armed uprising by the Malay citizens of the town . In the street fighting 13 British troops and 300 Malays were killed . Resistance was subsequently lost on 24 July 1798 , accidentally destroyed with more than 300 of its crew in an unexplained ammunition explosion in the Banca Strait . There were originally twelve survivors , but eight died of their injuries and the remaining sailors were captured by Sumatran pirates and sold into slavery . Mahmud Shah III , Sultan of Johor later released them , although only one , named Thomas Scott , was confirmed to have survived . 
 Maintenance of the blockade of Île de France was the responsibility of the substantial British squadron at the Cape Colony , which had suffered severely from unrest inspired by the Spithead and Nore mutinies in Britain . The crews of HMS Tremendous and HMS Sceptre rose up and deposed their officers , but found the guns of Cape Town trained on their ships , Governor Lord Macartney threatening them with destruction . Intimidated the seamen surrendered , the incident followed by floggings and executions . Despite this paralysis , Sercey 's squadron was in no position to contest control of the Indian Ocean : supplies and manpower were severely limited and the Colonial Committee , still resentful following the incident with the agents in 1796 , was reluctant to offer support . Sercey 's only operations were limited cruises in the Seychelles and the supply of 300 reinforcements to Batavia during the summer of 1797 , while Cybèle was sent back to France in the spring of 1797 and Vertu , Régénerée and Seine followed in early 1798 . Vertu and Régénerée passed undetected into the Atlantic until they halted at the Îles de Los on 24 April . There they were discovered by the 32 @-@ gun frigate HMS Pearl under Captain Samuel James Ballard . Sailing to investigate Ballard came under fire from the French ships and was forced to pass between them , firing broadsides in each direction as he did so . Chased by Régénerée , Pearl withdrew to Sierra Leone with damaged rigging and one man killed . Seine was also intercepted , by a squadron of frigates from the Brest blockade near the <unk> . Fleeing south , the ship battled its pursuers in the Action of 30 June 1798 , which ended with Seine and the British frigates HMS Jason and HMS Pique all ashore near La Rochelle . Jason and the captured Seine were refloated , but Pique was destroyed . 
 = = Red Sea and Mysore = = 
 In July 1798 Napoleon Bonaparte led a French expeditionary force across the Mediterranean to invade Egypt , then part of the Ottoman Empire . Initial landings were successful and the Battle of the Pyramids confirmed Bonaparte 's control of the country . On 1 August however his fleet was destroyed by a British force under Sir Horatio Nelson at the Battle of the Nile on 1 August , isolating the French army in Egypt . The Admiralty initiated a major response , including dispatching a squadron under Commodore John Blankett to blockade the Egyptian Red Sea coast : there was concern in London that Bonaparte might proceed to attack India from Egypt , in conjunction with the Tipu Sultan and the armies of Mysore . Blankett 's force arrived in December 1798 , joined by a squadron sent by Rainier . Bonaparte had visited Suez early in the month , and plans had been drawn up for a small French Red Sea squadron , but Blankett 's force and the regional supremacy it brought rendered these plans obsolete . Attacks were made on commercial shipping at Suez in April , and the entrance to the Red Sea was effectively blockaded by British occupation of Perim and <unk> , and in July 1799 Blankett ordered the frigates HMS Daedalus and Fox to destroy the French @-@ held castle at Qusayr . The town was heavily bombarded , although attempts to make amphibious landings were driven off . 
 British attention elsewhere in the theatre was focused on Southern India . In January 1798 , a French privateer brought envoys from Mysore to Île de France with a request for support . Malartic supplied 86 volunteers , which were sent to India on Preneuse under Captain Jean @-@ Matthieu @-@ Adrien Lhermitte . Lhermitte 's mission was meant to be covert , but in April 1798 he attacked and captured two East Indiamen , <unk> and Raymond , at Tellicherry , and landed the volunteers at Mangalore on 24 April . This action caused a crisis in relations between the EIC and Mysore , which Tipu Sultan 's obvious enthusiasm for French intervention in India inflamed . The Fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore War began in February 1799 when two British armies crossed into Mysorean territory . Forced back to his capital Seringapatam , the Tipu Sultan held out against a siege for several weeks until the city was taken by storm , with Tipu Sultan being killed during the ensuing street @-@ fighting . 
 = = British dominance = = 
 During the summer of 1798 , Forte and Prudente conducted a commerce raiding operation under Captain <unk> in the Bay of Bengal and the Bali Strait which achieved moderate success but also saw the first of a number of mutinies among Sercey 's crews . The French admiral then planned a joint operation with the Spanish squadron at Manila , sailing to Batavia in Brûle @-@ Gueule , to be joined by Preneuse . He had ordered <unk> to join his force there , but the French captain instead returned to Port Louis where Prudente was seized by the Malartic and sold as a privateer and Forte sent on a commerce raid in the Bay of Bengal in defiance of Sercey 's orders . Prudente was captured by Daedalus at the Action of 9 February 1799 off the coast of Natal , while Forte was captured by Sybille off the mouth of the Hooghly River at the Action of 28 February 1799 . 
 Sercey 's fury at the seizure of his strongest frigates was compounded by the condition of Preneuse , which arrived at Batavia in a state of mutiny . Lhermitte had executed five crew on the journey and Sercey immediately sent the ship out again on a cruise off Borneo in an effort to contain the disaffection . With his forces unexpectedly reduced , Sercey then sent his remaining ships to Manila for operations with the Spanish , but the condition of the Spanish ships was so poor that no operations could be undertaken in 1798 . An attack on the China Fleet was eventually attempted in January 1799 , but on arrival at Macau the combined Spanish squadron refused to engage the powerful British escort and the entire force withdrew , pursued by Captain William Hargood in HMS Intrepid . 
 Disappointed by the failure off Macau and weakened by losses to his squadron , Sercey withdrew to Île de France in the spring of 1799 . There he sent Preneuse on a raiding cruise in the Mozambique Channel . On 20 September , Lhermitte fought a brief and inconclusive night engagement with a small squadron of Royal Navy ships in Algoa Bay , which led three weeks later to an inconclusive clash on 9 October with the 50 @-@ gun HMS Jupiter . Returning to Île de France with little to show for his three @-@ month cruise , Lhermitte was intercepted off Port Louis by the blockade squadron of Adamant and HMS Tremendous at the Action of 11 December 1799 and Preneuse was driven onshore and destroyed . Sercey had already sent Brûle @-@ Gueule back to France at the end of September with political prisoners from Île de France and more than a million in specie , the corvette eventually being wrecked with the loss of 132 lives on the Pointe du Raz on the Breton coast . Sercey , an admiral without a command , returned to France and retired from the Navy . He subsequently settled on Île de France . 
 As the French naval presence in the Indian Ocean declined , the commerce raiding role was taken up by privateers . These fast vessels operated with considerable success against British merchant shipping , and protecting convoys from their depredations consumed a considerable proportion of Rainier 's naval strength : gradually however they were intercepted and captured , including Adele in May 1800 and L <unk> in August 1800 . Among the more notorious privateers was <unk> , which seized a packet ship , Pearl , in the Persian Gulf in October 1799 . Pursued by the sloop HMS Trincomalee , the two fought a fierce engagement on 12 October at which both ships were destroyed and more than 200 men killed . Most dangerous among the <unk> was Robert Surcouf , who sailed in Clarissa and then Confiance . In the latter he fought a significant battle off the Hooghly River on 9 October 1800 with the East Indiaman Kent . Eventually subdued by a boarding action , Kent lost 14 killed , including Captain Robert Rivington , and 44 wounded ; Surcouf 's men suffered 14 casualties . The privateer conflict continued to the end of the war , the large privateers Grand <unk> and Gloire remaining at sea into 1801 before being captured , and Courier and Surcouf 's Confiance evading interception entirely . 
 = = Peace of Amiens = = 
 Rainier 's main priorities remained the protection of trade , but his command came under increasing interference from London , in particular the Secretary of State for War Henry Dundas . Dundas was insistent throughout 1799 and 1800 that the priority for Rainier should be the invasion and capture of Java , thus eliminating the Dutch East Indies entirely . Contradictory orders came from Lord Mornington , who was instructing Rainier to plan an invasion of Île de France , while Rainier himself wished to resurrect the abandoned operation against Manila . So confused was the command structure that in September 1800 Rainier threatened to resign , but in October 1800 a renewed threat from Egypt redirected the focus of his squadron to the Red Sea and only a handful of minor operations against Dutch posts on Java were carried out by a small force under Captain Henry Lidgbird Ball , capturing a few merchant ships but losing more than 200 men to disease in the process . At the Cape of Good Hope , a gale on 5 December 1799 caused severe damage to shipping in Table Bay : among the wrecks were HMS Sceptre with 290 crew , the Danish ship of the line Oldenburg and several large American merchant ships . 
 The Red Sea campaign of 1801 was intended to complement the British invasion of French @-@ held Egypt from the Mediterranean , which went ahead in March 1801 . Initial operations were trusted to Blankett at Jeddah , who was in poor health and struggling to negotiate with Ghalib Efendi bin Musa 'ed , Sharif of Mecca . These problems were compounded when Forte was wrecked entering the port . Blankett 's forces landed unopposed at Suez on 22 March , the French having withdrawn their forces in Southern Egypt to oppose the Mediterranean landings . His mission complete , Blankett withdrew in June after sending 300 soldiers to join the conflict in Northern Egypt , and met with a large reinforcement squadron under Captain Sir Home Popham off Qusayr . An army under General David Baird then took passage up the Nile , but did not arrive before the campaign ended with the Capitulation of Alexandria in August . 
 The French Navy played little part in opposing the British campaign in Egypt , but a frigate was sent to the Indian Ocean to interfere with the supply lines to the Red Sea . This ship , Chiffone was based at Mahé in the Seychelles . The voyage had been eventful , Chiffone seizing a Brazilian frigate <unk> in the Atlantic and the East Indiaman Bellona , as well as conveying 32 political prisoners sentenced to exile in the Indian Ocean . At the Battle of Mahé on 19 August however , Chiffone was discovered at anchor by Sybille and captured . The final operations in the Indian Ocean saw British forces consolidate further , landing troops at the Portuguese colonies in the region to prevent the enforcement of the terms of the Treaty of Badajoz , under which Portugal agreed to exclude British shipping from its ports , while the EIC attacked and captured the Dutch island of Ternate . 
 The Peace of Amiens came into effect on 1 October 1801 , bringing the French Revolutionary Wars to an end . Confirmation of this armistice did not reach India until 1 February 1802 , but it had been widely expected and neither side had undertaken significant naval operations during the interim . The terms of the treaty returned all territory captured by British forces in the East Indies to its original masters with the noted exception of Ceylon , which was officially named a British Crown Colony . No one in the Indian Ocean believed that the Peace would last , each side building substantial forces in the region . As historian William James noted , " who then could doubt that , although the wax on the seals of the treaty concluding the last had scarcely cooled , a new war was on the eve of bursting forth ? " . The peace was short lived , the Napoleonic Wars erupting in May 1803 , by which time Emperor Napoleon had sent substantial reinforcements to Île de France and the other French territories in the East Indies . Although the campaign had personally benefited Rainier by around £ 300 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 24 @,@ 160 @,@ 000 as of 2015 ) , historian C. Northcote Parkinson wrote that " It cannot be said that the naval war in the Indian Ocean from 1794 to 1801 had been a brilliant success " for either side . The lack of French reinforcements and Sercey 's ineffectiveness counterbalanced by confused British leadership and scattered priorities , with aborted operations against Manila and Batavia and a marginal campaign in the Red Sea consuming inordinate amounts of time and energy . 
 = Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph = 
 The Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph was an early electrical telegraph system dating from the 1830s invented by English inventor William Fothergill Cooke and English scientist Charles Wheatstone . It was the first telegraph system to be put into commercial service . The receiver consisted of a number of needles which could be moved by electromagnetic coils to point to letters on a board . This feature was liked by early users who were unwilling to learn codes , and employers who did not want to invest in staff training . 
 In later systems the letter board was dispensed with , and the code was read directly from the movement of the needles . This came about because the number of needles was reduced , leading to more complex codes . The change was motivated by the economic need to reduce the number of telegraph wires used , which was related to the number of needles . The change became more urgent as the insulation of some of the early installations deteriorated , causing some of the original wires to be unusable . Cooke and Wheatstone 's most successful system was eventually a one @-@ needle system that continued in service into the 1930s . 
 Cooke and Wheatstone 's telegraph played a part in the apprehension of the murderer John Tawell . Once it was known that Tawell had boarded a train to London , the telegraph was used to signal ahead to the terminus at Paddington and have him arrested there . The novelty of this use of the telegraph in crime @-@ fighting generated a great deal of publicity and led to increased acceptance and use of the telegraph by the public . 
 = = Inventors = = 
 The telegraph arose from a collaboration between William Fothergill Cooke and Charles Wheatstone , best known to schoolchildren from the eponymous Wheatstone bridge . This was not a happy collaboration due to the differing objectives of the two men . Cooke was an inventor and entrepreneur who wished to patent and commercially exploit his inventions . Wheatstone , on the other hand , was an academic with no interest in commercial ventures . He intended to publish his results and allow others to freely make use of them . This difference in outlook eventually led to a bitter dispute between the two men over claims to priority for the invention . Their differences were taken to arbitration with Marc Isambard Brunel acting for Cooke and John Frederic Daniell acting for Wheatstone . Cooke eventually bought out Wheatstone 's interest in exchange for royalties . 
 Cooke had some ideas for building a telegraph prior to his partnership with Wheatstone and had consulted scientist Michael Faraday for expert advice . However , much of the scientific knowledge for the model actually put into practice came from Wheatstone . Cooke 's earlier ideas for a mechanical telegraph ( involving a clockwork mechanism with an electromagnetic detent ) were largely abandoned . 
 = = History = = 
 In January 1837 Cooke proposed a design for a 60 @-@ code telegraph to the directors of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway . This was too complicated for their purposes ; the immediate need was for a simple signal communication between the Liverpool station and a rope @-@ haulage engine house at the top of a steep incline through a long tunnel outside the station . Rope @-@ haulage into main stations was common at this time to avoid noise and pollution , and in this case the gradient was too steep for the locomotive to ascend unaided . All that was required were a few simple signals such as an indication to the engine house to start hauling . Cooke was requested to build a simpler version with fewer codes , which he did by the end of April 1837 . However , the railway decided to use instead a pneumatic telegraph equipped with whistles . Soon after this Cooke went into partnership with Wheatstone . 
 In May 1837 Cooke and Wheatstone patented a telegraph system which used a number of needles on a board that could be moved to point to letters of the alphabet . The patent recommended a five @-@ needle system , but any number of needles could be used depending on the number of characters it was required to code . A four @-@ needle system was installed between Euston and Camden Town in London on a rail line being constructed by Robert Stephenson between London and Birmingham . It was successfully demonstrated on 25 July 1837 . This was a similar application to the Liverpool project . The carriages were detached at Camden Town and travelled under gravity into Euston . A system was needed to signal to an engine house at Camden Town to start hauling the carriages back up the incline to the waiting locomotive . As at Liverpool , the electric telegraph was in the end rejected in favour of a pneumatic system with whistles . 
 Cooke and Wheatstone had their first commercial success with a telegraph installed on the Great Western Railway over the 13 miles ( 21 km ) from Paddington station to West Drayton in 1838 . Indeed , this was the first commercial telegraph in the world . This was a five @-@ needle , six @-@ wire system . The cables were originally installed underground in a steel conduit . However , the cables soon began to fail as a result of deteriorating insulation and were replaced with uninsulated wires on poles . As an interim measure , a two @-@ needle system was used with three of the remaining working underground wires , which despite using only two needles had a greater number of codes . But when the line was extended to Slough in 1843 , a one @-@ needle , two @-@ wire system was installed . 
 From this point the use of the electric telegraph started to grow on the new railways being built from London . The Blackwall Tunnel Railway ( another rope @-@ hauled application ) was equipped with the Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph when it opened in 1840 , and many others followed . The one @-@ needle telegraph proved highly successful on British railways , and 15 @,@ 000 sets were still in use at the end of the nineteenth century . Some remained in service in the 1930s . In September 1845 the financier John Lewis Ricardo and Cooke formed the Electric Telegraph Company . This company bought out the Cooke and Wheatstone patents and solidly established the telegraph business . In 1869 the company was nationalised and became part of the General Post Office . 
 = = = Tawell Arrest = = = 
 Murder suspect John Tawell was apprehended following the use of a needle telegraph message from Slough to Paddington on 1 January 1845 . This is thought to be the first use of the telegraph to catch a murderer . The message was : 
 A <unk> HAS <unk> <unk> <unk> AT SALT HILL AND THE <unk> <unk> WAS <unk> TO <unk> A FIRST CLASS <unk> TO LONDON BY THE <unk> <unk> LEFT <unk> AT 742 PM HE IS IN THE <unk> OF A <unk> WITH A GREAT <unk> ON <unk> <unk> <unk> DOWN TO HIS FEET HE IS IN THE LAST <unk> OF THE SECOND CLASS <unk> 
 The Cooke and Wheatstone system did not support punctuation , lower case , or some letters . Even the two @-@ needle system omitted the letters J , Q , and Z ; hence the misspellings of ' just ' and ' Quaker ' . This caused some difficulty for the receiving operator at Paddington who repeatedly requested a <unk> after receiving K @-@ W @-@ A which he assumed was a mistake . This continued until a small boy suggested the sending operator be allowed to complete the word , after which it was understood . After arriving , Tawell was followed to a nearby coffee shop by a detective and arrested there . Newspaper coverage of this incident gave a great deal of publicity to the electric telegraph and brought it firmly into public view . 
 The widely publicised arrest of Tawell was one of two events which brought the telegraph to greater public attention and led to its widespread use beyond railway signalling . The other event was the announcement by telegraph of the birth of Alfred Ernest Albert , second son of Queen Victoria . The news was published in The Times at the unprecedented speed of 40 minutes after the announcement . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph consisted of a number of magnetic needles which could be made to turn a short distance either clockwise or anti @-@ clockwise by electromagnetic induction from an energising winding . The direction of movement was determined by the direction of the current in the telegraph wires . The board was marked with a diamond shaped grid with a letter at each grid intersection , and so arranged that when two needles were energised they would point to a specific letter . 
 The number of wires required by the Cooke and Wheatstone system is equal to the number of needles used . The number of needles determines the number of characters that can be encoded . Cooke and Wheatstone 's patent recommends five needles , and this was the number on their early demonstration models . The number of codes that can be obtained from 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ... needles is 2 , 6 , 12 , 20 , 30 ... respectively . 
 At the sending end there were two rows of buttons , a pair of buttons for each coil in each row . The operator selected one button from each row . This connected two of the coils to the positive and negative ends of the battery respectively . The other ends of the coils were connected to the telegraph wires and thence to one end of the coils at the receiving station . The other end of the receiving coils , while in receive mode , were all <unk> together . Thus the current flowed through the same two coils at both ends and energised the same two needles . With this system the needles were always energised in pairs and always rotated in opposite directions . 
 = = = Five @-@ needle telegraph = = = 
 The five @-@ needle telegraph with twenty possible needle positions was six codes short of being able to encode the complete alphabet . The letters omitted were C , J , Q , U , X and Z. A great selling point of this telegraph was that it was simple to use and required little operator training . There is no code to learn , as the letter being sent was visibly displayed to both the sending and receiving operator . 
 The Paddington to West Drayton telegraph originally used six wires rather than five , although it was a five @-@ needle system . The sixth wire was to provide a common return so that the needles could be operated independently , thus giving the possibility of more available codes . Using these codes , however , would have required more extensive operator training since the display could not be read on sight from the grid as the simple alphabetic codes were . Telegraph systems were later to use earth return to avoid the need for a return wire , but this principle was not established at the time of Cooke and Wheatstone 's telegraph . The economic need to reduce the number of wires in the end proved a stronger incentive than simplicity of use and led Cooke and Wheatstone to develop the two @-@ needle telegraph . 
 = = = Two @-@ needle telegraph = = = 
 The two @-@ needle telegraph required three wires , one for each needle and a common return . The coding was somewhat different from the five @-@ needle telegraph and needed to be learned , rather than read from a display . The needles could move to the left or right either one , two , or three times in quick succession , or a single time in both directions in quick succession . Either needle , or both together , could be moved . This gave a total of 24 codes , one of which was taken up by the stop code . Thus , three letters were omitted : J , Q and Z , which were substituted with G , K and S respectively . 
 = = = One @-@ needle telegraph = = = 
 This system was developed to replace the failing multi @-@ wire telegraph on the Paddington to West Drayton line . It required only two wires , but a more complex code and slower transmission speed . Whereas the two @-@ needle system needed a three @-@ unit code ( that is , up to three movements of the needles to represent each letter ) , the one @-@ needle system used a four @-@ unit code , but had enough codes to encode the entire alphabet . Like the preceding two @-@ needle system , the code units consisted of rapid deflections of the needle to either left or right in quick succession . The needle struck a post when it moved causing it to ring . Different tones were provided for the left and right movements so that the operator could hear which direction the needle had moved without looking at it . 
 = = Codes = = 
 The codes were refined and adapted as they were used . By 1867 numerals had been added to the five @-@ needle code . This was achieved through the provision of a sixth wire for common return making it possible to move just a single needle . With the original five wires it was only possible to move the needles in pairs and always in opposite directions since there was no common wire provided . Many more codes are theoretically possible with common return signalling , but not all of them can conveniently be used with a grid indication display . The numerals were worked in by marking them around the edge of the diamond grid . Needles 1 through 5 when energised to the right pointed to numerals 1 through 5 respectively , and to the left numerals 6 through 9 and 0 respectively . Two additional buttons were provided on the telegraph sets to enable the common return to be connected to either the positive or negative terminal of the battery according to the direction it was desired to move the needle . 
 Also by 1867 , codes for Q ( ) and Z ( ) were added to the one @-@ needle code , but not , apparently , for J. However , codes for Q ( ) , Z ( ) , and J ( ) are marked on the plates of later needle telegraphs , together with six @-@ unit codes for number shift ( ) and letter shift ( ) . Numerous compound codes were added for operator controls such as wait and repeat . These compounds are similar to the prosigns found in Morse code where the two characters are run together without a character gap . The two @-@ needle number shift and letter shift codes are also compounds , which is the reason they have been written with an <unk> . 
 The codes used for the four @-@ needle telegraph are not known , and none of the equipment has survived . It is not even known which letters were assigned to the twelve possible codes . 
 = Caleb Strong = 
 Caleb Strong ( January 9 , 1745 – November 7 , 1819 ) was a Massachusetts lawyer and politician who served as the sixth and tenth Governor of Massachusetts between 1800 and 1807 , and again from 1812 until 1816 . He assisted in drafting the Massachusetts State Constitution in 1779 and served as a state senator and on the Massachusetts Governor 's Council before being elected to the inaugural United States Senate . A leading member of the Massachusetts Federalist Party , his political success delayed the decline of the Federalists in Massachusetts . 
 A successful Northampton lawyer prior to 1774 , Strong was politically active in the rebel cause during the American Revolutionary War . He played an influential role in the development of the United States Constitution at the 1788 Philadelphia Convention , and , as a US Senator , in the passage of its 11th Amendment . He also played a leading role in the passage of the Judiciary Act of 1789 , which established the federal court system . 
 Adept at moderating the sometimes harsh political conflict between Federalists and Democratic @-@ Republicans and popular in Massachusetts , he navigated the state in a Federalist direction through the early years of the 19th century as the rest of the country became progressively more Republican . Although he sought to retire from politics after losing the 1807 governor 's race , the advent of the War of 1812 brought him back to the governor 's office as a committed opponent of the war . He refused United States Army requests that state militia be placed under army command , and in 1814 sought to engage Nova Scotia Governor John Coape Sherbrooke in peace talks . The state and federal government 's weak defense of Massachusetts ' northern frontier during Strong 's tenure contributed to the successful drive for Maine 's statehood , which was granted in 1820 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Caleb Strong was born on January 9 , 1745 , in Northampton , one of the principal towns of Hampshire County on the Connecticut River in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . His parents were Phebe Lyman Strong and Caleb Strong , the latter a descendant of early Massachusetts settlers such as John Strong , a 1630 immigrant to Massachusetts who was one of the founders of Northampton and the lead elder of the church for many years . Caleb was their only son . He received his early education from Rev. Samuel Moody , and entered Harvard College in 1760 , graduating four years later with high honors . He was shortly thereafter afflicted with smallpox , which temporarily blinded him and prevented him from engaging in the study of law for several years . He studied law with Joseph Hawley , was admitted to the bar in 1772 , and began the practice of law in Northampton . Hawley was also a political mentor , shaping Strong 's views on relations between the colonies and Great Britain . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 Strong and Hawley were both elected to the Massachusetts Provincial Congress in 1774 . When the American Revolutionary War broke out in 1775 , Strong was unable to serve in the military because of his damaged sight , but he was otherwise active in the Patriot cause . He served on the Northampton Committee of Safety and in other local offices , but refused service in the Continental Congress . He was a delegate to the 1779 Massachusetts Constitutional Convention , and was elected to the committee that drafted the state constitution , ratified in 1780 . He then served on the first governor 's council and in the state senate from 1780 to 1789 . 
 Strong 's legal practice thrived during the tumultuous war years , and was one of the most successful in Hampshire County . He became a judge of the Court of Common Pleas in 1775 , and was appointed county attorney of Hampshire County the following year , a post he held until 1800 . On more than one occasion he was offered a seat on the state 's supreme court , but rejected the position on account of its inadequate salary . Strong was described by a contemporary as meticulously detailed in his preparation of legal paperwork and a persuasive advocate when speaking to a jury . 
 In 1781 Strong was one of the lawyers ( another was Worcester lawyer and future United States Attorney General Levi Lincoln , Sr. ) who worked on a series of legal cases surrounding Quock Walker , a former slave seeking to claim his freedom . One of the cases , Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. Nathaniel Jennison , firmly established that slavery was incompatible with the new state constitution . 
 = = United States Senator = = 
 Strong was elected as a delegate to the Philadelphia Convention that drafted the U.S. Constitution in 1787 . A committed Federalist , Strong opposed the idea of the Electoral College as a means of electing the president , instead supporting the idea that the legislature should choose him . Although he initially opposed proposals that the number of senators should be equal for all states , he eventually changed his mind , enabling passage of the Connecticut Compromise . To temper the power of the states , he introduced language requiring tax legislation to originate in the House of Representatives . Illness of his wife forced him to return to Massachusetts before the work was completed , so he did not sign the document . He was a vocal supporter of its adoption by the state 's ratifying convention . 
 When the Constitution came into force in 1789 , Strong was chosen by the state legislature to serve in the United States Senate . As what is now known as a Class 2 Senator he came up for reelection in 1792 , when he was again chosen . He was one of the principal drafters of the Judiciary Act of 1789 , which established the federal courts . He was also instrumental in 1793 and 1794 in the development and passage by Congress of the 11th Amendment to the United States Constitution . This measure was enacted in response to Chisholm v. Georgia , a Supreme Court decision in which a private individual sued the state of Georgia . The amendment expanded the sovereign immunity of states to limit suits against them by private individuals from other states . 
 Strong was also one of a small group of senators who convinced President George Washington in 1794 that a special envoy should be sent to Britain in order to avert war , and who convinced John Jay to accept that role . Jay ended up negotiating what became known as the Jay Treaty , which resolved a number of issues between the two nations , but also angered the leadership of Revolutionary France and was widely disliked , criticized , and opposed by Republicans . 
 Strong resigned his seat in 1796 and returned to private life in Northampton . 
 = = First term as governor = = 
 In the election of 1800 Strong was nominated by the Federalists as their candidate for governor ; his principal opponent was Elbridge Gerry , nominated by the Democratic @-@ Republicans . Strong was criticized by his opponents for his lack of military service and for the fact that he was a lawyer ; he countered by asserting his patriotism through his association with Joseph Hawley . His popularity in the western part of the state was decisive : the wide margin by which he won there overcame the smaller advantage by which Gerry carried the east . Acting Governor Moses Gill died ten days before Strong took office at the end of May . 
 Strong won annual reelection to the governor 's seat until 1807 . During this tenure the state introduced a new penitentiary system and reformed the judiciary , reducing the number of judges . Strong 's time as governor was also marked by virulent political debate in the state , principally over foreign policy related to British interference with Massachusetts maritime trade . That interference was a consequence of the ongoing Napoleonic Wars engulfing Europe . Over the years of Strong 's tenure the Republicans gradually gained in power both nationally and in Massachusetts . 
 In the 1806 election the Republicans secured a majority in the Massachusetts assembly , and the gubernatorial election was notably close . Running mainly against James Sullivan , Strong barely received a majority of the votes cast . With fewer than 200 votes in the balance , the Republican @-@ controlled legislature scrutinized the returns in a partisan manner , discarding ballots that had misspelled Strong 's name while retaining those that misspelled Sullivan 's and performing tallies in ways that favored their candidate . This process concluded with a finding that Strong in fact lacked a majority of votes , which was what was then required to carry the election , as opposed to the modern plurality requirement . Strong 's Federalist allies in the legislature were able to publicize the partisan nature of the analysis , resulting in a hostile public backlash . He was proclaimed the winner after further , less biased , analysis corrected the count in his favor . However , in the 1807 election the rising tide of Republicanism swept Strong ( along with other New England Federalists ) out of office . Federalists asked him to run in 1808 , but he refused , noting that he had " done his part " and that his home base in Hampshire County was strongly Federalist . 
 = = Second term and War of 1812 = = 
 In 1812 Strong was convinced by Massachusetts Federalist leaders to come out of retirement to run once again for governor . War with Britain was imminent , and the Federalists sought a strong candidate to oppose Elbridge Gerry , who had been victorious against Christopher Gore in the previous two elections . Gerry , who had originally been somewhat moderate , became increasingly partisan during his tenure , and Federalists viewed Strong 's earlier success in office and relatively modest demeanor as assets . Strong 's victory in the election , which saw the Federalists also regain control of the legislature , was attributed to several factors : Federalists capitalized on the partisanship of the recent redistricting of the state that resulted in the coining of the term " gerrymander " , and there was strong antiwar sentiment in the state . Strong was reelected by wide margins in the following war years . 
 Strong took a principled stand against the War of 1812 , generally refusing to assist federal government efforts to prosecute the war . Strong was part of a chorus of Massachusetts ( and more broadly New England ) Federalists who complained that in " Mr. Madison 's War " the federal government was trampling state and individual rights . He adhered to the view that state militia could not be required to serve under regular army command . When the first such requests were made by U. S. Army General Henry Dearborn , Strong , with the backing of not just the Governor 's Council but also the Supreme Judicial Court , refused , arguing that there was no need to call out the militia because invasion was not imminent . Because of his stance against regular army command , the state was denied a shipment of arms that was instead diverted to frontier areas and the war theater . Strong also took no particular actions to prevent widespread smuggling along the state 's frontiers with the neighboring British provinces . 
 Strong 's opposition to regular army control was more nuanced than that of neighboring Connecticut Governor John Cotton Smith , who ensured that his militia always remained under state command . Strong was more concerned that the state militia not be used except in defense of the state 's borders , and compromised on the issue of command . In 1812 , not long after refusing General Dearborn 's request , he authorized the dispatch of militia companies to the state 's eastern district ( now Maine ) under United States Army command . 
 With the British naval blockade tightening and threatening the state 's coastal communities in early 1814 , Strong authorized U. S. Brigadier General Thomas H. Cushing to command militia forces in the defenses of Boston Harbor , subject to reasonable limitations . Cushing was transferred to Connecticut , and General Dearborn again commanded the regular army forces in Massachusetts . Dearborn interpreted the agreement Strong had made with Cushing to apply statewide , and began reorganizing militia companies to conform to regular army practices . This engendered ill will among the militia , and Strong refused to place additional levies under Dearborn 's command . 
 The defense of Maine , however , proved problematic . Strong 's aide William H. Sumner negotiated an agreement with the Army command for the defense of Portland , but the ironically Republican @-@ dominated district militia objected , first to the idea of serving under any regular army leadership , and then to serving under a relatively low @-@ ranked officer ( a lieutenant colonel ) who was given command of Portland after the agreement was signed . Several units of local militia refused the perform their assigned duties . One consequence of the dispute was that most militia in the state remained under state control , and were thus paid for from state coffers at a cost that ran to $ 200 @,@ 000 per month . This further strained the state economy , which was already suffering due to the British blockade . 
 Following the British seizure of Castine in September 1814 , Strong called the legislature into session early in October to respond to the occupation . Given that the federal government was unwilling to fund militia not under its control , the legislature authorized Strong to borrow money to fund a major expansion of the militia , but most of the funds acquired were spent improving Boston 's defenses . Another result of the special session was a call for a meeting of states opposed to the war , which became known as the Hartford Convention . Around the time of the convention , which was held in Hartford , Connecticut beginning in December 1814 , Strong secretly wrote to Nova Scotia Lieutenant @-@ Governor Sir John Coape Sherbrooke , essentially offering a separate peace in exchange for the return of the seized territory . He also refused to authorize temporary Massachusetts funding for a federally led expedition to recover Castine , leading to further cries of indignation from Maine 's Republicans . The Treaty of Ghent ended the war before the Nova Scotia negotiations went anywhere . Strong 's policies during the war are credited as one of the reasons for Maine 's drive for statehood , which came to a successful conclusion in 1820 . 
 In 1816 , with the war at an end , Strong elected once again to retire from politics . Strong died in Northampton on November 7 , 1819 , and was buried in its Bridge Street Cemetery . 
 = = Family , charity , and legacy = = 
 In 1777 Strong married Sarah Hooker , the daughter of a local pastor . They had nine children , four of whom survived the couple . Strong was active in his church and was a leading member of local missionary and Bible societies . He was a founding member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and a member of the Massachusetts Historical Society . In 1813 , Strong was also elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society . 
 In World War II , the United States liberty ship SS Caleb Strong was named in his honor . The town of Strong , Maine , incorporated in 1801 , was named for Strong and Windham Township , Portage County , Ohio was originally named <unk> in his honor . The <unk> land had been allocated to Strong as part of his ownership share in the Ohio Company , and was sold by him and several minority partners in 1810 . 
 = Press pass = 
 A press pass ( alternatively referred to as a press card or a journalist pass ) grants some type of special privilege to journalists . Some cards have recognized legal status ; others merely indicate that the bearer is a practicing journalist . The nature of the benefits is determined by the type of issuing agency , of which there are three major categories : news organizations , law @-@ enforcement agencies , and event organizers ( usually for a specific single affair like a corporate press conference ) . Each type of card grants different authorizations , thus it is often necessary or desirable for reporters to hold multiple press passes simultaneously . 
 = = Law @-@ enforcement cards = = 
 Police departments at a city , county , or state / provincial level may issue press passes in some countries . Such passes allow the bearer to cross police or fire lines to report breaking news , or grant access to crime scenes or other restricted areas – though admission may be denied if it would interfere with the duties of emergency personnel . Popular media of the mid @-@ 20th century often depicted reporters at a crime scene with their press passes tucked into their hat bands , which was unusual in reality . 
 Because of the exceptional dispensation endowed by police press passes , they are issued with discretion – some jurisdictions require an in @-@ person interview with all prospective applicants , complete set of fingerprints , and a background check . Generally , only reporters who cover breaking news are eligible ; other journalists ( feature writers , editors and editorialists , freelance writers , and bloggers ) are not . 
 Police @-@ issued passes do not grant access to government press conferences or any other such privileges : they are only recognized by emergency response personnel , and only valid within the jurisdiction of the issuing agencies . 
 = = = Parking permits = = = 
 Police parking permits , issued in some jurisdictions , exempt news vehicles from certain parking restrictions while on the job . They may be offered to any news @-@ gathering organization that covers breaking news for use in company vehicles employed by full @-@ time reporters , photographers , and camera operators . Often , these permits are only granted to journalists who already carry a police press card . 
 When conspicuously displayed , these permits may allow the bearer to park in restricted " resident @-@ only " parking zones , and may exempt him or her from parking @-@ meter costs . These privileges apply only for the duration of breaking @-@ news coverage , and do not nullify all parking restrictions : red zones , fire hydrants , crosswalks , bus zones , disabled parking zones or access ramps , commercial loading zones , taxi cab zones , " no stopping " or " no parking " zones , transit lanes , and other <unk> zones are still off @-@ limits . 
 = = Event @-@ specific = = 
 For <unk> , community gatherings , sporting events , award shows , professional conferences , or major events of any type , press passes are generally available . These are sometimes referred to as " press badges " . For many events publicity in news media and elsewhere is of great importance , and granting privileges to the press can help in this . The privileges granted to holders of press badges , and who is eligible to receive them , depends on the nature of the affair . 
 Generally , prospective recipients must apply in advance , offering evidence of their affiliation . Event sponsors may request past published material , or a letter from the news agency on its letterhead , detailing the job assignment . Generally , non @-@ reporting employees of news agencies ( executives , sales personnel , publishers , editors , etc . ) are not eligible for press passes . In addition to journalists , some bloggers may be granted event passes . 
 Many major events , especially trade shows , issue press kits to pass @-@ holders . A press pass may allow the bearer to request interviews with noteworthy attendees , and special rooms are sometimes set aside for this purpose . 
 = = = Open events = = = 
 For activities open to the public , such as community gatherings , school events , or trade shows , a police- or media @-@ issued press pass may offer little advantage . Free or reduced @-@ price admission , or guaranteed entry , can sometimes be arranged . The benefits may be more extensive , granting access to front @-@ row seats or to press @-@ only rooms . For sporting events , a press pass issued by a stadium grants access to the press box . Because open events are usually funded by paying attendees , the number of press passes may depend on the number of tickets sold . 
 = = = Closed events = = = 
 For events closed to the general public , police- or news organization @-@ issued press passes sometimes grant access , but almost all require advance application for admittance . Greater exclusivity , however , means more restrictions on potential pass recipients . For professional conferences or trade shows , passes may be granted only to journalists who regularly cover the industry or who hold a title of " industry analyst , " or with an editorial or reporting designation . 
 = = News agency cards = = 
 " You do not need to ask permission from anyone to be a journalist , " explains the Periodical Publishers Association ; " however , it is sometimes useful to be able to identify yourself as a journalist when needed . " To this end , journalistic agencies issue press cards to their reporters , editorialists , writers , and photographers . These do not have the legal merits of government @-@ issued cards , and they will not replace event @-@ specific passes ; the card only serves as proof of its bearer 's status as a legitimate <unk> according to the issuing organization . As such , card @-@ carriers may be better able to obtain interviews , acquire information from law @-@ enforcement , or gain access to exclusive venues . 
 In the United Kingdom , the UK Press Card Authority ( a voluntary consortium of news agencies ) issues a nationally standardized card to United Kingdom @-@ based news gatherers . 
 For freelance journalists , organizations like the National Writers Union , Professional Publishers Association . 
 = = Press armbands = = 
 Journalists in Asia use an armband to mark themselves , similar to a press badge . Journalists are encouraged by journalist trade union to wear press armbands to protect themselves during protests and government upheavals . 
 = = Fake cards = = 
 Genuine press cards can be obtained by people not entitled to them , counterfeit copies of real cards can be made , and plausible @-@ looking cards can be issued by anybody , or made . The reasons and consequences range from the trivial ( free drinks ) to the catastrophic ( access by terrorists to rulers ) . 
 Spurious cards 
 Press passes not issued by a recognised publication can be obtained or made , with the intention of gaining benefits offered to holders of legitimate press cards . Joan Stewart of the Public Relations Society of America reports , “ Fake press passes abound at restaurant and theater openings , sporting events , music festivals , political rallies , celebrity parties and even crime scenes . With a decent computer and color printer , almost anybody can crank out an official @-@ looking pass within minutes . ” 
 Counterfeit cards 
 Counterfeit copies of cards issued by legitimate publications can be made . <unk> of cards have taken measures to prevent counterfeiting of their cards , creating cards with holographic foil blocking , signature strips , and tamper @-@ resistant lamination . 
 = Winkler County nurse whistleblower case = 
 The Winkler County nurse whistleblower case was a series of legal proceedings in West Texas that centered on the retaliation upon two nurses who submitted an anonymous state medical board complaint against a physician in 2009 . The case attracted national attention for its implications on whistleblowing by nurses . After witnessing what they believed to be unsafe medical care , nurses Anne Mitchell and Vicki Galle submitted an anonymous complaint against Dr. Rolando Arafiles to the Texas Medical Board ( TMB ) . 
 When he learned of the complaint , Arafiles spoke with the sheriff of Winkler County , who was his friend and one of his patients . Arafiles alleged that the nurses ' reports to the medical board constituted harassment . The sheriff investigated and obtained the TMB complaint , which provided enough information about Mitchell and Galle to make them identifiable . Galle and Mitchell were terminated from the hospital and faced criminal charges of misuse of official information . Galle 's charges were dropped before trial and Mitchell was acquitted by a jury . In the aftermath of Mitchell 's trial , Arafiles , several county officials and a hospital administrator all faced jail time for their roles in the retaliation against the nurses . 
 The case raised questions about the extent of whistleblower protection for healthcare providers who report patient care concerns to licensing authorities . Texas law included remedies against retaliation for whistleblowers , but no known U.S. state had whistleblower laws that addressed appropriate prosecutorial conduct . According to the Texas Nurses Association , " No one ever imagined that a nurse would be criminally prosecuted for reporting a patient care concern to a licensing agency . " After the Mitchell case , protection from prosecution was incorporated into Texas whistleblower laws . The TMB stopped investigating anonymous complaints about physicians in September 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The case originated at Winkler County Memorial Hospital ( WCMH ) , a 15 @-@ bed hospital in Kermit , Texas . Mitchell and Galle were registered nurses at WCMH . The two nurses held multiple roles at the hospital and both were employed there for more than 20 years . Galle headed quality improvement and utilization management for the hospital , while Mitchell served as its compliance officer . Galle and Mitchell also split the responsibilities of the medical staff coordinator position . Mitchell held a part @-@ time role as the county 's emergency management coordinator . She also had experience as a travel nurse and as an instructor and director in a licensed vocational nursing program . 
 In April 2008 , Arafiles arrived at WCMH . He had attended medical school in the Philippines and had come to the United States to train in Baltimore and Buffalo . Texas issued a medical license to him in 1998 . The year before Arafiles came to Winkler County , the TMB restricted his ability to supervise nurse practitioners and physician assistants for three years and fined him $ 1 @,@ 000 . In that case , Arafiles allegedly failed to adequately supervise a physician assistant at a weight loss clinic and failed to exercise independent medical judgement when applying protocols written by the clinic 's owner . 
 Mitchell and Galle had concerns about Arafiles 's care soon after he arrived at WCMH . The doctor 's practice in Kermit included the use of alternative medicine therapies such as herbal remedies . Witnesses later said that Mitchell made comments at work which characterized Arafiles as a " witch doctor " . Other coworkers said that Mitchell had legitimate concerns about the quality of the physician 's patient care ; they said that Mitchell first raised the issues with the hospital 's administration , but that her concerns were not addressed . In one incident , Arafiles was alleged to have performed a skin graft on an emergency room patient even though he was not credentialed to perform surgery at the facility . Another patient came to the hospital with a crushed finger and Arafiles allegedly took a rubber tip off of a pair of medical scissors and stitched it onto the patient 's finger . 
 Mitchell and Galle sent an anonymous complaint to the TMB detailing their concerns with Arafiles 's care of nine patients in 2008 and 2009 . The letter said that the nurses feared losing their jobs if their identities were revealed in connection with the complaint . Arafiles became aware of the complaint and spoke to Winkler County Sheriff Robert Roberts , alleging that the complaint amounted to harassment . The TMB issued a copy of the complaint to Roberts with the understanding that it would only be used to investigate criminal activity by Arafiles . Roberts sent the complaint to Arafiles and to WCMH administrator Stan Wiley . As WCMH was a small hospital , details from the letter identified Mitchell and Galle as the sources of the complaint . 
 Roberts obtained warrants to search the nurses ' computers and he found the letter to the TMB . The sheriff was friends with Arafiles . The doctor had treated Roberts in the emergency room for a heart attack . Roberts credited Arafiles with saving his life . He referred to the doctor as " the most sincerely caring person I have ever met . " Roberts later commented on the board report , saying , " If it ’ s made to destroy somebody ’ s reputation or forcing them to leave town , then I don ’ t believe it is good faith . " 
 = = Termination and criminal charges = = 
 Mitchell and Galle were terminated from WCMH in June 2009 . A few days later , both nurses were arrested . They were charged with misuse of official information , a felony that carries the possibility of ten years imprisonment and fines up to $ 5 @,@ 000 . Roberts said that the nurses filed the complaint as a personal vendetta rather than as a good faith reporting of facts . He also noted that Mitchell and Galle sent the medical records of ten patients to the TMB without their consent ; however , the reports did not include the names of patients and federal law exempts medical board reports from patient privacy laws . 
 The case attracted national attention in July 2009 when the American Nurses Association ( ANA ) and Texas Nurses Association ( TNA ) began to raise awareness of the plight of the nurses . Galle later said , " We didn 't have any support - emotional or financial - until TNA and ANA stepped in . " TNA filed a complaint with the Texas Department of State Health Services ( <unk> ) that resulted in an onsite investigation of the hospital . By February 2010 , the TNA Legal Defense Fund had collected more than $ 45 @,@ 000 in donations to the defense of Galle and Mitchell . TMB executive director Mari Robinson commented that such prosecution could have " a significant chilling effect " on the reporting of physician practice issues . 
 The charges against Galle were dropped before her case went to trial . Mitchell 's case was tried by county attorney Scott Tidwell , a political supporter of Roberts and the personal attorney for Arafiles , in February 2010 . Both the TMB executive director and the county attorney in nearby Andrews County discouraged Tidwell from trying the case . At trial , Mitchell did not testify . The relationship between Arafiles and Roberts was explored during the proceedings . Arafiles introduced Roberts to a supplement @-@ selling program known as <unk> , and recommended the supplements to his patients . Roberts sold the supplements , but he said that his friendship with Arafiles had not impacted his actions with the nurses and that he did not have a business relationship with Arafiles . 
 Attorneys with the office of the Texas Attorney General took on Mitchell 's case after being contacted by the TMB . Assistant Attorney General David <unk> later said that the case was the most bizarre he had seen in an 11 @-@ year stint with the office . " We 're used to dealing with cases where public officials have enriched themselves at the expense of the office and the public trust , like bribery and theft . But there was no financial benefit to the bad actors in this case . " The jury returned with a not guilty verdict after an hour of deliberation . Those present in the courtroom said that each juror approached Mitchell after the verdict and hugged her . In comments he made after the trial , jury foreman Harley Tyler said he wondered why the nurses were arrested . ANA president Rebecca Patton said that the verdict was " a resounding win on behalf of patient safety . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 TNA asserted that state laws , including the Texas Nursing Practice Act and the Public Employee Whistleblower Law , gave any health care provider the right to report concerns about the patient care of other providers . Under these protections , a termination could be presumed improper if it occurred within 60 days of filing such a complaint . Mitchell and Galle filed a civil lawsuit against Winkler County , WCMH , Wiley , Roberts , Tidwell and Arafiles . The lawsuit alleged violations of civil rights , breaches of due process and improper termination . 
 A few months after Mitchell 's trial , Galle and Mitchell split a $ 750 @,@ 000 settlement in the civil suit . The nurses , who both live in Jal , New Mexico , were unable to find employment in nursing after being terminated from WCMH . After signing the settlement , Wiley reinforced his support of Arafiles , saying , " He ’ s done a lot of good in this county . If you have a heart attack or anything of that nature in the emergency room , he is definitely the doctor that you want to take care of you . " 
 Several officials faced criminal charges for their involvement in the prosecution or termination of Galle and Mitchell . Wiley was the first to go to trial after he was indicted on two felony counts of retaliation . He pleaded guilty to the lesser of the two charges . He was sentenced to 30 days in jail and a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine and agreed to cooperate in the prosecution of other involved officials . Wiley terminated Galle and Mitchell after they submitted the anonymous medical board complaint . He submitted his resignation from the hospital in August 2010 , but the WCMH board of directors declined to accept it . He resigned again in October 2010 . 
 Roberts was convicted on two counts of misuse of official information , two counts of retaliation and two counts of official oppression . In June 2011 , he was sentenced to 100 days in jail , four years of felony probation and a $ 6 @,@ 000 fine . After the sentence , Roberts was removed as sheriff and forced to surrender his license as a peace officer . Convicted on similar charges , Tidwell was removed from office and sentenced to 120 days in jail , ten years of probation and a $ 6 @,@ 000 fine . Tidwell 's trial publicly uncovered a 2004 guilty plea he entered after being charged with soliciting a prostitute . <unk> assessed a $ 15 @,@ 850 fine against the hospital for inadequate supervision of Arafiles and illegal termination of Galle and Mitchell . 
 By mid @-@ 2011 , Arafiles had moved his practice to East Texas and was affiliated with <unk> Germany Hospital in Grand Saline . A hospital administrator there said that she had looked into some of the allegations against Arafiles that she found on the Internet but that no one had formally complained to her about the doctor . In November 2011 , Arafiles entered a guilty plea on two counts of misuse of official information . Two other charges were dismissed and a pending indictment for aggravated perjury was dropped . Arafiles was forced to surrender his medical license , sentenced to 60 days in jail and five years of probation , and assessed a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine . 
 Several of the people involved in the nurses ' case had assumed new employment by the summer of 2012 . Mitchell found a position in New Mexico working with the developmentally disabled . Galle , who said in 2010 that the case had " derailed our careers " , entered early retirement . Galle and Mitchell earned the Dean 's Advocacy Award from the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center in 2010 . Arafiles was working at a Pizza Hut restaurant in Kermit as a janitor . Wiley left Winkler County for Lubbock . Tidwell was appealing the revocation of his license to practice law . 
 New legislation stopped the TMB from investigating anonymous complaints concerning physicians as of the fall of 2011 . The change was seen as a victory by physicians rights groups , who said that it would promote accountability in the investigations of physicians . Other groups worried that the new law would discourage the reporting of legitimate complaints against physicians . The board received 6 @,@ 849 complaints in 2010 ; four percent of the complaints were submitted anonymously . 
 = ESRB re @-@ rating of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion = 
 On May 3 , 2006 , the North American Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) changed the rating of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , a video game for PCs , the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 , from Teen ( 13 + ) to Mature ( 17 + ) . The ESRB cited the presence of content not considered in their original review in the published edition of Oblivion . This included detailed depictions of blood and gore and sexually explicit content . The sexually explicit content was an art file , made accessible by a third @-@ party modification called the Oblivion Topless Mod , that rendered the game with topless female characters . 
 In response to the new content , the ESRB conducted a new review of Oblivion , showing to its reviewers the content originally submitted by the game 's publisher along with the newly disclosed content . The new review resulted in an M rating . The ESRB reported that Bethesda Softworks , the game 's developer and publisher , would promptly notify all retailers of the change , issue stickers for retailers and distributors to affix on the product , display the new rating in all following product shipments and marketing , and create a downloadable patch rendering the topless skin inaccessible . Bethesda complied with the request , but issued a press release declaring their disagreement with the ESRB 's rationale . Although certain retailers began to check for ID before selling Oblivion as a result of the change , and the change elicited criticism for the ESRB , the events passed by with little notice from the public at large . Other commentators remarked on the injustice of punishing a company for the actions of its clients , and one called the event a " pseudo @-@ sequel " to the Hot Coffee minigame controversy . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = ESRB review process = = = 
 The ESRB 's review process involves the submission , by the game 's publisher , of a video which captures all " pertinent content " in the game , where pertinent content is defined as any content that accurately reflects both the " most extreme content of the final product " and " the final product as a whole . " That is to say , it must depict the " relative frequency " of said content . As ESRB President Patricia Vance explains it , the ESRB would not just want a " tape of one extreme cut to another , " but rather " context for the storyline , the missions , the features and functionality of a game , so that the raters really can get exposed to a pretty reasonable sense of what they 'd experience playing the game . " The fact that the content of Oblivion under investigation was inaccessible during normal play made no difference in the decision . ESRB policy had been " absolutely clear " since the Hot Coffee controversy , Patricia Vance told a reporter . Publishers were told that they could not leave unfinished or other pertinent content on a disc . If locked @-@ out content was " pertinent to a rating , " ESRB policy stated that it needed to be disclosed , and Bethesda had not done so . 
 = = = Oblivion Topless Mod = = = 
 Released in March 2006 and reported on game news sites as a curiosity in April of the same year , the Oblivion Topless Mod had been created by a woman calling herself " <unk> . " <unk> created the mod in protest against what she called " government / society / whatever forcing companies to ' protect our innocent population from seeing those evil dirty things 50 % of them possess personally anyways . ' " The gaming website Joystiq reported on the mod on April 6 , 2006 : " <unk> are already hard at work on bending the code of the recently released PC version of Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion to their will . Early success : topless mod FTW ! " Kotaku , another gaming site , reporting on the mod on April 5 , 2006 , didn 't consider the mod anything new and said , " As usual in the world of computer gaming , one of the very first mods released for a popular game allows you to see the breasts of the main character . " The content of the mod , wrote commentator Michael Zenke , Editor of Slashdot games , was fairly tame . Without nudity of the lower torso , and without self @-@ consciousness on the part of the nude NPCs , Zenke wrote , the Oblivion Topless Mod was " as erotic as a doctor 's visit . " Pete Hines had discussed the mod with GameSpot staff before the game was re @-@ rated , saying that he did not consider it a concern . " We can 't control and don 't condone the actions of anyone who alters the game so that it displays material that may be considered offensive . We haven 't received any complaints on the issue from anyone . " 
 = = = ESRB re @-@ review and rating change = = = 
 During these investigations ESRB staff also found more blood and gore than the review tape had portrayed : 
 What Bethesda had originally disclosed to us , as an example : In that section of the game , there is a hanging corpse . What they disclosed to us was a hanging corpse in the dark , pretty far away and without much detail . And yet , when you bring a torch up to the hanging corpse in the actual game , you can see that it 's very mutilated with lots of blood and bones . That was a very different depiction , far more intense , far more extreme than what had been disclosed to us . 
 In response to the new content , the ESRB hastily conducted a new review of Oblivion , showing to its reviewers the content originally submitted by Bethesda along with the newly disclosed content . The new review resulted in a Mature rating . The ESRB reported that Bethesda , to correct for the discrepancy , would promptly notify all retailers of the change , issue stickers for retailers and distributors to affix on the product , display the new rating in all following product shipments and marketing , and create a patch for download rendering the topless skin inaccessible . In line with its stated mission of informing consumers regarding the age @-@ suitability of its marked games , the ESRB also released an ESRB Parent Advisory , ensuring that parents would be " immediately notified " of the change . 
 = = Industry impact = = 
 = = = Retailer response = = = 
 Following news of the rating change on May 3 , 2006 , the Interactive Entertainment Merchants Association ( IEMA ) , an organization of game retailers , which had previously eased the adoption of industry @-@ wide ratings enforcement , issued its own statement , lauding its own retailers for the speed with which they reacted to the rating change . The IEMA release further stated that identification was needed to secure the purchase of Mature @-@ rated games at roughly the same rate as was needed for R @-@ rated film admission . In compliance with the ESRB 's further demand that Bethesda request retailers " to adhere to their respective store policies not to sell the newly rated M ( Mature ) game to those under the age of 17 , " several retailers had begun to include cash register prompts tied to the game 's bar code , instructing the cashier to ask for ID . A report by Gamasutra observed that some retailers — Circuit City specifically — were even pulling the game from their shelves entirely , " presumably until rating modifications can be made . " 
 = = = Publisher response = = = 
 Following the announcement of the rating change , Bethesda issued their own press release . Bethesda announced that it was their organization , not Take @-@ Two Interactive , that had handled the ratings application , and that they stood behind it . Bethesda would not contest the change , and would promptly seek to implement the ESRB 's demands , without demanding a product recall . Nonetheless , Bethesda stated that Oblivion was not typical of Mature rated titles , and did not contain " central themes of violence " common to such titles . The response asserted that Bethesda 's submission to the ESRB was " full , accurate , and comprehensive , " following the forms and requirements published by the ESRB , and that nothing was withheld . Bethesda stressed that there was no nudity in their game without a modification , that the company " didn 't create a game with nudity " and did not intend for nudity to appear in their game . " Bethesda can not control tampering with Oblivion by third parties , " the press release concluded . 
 = = = Rating agency response outside the United States = = = 
 The British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) , the ESRB 's counterpart in the United Kingdom , did not change its rating of 15 . " Were it the case that the developer themselves had included and failed to disclose certain modifications of content , a recall may be required , but not as a result of a patch that has been placed on the Internet by a third party , " a BBFC spokesperson told GamesIndustry.biz reporters on May 4 , 2006 . Any modifications made after release fall outside the powers of the Video Recordings Act . 
 In July 2007 , the Pan European Game Information ( PEGI ) announced that it was extending its purview to cover " games playable online via consoles , PCs and mobiles . " Websites or online retail games participating in the program would be granted a PEGI Online logo , specifying whether " the particular game or site is under the control of an operator that cares about protecting young people . " An article by gaming website Shacknews noted at the time that PEGI 's initiative would address the concerns US publishers had with user @-@ created mods for San Andreas and Oblivion : responsibility for such mods would be placed on the participating publishers . 
 = = Public impact = = 
 The events passed by with little concern from either the public or gaming journalists in particular . Zenke attributed the draw in attention to bigger stories that came later in May . The news , for example , came just a week before E3 2006 , the last E3 before the show changed from a grand spectacle to a reserved industry @-@ only affair . The story did not pass completely unnoticed , as certain commentators issued statements regarding the issue in the days following the re @-@ rating . On May 4 , 2006 , then @-@ California Assemblyman Leland Yee used the rating change to criticize the ESRB . Yee , who had previously called on the ESRB to change their rating of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas to AO ( Adults Only 18 + ) , issued a statement criticizing the ESRB for deceiving parents . Yee chastised the ESRB for failing parents again , and demonstrating their inability to police themselves . Yee called the ESRB 's rating system drastically flawed , and called for further legislation to assist parents and protect children . Attorney and activist Jack Thompson sought talk show appearances over the issue , planning to explain to prospective interviewers why the re @-@ rating issue was an even worse disaster than the Hot Coffee scandal , as children of all ages had already bought the game . The ESRB , Thompson said , had learned nothing from its past mistakes . 
 Game designer John Romero , lead designer of Doom , posted a statement in his blog criticizing the modders responsible : 
 Now what 's going to happen ? You 'll probably start seeing game data files becoming encrypted and the open door on assets getting slammed shut just to keep modders from financially screwing the company they should be helping . And the day a game company 's file encryption is hacked to add porn and the case goes to the ESRB for review – that 's when we 'll see how well game companies are protected from these antics and what the courts will rule . Hopefully it 'll be on the developer 's side . 
 When the ratings change came , Zenke saw political caution in the move , rather than an intelligent response to new content . Previous scandals had forced the Board 's hand , and the ratings change was an act of self @-@ preservation . Zenke , writing in June 2007 for online gaming magazine The Escapist , criticized the public for its failure to respond to the rating change , and emphasized what the change would mean to moddable games . At the core of Zenke 's article was concern that a developer or publisher could be punished for content they neither produced nor distributed . Echoing Romero 's concerns , Zenke saw the rating change as a threat , not only to modders , but to developers as well . Zenke asked what the ESRB would do in response to " Game 3 @.@ 0 " concepts , where community involvement is key . Referring to Sony 's LittleBigPlanet , Zenke asked , " Will Sony provide personnel to review every fan @-@ made level for offensive content ? Will the ESRB ? " 
 The Escapist , thinking the issues of a year past long since died down , especially since they hadn 't aroused much concern on first coming to light , did not expect the discord that ensued ; response on their forums was heated , and the ESRB took " vigorous exception " to the piece . Zenke conducted a follow @-@ up interview with ESRB President Patricia Vance . In regard to what is considered by the ESRB for rating a game , Vance stated , " Our policies are quite clear : it 's what 's created by the publisher and included on the disc , not what 's created or introduced by a mod . The mod may unlock it , the mod may make it accessible , but again , going back to the publisher 's burden ; putting the accountability on the publisher to fully account for the content that they create and they ship – that 's all we care about . " Vance went on to state that " ESRB can 't rate content that is created by other players . We never have , we never tried , nor will we ever , " and that the only warning ESRB issues regarding third @-@ party content is " Game Experience May Change During Online Play . " 
 = Development of Duke Nukem Forever = 
 The video game Duke Nukem Forever spent fifteen years in development , from 1996 to 2011 . It is a first @-@ person shooter for PC , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , developed by 3D Realms , Triptych Games , Gearbox Software and Piranha Games . It is a sequel to the 1996 game Duke Nukem 3D , as part of the long @-@ running Duke Nukem video game series . Intended to be groundbreaking , Duke Nukem Forever has become infamous in the video games industry and was considered vaporware due to its severely protracted development schedule ; the game had been in development under 3D Realms since 1996 . Director George Broussard , one of the creators of the original Duke Nukem game , first announced the title 's development in April 1997 , and promotional information for the game was released in one form or another from 1997 until its release in 2011 . 
 After repeatedly announcing and deferring release dates , 3D Realms announced in 2001 that it would be released simply " when it 's done " . In May 2009 , 3D Realms was downsized for financial reasons , resulting in the loss of the game 's development team . Statements by the company indicated that the project was due to " go gold " soon with pictures of final development . Take @-@ Two Interactive , which owns the publishing rights to the game , filed a lawsuit in 2009 against 3D Realms over their " failure to finish development " . 3D Realms retorted that Take @-@ Two 's legal interest in the game is limited to their publishing right . The case was settled with prejudice and details undisclosed in May 2010 . On September 3 , 2010 , 14 years after the start of the development , Duke Nukem Forever was officially reported by 2K Games to be in development at Gearbox Software , with an expected release date of 2011 . The official release date was then revealed to be May 3 , 2011 , in North America , with a worldwide release following on May 6 , 2011 . This was however delayed by a month to June 10 internationally with a North American release on June 14 . Duke Nukem Forever was finally released after 15 years of development on June 10 , 2011 , to mostly negative reviews . 
 = = Background = = 
 Scott Miller was a lifelong gamer who released his text @-@ based video games as shareware in the 1980s . By 1988 , the shareware business was a $ 10 to $ 20 million a year market , but the distribution method had never been tried for video games . Miller found that gamers were not willing to pay for something they could get for free , so he came up with the idea of offering only the opening levels of his games ; players could purchase the game to receive the rest of the game . George Broussard , whom Miller met while he was in high school , joined Miller at his company , Apogee , which published and marketed games developed by other companies . While Miller was quiet , with a head for business , Broussard was an enthusiastic " creative impresario " . Apogee ( from which a new brand name was made in 1994 , 3D Realms ) grew from a small startup to a successful corporation . Among the titles they published was id Software 's Commander Keen in 1990 and Wolfenstein 3D in 1992 . Commander Keen met great success , leading to the development of many <unk> for the DOS platform , including many developed by Apogee and using the same engine that powered the Keen games , and Wolfenstein was highly successful , popularizing 3D gaming and establishing the first @-@ person shooter ( FPS ) genre . 
 By 1994 , Broussard began working on 3D Realms ' own first @-@ person shooter . Rather than the faceless marine of other games , players assumed the role of Duke Nukem , the title character of a pair of 2D platforms from Apogee , Duke Nukem and Duke Nukem II . Broussard described Duke as " a combo of John Wayne , Clint Eastwood , and Arnold Schwarzenegger . " After a year and a half of work , Duke Nukem 3D was released in January 1996 . Among game aspects that appealed to players were environmental interaction and adult @-@ oriented content — including blood and strippers . Buoyed by the success , Broussard announced a follow @-@ up , Duke Nukem Forever . 
 = = Quake II engine , 1996 – 1998 = = 
 Duke Nukem Forever was officially announced on April 28 , 1997 , with the intention of releasing the game no later than mid @-@ 1998 . Barely a year after the release of Duke Nukem 3D , the game 's graphics and its game engine , the Build engine , were antiquated . Id Software 's new Quake II engine was far superior to Build , so Broussard decided to license it . The price spent for the licensing rights was steep — estimates were as high as $ 500 @,@ 000 — but Broussard reasoned that it would save time used to write a game engine from scratch . Broussard and Miller were flush with cash from the sales of Duke Nukem 3D and other games , so they decided to fund Duke Nukem Forever themselves , turning marketing and publishing rights over to GT Interactive . 
 In August and September , the first screenshots of Duke Nukem Forever were released in PC Gamer . However , 3D Realms did not receive the Quake II engine code until November 1997 , and the earlier screenshots were mock @-@ ups with the Quake engine that the team had made in their spare time . 3D Realms unveiled the first video footage of Duke Nukem Forever using the Quake II engine at the 1998 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) conference . The trailer showed Duke fighting on the back of a moving truck and firefights with aliens . While critics were impressed , Broussard was not happy with the progress being made . 
 = = Unreal engine , 1998 – 2003 = = 
 Soon after the release of the Quake II engine , Epic Games had unveiled its own Unreal Engine . The Unreal Engine was more realistic than Quake II and was better suited to producing open spaces — 3D Realms had been struggling to render the Nevada desert . Soon after E3 , a programmer suggested that they make the switch . After discussions , the developers unanimously agreed to the change , which would mean scrapping much of their work so far , including significant changes 3D Realms had made to the Quake Engine . In June 1998 , 14 months after the Quake II announcement , 3D Realms made the switch announcement . Broussard said that the game would not be " significantly delayed " by the switch , but that the project would be back to where it was at E3 " within a month to six weeks " . Broussard also said that no content seen in the E3 trailer would be lost . Chris Hargrove , one of the game 's programmers at the time , confided that the change amounted to a complete reboot of the project . 
 By the end of 1999 , Duke Nukem Forever had missed several release dates and was largely unfinished ; half the game 's weapons remained concepts . Broussard shot back at criticisms of the game 's lengthy development time as the price paid for developing complex modern games : A significant factor contributing to the game 's protracted development was that Broussard was continually looking to add new elements to the game . A running joke at 3D Realms was to stop Broussard from seeing a new video game , as he would want to include portions of it in Duke Nukem Forever . Later that year , Broussard decided to upgrade to a new version of the Unreal engine that was designed for multiplayer matches . Former employees recalled that Broussard did not have a plan for what the finished game would look like . At the same time , GT Interactive was facing higher @-@ than @-@ expected losses and hired Bear Stearns to look into selling the company or merging it . Later that year , Infogrames Entertainment announced it was purchasing a controlling interest in GT Interactive . The publishing rights for Duke Nukem Forever passed to Gathering of Developers in early December 2000 . 
 To placate anxious fans , Broussard decided to create another trailer for E3 2001 — it was the first public look at the game in three years . The video showed a couple of minutes of in @-@ game footage , which notably showed the player moving in what appears to be Las Vegas and a certain level of interactivity ( the player buys a sandwich from a vending machine and pushes each individual button on a keypad with Duke 's outstretched finger ) . The trailer was impressive , and Duke Nukem was the talk of the convention ; IGN reported on the game 's graphics , saying , " Characters come to life with picturesque facial animations that are synced perfectly with speech , hair that swings as they bob their heads , eyes that follow gazes , and more . The particle effects system , meanwhile , boasts impressive explosion effects with shimmering fire , shattered glass , and blood spilt in every direction [ ... ] Add in real @-@ time lighting effects , interactive environments , and a variation in locales unequaled in any other first @-@ person shooter and you begin to see and understand why Duke Nukem Forever has been one of the most hotly anticipated titles over the last couple of years . " Duke Nukem Forever looked as good or better than most games , and staff at 3D Realms recalled a sense of elation after the presentation ; " The video was just being eaten up by people , " one said . " We were so far ahead of other people at the time . " While many of the staff expected Broussard to make a push for finishing the game , however , he still did not have a finished product in mind . Following the death of one of Gathering of Developers ' co @-@ founders and continuing financial problems , the publishers ' Texas @-@ based offices were shut down and absorbed into parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive . 
 = = Conflict with Take @-@ Two , 2003 – 2006 = = 
 By 2003 , only 18 people at 3D Realms were working on the game . One former employee said that Broussard and Miller were still operating on a " 1995 mentality " , before games became large @-@ team , big budget development affairs . Because they were financing the project themselves , the developers could also ignore pressure from their publisher ; their standard reply to when Duke Nukem Forever would ship was " when it 's done " . In 2003 , Take @-@ Two CEO Jeffrey Lapin reported that the game would not be out that year . He further said the company was writing off $ 5 @.@ 5 million from its earnings due to Duke Nukem Forever 's lengthy development time . Broussard shot back that " Take @-@ Two needs to STFU ... We don ’ t want Take @-@ Two saying stupid @-@ ass things in public for the sole purposes of helping their stock . It 's our time and our money we are spending on the game . So either we 're absolutely stupid and clueless , or we believe in what we are working on . " Later that year , Lapin said 3D Realms had told him that Duke Nukem Forever was expected to be finished by the end of 2004 , or the beginning of 2005 . 
 In 2004 , video game website GameSpot reported that Duke Nukem Forever had switched to the Doom 3 engine . Many gaming news sites mailed Broussard , asking him to confirm or deny the rumor . After receiving no answer from him , they published the rumor as fact , but Broussard explicitly denied the rumor soon after . Soon after 3D Realms replaced the game 's Karma physics system with one designed by <unk> , a relatively unknown Swedish firm . Closed @-@ doors demonstrations of the technology suggested that the physics of Duke Nukem Forever would be a step up from the critically acclaimed Half @-@ Life 2 . Rumors suggested that the game would appear at 2005 E3 . While 3D Realms ' previously canceled Prey made an appearance , the rumors of Duke Nukem Forever 's appearance proved false . 
 Broussard reported in a January 2006 interview that many of Duke Nukem Forever 's elements had been finished ; " we 're just basically pulling it all together and trying to make it fun " . Later that year Broussard demonstrated samples of the game , including an early level , a vehicle sequence , and a few test rooms . Among the features seen was the interactive use of an in @-@ game computer to send actual e @-@ mails . The developer seemed contrite and affected by the long delays ; while a journalist demoed the game Broussard referenced note cards and constantly apologized for the state of the game . In filing with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission , Take @-@ Two revealed they had renegotiated the Duke Nukem Forever deal , with the former publisher receiving $ 4 @.@ 25 million instead of $ 6 million on release of the game . Take @-@ Two offered a $ 500 @,@ 000 bonus if Duke Nukem Forever was commercially released by December 31 , 2006 . However , Broussard denied the rumors that DNF would be released , saying that 3D Realms never cared for or asked for the bonus . He stated that he would " never ship a game early . " 
 Some of the staff were tired of the delays — Duke Nukem Forever was the only 3D game many had worked on , giving them little to put on a resume , and as much of 3D Realms ' payment hinged on profit @-@ sharing after release , the continual delays meant deferred income . By August 2006 , between 7 – 10 employees had left since 2005 , a majority of the Duke Nukem Forever team ( which in recent months had shrunk to around 18 staff ) . While Shacknews speculated that the departures would lead to further delays , 3D Realms denied the claims , stating that the employees had left over a number of months and that the game was still moving ahead . Creative director Raphael van <unk> , hired in 2007 , played through the completed content and realized that there was more finished than he expected . <unk> told Broussard that he felt they could push the game and " blow everyone out of the water " , but Broussard responded that the game was still two years away from completion . 
 = = 3D Realms final years in development , 2007 – 2009 = = 
 The long delay strained Broussard and Miller 's relationship , and by the end of 2006 , Broussard appeared to become serious about shipping the title . On January 25 and May 22 , 2007 , Broussard posted two Gamasutra job ads with small screenshots of Duke Nukem and an enemy , which he later confirmed were real in @-@ game screenshots . The team doubled in size within a short timeframe . Among the new hires was project lead Brian Hook , who became the first person to successfully resist Broussard 's requests for changes . 
 A new game trailer was released on December 19 , 2007 , the first teaser in more than six years . The video was made by 3D Realms employees as part of holiday festivities . While Broussard maintained the release date would be " when it 's done " , he added that " you can expect more frequent media releases [ and ] we have considerable work behind us " . While the Dallas Business Journal " confirmed " a 2008 release date for the game , Broussard later reported that this was based on a misunderstanding of " off the record " information . In @-@ game footage of the game appeared in 2008 premiere episode of The Jace Hall Show . Filmed entirely on hand @-@ held cameras but not originally expected to be publicly released , the video showed host Jason Hall playing through parts of a single level on a PC at 3D Realms ' offices . The footage was confirmed to have been shot six months prior to the episode air date and according to Broussard , contained outdated particle and combat effects that had since been replaced . The game did not make an appearance at E3 2008 , an event which Miller described as " irrelevant " . 
 While the game neared completion , the funding began to dry up . Having spent more than $ 20 million of their own money , Broussard and Miller asked Take @-@ Two for $ 6 million to complete the game . According to Broussard and Miller , Take @-@ Two initially agreed , but then only offered $ 2 @.@ 5 million . Take @-@ Two maintained that they offered $ 2 @.@ 5 million up front and another $ 2 @.@ 5 million on completion . Broussard rejected the counteroffer , and on May 6 , 2009 , suspended all development . 
 = = DNF team laid off and 3D Realms downsized , 2009 – 2010 = = 
 3D Realms laid off the DNF staff on May 8 , 2009 due to lack of funding , but inside sources claimed it would still operate as a smaller company . Development on DNF halted , and its fate was unknown . Publisher Take @-@ Two Interactive , in response , stated that they still held the publishing rights for Duke Nukem Forever , but they were not funding the game . Prior to and after the action , unreleased screenshots , concept art , pictures of models from the game and a goodbye message from 3D Realms were posted by alleged former employees . Similar leaks followed after May 8 , 2009 . 
 Take @-@ Two filed a lawsuit against 3D Realms over their failure to complete Duke Nukem Forever , citing that they paid $ 12 million to Infogrames in 2000 to acquire the publishing rights . 3D Realms argued , however , that they never received that money , as it was a direct agreement between Infogrames and Take @-@ Two . The lawsuit seemed to be over a contractual breach , but not regarding the $ 12 million mentioned above . Take @-@ Two asked for a restraining order and a preliminary injunction , to make 3D Realms keep the Duke Nukem Forever assets intact during proceedings , but the court denied the publisher 's request for a temporary restraining order . In December 2009 , Apogee CEO Scott Miller clarified that " we 've never said that Duke Nukem Forever has ceased development , [ though ] we released the internal team , but that doesn 't correlate to the demise of the project . " 
 3D Realms made plans to hire an " external " developer to complete the progress while continuing to downsize itself , resulting in development on another title known as Duke Begins being halted . An unofficial compilation of gameplay footage was also released in December 2009 . By 2010 , 3D Realms and Take @-@ Two had settled the lawsuit and dismissed it with prejudice . 
 = = Gearbox revival and release , 2010 – 2011 = = 
 Despite the discontinuation of internal game development at 3D Realms , development of the game did not cease entirely . Nine ex @-@ employees including key personnel like Allen Blum , continued game development throughout 2009 from their homes . These employees would later become Triptych Games , an independent studio housed in the same building as Gearbox , with whom they collaborated on the project . 
 After ceasing internal game development , 3D Realms approached noted game developers Gearbox Software and asked them if they were interested in helping Triptych Games polish the nearly finished PC version and port it to the consoles . Gearbox CEO Randy Pitchford , who had worked on an expansion to Duke Nukem 3D and very briefly on Forever before he left to found Gearbox , felt that " Duke can 't die " and decided that he was going to help " in Duke ’ s time of need . " He started providing funding for the game and contacted 2K Games ' president to persuade his company that Gearbox and Triptych can complete the development of the game and get it released on all platforms in time . Duke Nukem Forever was originally intended to be a PC exclusive game , however 2K and Gearbox had hired Piranha Games to port the game designed for PC to Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 and added a Multiplayer in order to raise sales . 
 The game was officially re @-@ announced at the Penny Arcade Expo 2010 on September 3 , 2010 . It was the first time in the game 's development history that gamers were able to actually try the game — according to Pitchford , " the line has gotten up to four hours long to see the game " . Gearbox Software subsequently purchased the Duke Nukem intellectual property from 3D Realms , and 2K Games held the exclusive long @-@ term publishing rights of the game . 
 Development was almost complete with only minor polishing to be done before the game was to be released in 2011 . A playable demo of Duke Nukem Forever was released once Gearbox figured out the timing , with purchasers of the Game of the Year Edition of Borderlands gaining early access . The demo is unexpectedly different from the versions available at PAX and <unk> . Those that purchased Borderlands on Valve 's Steam prior to October 12 , 2010 got the code for the demo without the need to buy the Game of the Year edition of the game . Duke Nukem Forever was initially scheduled for release on May 3 in the United States and May 6 internationally and after another delay was finally released on June 14 in North America and June 10 worldwide , nearly four weeks after the game had ' gone gold ' within 15 years . 
 = = Press coverage = = 
 Wired News has awarded Duke Nukem Forever its Vaporware Award several times . It placed second in June 2000 and topped the list in 2001 and 2002 . Wired magazine created the Vaporware Lifetime Achievement Award exclusively for DNF and awarded it in 2003 . George Broussard accepted the award , simply stating , " We 're undeniably late and we know it . " In 2004 , the game did not make the top 10 ; Wired editors said that they had given DNF the Lifetime Achievement Award to get it off of the list . However , upon readers ' demands , Wired changed its mind , and DNF won first place in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 . In 2008 , Wired staff officially considered removing DNF from their annual list , citing that " even the best jokes get old eventually " , only to reconsider upon viewing the handheld camera footage of the game in The Jace Hall Show , awarding the game with first place once again . In 2009 , Wired published Wired News ' Vaporware Awards 2009 : Duke Nukem Forever was excluded from consideration on the grounds that the project was finally dead . Duke made a comeback with an unprecedented 11th place award on Wired 's 2010 Vaporware list . When the GameSpy editors compiled a list of the " Top 25 Dumbest Moments in Gaming History " in June 2003 , Duke Nukem Forever placed # 18 . Duke Nukem Forever has drawn a number of jokes related to its development timeline . The video gaming media and public in general have routinely suggested several names in place of Forever , calling it " Never " , " ( Taking ) Forever " , " Whenever " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " If Ever " . The game has also been ridiculed as Duke Nukem : Forever In Development , " Either this is the longest game ever in production or an elaborate in @-@ joke at the expense of the industry " . 
 = = Additional references = = 
 = A Tale of Two Cities ( Lost ) = 
 " A Tale of Two Cities " is the third season premiere , and 50th episode overall , of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) ' s serial drama television series Lost . The episode was written by co @-@ creators / executive producers J. J. Abrams and Damon Lindelof , based on a story by Lindelof and directed by executive producer Jack Bender . The episode begins with the introduction of Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) and The Barracks . The character of Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks . This is the only episode of the series other than the pilot to have been co @-@ written by J.J. Abrams . 
 When the episode first aired on October 4 , 2006 , in the United States , it was watched by an average of 19 million American viewers , making it the fourth most watched episode of the week . It premiered to generally positive reviews , with many praising Mitchell 's new character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 In Jack 's flashbacks , Jack is going through a divorce from his wife Sarah ( Julie Bowen ) . He demands to know who she has been dating , but she refuses to tell him , so he spies on her and steals her cell phone . He proceeds to call every number in her phone , and his father Christian Shephard 's ( John Terry ) cell phone rings . After following Christian to an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting , Jack accuses him of sleeping with his wife and physically attacks him . After Jack is arrested , Sarah pays his bail , and tells him Christian is no longer sober . She then leaves with an unidentified man , after telling Jack that " now [ he has ] something to fix . " 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 New character Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) prepares for a book club meeting in a modern suburban home . The club is in a heated discussion of Stephen King 's Carrie , when they are interrupted by what sounds like an earthquake . The group leaves Juliet 's house and Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , previously known as " Henry Gale " to the survivors , appears along with Ethan Rom ( William Mapother ) , looking up to watch Oceanic Flight 815 break apart in mid @-@ air . Ben quickly orders Goodwin ( Brett Cullen ) and Ethan to join the survivors , stay undercover , and provide " lists in three days . " The camera zooms out to reveal that the suburb is actually on the Island and is inhabited by The Others , while in the background the smoke trail of the midsection and tail section of Flight 815 can be seen . 
 Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) wakes up on the floor of a locker room . Tom ( M.C. Gainey ) allows her to have a shower and afterwards , forces her to change into a dress , after which she is led to an elegant breakfast on the beach with Ben , who tells her to put on handcuffs before she can eat . She asks him why he is doing this , and he tells her that he wanted to give her something pleasant to remember , as the next two weeks will be " very unpleasant " . James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) wakes up in a cage in the jungle . A teenager , Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) , in a nearby cage initially ignores Sawyer but then later expresses interest in Sawyer 's camp and unlocks his cage then Sawyer 's . However , they are both caught and Tom makes Karl , who is now beaten and bloody , apologize to Sawyer before taking the teen away . Sawyer figures out the mechanical puzzle in his cage , though Tom says it " only took the bears two hours . " Kate is then put in Karl 's ( now empty ) cage . 
 Jack wakes up in a cell in the Hydra Station , where Juliet gently interrogates him . At one point Jack attacks her and attempts to escape , holding an improvised weapon at her throat . He orders her to open a door , but she refuses to comply , claiming that doing so would kill them both . Ben appears and agrees that opening the door will kill them all . Jack throws Juliet away , and then opens the door . As Ben dashes back through the door he came in , water starts rushing into the hallway . Juliet helps Jack struggle into an adjoining room , tells him to push a button which she had previously mentioned was for emergencies . He does so and she knocks him unconscious . When he awakes , she shows Jack a file which she says contains documents about his entire life . Juliet asks Jack if he has any questions about Sarah . After a pause , he asks , " Is she happy ? " Juliet replies yes , and walks outside , and Ben congratulates her on a job well done . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " A Tale of Two Cities " was the first episode to introduce the character of Juliet . The actress who plays her , Elizabeth Mitchell , was cast in late July 2006 as a new series regular , who was meant to be a possible love interest for Jack . Mitchell has commented her first or second day of shooting was the opening sequence , when the Others watched Oceanic 815 fall out of the sky . When she first met actor Matthew Fox they briefly introduced themselves , but most of their initial conversation was in regard to the script and their characters . Mitchell found this helpful while shooting the premiere 's scenes , since then they knew the other as their characters , and not as Matthew and Elizabeth . The scene in which Jack yells at Juliet , and she responds " No Jack , I think you 're stubborn " , was used as her audition scene . One of the Others , Amelia , was played by the elderly Julie Adams , who was the protagonist in Creature from the Black Lagoon . 
 Previous guest actors William Mapother , Julie Bowen , M.C. Gainey , Brett Cullen , and John Terry made brief appearances in the episode . The premiere marked the first appearances of recurring guest actors Blake Bashoff and Stephen Semel . In addition to Mitchell 's new billing , only four other characters of star billing appeared in the episode : Michael Emerson , depicting Ben Linus , was promoted to a main character for the third season ; the other three were Matthew Fox playing Jack Shephard , Evangeline Lilly as Kate Austen and Josh Holloway as Sawyer . Henry Ian Cusick was also promoted to a main character as Desmond Hume , along with new characters Nikki and Paulo , played by Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro respectively . Malcolm David Kelley ( Walt Lloyd ) , Harold Perrineau ( Michael Dawson ) , Michelle Rodriguez ( Ana Lucia Cortez ) , and Cynthia Watros ( Libby ) were no longer credited as main characters after each of their characters were written out at the end of the previous season . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Co @-@ creators and executive producers Damon Lindelof and J.J. Abrams wrote the premiere 's teleplay based upon a story by Lindelof . The episode was Abrams ' first Lost writing credit since the pilot . They laid out the third season with the idea of " us versus them " ; Carlton Cuse , a showrunner , explained , " And who is us ? And who is them ? I mean I think we all tend to objectify people who we don 't know much about and I think that 's the audience 's view of The Others right now -- they are bad , they are the malevolent force on the island . But over the course of the stories we 're going to be telling this season on the show we expect the audience 's view of The Others to change a lot . " 
 The opening sequence of the episode was meant to replicate the same idea of season 2 's premiere " Man of Science , Man of Faith " , where what seems to be a flashback is instead set on a new part of the island . Director Jack Bender questioned what Jack 's goal was when he pulled on the chain , but Lindelof told him not to worry , because " Fox will sell it , and he did " . Lindelof described when Jack attacks his father at the AA meeting as " pot @-@ committed ... it basically means you put so much money on the bluff , you can 't fold your cards " . The scene with Kate in a dress was inspired by Raiders of the Lost Ark , where Belloq gives a dress for Marion Ravenwood to wear , and was intended to make " tom @-@ boyish " Kate feel vulnerable . The title , inspired by Charles Dickens ' eponymous novel , refers to the reveal of another " city " on the island with the place where the Others live , in addition to the castaways ' beach camp . The episode has only three characters of the second season 's main cast , Jack , Kate and Sawyer . Lindelof later described this limited scope as " a mistake , when the audience is away from the show for that long , they want to see everybody " , causing the following season openers to have scenes with most of the main characters . 
 In the episode , Tom tells Kate that she is not his type . This comment resulted in online discussion in regard to Tom 's sexual orientation , and Lindelof and Cuse hinted that a Lost character would later be outed . Gainey joked , " if [ Kate 's ] not your type , you 're gay " , and began playing the character as such . After the broadcast of " Meet Kevin Johnson " , Lindelof and Cuse confirmed that the line from the third season premiere is an allusion to Tom 's sexuality , but felt that it needed to be explicitly confirmed in the show , although Lindelof noted that the confirmation scene in " Meet Kevin Johnson " " was not subtle , to say the least " . The beginning of the episode featured a scene where Juliet and Amelia discuss Ben 's feelings for Juliet , which was shot but deleted . This scene was later made into the twelfth " Lost : Missing Pieces " mobisode , " The Envelope " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The exterior of the Hydra was shot in an abandoned theme park , which art director Andrew Murdock thought it fit as a location for the " kind of blocky , 80 's @-@ style architecture " , where everything was " aged , industrial , and a little bit larger , and a little bit unusual " . The opening sequence features Petula Clark 's " Downtown " , a song that would later be used in another third season episode featuring Juliet . Another song heard in the premiere , " Moonlight Serenade by Glenn Miller , was first used in the season two episode " The Long Con " . Lindelof has stated the songs they choose for Lost were often inspired from his childhood , when his mother would vacuum to music on Sundays . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its original broadcast in the United States on ABC , the premiere was watched by an estimated 18 @.@ 82 million viewers , making it the most watched episode of the night and the fourth most watched of the week . " A Tale of Two Cities " had four million less viewers than the previous season premiere . In Canada , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 972 million viewers on CTV , easily winning its timeslot . In the United Kingdom , " A Tale of Two Cities " was broadcast on November 22 along with follow @-@ up " The Glass Ballerina " in Lost 's first broadcast after changing to Sky1 . With 1 @.@ 549 million viewers , it was most watched program of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels . 
 IGN 's Chris Carabott rated the premiere 9 / 10 , calling the " peek into the life of The Others ... exceptionally done " and the non @-@ appearance of the other survivors " a smart move " . Carabott also praised Jack 's flashbacks , writing " Previously , Jack has been written as the white knight and reluctant hero who everyone looked to in their time of need . The more chinks they show in Jack 's armor , the better - the more human he becomes . " He called " Juliet ... a promising new character who will hopefully add a new dimension to The Others this season " and concluded his review by calling the episode " a solid season opener " . Robert Bianco from USA Today praised the opening scene and called the episode " a fine start for a great series " but with reservations . Bianco wished Jack would " win one again for the team " , and was fearful that Lost could eventually become like Alias , " a series that became so entranced by its puzzle and its villains that it let the main characters vanish behind them " . 
 On a list of Lost episodes , the Los Angeles Times ranked " A Tale of Two Cities " number 66 out of 113 episodes , explaining it was " Not bad . The introduction of Juliet is a killer , and Jack raging against the Others is fun . But many of the big revelations -- Ben 's name , for example -- aren 't very well handled . " On a similar list , IGN ranked the episode at number 38 ; they called the opening " one of the show 's characteristic fake @-@ outs " , and Jack 's flashbacks " not nearly as interesting as his first encounters with Juliet " . 
 Matthew Fox submitted this episode for consideration for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Heffernan v. City of Paterson = 
 Heffernan v. City of Paterson , No. 14 @-@ 1280 , 578 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2016 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees . By a 6 – 2 margin , the Court held that a public employee 's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer disciplines them for the belief that the employee was engaging in protected speech , even if the employee never actually exercised their constitutional rights . 
 The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan , a detective with the Paterson , New Jersey , police force , went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city 's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election as a favor for his mother . While Heffernan himself did not actually support the candidate , after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers , including the police chief , who strongly supported the mayor . For his apparent support of the other candidate , they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer . 
 Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights . The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court . For most of that time it was in federal district court , where it was heard by three different judges . A jury verdict in Heffernan 's favor was set aside , and a later summary judgment in the city 's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial . 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department 's belief was all that mattered , since the Court 's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee ( who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline ) for engaging in partisan political activity , as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency 's operations . Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech , he wrote , the discipline against him sent a message to others not to exercise their rights . Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito , where he agreed that <unk> had been harmed , but his constitutional rights had not been violated . 
 = = Legal background = = 
 The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly , among others . While not explicitly mentioned , the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association , particularly political association . These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights , but also from taking actions which would violate them . While the Bill of Rights — which includes the First Amendment — originally only applied to the federal government , the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine . 
 In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction era , Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of president Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations infringing on the voting rights of black citizens . The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the " color of any statute , ordinance , regulation , custom , or usage , of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia " and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983 . With its decision in Monroe v. Pape ( 1961 ) , the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights . 
 The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern . In Pickering v. Board of Education ( 1968 ) the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech . There , the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue . Eight years later , this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns . 
 The Court however has recognized that the " government as employer " has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the " government as sovereign " . In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government @-@ as @-@ employer 's discretion , the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers ( 1983 ) known as the Connick test . It consists of two prongs . The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim : the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern . The second prong falls to the employer : they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech . 
 In Waters v. Churchill ( 1994 ) the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue . The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said . The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker . There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said . Justice O 'Connor , joined by a plurality of justices , opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur . 
 = = Facts of the case = = 
 = = = Original dispute = = = 
 In 2005 , Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson , New Jersey , police . His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city 's incumbent mayor , Jose Torres , who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year 's election . Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola , a former police chief , and informally supported his campaign , although he could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city . At the request of his sick mother , he went while off @-@ duty to pick up a lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen . Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to campaign staff . They soon notified superiors and the next day he was demoted from detective to patrol officer for his perceived " overt involvement " with the Spagnola campaign . 
 = = = District court = = = 
 Heffernan sued the city , the mayor , and his superior officers under 42 USC § 1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey , claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated . Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech , the department acted on the belief that he had , and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief . 
 In 2009 , a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city . Despite the verdict , Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim ; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim . While he was considering these motions , Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict , setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh . 
 Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions , holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated . In 2012 , the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh 's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary @-@ judgment motions . 
 Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand . After considering the parties ' motions for summary judgment again , he ruled in the city 's favor in 2014 . Heffernan , he ruled , had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct . Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims his perceived speech was protected , per Ambrose v. Robinson Township , a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit , or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech . Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association . He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission , a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association , was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent . 
 = = = Court of Appeals = = = 
 On appeal to the Third Circuit , a three @-@ judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen , Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city . In a decision issued in 2015 , Judge Vanaskie , writing for the Court , reiterated Judge McNulty 's finding that Heffernan 's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association . He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit 's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case , the employers had inferred the employees ' intent from their non @-@ participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken , as had occurred in Heffernan 's case . 
 Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court 's 1984 holding in Waters v. Churchill , where it had upheld an Illinois public hospital 's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments , since it found the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her . In that case , the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation . 
 = = = Supreme Court = = = 
 Following the Third Circuit 's decision , Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari , requesting they hear the case . After the Court considered both Heffernan 's petition and the city 's reply , it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term . Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case . The National Association of Government Employees , Becket Fund for Religious Liberty and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan , while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson . The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan , as well as a motion to appear at oral argument , which the Court granted , meaning the Solicitor General 's office would be appearing at oral arguments , held on January 19 , 2016 . 
 = = = = Oral arguments = = = = 
 Mark Frost , arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan , was immediately met with questions from the justices : Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected , and Antonin Scalia , Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech . Justice Scalia ( who died before the decision was announced ) argued that there was " no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason " . Frost responded that the motives of the government , rather than the actions of the individual , were important in this case . Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders , arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan , continued this argument stating that there is " a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs . " 
 Arguing for respondents , Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy . He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality , the conscious choice to not take a position , but does not protect political apathy , when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral . As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with the Spagnola , the respondents argued that Heffernan 's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality . Justice Elena Kagan questioned him as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying , " the idea has to do with why the government acted " to which Goldstein responded , " It 's called an individual right , not a government wrong . " Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein 's distinction between political neutrality and apathy arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 In a 6 – 2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer , the Court reversed the ruling of the lower Court and ruled that the employer 's motive is material to First Amendment challenges . Citing Waters v. Churchill , Justice Breyer wrote , 
 [ w ] e conclude that , as in Waters , the government 's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here . When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects , the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... — even if , as here , the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee 's behavior . 
 The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that while it is <unk> to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech , the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies . The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning : that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment , that their interpretation better served the First Amendment 's purpose of limiting political patronage , and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers . 
 Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment which focuses on the rights of the people , the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says , " Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech . " As the text of the amendment focuses on the government 's abilities to make laws , it is the government 's actions and motives , not the actual actions of citizens which are proscribed by the Amendment . While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress , the actions were still that of a government official which infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment . 
 The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity . Citing <unk> v. Finkel , the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful , and similarly extended that logic to this case : the potential chilling affect on constitutionally protected speech still exists regardless of the factual basis of the employer 's reasoning . Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal , both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment . 
 Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers . The Court rejected this argument , saying that an employee would still need to prove the <unk> acted out of an improper motive . Referring to Heffernan 's case and those like it , the Court said that " the employee will , if anything , find it more difficult to prove that motive , for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer 's intent " . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent , in which Justice Alito joined . Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld " because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated " . The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under : 42 U.S.C. § 1983 . The statute only provides a cause of action for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government . Because Heffernan maintained that he was not exercising his First Amendment rights , the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated , and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity . 
 The dissent argued that , for a section 1983 claim to be valid , " harm alone is not enough ; it has to be the right kind of harm " . Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause . This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped , but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights were violated . Similarly , it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well . For the dissent , even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered , the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised . 
 Further supporting their argument , the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey , Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law . Under criminal law , a factually impossible attempt , such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money , can still be tried as an attempt . No such doctrine exists in tort law . Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity , the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right and thus must fail because " there are no attempted torts . " 
 = = Commentary = = 
 The day after oral arguments , Gilad Edelman criticized the Court 's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights , saying , " the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare . " Edelman interpreted Heffernan 's actions as well within the existing First Amendment precedent . Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate , he was talking and associating with people , actions already protected under existing precedent . Edelman went further and suggested that regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign , he was still punished for associating . 
 Soon after the ruling was announced , the decision was largely praised . Jonathan Stahl , a writer at the Constitution Daily , said that " [ t ] he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable " . Similarly , The Economist called it " good law " and a " significant development " for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech , not just actual speech . 
 = Regulamentul Organic = 
 Regulamentul Organic ( Romanian name , translated as Organic Statute or Organic Regulation ; French : <unk> <unk> , Russian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) was a quasi @-@ constitutional organic law enforced in 1834 – 1835 by the Imperial Russian authorities in Moldavia and Wallachia ( the two Danubian Principalities that were to become the basis of the modern Romanian state ) . The document partially confirmed the traditional government ( including rule by the hospodars ) and set up a common Russian protectorate which lasted until 1854 . The Regulament itself remained in force until 1858 . Conservative in its scope , it also engendered a period of unprecedented reforms which provided a setting for the Westernization of the local society . The Regulament offered the two Principalities their first common system of government . 
 = = Background = = 
 The two principalities , owing tribute and progressively ceding political control to the Ottoman Empire since the Middle Ages , had been subject to frequent Russian interventions as early as the Russo @-@ Turkish War ( 1710 – 1711 ) , when a Russian army penetrated Moldavia and Emperor Peter the Great probably established links with the Wallachians . Eventually , the Ottomans enforced a tighter control on the region , effected under Phanariote hospodars ( who were appointed directly by the Porte ) . Ottoman rule over the region remained contested by competition from Russia , which , as an Eastern Orthodox empire with claim to a Byzantine heritage , exercised notable influence over locals . At the same time , the Porte made several concessions to the rulers and boyars of Moldavia and Wallachia , as a means to ensure the preservation of its rule . 
 The Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca , signed in 1774 between the Ottomans and Russians , gave Russia the right to intervene on behalf of Eastern Orthodox Ottoman subjects in general , a right which it used to sanction Ottoman interventions in the Principalities in particular . Thus , Russia intervened to preserve reigns of hospodars who had lost Ottoman approval in the context of the Napoleonic Wars ( the casus belli for the 1806 – 12 conflict ) , and remained present in the Danubian states , vying for influence with the Austrian Empire , well into the 19th century and annexing Moldavia 's Bessarabia in 1812 . 
 Despite the influx of Greeks , arriving in the Principalities as a new bureaucracy favored by the hospodars , the traditional Estates of the realm ( the Divan ) remained under the tight control of a number of high boyar families , who , while intermarrying with members of newly arrived communities , opposed reformist attempts – and successfully preserved their privileges by appealing against their competitors to both Istanbul and Saint Petersburg . 
 In the last decades of the 18th century , the growing strategic importance of the region brought about the establishment of consulates representing European powers directly interested in observing local developments ( Russia , the Austrian Empire , and France ; later , British and Prussian ones were opened as well ) . An additional way for consuls to exercise particular policies was the awarding of a privileged status and protection to various individuals , who were known as sudiți ( " subjects " , in the language of the time ) of one or the other of the foreign powers . 
 A seminal event occurred in 1821 , when the rise of Greek nationalism in various parts of the Balkans in connection with the Greek War of Independence led to occupation of the two states by the Filiki <unk> , a Greek secret society who sought , and initially obtained , Russian approval . A mere takeover of the government in Moldavia , the <unk> expedition met a more complex situation in Wallachia , where a regency of high boyars attempted to have the anti @-@ Ottoman Greek nationalists confirm both their rule and the rejection of Phanariote institutions . A compromise was achieved through their common support for Tudor Vladimirescu , an Oltenian <unk> leader who had already instigated an anti @-@ Phanariote rebellion ( as one of the Russian sudiți , it was hoped that Vladimirescu could assure Russia that the revolt was not aimed against its influence ) . However , the eventual withdrawal of Russian support made Vladimirescu seek a new agreement with the Ottomans , leaving him to be executed by an alliance of <unk> and weary locals ( alarmed by his new anti @-@ boyar program ) ; after the Ottomans invaded the region and crushed the <unk> , the boyars , still perceived as a third party , obtained from the Porte an end to the Phanariote system 
 = = Akkerman Convention and Treaty of Adrianople = = 
 The first reigns through locals – <unk> Sandu Sturdza as Prince of Moldavia and Grigore IV Ghica as Prince of Wallachia – were , in essence , short @-@ lived : although the patron @-@ client relation between Phanariote hospodars and a foreign ruler was never revived , Sturdza and Ghica were deposed by the Russian military intervention during the Russo @-@ Turkish War , 1828 – 1829 . Sturdza 's time on the throne was marked by an important internal development : the last in a series of constitutional proposals , advanced by boyars as a means to curb princely authority , ended in a clear conflict between the rapidly decaying class of low @-@ ranking boyars ( already forming the upper level of the middle class rather than a segment of the traditional nobility ) and the high @-@ ranking families who had obtained the decisive say in politics . The proponent , <unk> <unk> , was defeated in the Divan after the Russian consul sided with the conservatives ( expressing the official view that the aristocratic @-@ republican and liberal aims of the document could have threatened international conventions in place ) . 
 On October 7 , 1826 , the Ottoman Empire — anxious to prevent Russia 's intervention in the Greek Independence War — <unk> with it a new status for the region in Akkerman , one which conceded to several requests of the inhabitants : the resulting Akkerman Convention was the first official document to nullify the principle of Phanariote reigns , instituting seven @-@ year terms for new princes elected by the respective Divans , and awarding the two countries the right to engage in unrestricted international trade ( as opposed to the tradition of limitations and Ottoman protectionism , it only allowed Istanbul to impose its priorities in the grain trade ) . The convention also made the first mention of new Statutes , enforced by both powers as governing documents , which were not drafted until after the war – although both Sturdza and Ghica had appointed commissions charged with adopting such projects . 
 The Russian military presence on the Principalities ' soil was inaugurated in the first days of the war : by late April 1828 , the Russian army of Peter Wittgenstein had reached the Danube ( in May , it entered present @-@ day Bulgaria ) . The campaign , prolonged for the following year and coinciding with devastating bubonic plague and cholera epidemics ( which together killed around 1 @.@ 6 % of the population in both countries ) , soon became a drain on local economy : according to British observers , the Wallachian state was required to <unk> itself to European creditors for a total sum of ten million piastres , in order to provide for the Russian army 's needs . Accusations of widespread plunder were made by the French author Marc <unk> , who travelled in the region during the 1830s ; <unk> alleged that Russian troops had confiscated virtually all cattle for their needs , and that Russian officers had insulted the political class by publicly stating that , in case the supply in oxen was to prove insufficient , boyars were to be tied to carts in their place – an accusation backed by Ion Ghica in his recollections . He also recorded a mounting <unk> with the new rule , mentioning that peasants were especially upset by the continuous maneuvers of troops inside the Principalities ' borders . Overall , Russophilia in the two Principalities appears to have suffered a major blow . Despite the confiscations , statistics of the time indicated that the pace of growth in heads of cattle remained steady ( a 50 % growth appears to have occurred between 1831 and 1837 ) . 
 The Treaty of Adrianople , signed on September 14 , 1829 , confirmed both the Russian victory and the provisions of the Akkerman Convention , partly amended to reflect the Russian political ascendancy over the area . Furthermore , Wallachia 's southern border was settled on the Danube thalweg , and the state was given control over the previously Ottoman @-@ ruled ports of Brăila , Giurgiu , and Turnu Măgurele . The freedom of commerce ( which consisted mainly of grain exports from the region ) and freedom of navigation on the river and on the Black Sea were passed into law , allowing for the creation of naval fleets in both Principalities in the following years , as well as for a more direct contact with European traders , with the confirmation of the Moldavia and Wallachia 's commercial privileges first stipulated at Akkerman ( alongside the tight links soon established with Austrian and Sardinian traders , the first French ships visited Wallachia in 1830 ) . 
 Russian occupation over Moldavia and Wallachia ( as well as the Bulgarian town of Silistra ) was prolonged pending the payment of war reparations by the Ottomans . Emperor Nicholas I assigned Fyodor Pahlen as governor over the two countries before the actual peace , as the first in a succession of three Plenipotentiary Presidents of the Divans in Moldavia and Wallachia , and official supervisor of the two commissions charged with drafting the Statutes . The bodies , having for secretaries Gheorghe Asachi in Moldavia and Barbu Dimitrie Știrbei in Wallachia , had resumed their work while the cholera epidemic was still raging , and continued it after Pahlen had been replaced with Pyotr Zheltukhin in February 1829 . 
 = = Adoption and character = = 
 The post @-@ Adrianople state of affairs was perceived by many of the inhabitants of Wallachia and Moldavia as exceptionally abusive , given that Russia confiscated both of the Principalities ' treasuries , and that Zheltukhin used his position to interfere in the proceedings of the commission , nominated his own choice of members , and silenced all opposition by having anti @-@ Russian boyars expelled from the countries ( including , notably , Iancu Văcărescu , a member of the Wallachian Divan who had questioned his methods of government ) . According to the radical Ghica , " General Zheltukhin [ and his subordinates ] defended all Russian abuse and injustice . Their system consisted in never listening to complaints , but rather rushing in with accusations , so as to inspire fear , so as the plaintiff would run away for fear of not having to endure a harsher thing than the cause of his [ original ] complaint " . However , the same source also indicated that this behaviour was hiding a more complex situation : " Those who nevertheless knew Zheltukhin better … said that he was the fairest , most honest , and most kind of men , and that he gave his cruel orders with an aching heart . Many gave assurance that he had addressed to the emperor heart @-@ breaking reports on the deplorable state in which the Principalities were to be found , in which he stated that Russia 's actions in the Principalities deserved the scorn of the entire world " . 
 The third and last Russian governor , Pavel Kiselyov ( or <unk> ) , took office on October 19 , 1829 , and faced his first major task in dealing with the last outbreaks of plague and cholera , as well as the threat of famine , with which he dealt by imposing quarantines and importing grain from Odessa . His administration , lasting until April 1 , 1834 , was responsible for the most widespread and influential reforms of the period , and coincided with the actual enforcement of the new legislation . The earliest of Kiselyov 's celebrated actions was the convening of the Wallachian Divan in November 1829 , with the assurance that abuses were not to be condoned anymore . 
 Regulamentul Organic was adopted in its two very similar versions on July 13 , 1831 ( July 1 , OS ) in Wallachia and January 13 , 1832 ( January 1 , OS ) in Moldavia , after having minor changes applied to it in Saint Petersburg ( where a second commission from the Principalities , presided by Mihail Sturdza and Alexandru <unk> , assessed it further ) . Its ratification by Sultan Mahmud II was not a requirement from Kiselyov 's perspective , who began enforcing it as a fait accompli before this was granted . The final version of the document sanctioned the first local government abiding by the principles of separation and balance of powers . The hospodars , elected for life ( and not for the seven @-@ year term agreed in the Convention of Akkerman ) by an Extraordinary Assembly which comprised representatives of merchants and guilds , stood for the executive , with the right to nominate ministers ( whose offices were still referred to using the traditional titles of courtiers ) and public officials ; hospodars were to be voted in office by an electoral college with a confirmed majority of high @-@ ranking boyars ( in Wallachia , only 70 persons were members of the college ) . 
 Each National Assembly ( approximate translation of <unk> <unk> ) , inaugurated in 1831 – 2 , was a legislature itself under the control of high @-@ ranking boyars , comprising 35 ( in Moldavia ) or 42 members ( in Wallachia ) , voted into office by no more than 3 @,@ 000 electors in each state ; the judiciary was , for the very first time , removed from the control of hospodars . In effect , the Regulament confirmed earlier steps leading to the eventual separation of church and state , and , although Orthodox church authorities were confirmed a privileged position and a political say , the religious institution was closely supervised by the government ( with the establishment of a quasi @-@ salary expense ) . 
 A fiscal reform ensued , with the creation of a poll tax ( calculated per family ) , the elimination of most indirect taxes , annual state budgets ( approved by the Assemblies ) and the introduction of a civil list in place of the hospodars ' personal treasuries . New methods of bookkeeping were regulated , and the creation of national banks was projected , but , like the adoption of national fixed currencies , was never implemented . 
 According to the historian Nicolae Iorga , " The [ boyar ] oligarchy was appeased [ by the Regulament 's adoption ] : a beautifully harmonious modern form had veiled the old medieval structure … . The bourgeoisie … held no influence . As for the peasant , he lacked even the right to administer his own commune , he was not even allowed to vote for an Assembly deemed , as if in jest , « national » . " Nevertheless , conservative boyars remained suspicious of Russian tutelage , and several expressed their fear that the regime was a step leading to the creation of a regional <unk> for the Russian Empire . Their mistrust was , in time , reciprocated by Russia , who relied on hospodars and the direct intervention of its consuls to push further reforms . Kiselyov himself voiced a plan for the region 's annexation to Russia , but the request was dismissed by his superiors . 
 = = Economic trends = = 
 = = = Cities and towns = = = 
 Beginning with the reformist administration of Kiselyov , the two countries experienced a series of profound changes , political , social , as well as cultural . 
 Despite underrepresentation in politics , the middle class swelled in numbers , profiting from a growth in trade which had increased the status of merchants . Under continuous competition from the sudiți , traditional guilds ( <unk> or <unk> ) faded away , leading to a more competitive , purely capitalist environment . This nevertheless signified that , although the traditional Greek competition for Romanian merchants and artisans had become less relevant , locals continued to face one from Austrian subjects of various nationalities , as well as from a sizeable immigration of Jews from the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria and Russia – prevented from settling in the countryside , Jews usually became keepers of inns and taverns , and later both bankers and leaseholders of estates . In this context , an anti @-@ Catholic sentiment was growing , based , according to Keith Hitchins , on the assumption that Catholicism and Austrian influence were closely related , as well as on a widespread preference for secularism . 
 The Romanian middle class formed the basis for what was to become the liberal electorate , and accounted for the xenophobic discourse of the National Liberal Party during the latter 's first decade of existence ( between 1875 and World War I ) . 
 Urban development occurred at a very fast pace : overall , the urban population had doubled by 1850 . Bucharest , the capital of Wallachia , expanded from about 70 @,@ 000 in 1831 to about 120 @,@ 000 in 1859 ; Iași , the capital of Moldavia , followed at around half that number . Brăila and Giurgiu , Danube ports returned to Wallachia by the Ottomans , as well as Moldavia 's <unk> , grew from the grain trade to become prosperous cities . Kiselyov , who had centered his administration on Bucharest , paid full attention to its development , improving its infrastructure and services and awarding it , together with all other cities and towns , a local administration ( see History of Bucharest ) . Public works were carried out in the urban sphere , as well as in the massive expansion of the transport and communications system . 
 = = = Countryside = = = 
 The success of the grain trade was secured by a conservative take on property , which restricted the right of peasants to exploit for their own gain those plots of land they leased on boyar estates ( the Regulament allowed them to consume around 70 % of the total harvest per plot leased , while boyars were allowed to use a third of their estate as they pleased , without any legal duty toward the neighbouring peasant workforce ) ; at the same time , small properties , created after Constantine Mavrocordatos had abolished serfdom in the 1740s , proved less lucrative in the face of competition by large estates – boyars profited from the consequences , as more landowning peasants had to resort to leasing plots while still owing corvées to their lords . Confirmed by the Regulament at up to 12 days a year , the corvée was still less significant than in other parts of Europe ; however , since peasants relied on cattle for alternative food supplies and financial resources , and pastures remained the exclusive property of boyars , they had to exchange right of use for more days of work in the respective boyar 's benefit ( as much as to equate the corresponding corvée requirements in Central European countries , without ever being enforced by laws ) . Several laws of the period display a particular concern in limiting the right of peasants to evade corvées by paying their equivalent in currency , thus granting the boyars a workforce to match a steady growth in grain demands on foreign markets . 
 In respect to pasture access , the Regulament divided peasants into three wealth @-@ based categories : <unk> ( " foremost people " ) , who , by definition , owned 4 working animals and one or more cows ( allowed to use around 4 hectares of pasture ) ; <unk> ( " middle people " ) – two working animals and one cow ( around 2 hectares ) ; <unk> ( " backward people " ) – people who owned no property , and not allowed the use of pastures . 
 At the same time , the major demographic changes took their toll on the countryside . For the very first time , food supplies were no longer abundant in front of a population growth ensured by , among other causes , the effective measures taken against epidemics ; rural – urban migration became a noticeable phenomenon , as did the relative increase in urbanization of traditional rural areas , with an explosion of settlements around established fairs . 
 These processes also ensured that industrialization was minimal ( although factories had first been opened during the Phanariotes ) : most revenues came from a highly productive agriculture based on peasant labour , and were invested back into agricultural production . In parallel , hostility between agricultural workers and landowners mounted : after an increase in lawsuits involving leaseholders and the decrease in quality of corvée outputs , resistance , hardened by the examples of Tudor Vladimirescu and various <unk> , turned to sabotage and occasional violence . A more serious incident occurred in 1831 , when around 60 @,@ 000 peasants protested against projected conscription criteria ; Russian troops dispatched to quell the revolt killed around 300 people . 
 = = Political and cultural setting = = 
 The most noted cultural development under the Regulament was Romanian Romantic nationalism , in close connection with Francophilia . Institutional modernization <unk> a renaissance of the intelligentsia . In turn , the concept of " nation " was first expanded beyond its coverage of the boyar category , and more members of the privileged displayed a concern in solving problems facing the peasantry : although rarer among the high @-@ ranking boyars , the interest was shared by most progressive political figures by the 1840s . 
 Nationalist themes now included a preoccupation for the Latin origin of Romanians and the common ( but since discarded ) reference to the entire region as Dacia ( first notable in the title of Mihail Kogălniceanu 's Dacia Literară , a short @-@ lived Romantic literary magazine published in 1840 ) . As a trans @-@ border notion , Dacia also indicated a growth in Pan @-@ Romanian sentiment – the latter had first been present in several boyar requests of the late 18th century , which had called for the union of the two Danubian Principalities under the protection of European powers ( and , in some cases , under the rule of a foreign prince ) . To these was added the circulation of fake documents which were supposed to reflect the text of Capitulations awarded by the Ottoman Empire to its Wallachian and Moldavian vassals in the Middle Ages , claiming to stand out as proof of rights and privileges which had been long neglected ( see also Islam in Romania ) . 
 Education , still accessible only to the wealthy , was first removed from the domination of the Greek language and Hellenism upon the disestablishment of Phanariotes sometime after 1821 ; the attempts of Gheorghe Lazăr ( at the Saint Sava College ) and Gheorghe Asachi to engender a transition towards Romanian @-@ language teaching had been only moderately successful , but Wallachia became the scene of such a movement after the start of Ion Heliade Rădulescu 's teaching career and the first issue of his newspaper , Curierul Românesc . Moldavia soon followed , after Asachi began printing his highly influential magazine Albina Românească . The Regulament brought about the creation of new schools , which were dominated by the figures of Transylvanian Romanians who had taken exile after expressing their <unk> with Austrian rule in their homeland – these teachers , who usually rejected the adoption of French cultural models in the otherwise conservative society ( viewing the process as an unnatural one ) , counted among them Ioan Maiorescu and August Treboniu Laurian . Another impetus for nationalism was the Russian @-@ supervised creation of small standing armies ( occasionally referred to as " militias " ; see Moldavian military forces and Wallachian military forces ) . The Wallachian one first maneuvered in the autumn of 1831 , and was supervised by Kiselyov himself . According to Ion Ghica , the prestige of military careers had a relevant tradition : " Only the arrival of the Muscovites [ sic ] in 1828 ended [ the ] young boyars ' sons flighty way of life , as it made use of them as commissioners ( <unk> ) in the service of Russian generals , in order to assist in providing the troops with [ supplies ] . In 1831 most of them took to the sword , signing up for the national militia . " 
 The Westernization of Romanian society took place at a rapid pace , and created a noticeable , albeit not omnipresent , generation gap . The paramount cultural model was the French one , following a pattern already established by contacts between the region and the French Consulate and First Empire ( attested , among others , by the existence of a Wallachian plan to petition Napoleon Bonaparte , whom locals believed to be a descendant of the Byzantine Emperors , with a complaint against the Phanariotes , as well as by an actual anonymous petition sent in 1807 from Moldavia ) . This trend was consolidated by the French cultural model partly adopted by the Russians , a growing mutual sympathy between the Principalities and France , increasingly obvious under the French July Monarchy , and , as early as the 1820s , the enrolment of young boyars in Parisian educational institutions ( coupled with the 1830 opening of a French @-@ language school in Bucharest , headed by Jean Alexandre Vaillant ) . The young generation eventually attempted to curb French borrowings , which it had come to see as endangering its nationalist aspirations . 
 = = Statutory rules and nationalist opposition = = 
 In 1834 , despite the founding documents ' requirements , Russia and the Ottoman Empire agreed to appoint the first two hospodars ( instead of providing for their election ) , as a means to ensure both the monarchs ' support for a moderate pace in reforms and their allegiance in front of conservative boyar opposition . The choices were Alexandru II Ghica ( the stepbrother of the previous monarch , Grigore IV ) as Prince of Wallachia and Mihail Sturdza ( a distant cousin of <unk> Sandu ) as Prince of Moldavia . The two rules ( generally referred to as <unk> <unk> – " statutory " or " regulated reigns " ) , closely observed by the Russian consuls and various Russian technical advisors , soon met a vocal and unified opposition in the Assemblies and elsewhere . 
 Immediately after the confirmation of the Regulament , Russia had begun demanding that the two local Assemblies each vote an Additional Article ( <unk> <unk> ) – one preventing any modification of the texts without the common approval of the courts in Istanbul and Saint Petersburg . In Wallachia , the issue turned into scandal after the pressure for adoption mounted in 1834 , and led to a four @-@ year @-@ long standstill , during which a nationalist group in the legislative body began working on its own project for a constitution , proclaiming the Russian protectorate and Ottoman suzerainty to be over , and self @-@ determination with guarantees from all European Powers of the time . The radical leader of the movement , Ion Câmpineanu , maintained close contacts with Polish nobleman Adam Jerzy Czartoryski 's Union of National Unity ( as well as with other European nationalists Romantics ) ; after the Additional Article passed due to Ghica 's interference and despite boyar protests , Câmpineanu was forced to abandon his seat and take refuge in Central Europe ( until being arrested and sent back by the Austrians to be imprisoned in Bucharest ) . From that point on , opposition to Ghica 's rule took the form of Freemason and <unk> @-@ inspired conspiracies , formed around young politicians such as Mitică Filipescu , Nicolae Bălcescu , <unk> <unk> , Ion Ghica , Christian Tell , Dimitrie Macedonski , and Cezar Bolliac ( all of whom held Câmpineanu 's ideology in esteem ) — in 1840 , Filipescu and most of his group ( who had tried in vain to profit from the Ottoman crisis engendered by Muhammad Ali 's rebellion ) were placed under arrest and imprisoned in various locations . 
 Noted abuses against the rule of law and the consequent threat of rebellion made the Ottoman Empire and Russia withdraw their support for Ghica in 1842 , and his successor , Gheorghe Bibescu , reigned as the first and only prince to have been elected by any one of the two Assemblies . In Moldavia , the situation was less tense , as Sturdza was able to calm down and manipulate opposition to Russian rule while introducing further reforms . 
 In 1848 , upon the outbreak of the European revolutions , liberalism consolidated itself into more overt opposition , helped along by contacts between Romanian students with the French movement . Nevertheless , the Moldavian revolution of late March 1848 was an abortive one , and led to the return of Russian troops on its soil . Wallachia 's revolt was successful : after the Proclamation of Islaz on June 21 sketched a new legal framework and land reform with an end to all corvées ( a program acclaimed by the crowds ) , the conspirators managed to topple Bibescu , who had by then dissolved the Assembly , without notable violence , and established a <unk> Government in Bucharest . 
 The new executive , orchestrating the public burning of the Regulament in September , attempted to play Ottoman interests against Russian ones , trying to obtain backing from the Porte ; the relative initial success was rendered void after Russian diplomats pressured Sultan Abd @-@ ul @-@ <unk> I to intervene in their place ( and thus not risk losing yet more control over the region to a more determined Russian expedition ) . A Russian occupation over Wallachia soon joined the Ottoman one ( begun on September 18 ) , and both lasted until April 1851 ; in 1849 , the two powers signed the Treaty of Balta Liman , which asserted the right of the Porte to nominate hospodars for seven @-@ year terms . 
 = = Crimean War = = 
 The Crimean War again brought the two countries under Russian military administration , inaugurated in 1853 . The hospodars of the period , Prince Grigore Alexandru Ghica in Moldavia and Prince Barbu Dimitrie Știrbei in Wallachia , were removed from their thrones , and the region was governed by the Russian general Aleksandr Ivanovich <unk> . 
 As the Balkans remained a secondary theatre of war , the two Principalities were taken over by a neutral Austrian administration in September 1854 – part of a settlement between the Porte and Russia ( the Austrians remained until 1857 ) . Grigore Ghica and Știrbei were returned to the thrones in the same year , and completed the last series of reforms carried under the terms of the Regulament . The most far @-@ reaching among these were the ones concerning Roma slavery . In Moldavia , Romas were liberated , without a period of transition , on December 22 , 1855 ; the change was more gradual in Wallachia , where measures to curb trade had been taken earlier , and where the decision to ban the ownership of slaves was taken by Știrbei on February 20 , 1856 . Concerned by worsening boyar @-@ peasant relations , Știrbei , who governed without an Assembly ( and had instead appointed his own Divan ) , enacted measures to improve the situation in the countryside , and ultimately enforced contract @-@ based work as the rule on estates ( whereby peasants who were not indebted after five years in service could leave the land they were working on ) . 
 This was the moment when the call for union of the two Principalities began to be voiced with confidence , and the two monarchs showed more or less approval for the designs of the unionist Partida Națională ( created by 1848 revolutionaries who had returned from exile ) . 
 The war ended with the Treaty of Paris ( March 30 , 1856 ) , which placed the countries , still as Ottoman vassals , under the protectorate of all European Powers ( the United Kingdom , the French Empire , the Kingdom of Piedmont @-@ Sardinia , Prussia , Austria , and , never again completely , Russia ) . The protector states had to decide on a compromise formula for the projected union ; the Ottomans demanded and obtained , in contradiction with the Regulament , the removal of both hospodars from their thrones , pending elections for the ad hoc Divans . The outcome remained disputed until the election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza , who reigned as first Domnitor of the United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia , the basis of modern Romania . 
 = Western Chalukya Empire = 
 The Western Chalukya Empire ruled most of the western Deccan , South India , between the 10th and 12th centuries . This Kannadiga dynasty is sometimes called the Kalyani Chalukya after its regal capital at Kalyani , today 's Basavakalyan in Karnataka and alternatively the Later Chalukya from its theoretical relationship to the 6th @-@ century Chalukya dynasty of Badami . The dynasty is called Western Chalukyas to differentiate from the contemporaneous Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi , a separate dynasty . Prior to the rise of these Chalukyas , the Rashtrakuta empire of Manyakheta controlled most of Deccan and Central India for over two centuries . In 973 , seeing confusion in the Rashtrakuta empire after a successful invasion of their capital by the ruler of the Paramara dynasty of Malwa , Tailapa II , a feudatory of the Rashtrakuta Dynasty ruling from Bijapur region defeated his overlords and made Manyakheta his capital . The dynasty quickly rose to power and grew into an empire under Someshvara I who moved the capital to Kalyani . 
 For over a century , the two empires of Southern India , the Western Chalukyas and the Chola dynasty of Tanjore fought many fierce wars to control the fertile region of Vengi . During these conflicts , the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi , distant cousins of the Western Chalukyas but related to the Cholas by marriage took sides with the Cholas further complicating the situation . During the rule of Vikramaditya VI , in the late 11th and early 12th centuries , the Western Chalukyas convincingly contended with the Cholas and reached a peak ruling territories that spread over most of the Deccan , between the Narmada River in the north and Kaveri River in the south . His exploits were not limited to the south for even as a prince , during the rule of Someshvara I , he had led successful military campaigns as far east as modern Bihar and Bengal . During this period the other major ruling families of the Deccan , the Hoysalas , the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri , the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuri , were subordinates of the Western Chalukyas and gained their independence only when the power of the Chalukya waned during the later half of the 12th century . 
 The Western Chalukyas developed an architectural style known today as a transitional style , an architectural link between the style of the early Chalukya dynasty and that of the later Hoysala empire . Most of its monuments are in the districts bordering the Tungabhadra River in central Karnataka . Well known examples are the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi , the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti , the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali and the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi . This was an important period in the development of fine arts in Southern India , especially in literature as the Western Chalukya kings encouraged writers in the native language Kannada , and Sanskrit . 
 = = History = = 
 Knowledge of Western Chalukya history has come through examination of the numerous Kannada language inscriptions left by the kings ( scholars Sheldon Pollock and Jan Houben have claimed 90 percent of the Chalukyan royal inscriptions are in Kannada ) , and from the study of important contemporary literary documents in Western Chalukya literature such as Gada Yuddha ( 982 ) in Kannada by Ranna and Vikramankadeva Charitam ( 1120 ) in Sanskrit by Bilhana . The earliest record is dated 957 , during the rule of Tailapa II when the Western Chalukyas were still a feudatory of the Rashtrakutas and Tailapa II governed from Tardavadi in present @-@ day Bijapur district , Karnataka . The genealogy of the kings of this empire is still debated . One theory , based on contemporary literary and inscriptional evidence plus the finding that the Western Chalukyas employed titles and names commonly used by the early Chalukyas , suggests that the Western Chalukya kings belonged to the same family line as the illustrious Badami Chalukya dynasty of 6th @-@ century , while other Western Chalukya inscriptional evidence indicates they were a distinct line unrelated to the early Chalukyas . 
 The records suggests a possible rebellion by a local Chalukya King , <unk> of Banavasi @-@ 12000 province ( c . 967 ) , in alliance with local Kadamba chieftains . This rebellion however was unfruitful but paved the way for his successor Tailapa II . A few years later , Tailapa II re @-@ established Chalukya rule and defeated the Rashtrakutas during the reign of Karka II by timing his rebellion to coincide with the confusion caused in the Rashtrakuta capital of Manyakheta by the invading <unk> of Central India in 973 . After overpowering the Rashtrakutas , Tailapa II moved his capital to Manyakheta and consolidated the Chalukya empire in the western Deccan by subjugating the Paramara and other aggressive rivals and extending his control over the land between the Narmada River and Tungabhadra River . However , some inscriptions indicate that <unk> in Mysore territory may have been a power centre up to the rule of Someshvara I in 1042 . 
 The intense competition between the kingdom of the western Deccan and those of the Tamil country came to the fore in the 11th century over the acutely contested fertile river valleys in the doab region of the Krishna and Godavari River called Vengi ( modern coastal Andhra Pradesh ) . The Western Chalukyas and the Chola Dynasty fought many bitter wars over control of this strategic resource . The imperial Cholas gained power during the time of the famous king Rajaraja Chola I and the crown prince Rajendra Chola I. The Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi were cousins of the Western Chalukyas but became increasingly influenced by the Cholas through their marital ties with the Tamil kingdom . As this was against the interests of the Western Chalukyas , they wasted no time in involving themselves politically and militarily in Vengi . When King Satyashraya succeeded Tailapa II to the throne , he was able to protect his kingdom from Chola aggression as well as his northern territories in Konkan and Gujarat although his control over Vengi was shaky . His successor , Jayasimha II , fought many battles with the Cholas in the south around c . 1020 – 21 when both these powerful kingdoms struggled to choose the Vengi king . Shortly thereafter in c . 1024 , Jayasimha II subdued the Paramara of central India and the rebellious Yadava King Bhillama . 
 It is known from records that Jayasimha 's son Someshvara I , whose rule historian Sen considers a brilliant period in the Western Chalukya rule , moved the Chalukya capital to Kalyani in c . 1042 . Hostilities with the Cholas continued while both sides won and lost battles , though neither lost significant territory during the ongoing struggle to install a puppet on the Vengi throne . In 1068 Someshvara I , suffering from an incurable illness , drowned himself in the Tungabhadra River ( <unk> ) . Despite many conflicts with the Cholas in the south , Someshvara I had managed to maintain control over the northern territories in Konkan , Gujarat , Malwa and Kalinga during his rule . His successor , his eldest son Someshvara II , feuded with his younger brother , Vikramaditya VI , an ambitious warrior who had initially been governor of Gangavadi in the southern Deccan when Someshvara II was the king . Before 1068 , even as a prince , Vikramaditya VI had invaded Bengal , weakening the ruling Pala Empire . These incursions led to the establishment of Karnata dynasties such as the Sena dynasty and Varman dynasty in Bengal , and the <unk> dynasty in Bihar . , Married to a Chola princess ( a daughter of Vira Rajendra Chola ) , Vikramaditya VI maintained a friendly alliance with them . After the death of the Chola king in 1070 , Vikramaditya VI invaded the Tamil kingdom and installed his brother @-@ in @-@ law , <unk> , on the throne creating conflict with Kulothunga Chola I , the powerful ruler of Vengi who sought the Chola throne for himself . At the same time Vikramaditya VI undermined his brother , Someshvara II , by winning the loyalty of the Chalukya feudatories : the Hoysala , the Seuna and the Kadambas of Hangal . Anticipating a civil war , Someshvara II sought help from Vikramaditya VI 's enemies , Kulothunga Chola I and the Kadambas of Goa . In the ensuing conflict of 1076 , Vikramaditya VI emerged victorious and proclaimed himself king of the Chalukya empire . 
 The fifty @-@ year reign of Vikramaditya VI , the most successful of the later Chalukya rulers , was an important period in Karnataka 's history and is referred to by historians as the " Chalukya Vikrama era " . Not only was he successful in controlling his powerful feudatories in the north ( Kadamba <unk> II of Goa , Silhara Bhoja and the Yadava King ) and south ( Hoysala Vishnuvardhana ) , he successfully dealt with the imperial Cholas whom he defeated in the battle of Vengi in 1093 and again in 1118 . He retained this territory for many years despite ongoing hostilities with the Cholas . This victory in Vengi reduced the Chola influence in the eastern Deccan and made him emperor of territories stretching from the Kaveri River in the south to the Narmada River in the north , earning him the titles <unk> and <unk> ( lord of three worlds ) . The scholars of his time paid him glowing tributes for his military leadership , interest in fine arts and religious tolerance . Literature proliferated and scholars in Kannada and Sanskrit adorned his court . Poet Bilhana , who immigrated from far away Kashmir , eulogised the king in his well known work Vikramankadeva Charita . Vikramaditya VI was not only an able warrior but also a devout king as indicated by his numerous inscriptions that record grants made to scholars and centers of religion . 
 The continual warring with the Cholas exhausted both empires , giving their subordinates the opportunity to rebel . In the decades after Vikramaditya VI 's death in 1126 , the empire steadily decreased in size as their powerful feudatories expanded in autonomy and territorial command . The time period between 1150 and 1200 saw many hard fought battles between the Chalukyas and their feudatories who were also at war with each other . By the time of Jagadhekamalla II , the Chalukyas had lost control of Vengi and his successor , Tailapa III , was defeated by the Kakatiya king <unk> in 1149 . Tailapa III was taken captive and later released bringing down the prestige of the Western Chalukyas . Seeing decadence and uncertainty seeping into Chalukya rule , the Hoysalas and Seunas also encroached upon the empire . Hoysala Narasimha I defeated and killed Tailapa III but was unable to overcome the Kalachuris who were vying for control of the same region . In 1157 the Kalachuris under Bijjala II captured Kalyani and occupied it for the next twenty years , forcing the Chalukyas to move their capital to Annigeri in the present day Dharwad district . 
 The Kalachuris were originally immigrants into the southern Deccan from central India and called themselves <unk> . Bijjala II and his ancestors had governed as Chalukya commanders ( <unk> ) over the <unk> @-@ 4000 and Tardavadi @-@ 1000 provinces ( overlapping region in present @-@ day Karnataka and Maharashtra ) with <unk> or Annigeri as their capital . Bijjala II 's <unk> record of 1157 calls him <unk> Chakravarti ( " emperor with powerful shoulders and arms " ) indicating he no longer was a subordinate of the Chalukyas . However the successors of Bijjala II were unable to hold on to Kalyani and their rule ended in 1183 when the last Chalukya scion , Someshvara IV made a final bid to regain the empire by recapturing Kalyani . Kalachuri King <unk> was killed by Chalukya general Narasimha in this conflict . During this time , Hoysala Veera Ballala II was growing ambitious and clashed on several occasions with the Chalukyas and the other claimants over their empire . He defeated Chalukya Someshvara IV and Seuna Bhillama V bringing large regions in the Krishna River valley under the Hoysala domains , but was unsuccessful against Kalachuris . The Seunas under Bhillama V were on an imperialistic expansion too when the Chalukyas regained Kalyani . Their ambitions were temporarily stemmed by their defeat against Chalukya general <unk> in 1183 but they later had their vengeance in 1189 . 
 The overall effort by Someshvara IV to rebuild the Chalukya empire failed and the dynasty was ended by the Seuna rulers who drove Someshvara IV into exile in Banavasi 1189 . After the fall of the Chalukyas , the Seunas and Hoysalas continued warring over the Krishna River region in 1191 , each inflicting a defeat on the other at various points in time . This period saw the fall of two great empires , the Chalukyas of the western Deccan and the Cholas of Tamilakam . On the ruins of these two empires were built the Kingdoms of their feudatories whose mutual antagonisms filled the annals of Deccan history for over a hundred years , the Pandyas taking control over some regions of the erstwhile Chola empire . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The Western Chalukya kingship was hereditary , passing to the king 's brother if the king did not have a male heir . The administration was highly decentralised and feudatory clans such as the Alupas , the Hoysalas , the Kakatiya , the Seuna , the southern Kalachuri and others were allowed to rule their autonomous provinces , paying an annual tribute to the Chalukya emperor . Excavated inscriptions record titles such as Mahapradhana ( Chief minister ) , <unk> , and <unk> ( chief justice ) . Some positions such as <unk> ( commander of reserve army ) were specialised in function while all ministerial positions included the role of Dandanayaka ( commander ) , showing that cabinet members were trained as army commanders as well as in general administrative skills . 
 The kingdom was divided into provinces such as Banavasi @-@ 12000 , <unk> @-@ 32000 , Gangavadi @-@ <unk> , each name including the number of villages under its jurisdiction . The large provinces were divided into smaller provinces containing a lesser number of villages , as in <unk> @-@ 300 . The big provinces were called Mandala and under them were Nadu further divided into <unk> ( groups of villages ) and finally a Bada ( village ) . A Mandala was under a member of the royal family , a trusted feudatory or a senior official . Tailapa II himself was in charge of Tardavadi province during the Rashtrakuta rule . Chiefs of <unk> were transferable based on political developments . For example , an official named <unk> administered Banavasi @-@ 12000 under King Someshvara III but was later transferred to <unk> @-@ 12000 . Women from the royal family also administered <unk> and <unk> . Army commanders were titled <unk> and those who headed a Nadu were entitled <unk> . 
 The Western Chalukyas minted punch @-@ marked gold pagodas with Kannada and Nagari legends which were large , thin gold coins with several varying punch marks on the obverse side . They usually carried multiple punches of symbols such as a stylised lion , Sri in Kannada , a spearhead , the king 's title , a lotus and others . Jayasimha II used the legend Sri Jaya , Someshvara I issued coins with Sri Tre lo ka malla , Someshvara II used <unk> malla , <unk> 's coin carried Sri Lasha , and Jagadhekamalla II coinage had the legend Sri <unk> . The Alupas , a feudatory , minted coins with the Kannada and Nagari legend Sri Pandya <unk> . Lakkundi in Gadag district and Sudi in Dharwad district were the main mints ( <unk> ) . Their heaviest gold coin was Gadyanaka weighting 96 grains , <unk> weighted 65 grains , <unk> 48 grains , Kasu 15 grains , <unk> 2 @.@ 5 grains , <unk> 1 @.@ 25 grains and Pana 9 @.@ 6 grain . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Agriculture was the empire 's main source of income through taxes on land and produce . The majority of the people lived in villages and worked farming the staple crops of rice , pulses , and cotton in the dry areas and sugarcane in areas having sufficient rainfall , with areca and betel being the chief cash crops . The living conditions of the labourers who farmed the land must have been bearable as there are no records of revolts by the landless against wealthy landlords . If peasants were disgruntled the common practice was to migrate in large numbers out of the jurisdiction of the ruler who was mistreating them , thereby depriving him of revenue from their labor . 
 Taxes were levied on mining and forest products , and additional income was raised through tolls for the use of transportation facilities . The state also collected fees from customs , professional licenses , and judicial fines . Records show horses and salt were taxed as well as commodities ( gold , textiles , perfumes ) and agricultural produce ( black pepper , paddy , spices , betel leaves , palm leaves , coconuts and sugar ) . Land tax assessment was based on frequent surveys evaluating the quality of land and the type of produce . Chalukya records specifically mention black soil and red soil lands in addition to wetland , dry land and wasteland in determining taxation rates . 
 Key figures mentioned in inscriptions from rural areas were the Gavundas ( officials ) or <unk> . The Gavundas belonged to two levels of economic strata , the <unk> Gavunda ( people 's Gavunda ) and the Prabhu Gavunda ( lord of Gavundas ) . They served the dual purpose of representing the people before the rulers as well as functioning as state appointees for tax collection and the raising of militias . They are mentioned in inscriptions related to land transactions , irrigation maintenance , village tax collection and village council duties . 
 The organisation of corporate enterprises became common in the 11th century . Almost all arts and crafts were organised into guilds and work was done on a corporate basis ; records do not mention individual artists , sculptors and craftsman . Only in the regions ruled by the Hoysala did individual sculptors etched their names below their creations . Merchants organised themselves into powerful guilds that transcended political divisions , allowing their operations to be largely unaffected by wars and revolutions . Their only threat was the possibility of theft from brigands when their ships and caravans traveled to distant lands . Powerful South Indian merchant guilds included the <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> . Local guilds were called <unk> , while the <unk> were traders from neighbouring kingdoms who perhaps mixed business with pleasure . The wealthiest and most influential and celebrated of all South Indian merchant guilds was the self @-@ styled <unk> , also known as the 500 <unk> of <unk> ( Brahmins and <unk> of present @-@ day Aihole ) , who conducted extensive land and sea trade and thereby contributed significantly to the total foreign trade of the empire . It fiercely protected its trade obligations ( Vira <unk> or law of the noble merchants ) and its members often recorded their achievements in inscriptions ( <unk> ) . Five hundred such excavated <unk> inscriptions , with their own flag and emblem , the bull , record their pride in their business . 
 Rich traders contributed significantly to the king 's treasury through paying import and export taxes . The edicts of the Aihole <unk> mention trade ties with foreign kingdoms such as Chera , Pandya , <unk> ( Malaysia ) , <unk> , Kaushal , Saurashtra , <unk> , <unk> ( Cambodia ) , Lata ( Gujarat ) , <unk> ( Persia ) and Nepal . Travelling both land and sea routes , these merchants traded mostly in precious stones , spices and perfumes , and other specialty items such as camphor . Business flourished in precious stones such as diamonds , lapis lazuli , onyx , topaz , <unk> and emeralds . Commonly traded spices were cardamom , saffron , and cloves , while perfumes included the by @-@ products of sandalwood , <unk> , musk , civet and rose . These items were sold either in bulk or hawked on streets by local merchants in towns . The Western Chalukyas controlled most of South India 's west coast and by the 10th century they had established extensive trade ties with the Tang Empire of China , the empires of Southeast Asia and the Abbasid Caliphate in <unk> , and by the 12th century Chinese fleets were frequenting Indian ports . Exports to Song Dynasty China included textiles , spices , medicinal plants , jewels , ivory , rhino horn , ebony and camphor . The same products also reached ports in the west such as Dhofar and Aden . The final destinations for those trading with the west were Persia , Arabia and Egypt . The thriving trade center of Siraf , a port on the eastern coast of the Persian Gulf , served an international clientele of merchants including those from the Chalukya empire who were feasted by wealthy local merchants during business visits . An indicator of the Indian merchants ' importance in Siraf comes from records describing dining plates reserved for them . In addition to this , Siraf received aloe wood , perfumes , sandalwood and condiments . The most expensive import to South India were Arabian horse shipments , this trade being monopolised by Arabs and local Brahmin merchants . Traveller Marco Polo , in the 13th century , recorded that the breeding of horses never succeeded in India due to differing climatic , soil and grassland conditions . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The fall of the Rashtrakuta empire to the Western Chalukyas in the 10th century , coinciding with the defeat of the Western Ganga Dynasty by the Cholas in Gangavadi , was a setback to Jainism . The growth of Virashaivism in the Chalukya territory and Vaishnava Hinduism in the Hoysala region paralleled a general decreased interest in Jainism , although the succeeding kingdoms continued to be religiously tolerant . Two locations of Jain worship in the Hoysala territory continued to be <unk> , Shravanabelagola and Kambadahalli . The decline of Buddhism in South India had begun in the 8th century with the spread of Adi Shankara 's Advaita philosophy . The only places of Buddhist worship that remained during the Western Chalukya rule were at Dambal and Balligavi . There is no mention of religious conflict in the writings and inscriptions of the time which suggest the religious transition was smooth . 
 Although the origin of the Virashaiva faith has been debated , the movement grew through its association with Basavanna in the 12th century . Basavanna and other Virashaiva saints preached of a faith without a caste system . In his Vachanas ( a form of poetry ) , Basavanna appealed to the masses in simple Kannada and wrote " work is worship " ( <unk> Kailasa ) . Also known as the Lingayats ( worshipers of the Linga , the universal symbol of Shiva ) , these Virashaivas questioned many of the established norms of society such as the belief in rituals and the theory of rebirth and supported the remarriage of widows and the marriage of unwed older women . This gave more social freedom to women but they were not accepted into the priesthood . Ramanujacharya , the head of the Vaishnava monastery in Srirangam , traveled to the Hoysala territory and preached the way of devotion ( bhakti marga ) . He later wrote <unk> , a commentary on <unk> Brahmasutra , a critique on the Advaita philosophy of Adi Shankara . Ramanujacharya 's stay in Melkote resulted in the Hoysala King Vishnuvardhana converting to Vaishnavism , a faith that his successors also followed . 
 The impact of these religious developments on the culture , literature , and architecture in South India was profound . Important works of metaphysics and poetry based on the teachings of these philosophers were written over the next centuries . Akka Mahadevi , Allama Prabhu , and a host of Basavanna 's followers , including Chenna Basava , <unk> , Siddharama , and <unk> <unk> wrote hundreds of poems called Vachanas in praise of Lord Shiva . The esteemed scholars in the Hoysala court , Harihara and Raghavanka , were Virashaivas . This tradition continued into the Vijayanagar empire with such well @-@ known scholars as Singiraja , <unk> , <unk> Dandesa and other prolific writers of Virashaiva literature . The Saluva , Tuluva and Aravidu dynasties of the Vijayanagar empire were followers of Vaishnavism and a Vaishnava temple with an image of Ramanujacharya exists today in the <unk> area of Vijayanagara . Scholars in the succeeding Mysore Kingdom wrote Vaishnavite works supporting the teachings of Ramanujacharya . King Vishnuvardhana built many temples after his conversion from Jainism to Vaishnavism . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 The rise of <unk> was revolutionary and challenged the prevailing Hindu caste system which retained royal support . The social role of women largely depended on their economic status and level of education in this relatively liberal period . Freedom was more available to women in the royal and affluent urban families . Records describe the participation of women in the fine arts , such as Chalukya queen Chandala Devi 's and Kalachuri queen <unk> Devi 's skill in dance and music . The compositions of thirty Vachana women poets included the work of the 12th @-@ century Virashaiva mystic Akka Mahadevi whose devotion to the bhakti movement is well known . Contemporary records indicate some royal women were involved in administrative and martial affairs such as princess <unk> , ( sister of King Jayasimha II ) who fought and defeated rebellious <unk> . Inscriptions emphasise public acceptance of widowhood indicating that Sati ( a custom in which a dead man 's widow used to immolate herself on her husband 's funeral pyre ) though present was on a voluntary basis . Ritual deaths to achieve salvation were seen among the Jains who preferred to fast to death ( Sallekhana ) , while people of some other communities chose to jump on spikes ( <unk> ) or walking into fire on an eclipse . 
 In a Hindu caste system that was conspicuously present , Brahmins enjoyed a privileged position as providers of knowledge and local justice . These Brahmins were normally involved in careers that revolved around religion and learning with the exception of a few who achieved success in martial affairs . They were patronised by kings , nobles and wealthy aristocrats who persuaded learned Brahmins to settle in specific towns and villages by making them grants of land and houses . The relocation of Brahmin scholars was calculated to be in the interest of the kingdom as they were viewed as persons detached from wealth and power and their knowledge was a useful tool to educate and teach ethical conduct and discipline in local communities . Brahmins were also actively involved in solving local problems by functioning as neutral arbiters ( Panchayat ) . 
 Regarding eating habits , Brahmins , Jains , Buddhists and Shaivas were strictly vegetarian while the partaking of different kinds of meat was popular among other communities . Marketplace vendors sold meat from domesticated animals such as goats , sheep , pigs and fowl as well as exotic meat including partridge , hare , wild fowl and boar . People found indoor amusement by attending wrestling matches ( <unk> ) or watching animals fight such as cock fights and ram fights or by gambling . Horse racing was a popular outdoor past time . In addition to these leisurely activities , festivals and fairs were frequent and entertainment by traveling troupes of acrobats , dancers , dramatists and musicians was often provided . 
 Schools and hospitals are mentioned in records and these were built in the vicinity of temples . Marketplaces served as open air town halls where people gathered to discuss and ponder local issues . Choirs , whose main function was to sing devotional hymns , were maintained at temple expense . Young men were trained to sing in choirs in schools attached to monasteries such as Hindu Matha , Jain Palli and Buddhist Vihara . These institutions provided advanced education in religion and ethics and were well equipped with libraries ( Saraswati <unk> ) . Learning was imparted in the local language and in Sanskrit . Schools of higher learning were called <unk> ( or <unk> or <unk> ) . Teaching Sanskrit was a near monopoly of Brahmins who received royal endowments for their cause . Inscriptions record that the number of subjects taught varied from four to eighteen . The four most popular subjects with royal students were Economics ( <unk> ) , Political Science ( <unk> ) , Veda ( <unk> ) and Philosophy ( <unk> ) , subjects that are mentioned as early as <unk> Arthasastra . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The Western Chalukya era was one of substantial literary activity in the native Kannada , and Sanskrit . In a golden age of Kannada literature , Jain scholars wrote about the life of Tirthankaras and Virashaiva poets expressed their closeness to God through pithy poems called Vachanas . Nearly three hundred contemporary Vachanakaras ( Vachana poets ) including thirty women poets have been recorded . Early works by Brahmin writers were on the epics , Ramayana , Mahabharata , Bhagavata , Puranas and Vedas . In the field of secular literature , subjects such as romance , erotics , medicine , lexicon , mathematics , astrology , encyclopedia etc. were written for the first time . 
 Most notable among Kannada scholars were Ranna , grammarian Nagavarma II , minister Durgasimha and the Virashaiva saint and social reformer Basavanna . Ranna who was patronised by king Tailapa II and Satyashraya is one among the " three gems of Kannada literature " . He was bestowed the title " Emperor among poets " ( Kavi <unk> ) by King Tailapa II and has five major works to his credit . Of these , <unk> <unk> ( or Gada yuddha ) of 982 in Champu style is a eulogy of his patron King Satyashraya whom he compares to Bhima in valour and achievements and narrates the duel between Bhima and Duryodhana using clubs on the eighteenth day of the Mahabharata war . He wrote <unk> purana in 993 describing the life of the second Tirthankara , <unk> . 
 Nagavarma II , poet laureate ( Katakacharya ) of King Jagadhekamalla II made contributions to Kannada literature in various subjects . His works in poetry , prosody , grammar and vocabulary are standard authorities and their importance to the study of Kannada language is well acknowledged . Kavyavalokana in poetics , Karnataka @-@ Bhashabhushana on grammar and <unk> a lexicon ( with Kannada equivalents for Sanskrit words ) are some of his comprehensive contributions . Several works on medicine were produced during this period . Notable among them were Jagaddala Somanatha 's Karnataka Kalyana <unk> . 
 A unique and native form of poetic literature in Kannada called Vachanas developed during this time . They were written by mystics , who expressed their devotion to God in simple poems that could appeal to the masses . Basavanna , Akka Mahadevi , Allama Prabhu , <unk> and Siddharama are the best known among them . 
 In Sanskrit , a well @-@ known poem ( <unk> ) in 18 cantos called Vikramankadeva Charita by Kashmiri poet Bilhana recounts in epic style the life and achievements of his patron king Vikramaditya VI . The work narrates the episode of Vikramaditya VI 's accession to the Chalukya throne after overthrowing his elder brother Someshvara II . The great Indian mathematician <unk> II ( born <unk> ) flourished during this time . From his own account in his famous work Siddhanta <unk> ( c . 1150 , comprising the Lilavati , <unk> on algebra , <unk> on the celestial globe and <unk> on planets ) <unk> Bida ( modern Bijapur ) was his native place . 
 Manasollasa or Abhilashitartha Chintamani by king Someshvara III ( 1129 ) was a Sanskrit work intended for all sections of society . This is an example of an early encyclopedia in Sanskrit covering many subjects including medicine , magic , veterinary science , valuing of precious stones and pearls , fortifications , painting , music , games , amusements etc . While the book does not give any of dealt topics particular hierarchy of importance , it serves as a landmark in understanding the state of knowledge in those subjects at that time . Someshwara III also authored a biography of his famous father Vikramaditya VI called Vikraman @-@ <unk> . The text is a historical prose narrative which also includes a graphic description of the geography and people of Karnataka . 
 A Sanskrit scholar Vijnaneshwara became famous in the field of legal literature for his Mitakshara , in the court of Vikramaditya VI . Perhaps the most acknowledged work in that field , Mitakshara is a treatise on law ( commentary on Yajnavalkya ) based on earlier writings and has found acceptance in most parts of modern India . An Englishman Colebrooke later translated into English the section on inheritance giving it currency in the British Indian court system . Some important literary works of the time related to music and musical instruments were Sangita Chudamani , Sangita <unk> and Sangita Ratnakara . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The reign of Western Chalukya dynasty was an important period in the development of Deccan architecture . The architecture designed during this time served as a conceptual link between the Badami Chalukya Architecture of the 8th century and the Hoysala architecture popularised in the 13th century . The art of the Western Chalukyas is sometimes called the " Gadag style " after the number of ornate temples they built in the Tungabhadra River @-@ Krishna River doab region of present @-@ day Gadag district in Karnataka . The dynasty 's temple building activity reached its maturity and culmination in the 12th century with over a hundred temples built across the Deccan , more than half of them in present @-@ day central Karnataka . Apart from temples , the dynasty 's architecture is well known for the ornate stepped wells ( Pushkarni ) which served as ritual bathing places , a few of which are well preserved in Lakkundi . These stepped well designs were later incorporated by the Hoysalas and the Vijayanagara empire in the coming centuries . 
 The Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi ( Gadag district ) , the Dodda Basappa Temple at Dambal ( Gadag district ) , the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti ( Bellary district ) , the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali ( Davangere district ) , the Siddhesvara Temple at Haveri ( Haveri district ) , the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri ( Dharwad district ) , the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi ( Koppal district ) , the <unk> Temple at <unk> , and the <unk> Temple at Balligavi are the finest examples produced by the later Chalukya architects . The 12th @-@ century Mahadeva Temple with its well executed sculptures is an exquisite example of decorative detail . The intricate , finely crafted carvings on walls , pillars and towers speak volumes about Chalukya taste and culture . An inscription outside the temple calls it " Emperor of Temples " ( <unk> <unk> ) and relates that it was built by Mahadeva , a commander in the army of king Vikramaditya VI . The <unk> Temple ( 1060 ) at Balligavi is an example of a transitional Chalukya @-@ Hoysala architectural style . The Western Chalukyas built temples in Badami and Aihole during their early phase of temple building activity , such as Mallikarjuna Temple , the <unk> Temple and the <unk> group of Temples . 
 The vimana of their temples ( tower over the shrine ) is a compromise in detail between the plain stepped style of the early Chalukyas and the decorative finish of the Hoysalas . To the credit of the Western Chalukya architects is the development of the lathe turned ( tuned ) pillars and use of Soapstone ( Chloritic Schist ) as basic building and sculptural material , a very popular idiom in later Hoysala temples . They popularised the use of decorative Kirtimukha ( demon faces ) in their sculptures . Famous architects in the Hoysala kingdom included Chalukyan architects who were natives of places such as Balligavi . The artistic wall decor and the general sculptural idiom was <unk> architecture . This style is sometimes called Karnata dravida , one of the notable traditions in Indian architecture . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The local language Kannada was mostly used in Western ( Kalyani ) Chalukya inscriptions and epigraphs . Some historians assert that ninety percent of their inscriptions are in the Kannada language while the remaining are in Sanskrit language . More inscriptions in Kannada are attributed to Vikramaditya VI than any other king prior to the 12th century , many of which have been deciphered and translated by historians of the Archaeological Survey of India . Inscriptions were generally either on stone ( Shilashasana ) or copper plates ( Tamarashasana ) . This period saw the growth of Kannada as a language of literature and poetry , impetus to which came from the devotional movement of the Virashaivas ( called Lingayatism ) who expressed their closeness to their deity in the form of simple lyrics called Vachanas . At an administrative level , the regional language was used to record locations and rights related to land grants . When bilingual inscriptions were written , the section stating the title , genealogy , origin myths of the king and benedictions were generally done in Sanskrit . Kannada was used to state terms of the grants , including information on the land , its boundaries , the participation of local authorities , rights and obligations of the grantee , taxes and dues , and witnesses . This ensured the content was clearly understood by the local people without any ambiguity . 
 In addition to inscriptions , chronicles called <unk> were written to provide historical details of dynasties . Writings in Sanskrit included poetry , grammar , lexicon , manuals , rhetoric , commentaries on older works , prose fiction and drama . In Kannada , writings on secular subjects became popular . Some well known works are <unk> , a prosody , and Karnataka Kadambari , a romance , both written by Nagavarma I , a lexicon called Rannakanda by Ranna ( 993 ) , a book on medicine called Karnataka @-@ Kalyanakaraka by Jagaddala Somanatha , the earliest writing on astrology called Jatakatilaka by <unk> ( 1049 ) , a writing on erotics called <unk> by <unk> , and an encyclopedia called <unk> by Chavundaraya II ( 1025 ) . 
 = Worlds Apart ( Fringe ) = 
 " Worlds Apart " is the twentieth episode of the fourth season of the Fox science @-@ fiction drama television series Fringe , and the series ' 85th episode overall . It was co @-@ written by series story editor Matt Pitts and DC Comics ' Nicole Phillips based on a story by co @-@ producer Graham Roland . Charles Beeson served as director . 
 The series depicts members of a Federal Bureau of Investigation " Fringe Division " team based in Boston , Massachusetts as they investigate a series of unexplained , often ghastly occurrences , which are related to mysteries surrounding a parallel universe . In this episode , David Robert Jones ( Jared Harris ) employs former Cortexiphan subjects to create simultaneous earthquakes across the globe , leading Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) to hypothesize that the end of both the prime and parallel universes is imminent . The two worlds must decide whether to close the bridge that was repairing the parallel universe , or they may all face destruction . 
 " Worlds Apart " first aired on April 27 , 2012 in the United States . The episode featured the return of David Call and Pascale Hutton , two guest actors not seen since the second season finale . It aired in the wake of the official renewal of a fifth season for the series . An estimated 3 @.@ 1 million viewers watched the episode , a small increase from the previous episode . Critical reception was generally positive , as many highlighted the performances as well as the scene between the two Walters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Several earthquakes strike simultaneously across the globe , at the same time and locations in both the prime and parallel universe . The combined Fringe teams agree that David Robert Jones is behind it , the quakes the result of stresses of bringing the two universes into synchronization so that he can collapse both of them . The teams also conclude that Jones has found a means , through the previous " experiment " in Westfield , Vermont ( " Welcome to Westfield " ) , to ride out the destruction of both universes . The idea of shutting down the bridge created by the Machine is brought up , believing that the bridge is enabling Jones ' plan . However , this is considered a last resort , as destroying the bridge will affect the healing of the singularities in the parallel universe . 
 When a second simultaneous set of earthquakes occur , the parallel universe 's version of Nick Lane ( David Call ) approaches Agent Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) of the prime universe , believing him to be the parallel universe 's version of Lee . Lee feigns familiarity , learning that Nick had visions of being at the epicenter of the quake before it began . When Lee reports this to Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) in the prime universe , she suddenly recalls her Cortexiphan trials including fellow subject Nick Lane , and with the team 's help , identifies that other Cortexiphan subjects are the epicenter of these quakes , linking to their parallel universe versions to achieve synchronization . 
 Believing that by taking in one of the Cortexiphan subjects they can stop the effects of another quake , a willing Lane from the parallel universe travels to the prime and is hooked to Walter 's ( John Noble ) equipment . Olivia also hooks herself up , allowing her to communicate what she sees in Lane 's mind . When the prime version of Lane attempts to get into the right position , Olivia is able to identify his location , and he is captured in time . However , despite disrupting the process for Lane , earthquakes continue across the world . Walter estimates that the next set of quakes will cause both universes to collapse . 
 The captured Lane expresses his belief that Jones is helping the prime universe to defeat the parallel one . Olivia tries to convince him of Jones ' true intentions . Eventually , Lane agrees to show the Fringe team a location where he once met with Jones . The team raids the site but finds nothing ; meanwhile , Lane escapes custody using his abilities . With only hours left until the next set of quakes , as projected by a watch that Lane was wearing , plans are made to shut down the bridge before this time runs out . 
 Walter and Walternate ( Noble ) start the Machine equipment to overload , which will take several minutes , after which they can pull the power and deactivate the Machine . Lee states to Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) that he will be staying in the parallel universe , where he feels at home , reflecting a previous conversation Peter had with Lee about staying with Olivia in the prime universe . Walter and Walternate have a heartfelt discussion over Peter , and Walter expresses concern that if the bridge disappears , so will Peter . The other Fringe members say their goodbyes to their counterparts . Eventually , the Machine is overloaded and deactivated , and the parallel universe aspects of the room disappear ; Walter is pleased to see Peter remains . 
 = = Production = = 
 Fringe story editor Matt Pitts and DC Comics ' Nicole Phillips co @-@ wrote the teleplay , based on a story by co @-@ producer Graham Roland . English director Charles Beeson , known for his work on the science fiction television series Supernatural and Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles , directed " Worlds Apart " , his second episode of the season ( the other being " Making Angels " ) . 
 In an on @-@ set interview with The Huffington Post , actor John Noble explained that the episode 's primary storyline concerned the bridge between the two worlds . The third season finale , he explained , ended with the two universes healing themselves with the help of a " bridge " . He remarked , " What happens if that bridge now begins to be used as a conduit for evil ? That ’ s the issue we ’ re facing . What do you do ? What do you do with this wonderful discovery ? Do you keep it ? What do you lose if you lose it ? For example , if we didn ’ t have that [ link ] , we ... wouldn ’ t have all these wonderful characters that we ’ ve grown to love . What would happen ? I think we have to face that issue . We have to face the issue of ' How long can you keep this alive , this link between interlacing the two universes ? ' " 
 Guest stars David Call and Pascale Hutton reprised their characters Nick Lane and Sally Clark , respectively . Both actors had last appeared in the second season finale " Over There " . Lead actress Anna Torv was pleased with their return , explaining , " A few faces from the past pop up , which is always fun . " 
 The reappearance of Nick Lane and his storyline helped resolve an earlier plot point from " Over There , " in which he was recognized by Fringe agent Lincoln Lee before dying . Noble noted that " Worlds Apart ' and the rest of the fourth season brought back a number of characters from the series ' " rich history " , including Sally , Nick , and David Robert Jones . " This episode , " he commented , " is bringing those things back together for us as we face the decision of what to do . Do we keep the worlds together ? How do we keep them together without creating the monster that is happening ? How do we stop this monster from happening ? That ’ s what this is all about . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Worlds Apart " was first broadcast on the day following the announcement of the renewal of Fringe for a final shortened fifth season . The episode saw a small increase in viewership from the previous week , with an estimated 3 @.@ 09 million viewers . In the adult demographic , the episode received a 1 @.@ 0 / 3 ratings share , which means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds with television sets , and 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . Fringe finished in fourth place among both total viewers and adults , behind episodes of CSI : New York , Grimm , and Primetime : What Would You Do ? . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Worlds Apart " received generally positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly writer Jeff Jensen noted that with the closing of the bridge , " Fringe effectively pulled the plug on the creative idea that defined the best years of the show . [ ... ] I don 't think we can understate the passing of the parallel world premise . " While he said he would miss the lost characters , especially Fauxlivia , the series " got the emotions [ of their departure ] just right . " He added his hope that the characters would be revisited . In an interview , <unk> said that they had spoken to Fox executives about closing off the bridge , to which one executive partner reportedly said , " I was so sad . I had tears in my eyes when we closed the door " . The executive added that despite having initially thought the idea of doppelganger characters as a poor one , she admitted that she " was so wrong " . 
 Jensen went on to praise Walter and Walternate 's conversation as " devastatingly perfect , " commenting " Just the very action of sitting , of Walternate choosing to literally to meet Walter at his lowest moment , was extraordinarily moving . " Dave Bradley of SFX magazine highlighted the episode 's acting as one particular positive element , praising Torv and Noble for " delivering perfect double performances . " Bradley also praised the scenes between the two Walters and two <unk> , writing that the " moments of connection make the decision to split the universes apart incredibly poignant . " Los Angeles Times writer Andrew Hanson also praised the Walter @-@ Walternate scenes , explaining that after their seated conversation " you almost forget the two characters are played by the same actor . If this isn ’ t the year that John Noble gets recognition for his performances in Fringe , it will be a crime . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with an A , describing " Worlds Apart " as an " exciting , emotional episode " that " seems to resolve some of this season ’ s storylines while setting up the upcoming two @-@ part season finale . " His favorite part of the episode was when the two teams worked together ; he gave particular attention to the Walter @-@ Walternate talk , remarking , " The last scene between the two Walters is something that I ’ ve been waiting to see for years now , and John Noble nails both sides of the conversation . It ’ s now one of the whole series ’ signature moments : Walter and Walternate , side @-@ by @-@ side . " Other critics also lauded the conversation between Walter and Walternate over Peter . 
 In a 2013 list , Den of Geek ranked " Worlds Apart " as the seventh best episode of the entire series , explaining that it " perhaps [ is ] a little rushed , but overall this is a satisfying conclusion to a number of major plot threads . Airing directly after " Letters of Transit " , the closing off of a number of dangling stories and characters in this episode allowed the remaining two episodes of season four and all of season five to deal with matters closer to home , and tie up the show ’ s most important remaining mystery , the Observers . " 
 = Pinoy = 
 Pinoy ( / <unk> / ) is an informal demonym referring to the Filipino people in the Philippines and their culture as well as to overseas Filipinos in the Filipino diaspora . 
 An unspecified number of Filipinos refer to themselves as Pinoy or sometimes the feminine Pinay . The word is formed by taking the last four letters of Filipino and adding the diminutive suffix -y in the Tagalog language ( the suffix is commonly used in Filipino nicknames : e.g. " Ninoy " or " <unk> " for Benigno Jr. and III respectively ] , " <unk> " for Augusto , etc . ) . Pinoy was used for self @-@ identification by the first wave of Filipinos going to the continental United States before World War II and has been used both in a pejorative sense and as a term of endearment , similar to Chicano . Although Pinoy and Pinay are regarded as derogatory by some younger Filipino @-@ Americans , the terms have been widely used and have recently gained mainstream usage particularly among members of the Filipino masses and the Filipino @-@ American sector . 
 Pinoy was created to differentiate the experiences of those immigrating to the United States but is now a slang term used to refer to all people of Filipino descent . " Pinoy music " impacted the socio @-@ political climate of the 1970s and was employed by both Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos and the People Power Revolution that overthrew his regime . Recent mainstream usages tend to center on entertainment ( Pinoy Big Brother ) and music ( Pinoy Idol ) , which have played a significant role in developing national and cultural identity . As of 2016 , the term has been extensively used by the government of the Philippines itself with apparently no derogatory connotations . It is now more positive than the slang term " flip " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 According to Filipino American historian Dawn <unk> , the earliest appearance of the terms " Pinoy " and " Pinay " was in a 1926 issue of the Filipino Student Bulletin . The article that featured the terms is titled " Filipino Women in U.S. Excel in Their Courses : <unk> Business , Politics . " 
 = = = Motivations = = = 
 The desire to self @-@ identify can likely be attributed to the diverse and independent history of the archipelagic country - comprising 7 @,@ 107 islands in the western Pacific Ocean - which trace back 30 @,@ 000 years before becoming a Spanish colony in the 16th century and later occupied by the United States , which led to the outbreak of the Philippine – American War ( 1899 – 1902 ) . The Commonwealth of the Philippines was established in 1935 with the country gaining its independence in 1946 after hostilities in the Pacific Theatre of the Second World War had ended . The Philippines have over 170 languages indigenous to the area , most of which belong to the Malayo @-@ Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family . In 1939 , then @-@ president Manuel L. Quezon renamed the Tagalog language as the <unk> Pambansa ( " national language " ) . The language was further renamed in 1959 as Filipino by Secretary of Education Jose Romero . The 1973 constitution declared the Filipino language to be co @-@ official , along with English , and mandated the development of a national language to be known as Filipino . Since then , the two official languages are Filipino and English . 
 As of 2003 there are more than eleven million overseas Filipinos worldwide , equivalent to about 11 % of the total population of the Philippines . 
 = = Earliest usages = = 
 The earliest known usages of Pinoy / Pinay in magazines and newspapers date to the 1920s include taking on social issues facing Pinoy , casual mentions of Pinoys at events , while some are advertisements from Hawaii from Filipinos themselves . The following are the more notable earliest usages : 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the United States , the earliest published usage known is a Philippine Republic article written in January 1924 by Dr. J. Juliano , a member of the faculty of the Schurz school in Chicago - " Why does a Pinoy take it as an insult to be taken for a <unk> or a Confucian ? " and " What should a Pinoy do if he is addressed as a Chinese or a Jap ? " 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 In the Philippines , the earliest published usage known is from December 1926 , in History of the Philippine Press , which briefly mentions a weekly Spanish @-@ Visayan @-@ English publication called Pinoy based in Capiz and published by the Pinoy Publishing Company . In 1930 , the Manila @-@ based magazine Khaki and Red : The Official Organ of the Constabulary and Police printed an article about street gangs stating " another is the ' <unk> ' gang of Intramuros , composed of patrons of pools rooms who banded together to ' protect <unk> ' from the abusive American <unk> . " 
 = = = Notable literature = = = 
 Pinoy is first used by Filipino poet Carlos Bulosan , in his 1946 semi @-@ autobiography , America Is in the Heart - " The Pinoys work every day in the fields but when the season is over their money is in the Chinese vaults . " The book describes his childhood in the Philippines , his voyage to America , and his years as an itinerant laborer following the harvest trail in the rural West . It has been used in American Ethnic courses to illustrate the racism experienced by thousands of Filipino laborers during the 1930s and 40s in the United States . 
 = = Pinoy music = = 
 In the early 1970s , Pinoy music or " Pinoy pop " emerged , often sung in Tagalog - it was a mix of rock , folk and ballads - marking a political use of music similar to early hip hop but transcending class . The music was a " conscious attempt to create a Filipino national and popular culture " and it often reflected social realities and problems . As early as 1973 , the Juan De la Cruz Band was performing " Ang <unk> Natin " ( " Our Music " ) , which is widely regarded as the first example of Pinoy rock . " Pinoy " gained popular currency in the late 1970s in the Philippines when a surge in patriotism made a hit song of Filipino folk singer Heber Bartolome 's " Tayo 'y mga Pinoy " ( " We are Pinoys " ) . This trend was followed by Filipino rapper Francis Magalona 's " <unk> <unk> Ko " ( " My Countrymen " ) in the 1990s and Filipino rock band Bamboo 's " <unk> " ( " Pinoy " in reversed syllables ) in the 2000s . Nowadays , " Pinoy " is used as an adjective to some terms highlighting their relationship to the Philippines or Filipinos . Pinoy rock was soon followed by Pinoy folk and later , Pinoy jazz . Although the music was often used to express opposition to then Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos and his use of martial law and the creating of the Batasang Bayan , many of the songs were more subversive and some just instilled national pride . Perhaps because of the cultural affirming nature and many of the songs seemingly being non @-@ threatening , the Marcos administration ordered radio stations to play at least one - and later , three - Pinoy songs each hour . Pinoy music was greatly employed both by Marcos and political forces who sought to overthrow him . 
 = California condor = 
 The California condor ( Gymnogyps californianus ) is a New World vulture , the largest North American land bird . This condor became extinct in the wild in 1987 ( all remaining wild individuals were captured ) , but the species has been reintroduced to northern Arizona and southern Utah ( including the Grand Canyon area and Zion National Park ) , the coastal mountains of central and southern California , and northern Baja California . Although other fossil members are known , it is the only surviving member of the genus Gymnogyps . The species is listed as critically endangered by the IUCN . 
 The plumage is black with patches of white on the underside of the wings ; the head is largely bald , with skin color ranging from gray on young birds to yellow and bright orange on breeding adults . Its huge 3 @.@ 0 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wingspan is the widest of any North American bird , and its weight of up to 12 kg ( 26 lb ) nearly equals that of the trumpeter swan , the heaviest among native North American bird species . The condor is a scavenger and eats large amounts of carrion . It is one of the world 's longest @-@ living birds , with a lifespan of up to 60 years . 
 Condor numbers dramatically declined in the 20th century due to poaching , lead poisoning , and habitat destruction . A conservation plan was put in place by the United States government that led to the capture of all the remaining wild condors which was completed in 1987 , with a total population of 27 individuals . These surviving birds were bred at the San Diego Zoo Safari Park and the Los Angeles Zoo . Numbers rose through captive breeding and , beginning in 1991 , condors were reintroduced into the wild . The California condor is one of the world 's rarest bird species : as of October 2014 there are 425 condors living wild or in captivity . The condor is a significant bird to many Californian Native American groups and plays an important role in several of their traditional myths . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The California condor was described by English naturalist George Shaw in 1797 as Vultur californianus . It was originally classified in the same genus as the Andean condor ( V. gryphus ) , but , due to the Andean condor 's slightly different markings , slightly longer wings , and tendency to kill small animals to eat , the California condor has now been placed in its own monotypic genus . The generic name Gymnogyps is derived from the Greek gymnos / <unk> " naked " or " bare " , and gyps / <unk> " vulture " , while the specific name californianus comes from its location in California . The word condor itself is derived from the Quechua word <unk> . 
 The exact taxonomic placement of the California condor and the other six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Though similar in appearance and ecological roles to Old World vultures , the New World vultures evolved from a different ancestor in a different part of the world . Just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead placed them in Incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 The genus Gymnogyps is an example of a relict distribution . During the Pleistocene epoch , this genus was widespread across the Americas . From fossils , the Floridan Gymnogyps <unk> from the Early Pleistocene and the Peruvian Gymnogyps <unk> from the Late Pleistocene have been described . A condor found in Late Pleistocene deposits on Cuba was initially described as <unk> <unk> , but has since been recognized as another member of Gymnogyps , Gymnogyps <unk> . It may even have derived from a founder population of California condors . 
 Today 's California condor is the sole surviving member of Gymnogyps and has no accepted subspecies . However , there is a Late Pleistocene form that is sometimes regarded as a <unk> , Gymnogyps californianus amplus . Current opinions are mixed regarding the classification of the form as a chronospecies or a separate species Gymnogyps amplus . Gymnogyps amplus occurred over much of the bird 's historical range – even extending into Florida – but was larger , having about the same weight as the Andean condor . This bird also had a wider bill . As the climate changed during the last ice age , the entire population became smaller until it had evolved into the Gymnogyps californianus of today , although more recent studies by <unk> query that theory . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult California condor is a uniform black with the exception of large triangular patches or bands of white on the underside of the wings . It has gray legs and feet , an ivory @-@ colored bill , a frill of black feathers surrounding the base of the neck , and brownish red eyes . The juvenile is mostly a mottled dark brown with blackish coloration on the head . It has mottled gray instead of white on the underside of its flight feathers . 
 The condor 's head and neck have few feathers , and the skin of the head and neck is capable of flushing noticeably in response to emotional state , a capability that can serve as communication between individuals . The skin color varies from yellowish to a glowing reddish @-@ orange . The birds do not have true <unk> vocalizations . They can make a few hissing or grunting sounds only heard when very close . 
 Contrary to the usual rule among true birds of prey , the female is slightly smaller than the male . Overall length can range from 109 to 140 cm ( 43 to 55 in ) and wingspan from 2 @.@ 49 to 3 m ( 8 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Their weight can range from 7 to 14 @.@ 1 kg ( 15 to 31 lb ) , with estimations of average weight ranging from 8 to 9 kg ( 18 to 20 lb ) . Wingspans of up to 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft ) have been reported but no wingspan over 3 @.@ 05 m ( 10 @.@ 0 ft ) has been verified . Most measurements are from birds raised in captivity , so determining if there are any major differences in measurements between wild and captive condors is difficult . 
 California condors have the largest wingspan of any North American bird . They are surpassed in both body length and weight only by the trumpeter swan and the introduced mute swan . The American white pelican and whooping crane also have longer bodies than the condor . Condors are so large that they can be mistaken for a small , distant airplane , which possibly occurs more often than they are mistaken for other species of bird . 
 The middle toe of the California condor 's foot is greatly elongated , and the hind one is only slightly developed . The talons of all the toes are straight and blunt , and are thus more adapted to walking than gripping . This is more similar to their supposed relatives the storks than to birds of prey and Old World vultures , which use their feet as weapons or organs of prehension . 
 = = Historic range = = 
 At the time of human settlement of the Americas , the California condor was widespread across North America ; condor bones from the late Pleistocene have been found at the Cutler Fossil Site in southern Florida . However , climate changes associated with the end of the last glacial period and the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna led to a subsequent reduction in range and population . Five hundred years ago , the California condor roamed across the American Southwest and West Coast . Faunal remains of condors have been found documented in Arizona , Nevada , New Mexico , and Texas . The Lewis and Clark Expedition of the early 19th century reported on their sighting and shooting of California condors near the mouth of the Columbia River . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The condors live in rocky shrubland , coniferous forests , and oak savannas . They are often found near cliffs or large trees , which they use as nesting sites . Individual birds have a huge range and have been known to travel up to 250 km ( 160 mi ) in search of carrion . 
 There are two sanctuaries dedicated to this bird , the <unk> Condor Sanctuary in the San Rafael Wilderness and the <unk> Condor Sanctuary in the Los Padres National Forest . These areas were chosen because of their prime condor nesting habitat . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 When in flight , the movements of the condor are remarkably graceful . The lack of a large sternum to anchor their correspondingly large flight muscles restricts them to being primarily <unk> . The birds flap their wings when taking off from the ground , but after attaining a moderate elevation they largely glide , sometimes going for miles without a single flap of their wings . They have been known to fly up to speeds of 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) and as high as 4 @,@ 600 m ( 15 @,@ 100 ft ) . They prefer to roost on high perches from which they can launch without any major wing @-@ flapping effort . Often , these birds are seen soaring near rock cliffs , using thermals to aid them in keeping aloft . 
 The California condor has a long life span , reaching up to 60 years . If it survives to adulthood , the condor has few natural threats other than humans . Because they lack a syrinx , their vocal display is limited to grunts and hisses . Condors bathe frequently and can spend hours a day preening their feathers . Condors also perform urohidrosis , or defecate on their legs , to reduce their body temperature . There is a well @-@ developed social structure within large groups of condors , with competition to determine a pecking order decided by body language , competitive play behavior , and a variety of hisses and grunts . This social hierarchy is displayed especially when the birds feed , with the dominant birds eating before the younger ones . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Wild condors maintain a large home range , often traveling 250 km ( 160 mi ) a day in search of carrion . It is thought that in the early days of its existence as a species , the California condor lived off the carcasses of the " megafauna " , which are now extinct in North America . They still prefer to feast on large , terrestrial mammalian carcasses such as deer , goats , sheep , donkeys , horses , pigs , cougars , bears , or cattle . Alternatively , they may feed on the bodies of smaller mammals , such as rabbits or coyotes , aquatic mammals such as whales and California sea lions , or salmon . Bird and reptile carcasses are rarely eaten . Since they do not have a sense of smell , they spot these corpses by looking for other scavengers , like eagles and smaller vultures , the latter of which cannot rip through the tougher hides of these larger animals with the efficiency of the larger condor . They can usually intimidate other scavengers away from the carcass , with the exception of bears , which will ignore them , and golden eagles , which will fight a condor over a kill or a carcass . In the wild they are intermittent eaters , often going for between a few days to two weeks without eating , then gorging themselves on 1 – 1 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 lb ) of meat at once . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Condors begin to look for a mate when they reach sexual maturity at the age of six . To attract a prospective mate , the male condor performs a display , in which the male turns his head red and puffs out his neck feathers . He then spreads his wings and slowly approaches the female . If the female lowers her head to accept the male , the condors become mates for life . The pair makes a simple nest in caves or on cliff clefts , especially ones with nearby roosting trees and open spaces for landing . A mated female lays one bluish @-@ white egg every other year . Eggs are laid as early as January to as late as April . The egg weighs about 280 grams ( 10 oz ) and measures from 90 to 120 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) in length and about 67 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) in width . If the chick or egg is lost or removed , the parents " double clutch " , or lay another egg to take the lost one 's place . Researchers and breeders take advantage of this behavior to double the reproductive rate by taking the first egg away for puppet @-@ rearing ; this induces the parents to lay a second egg , which the condors are sometimes allowed to raise . 
 The eggs hatch after 53 to 60 days of incubation by both parents . Chicks are born with their eyes open and sometimes can take up to a week to leave the shell completely . The young are covered with a grayish down until they are almost as large as their parents . They are able to fly after five to six months , but continue to roost and forage with their parents until they are in their second year , at which point the parents typically turn their energies to a new nest . Ravens are the main predatory threat to condor eggs , while golden eagles and bears are potential predators of condor offspring . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Obstacles to recovery = = = 
 In modern times , a wide variety of causes have contributed to the condor 's decline . Its low clutch size ( one young per nest ) , combined with a late age of sexual maturity , make the bird vulnerable to artificial population decline . Significant past damage to the condor population has also been attributed to poaching , especially for museum specimens , lead poisoning ( from eating animals containing lead shot ) , DDT poisoning , electric power lines , egg collecting , and habitat destruction . During the California Gold Rush , some condors were even kept as pets . The leading cause of mortality in nestling condors is the ingestion of trash that is fed to them by their parents . 
 In addition to this , cattle ranchers who observed condors feeding on the dead young of their cattle assumed that the birds killed the cattle . This fallacy led to the condor 's extirpation in some parts of the western United States . This belief was so deeply ingrained that the reintroduction of condors to the Grand Canyon was challenged by some cattle ranchers , who mistakenly believed that the bird hunted calves and lambs . 
 Unanticipated deaths among recent condor populations occurred due to contact with golden eagles , lead poisoning , and other factors such as power line collisions . Since 1994 , captive @-@ bred California condors have been trained to avoid power lines and people . Since the implementation of this aversion conditioning program , the number of condor deaths due to power lines has greatly decreased . Lead poisoning due to fragmented lead bullets in large game waste is a particularly big problem for condors due to their extremely strong digestive juices ; lead waste is not as much of a problem for other avian scavengers such as the turkey vulture and common raven . This problem has been addressed in California by the Ridley @-@ Tree Condor Preservation Act , a bill that went into effect July 1 , 2008 that requires that hunters use non @-@ lead bullets when hunting in the condor 's range . Blood lead levels in golden eagles as well as turkey vultures has declined with the implementation of the Ridley @-@ Tree Condor Preservation Act , demonstrating that the legislation has helped reduce other species ' lead exposures aside from the California condor . 
 In an article titled : " Condors or lead ammunition ? We can 't have both " published by The Ecologist in January 2015 , author Dawn <unk> states : " Over 60 % of the adult and juvenile deaths ( that is , excluding chicks and fledglings ) in the wild population have been as a result of lead poisoning . " She continues : " Because condors have been known to live past the age of 50 , do not breed until they are at least six years old , and raise only one chick every other year , their populations cannot withstand the mortality rates caused by this neurological toxin . " According to epidemiologist Terra Kelly : " Until all natural food sources are free from lead @-@ based ammunition , lead poisoning will threaten recovery of naturally sustaining populations of condors in the wild . " The article also states : " The military doesn 't use lead , and if that isn 't a huge message I don 't know what is . " However , this statement must be taken in the context that the military has limited the use of lead ammunition at installations in the condor 's range , not service wide . 
 = = = California Condor Recovery Plan = = = 
 As the condor 's population continued to decline , discussion began about starting a captive breeding program for the birds . Opponents to this plan argued that the condors had the right to freedom , that capturing all of the condors would change the species ' habits forever , and that the cost was too great . However , the project received the approval of the United States government , and the capture of the remaining wild condors was completed on Easter Sunday 1987 , when AC @-@ 9 , the last wild condor , was captured . At that point , there were only 22 condors in existence , all in captivity . 
 The goal of the California Condor Recovery Plan was to establish two geographically separate populations , one in California and the other in Arizona , each with 150 birds and at least 15 breeding pairs . As the Recovery Program works toward this goal the number of release sites has grown . There are three active release sites in California , one in Arizona and one in Baja California , Mexico . 
 The captive breeding program , led by the San Diego Wild Animal Park and Los Angeles Zoo , and with other participating zoos around the country , including the Oklahoma City Zoo and Botanical Garden , got off to a slow start due to the condor 's mating habits . However , utilizing the bird 's ability to double clutch , biologists began removing the first egg from the nest and raising it with puppets , allowing the parents to lay another egg . 
 As the number of condors grew , attention began to focus on releasing some back into the wild . In 1988 , the United States Fish and Wildlife Service began a reintroduction experiment involving the release of captive Andean condors into the wild in California . Only females were released , to eliminate the possibility of accidentally introducing a South American species into the United States . The experiment was a success , and all the Andean condors were recaptured and re @-@ released in South America . California condors were released in 1991 and 1992 in California , and again in 1996 in Arizona near the Grand Canyon . Though the birth rate remains low in the wild , their numbers are increasing steadily through regular releases of captive @-@ reared adolescents . 
 The California condor conservation project may be one of the most expensive species conservation projects in United States history , costing over $ 35 million , including $ 20 million in federal and state funding , since World War II . As of 2007 the annual cost for the condor conservation program was around $ 2 @.@ 0 million per year . However , nesting milestones have been recently reached by the reintroduced condors . In 2003 , the first nestling fledged in the wild since 1981 . In March 2006 , a pair of California condors , released by Ventana Wildlife Society , attempted to nest in a hollow tree near Big Sur , California . This was the first time in more than 100 years in which a pair of California condors had been seen nesting in Northern California . As of November 2011 there were 394 individuals living , including 205 in the wild and the rest in the San Diego Wild Animal Park , the Los Angeles Zoo , the Oregon Zoo , and the World Center for Birds of Prey in Boise , Idaho . As of October 2010 , the wild condor population in its name state of California reached 100 individuals , and 73 wild condors in Arizona . As of May 2012 , the number of living individuals has reached 405 , with 179 living in captivity . By June 2014 , using data from the National Park Service , the condor population had reached 439 : 225 in the wild and 214 in captivity . Official statistics from the October 2014 USFWS record an overall population of 425 , of which 219 are wild and 206 are captive . 
 As the Recovery Program achieved milestones , a fifth active release site in Sierra de San Pedro Mártir National Park , Baja California , Mexico , was added to the three release sites in California ( Big Sur , Pinnacles National Park and Bitter Creek National Wildlife Refuge ) and the Vermilion Cliffs release site in Arizona . In early 2007 , a California condor laid an egg in Mexico for the first time since at least the 1930s . The population of the condors has risen due to these wild and also captive nestings . In June , 2016 , three chicks that were born in Chapultepec Zoo in Mexico City , were <unk> to Sierra de San Pedro Mártir National Park , Baja California , Mexico . In the spring of 2009 , a second wild chick was born in the Sierra de San Pedro Mártir National Park and was named <unk> ( " Sun " in the <unk> language ) by local environmentalists . In 2014 , Condor # 597 , also known as " <unk> " , was spotted near Pescadero , a coastal community south of San Francisco . <unk> had been routinely seen at Pinnacles National Park after having been released into the wild at Big Sur the previous year . Younger birds of the Central California are seeking to expand their territory , which could mean that a new range expansion is possible for the more than 60 condors flying free in central California . Also in 2014 the first successful breeding in Utah was reported . A pair of condors , who were released in Arizona , nested in Zion National Park and the hatching of one chick was confirmed . 
 = = = Condor Watch = = = 
 A crowdsourcing project called Condor Watch ( CW ) was started on April 14 , 2014 , hosted by the web portal <unk> . Volunteers are asked to examine motion @-@ capture images of California condors associated with release sites managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service , National Park Service and Ventana Wildlife Society . The tasks on the website include identifying tagged condors and marking the distance to feeding sources such as animal carcasses . Biologists can then use this data to deduce which birds are at risk of lead poisoning . 
 Condor Watch enables volunteers , or citizen scientists , to participate in active research . The project has up 175 @,@ 000 images to view and assess — far more than the team could hope to view on their own . Lead scientist Myra Finkelstein believes volunteering is fun because it allows enthusiasts to track the " biographies " of individual condors . Citizen science has long been used in ornithology , for instance in the Audubon Society 's Christmas Bird Count , which began in 1900 and the breeding bird survey which began in 1966 . McCaffrey ( 2005 ) believes this approach not only directly benefits ongoing projects , but will also help train aspiring ornithologists . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Throughout its historic range , the California condor has been a popular subject of mythology and an important symbol to Native Americans . Unusually , this bird takes on different roles in the storytelling of the different tribes . 
 The Wiyot tribe of California say that the condor recreated mankind after Above Old Man wiped humanity out with a flood . However , other tribes , such as California 's Mono , viewed the condor as a destroyer , not a creator . They say that Condor seized humans , cut off their heads , and drained their blood so that it would flood Ground Squirrel 's home . Condor then seized Ground Squirrel after he fled , but Ground Squirrel managed to cut off Condor 's head when Condor paused to take a drink of the blood . According to the <unk> tribe , the condor sometimes ate the moon , causing the lunar cycle , and his wings caused eclipses . The Chumash tribe of Southern California believed that the condor was once a white bird , but it turned black when it flew too close to a fire . 
 Condor bones have been found in Native American graves , as have condor feather headdresses . Cave paintings of condors have also been discovered . Some tribes ritually killed condors to make ceremonial clothing out of their feathers . Shamans then danced while wearing these to reach the upper and lower spiritual worlds . Whenever a shaman died , his clothes were said to be cursed , so new clothing had to be made for his successor . Some scientists , such as Noel Snyder , believe that this process of making ceremonial clothing contributed to the condor 's decline . 
 = Spencer ( surname ) = 
 Spencer ( also Spence , Spender , Spens , and Spenser ) is a surname . The origin can be traced directly to Robert d 'Abbetot , who is listed as Robert le Dispenser , a tenant @-@ in @-@ chief of several counties , in the Domesday Book of 1086 . Robert was possibly one of the Norman knights who fought alongside ( or accompanied ) William the Conqueror in the defeat of Harold II , King of England at the Battle of Hastings in 1066 . There is little doubt that both Robert and his brother Urse came to England at about the time of the Battle of Hastings . They were both beneficiaries of William over the years , and were given titles and substantial land and property — suggesting repayment for some earlier deeds . It is likely that Robert 's first acknowledgment was his official appointment as Royal " <unk> " sometimes expressed more grandly as " Royal Steward " , " King 's Steward " or " Lord Steward " . As dispenser of provisions to the King and his household Robert was known and recorded as Robert le Despencer or , in its Latinised form , <unk> Dispensator . There is also the possibility that Robert held this official position before arriving in England . 
 Robert 's adopted surname was usually written as Despenser or Dispenser — notably in works such as the Domesday Book of 1086 and the Scottish Ragman Rolls of 1291 and 1296 . From 1066 until the 13th century the occupational name attributed to Robert d 'Abbetot existed with numerous spelling and other variations . Eventually both the " le " and " de " that frequently preceded the name were omitted . In 1392 the popular " s " in the centre of the name was discarded and replaced with the " c " seen in the present @-@ day form — Spencer . 
 The surname Spencer has gained in popularity over time . In the 19th century it also become popular as a given name — especially in the more anglicised areas of the United States . 
 = = Variations = = 
 = = = English = = = 
 In its transition from the French <unk> to its current form , the name Spencer has been presented and spelled in many ways — especially through the period of its early evolution in the medieval period from <unk> to 1350 AD . The following ( in alphabetical order ) is a selection of the many orthographic variants : 
 Despencer , de <unk> ( derived from expence ) , De Spencer , de <unk> , de Spens , de la <unk> , De la Spence , de la <unk> , del Spens , Despenser , <unk> , <unk> , Dispenser , <unk> , Dispensator , la Spens , le Despencer , le <unk> , le Despencer , le Despenser , le <unk> , le <unk> , le <unk> , le Spencer , le <unk> , <unk> , le Spenser , le <unk> , Spence , <unk> , Spen , Spender , Spens , <unk> , <unk> , Spenser , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , also the rare patronymic Spencers , and the <unk> ( derived ) Spender . 
 Within a few generations the le ( " the " ) usually placed before Despenser was omitted . The name variant Spens first appears as Simon del Spens , dated 1300 , in the " Charters of Gisburn Priory " , Yorkshire , England , during the reign of Edward I. Spence , another form of Spens , means both " the place where provisions are kept " and the " clerk of the kitchen " . This form of the name was popular in both the north of England and in Scotland . In Fife the word referred to " a spare room beside the kitchen " , and in England to a " yard , enclosure or buttery " — simply an abbreviation of <unk> referring to the household store . The principal Scottish family of Clan Spens descend from one of the ancient Earls of Fife . John " Dispensator or Le Dispenser " appeared in a list of the tenants and vassals of Walter fitz Alan High Steward of Scotland in the period 1161 – 1171 . Roger ' Dispensator ' witnessed a charter by Bricius de Douglas , the bishop of Moray granting the church of <unk> to Spynie between 1202 and 1222 . The family de Spens in Fife trace their ancestry back to 1170 and the " Baron de Spens d <unk> " , who settled in France in 1450 , and " the Count de Spens , who ranked among the first of the Swedish nobility and was generalissimo of the Swedish forces " . As a north country word for ' pantry ' , spence was used by Poet Laureate Alfred Lord Tennyson in the sense of a refectory : " Bluff Harry broke into the spence and turn 'd the cowls adrift " ( The Talking Oak , <unk> ) . 
 The surnames Stewart and Stuart denote essentially the same occupation but have a completely different word derivation . They originate from the pre @-@ 7th @-@ century English words <unk> — a compound of <unk> meaning household — and <unk> , a guardian . 
 = = = Other countries and cultures = = = 
 Foreign Equivalents : 
 German : Speiser – a steward . This is a derivative of the Middle High German <unk> , meaning food or supplies via the Old High German — in turn derived from Late Latin <unk> ( n ) sa ( <unk> ) , or " ( money ) expended " . 
 Jewish ( Ashkenazic ) : Speiser – occupational name for a grocer , from a later semantic development of " Speiser " . 
 Greek : <unk> – the anglicised surname derived from the Greek <unk> ( " <unk> " in Greek pronounced as a long E. ) <unk> ( English = <unk> ) means house in classical Greek . This surname has the same occupational derivation as Spencer but , like the surnames Stewart and Stuart , has a different etymology . The original meaning of <unk> was a home owner but it evolved to mean estate manager , somebody who was responsible for all resources on the estate , a steward . <unk> was a medieval Eastern Roman title for somebody who was in charge of a project or institution ; it is still used by the Greek Orthodox church . Over time the meaning of <unk> has evolved from " manager of resources " to " manager of money , a treasurer " . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 <unk> have been able to track changes in the name Spencer over time — in different dialects and languages — as well as trace its derivation from a common ancestry . The name Spencer can be traced through its Latin and French roots to its Middle English and modern form . 
 Medieval Latin – <unk> , <unk> and <unk> – steward . 
 Old French – 
 a. <unk> – larder 
 b. <unk> , <unk> – dispenser of money , provisions etc . ; someone working at , or in charge of , the buttery ; a household steward 
 c. <unk> – steward . 
 Anglo @-@ French – <unk> , <unk> . 
 Middle English – <unk> ( e ) and spence – larder ; <unk> – steward . With the agent suffix – er this becomes <unk> – butler or steward . 
 = = = Derivation = = = 
 In England , up to about the time of the Norman Conquest when communities were small , each person was identifiable by a single name , usually a personal name or nickname . Picts , Gaels , Britons , Anglo @-@ Saxons , Scandinavians and Normans all originally used single names , but as the population increased , it became necessary to identify people further — giving rise to names like John the butcher , Henry of Sutton , Roger son of Richard and William the short , which naturally evolved into John Butcher , Henry Sutton , Roger Richardson and William Short . Although a few hereditary patrilineal surnames ( those passed from father to son and daughter ) appear to have existed in before the Norman Conquest , the now traditional use of binomials ( two names , a given name and a surname ) appears to have gathered momentum at this time — particularly after the introduction of records for personal taxation , known in England as the poll tax , first levied in 1275 . The poll tax was the historical means by which local communities recorded the registering , categorizing , and polling of citizens , free @-@ subjects and other voters . 
 The meaning of a surname generally derives from one of the following four sources : location ( toponym ) such as a specific place ( e.g. London , York ) or feature of the place or landscape ( e.g. Hill , Townsend ) ; a relationship ( e.g. Richardson ) ; a nickname ( e.g. Grey , <unk> ) ; or an occupation or office ( e.g. Sawyer , Skinner ) . The surname Spencer relates to occupation and office . 
 = = Robert Despenser , Urse d 'Abbetot , and the Despenser family = = 
 = = = Robert Despenser = = = 
 Robert d 'Abbetot was the son of Almericus d 'Abbetot whose Viking ancestry has been traced back to Tancred of Hauteville ( 980 – 1041 ) . Almericus is known to have held the position of mayor in the town of Saint @-@ Jean @-@ d 'Abbetot in Normandy . Robert , like William 's other close knights , was granted titles , lands and a high position in William 's court . In addition to his position as steward he also was given land grants in county Bedford . He held his office for the period <unk> – 1098 . 
 Robert 's last name of d 'Abbetot had no meaning in England so it was likely changed to Robert le Despenser ( many spelling variants of this name exist including Robert the <unk> , Robert <unk> , Robert Dispenser , and Robert <unk> . ) which reflected his new official position and occupation . He seems to have maintained his popularity with William because in the Domesday Book of 1086 , Robert Despenser was listed as a land tenant @-@ in @-@ chief in Gloucestershire , Leicestershire , Lincolnshire , Oxfordshire , and Warwickshire , as well as holding lands in Worcestershire obtained from the Bishop of Worcester . 
 Robert is assumed to have died shortly after restoring some estates to Westminster Abbey but he appears to have had no legitimate male children , as his heir was his brother Urse . He may have had a daughter , as some of his lands were inherited by the Marmion family , but it is also possible that a daughter of Urse married into the Marmion family . Robert 's office as the king 's steward may also have gone to Urse , as it was later held by Urse 's heirs . A later steward , Thurstin , might have been an illegitimate son of Robert . 
 = = = Robert 's brother Urse d 'Abbetot = = = 
 Robert Despenser 's brother , Urse d 'Abbetot ( c . 1040 – 1108 ) , became a medieval Sheriff of Worcester and royal official . He did not take up the name Despenser . In Normandy the brothers lived in the town of Saint Jean d 'Abbetot as tenants on lands of feudal lords in the Tancarville family in the Pays de Caux region on the lower Seine . 
 Ralph Fitz Gerald ( Chamberlain of Tankerville ) was the elder brother of <unk> d 'Abetot . Their father was Gerold ( husband of <unk> ) Sire de Tankerville with the hereditary office of chamberlain to the Dukes of Normandy . His younger son , <unk> , inherited the fiefs of Abetot and had two sons , Urso and Robert " Despencer " who gave the name to the noble families of Le Despencer and Spenser that trace their descent from his niece . In 1073 Urse was one of the king 's council . He rendered great service in the suppression of the rebellion of the Earls of Hereford and Norfolk and had a reputation as a spoiler and <unk> of the Church . Urse 's son Roger d 'Abetot , having killed a servant of Henry I , was banished and his confiscated estates given by the king — together with the hand of his sister Emmeline d 'Abetot — to Walter de Beauchamp of Bedford . 
 However , within 2 – 3 years of 1066 both brothers were established in England — Urse as Sheriff of Worcestershire , supervising the construction of Worcester Castle . The Domesday survey showed Urse 's lands mostly in the West Midlands while Robert 's extended to the North Sea . Robert remained a benefactor to the Priory of St. Barbe @-@ en @-@ Auge in Normandy , which had been founded by the Tancarville lords . 
 Lands held by the d <unk> in Worcester are recorded in Hemming 's Cartulary . The d 'Abbetot family settled mostly in Worcester where they were lords of Hindlip ( Hind Leap ) , 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Worcester , for 200 years holding the manor for a knight 's fee , that is , the service of an armed knight in the event of war . A church has stood on the site since the 11th century . Two villages have taken the D 'Abbetot family name . Redmarley D 'Abitot lies on the extreme south @-@ west border of Worcestershire in Gloucestershire . Here the D 'Abitots owned property in the parish in the 16th century , and lived at Down House although the last member of the family is believed to have died in the 18th century . The other village is Croome D 'Abitot , which lies 7 – 8 miles south @-@ east of Worcester . Many of the descendants of Robert Despenser and Urse achieved notoriety of various kinds and the Dispenser line has been traced for at least 10 generations . 
 = = = Associated families = = = 
 The Norman family of de Ferrers , through Henry de Ferrers , had received the largest grants of land and manors in Derbyshire and were closely related to the d <unk> by marriage . Similarly , Urse 's son Roger had a sister , Emmeline , who married Walter de Beauchamp from another influential family of the time . Walter succeeded to Urse 's lands after the exiling of Roger around 1110 . Tradition has it that the Derbyshire D 'Abitots sprang either from Robert d 'Abitot or a junior branch of the Worcester d 'Abitots , although it is more likely to trace directly from Urse . 
 = = Heraldry = = 
 Heraldry , the practice of designing , displaying , describing , and recording coats of arms and badges , arose from the need to distinguish participants in combat when their faces were hidden by iron and steel helmets . The process of creating coats of arms ( these are often called " family crests " but in the heraldic traditions of England and Scotland an individual , rather than a family , had a coat of arms ) began in the eight and 9th centuries . Eventually a formal system of rules developed into increasingly complex forms of heraldry that allowed the use of coats of arms by countries , states , provinces , towns and villages in a form of civic heraldry . In more recent times coats of arms have evolved from their military origins to denote educational institutes , and other establishments , apparently leading to the modern logo and corporate livery . 
 The <unk> or private seal of Henry le Despenser , Bishop of Norwich ( A.D. 1370 – 1406 ) is shown here . Arms of Hugh le Despencer . 
 = = Hereditary names and genetic lineages = = 
 The possession of the surname Spencer does not necessarily indicate a hereditary relationship to Robert Despenser . Irregularities can occur with non @-@ paternity and it is possible that consecutive but unrelated people in the same occupation may well have adopted the same name resulting in the foundation of many different Spencer genetic lineages . It is known , for example , that in London in the 13th and 14th centuries trade apprentices would take on the names of their masters . Nevertheless , also in London , surnames of all kinds had become hereditary in the patrician class by the 12th century . 
 Nevertheless , the genetic similarity of people with identical surnames has been shown to be quite high , especially those with rarer surnames . It might seem an almost insurmountable task to determine the true lineage of contemporary Spencers when such an " occupational " name probably has many founders . Nevertheless , modern genetics now has the capacity to discriminate relationships at an increasingly detailed resolution both in terms of close recent ancestry and distant ancestry . Many people are now using gene testing laboratories as part of a surname DNA project to resolve not only who their close relations are around the world , but also the migration patterns of their ancestors over the 50 @,@ 000 years since modern man left Africa . 
 In America many Spencers have been traced back genetically to four Spencer brothers : William Spencer 1601 – 1640 , Thomas Spencer 1607 – 1687 , Michael Spencer 1611 – 1653 , and Gerard Spencer 1614 – 1685 . 
 = = The Spencer aristocracy = = 
 The English aristocratic Spencer family has resided at their ancestral home at Althorp , Northamptonshire , since the early 16th century . The Estate now covers 14 @,@ 000 acres ( 57 km2 ) in Northamptonshire , Warwickshire and Norfolk . From pre @-@ Tudor times the Spencers had been farmers , coming to prominence in Warwickshire in the 15th century when John Spencer became feoffee of Wormleighton in 1469 , and a tenant at Althorp in 1486 . His nephew , another John , used the gains from trade in livestock and commodities to buy both properties . He was knighted in 1504 and died in 1522 . John 's descendants expanded the family holdings through business dealings and marriage into the peerage . The family is related through marriage to the Churchills of Blenheim Palace , a line that included the Dukes of Marlborough and Winston Churchill . From the Althorp line came the Earls of Sunderland , the later Dukes of Marlborough , and the Earls Spencer . The family captured international attention when Lady Diana Frances Spencer married Prince Charles on 29 July 1981 , and her death in a car crash in Paris on 31 August 1997 . 
 = = Notable Spencers = = 
 The following is a small selection of notable Spencers . 
 = = = 13th Century = = = 
 Hugh le Despenser I ( died 1238 ) was a wealthy land owner in the East Midlands of England , as well as High Sheriff of Berkshire . 
 Sir Hugh le Despencer , 1st Baron le Despencer ( 1223 – 1265 ) son of Hugh le Despenser I was an important ally of Simon de Montfort during the reign of Henry III . He served briefly as Justiciar of England ( Chief Justice ) in 1260 and as Constable of the Tower of London and the castles of Shrewsbury , Bruges , and <unk> . 
 Hugh le Despenser , 1st Earl of Winchester ( 1262 – 1326 ) the elder Despenser , was for a time the chief adviser to King Edward II of England . 
 Hugh Despenser the Younger ( 1286 – 1326 ) became Royal Chamberlain in 1318 and the favourite of Edward II of England but developed a reputation for greed and , after falling out with the Barons , was accused of treason . He was forced into exile in 1321 with his father , who later fled to Bordeaux . Hugh was captured and sentenced to public execution by hanging ( for thievery ) , and drawing and quartering ( for treason ) . 
 = = = 14th Century = = = 
 Edward le Despenser ( 1310 – 1342 ) was the third eldest son of Hugh le Despenser the Younger by his wife Eleanor de Clare . 
 Edward le Despencer , 1st Baron le Despencer , KG ( also called Despenser ) ( c . 24 March 1335 or 1336 – 11 November 1375 ) was the son of Edward le Despenser ( 1310 – 1342 ) and Anne , the sister of Henry , Lord Ferrers of Groby . He succeeded as Lord of Glamorgan in 1349 . 
 Thomas le Despenser , 1st Earl of Gloucester ( 22 September 1373 – 13 January 1400 , Bristol ) was the son of Edward le Despenser , 1st Baron le Despencer , whom he succeeded in 1375 . 
 Richard le Despenser , 4th Baron Burghersh ( 1396 – 1414 ) was the son and heir of Thomas le Despenser , 1st Earl of Gloucester ( 1373 – 1400 ) 
 = = = 16th Century = = = 
 John Spencer ( 1524 – 1586 ) , owner of Althorp and MP 
 Edmund Spenser ( c . 1552 – 13 January 1599 ) was an English poet best known for The Faerie Queene , an epic poem celebrating — through fantastical allegory — the Tudor dynasty and Elizabeth I. He is recognized as one of the premier craftsmen of Modern English verse in its infancy . 
 = = = 17th Century = = = 
 Col. Nicholas Spencer ( 1633 – 1689 ) was an English merchant born at <unk> , Bedfordshire , who emigrated to the Colony of Virginia , where he served as land agent for his cousin Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper . A planter with extensive landholdings , Spencer later served in the Virginia House of Burgesses , as Secretary and President of the Council of the Virginia Colony , and as Acting Governor . With his friend John Washington , Col. Spencer patented the Mount Vernon estate land grant . 
 = = = 19th Century = = = 
 Sir Walter Baldwin Spencer KCMG ( 23 June 1860 – 14 July 1929 ) was a British @-@ Australian biologist and anthropologist . 
 Herbert Spencer ( 27 April 1820 – 8 December 1903 ) was an English philosopher , prominent classical liberal political theorist , and sociological theorist of the Victorian era . 
 = = = 20th Century = = = 
 Elizabeth Spencer ( soprano ) was a recording artist for Thomas Alva Edison . 
 Percy Spencer ( 9 July 1894 – 8 September 1970 ) American inventor of the microwave oven . 
 Diana , Princess of Wales , ( Diana Frances ; née Spencer ; 1 July 1961 – 31 August 1997 ) was the first wife of Charles , Prince of Wales . 
 Prince William , Duke of Cambridge eldest son of Diana , Princess of Wales second in line to the thrones of the United Kingdom and fifteen other Commonwealth realms . 
 Prince Harry second son of Diana , Princess of Wales . 
 Cliff Spencer , co @-@ author of the original implementation of the Unix utility <unk> 
 = = Popularity , numbers and distribution = = 
 There is strong evidence that despite population movement in the 19th Century most people stayed relatively near to their place of birth . The greatest density of Spencers in present @-@ day England is in Nottinghamshire , followed by Derbyshire ( see below ) . Derby and Notts were closely connected at the time of Domesday , and up until the time of Elizabeth I had the same Sheriff . The d 'Abbetot family had holdings in Croome , Hindlip and Redmarley as well as Clopton and Acton Beauchamp . 
 In North America early settlement of Spencers date to Thomas Spencer in Virginia in 1623 ; William Spencer , Cambridge , Massachusetts in 1630 ; Thomas Spencer , Maine 1630 . Col. Nicholas Spencer arrived in Virginia in the 1650s and subsequently served as Acting Governor . An account of Spencers in America has been published by <unk> 
 Spencers arriving in Australia with the convicts of the First Fleet in 1788 were Daniel Spencer from Dorchester , John Spencer , and Mary Spence from Wigan . With the Third Fleet in 1791 came John Spencer from Lancaster and Thomas Spencer from London . 
 Statistics for popularity , numbers and distribution of Spencers are presented in the tables below : 
 FPM = frequency per million 
 = Main sequence = 
 In astronomy , the main sequence is a continuous and distinctive band of stars that appears on plots of stellar color versus brightness . These color @-@ magnitude plots are known as Hertzsprung – Russell diagrams after their co @-@ developers , Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell . Stars on this band are known as main @-@ sequence stars or " dwarf " stars . 
 After a star has formed , it generates thermal energy in the dense core region through nuclear fusion of hydrogen atoms into helium . During this stage of the star 's lifetime , it is located along the main sequence at a position determined primarily by its mass , but also based upon its chemical composition and other factors . All main @-@ sequence stars are in hydrostatic equilibrium , where outward thermal pressure from the hot core is balanced by the inward pressure of gravitational collapse from the overlying layers . The strong dependence of the rate of energy generation in the core on the temperature and pressure helps to sustain this balance . Energy generated at the core makes its way to the surface and is radiated away at the photosphere . The energy is carried by either radiation or convection , with the latter occurring in regions with steeper temperature gradients , higher opacity or both . 
 The main sequence is sometimes divided into upper and lower parts , based on the dominant process that a star uses to generate energy . Stars below about 1 @.@ 5 times the mass of the Sun ( or 1 @.@ 5 solar masses ( M ☉ ) ) primarily fuse hydrogen atoms together in a series of stages to form helium , a sequence called the proton – proton chain . Above this mass , in the upper main sequence , the nuclear fusion process mainly uses atoms of carbon , nitrogen and oxygen as intermediaries in the CNO cycle that produces helium from hydrogen atoms . Main @-@ sequence stars with more than two solar masses undergo convection in their core regions , which acts to stir up the newly created helium and maintain the proportion of fuel needed for fusion to occur . Below this mass , stars have cores that are entirely radiative with convective zones near the surface . With decreasing stellar mass , the proportion of the star forming a convective envelope steadily increases , whereas main @-@ sequence stars below 0 @.@ 4 M ☉ undergo convection throughout their mass . When core convection does not occur , a helium @-@ rich core develops surrounded by an outer layer of hydrogen . 
 In general , the more massive a star is , the shorter its lifespan on the main sequence . After the hydrogen fuel at the core has been consumed , the star evolves away from the main sequence on the HR diagram . The behavior of a star now depends on its mass , with stars below 0 @.@ 23 M ☉ becoming white dwarfs directly , whereas stars with up to ten solar masses pass through a red giant stage . More massive stars can explode as a supernova , or collapse directly into a black hole . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early part of the 20th century , information about the types and distances of stars became more readily available . The spectra of stars were shown to have distinctive features , which allowed them to be categorized . Annie Jump Cannon and Edward C. Pickering at Harvard College Observatory developed a method of categorization that became known as the Harvard Classification Scheme , published in the Harvard Annals in 1901 . 
 In Potsdam in 1906 , the Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung noticed that the reddest stars — classified as K and M in the Harvard scheme — could be divided into two distinct groups . These stars are either much brighter than the Sun , or much fainter . To distinguish these groups , he called them " giant " and " dwarf " stars . The following year he began studying star clusters ; large groupings of stars that are co @-@ located at approximately the same distance . He published the first plots of color versus luminosity for these stars . These plots showed a prominent and continuous sequence of stars , which he named the Main Sequence . 
 At Princeton University , Henry Norris Russell was following a similar course of research . He was studying the relationship between the spectral classification of stars and their actual brightness as corrected for distance — their absolute magnitude . For this purpose he used a set of stars that had reliable parallaxes and many of which had been categorized at Harvard . When he plotted the spectral types of these stars against their absolute magnitude , he found that dwarf stars followed a distinct relationship . This allowed the real brightness of a dwarf star to be predicted with reasonable accuracy . 
 Of the red stars observed by Hertzsprung , the dwarf stars also followed the spectra @-@ luminosity relationship discovered by Russell . However , the giant stars are much brighter than dwarfs and so , do not follow the same relationship . Russell proposed that the " giant stars must have low density or great surface @-@ brightness , and the reverse is true of dwarf stars " . The same curve also showed that there were very few faint white stars . 
 In 1933 , Bengt Strömgren introduced the term Hertzsprung – Russell diagram to denote a luminosity @-@ spectral class diagram . This name reflected the parallel development of this technique by both Hertzsprung and Russell earlier in the century . 
 As evolutionary models of stars were developed during the 1930s , it was shown that , for stars of a uniform chemical composition , a relationship exists between a star 's mass and its luminosity and radius . That is , for a given mass and composition , there is a unique solution for determining the star 's radius and luminosity . This became known as the Vogt @-@ Russell theorem ; named after Heinrich Vogt and Henry Norris Russell . By this theorem , when a star 's chemical composition and its position on the main sequence is known , so too is the star 's mass and radius . ( However , it was subsequently discovered that the theorem breaks down somewhat for stars of non @-@ uniform composition . ) 
 A refined scheme for stellar classification was published in 1943 by W. W. Morgan and P. C. Keenan . The MK classification assigned each star a spectral type — based on the Harvard classification — and a luminosity class . The Harvard classification had been developed by assigning a different letter to each star based on the strength of the hydrogen spectral line , before the relationship between spectra and temperature was known . When ordered by temperature and when duplicate classes were removed , the spectral types of stars followed , in order of decreasing temperature with colors ranging from blue to red , the sequence O , B , A , F , G , K and M. ( A popular mnemonic for memorizing this sequence of stellar classes is " Oh Be A Fine Girl / Guy , Kiss Me " . ) The luminosity class ranged from I to V , in order of decreasing luminosity . Stars of luminosity class V belonged to the main sequence . 
 = = Formation = = 
 When a protostar is formed from the collapse of a giant molecular cloud of gas and dust in the local interstellar medium , the initial composition is homogeneous throughout , consisting of about 70 % hydrogen , 28 % helium and trace amounts of other elements , by mass . The initial mass of the star depends on the local conditions within the cloud . ( The mass distribution of newly formed stars is described empirically by the initial mass function . ) During the initial collapse , this pre @-@ main @-@ sequence star generates energy through gravitational contraction . Upon reaching a suitable density , energy generation is begun at the core using an exothermic nuclear fusion process that converts hydrogen into helium . 
 When nuclear fusion of hydrogen becomes the dominant energy production process and the excess energy gained from gravitational contraction has been lost , the star lies along a curve on the Hertzsprung – Russell diagram ( or HR diagram ) called the standard main sequence . Astronomers will sometimes refer to this stage as " zero age main sequence " , or <unk> . The <unk> curve can be calculated using computer models of stellar properties at the point when stars begin hydrogen fusion . From this point , the brightness and surface temperature of stars typically increase with age . 
 A star remains near its initial position on the main sequence until a significant amount of hydrogen in the core has been consumed , then begins to evolve into a more luminous star . ( On the HR diagram , the evolving star moves up and to the right of the main sequence . ) Thus the main sequence represents the primary hydrogen @-@ burning stage of a star 's lifetime . 
 = = Properties = = 
 The majority of stars on a typical HR diagram lie along the main @-@ sequence curve . This line is pronounced because both the spectral type and the luminosity depend only on a star 's mass , at least to zeroth @-@ order approximation , as long as it is fusing hydrogen at its core — and that is what almost all stars spend most of their " active " lives doing . 
 The temperature of a star determines its spectral type via its effect on the physical properties of plasma in its photosphere . A star 's energy emission as a function of wavelength is influenced by both its temperature and composition . A key indicator of this energy distribution is given by the color index , B − V , which measures the star 's magnitude in blue ( B ) and green @-@ yellow ( V ) light by means of filters . This difference in magnitude provides a measure of a star 's temperature . 
 = = Dwarf terminology = = 
 Main @-@ sequence stars are called dwarf stars , but this terminology is partly historical and can be somewhat confusing . For the cooler stars , dwarfs such as red dwarfs , orange dwarfs , and yellow dwarfs are indeed much smaller and dimmer than other stars of those colors . However , for hotter blue and white stars , the size and brightness difference between so @-@ called dwarf stars that are on the main sequence and the so @-@ called giant stars that are not becomes smaller ; for the hottest stars it is not directly observable . For those stars the terms dwarf and giant refer to differences in spectral lines which indicate if a star is on the main sequence or off it . Nevertheless , very hot main @-@ sequence stars are still sometimes called dwarfs , even though they have roughly the same size and brightness as the " giant " stars of that temperature . 
 The common use of dwarf to mean main sequence is confusing in another way , because there are dwarf stars which are not main @-@ sequence stars . For example , a white dwarf is the dead core of a star that is left after the star has shed its outer layers , that is much smaller than a main @-@ sequence <unk> — roughly the size of Earth . These represent the final evolutionary stage of many main @-@ sequence stars . 
 = = Parameters = = 
 By treating the star as an idealized energy radiator known as a black body , the luminosity L and radius R can be related to the effective temperature Teff by the Stefan – Boltzmann law : 
 L 
 = <unk> 
 where σ is the Stefan – Boltzmann constant . As the position of a star on the HR diagram shows its approximate luminosity , this relation can be used to estimate its radius . 
 The mass , radius and luminosity of a star are closely interlinked , and their respective values can be approximated by three relations . First is the Stefan – Boltzmann law , which relates the luminosity L , the radius R and the surface temperature Teff . Second is the mass – luminosity relation , which relates the luminosity L and the mass M. Finally , the relationship between M and R is close to linear . The ratio of M to R increases by a factor of only three over 2 @.@ 5 orders of magnitude of M. This relation is roughly proportional to the star 's inner temperature TI , and its extremely slow increase reflects the fact that the rate of energy generation in the core strongly depends on this temperature , whereas it has to fit the mass – luminosity relation . Thus , a too high or too low temperature will result in stellar instability . 
 A better approximation is to take ε = 
 L / M , the energy generation rate per unit mass , as ε is proportional to <unk> , where TI is the core temperature . This is suitable for stars at least as massive as the Sun , exhibiting the CNO cycle , and gives the better fit R ∝ <unk> 
 = = = Sample parameters = = = 
 The table below shows typical values for stars along the main sequence . The values of luminosity ( L ) , radius ( R ) and mass ( M ) are relative to the Sun — a dwarf star with a spectral classification of G2 V. The actual values for a star may vary by as much as 20 – 30 % from the values listed below . 
 = = Energy generation = = 
 All main @-@ sequence stars have a core region where energy is generated by nuclear fusion . The temperature and density of this core are at the levels necessary to sustain the energy production that will support the remainder of the star . A reduction of energy production would cause the overlaying mass to compress the core , resulting in an increase in the fusion rate because of higher temperature and pressure . Likewise an increase in energy production would cause the star to expand , lowering the pressure at the core . Thus the star forms a self @-@ regulating system in hydrostatic equilibrium that is stable over the course of its main sequence lifetime . 
 Main @-@ sequence stars employ two types of hydrogen fusion processes , and the rate of energy generation from each type depends on the temperature in the core region . Astronomers divide the main sequence into upper and lower parts , based on which of the two is the dominant fusion process . In the lower main sequence , energy is primarily generated as the result of the proton @-@ proton chain , which directly fuses hydrogen together in a series of stages to produce helium . Stars in the upper main sequence have sufficiently high core temperatures to efficiently use the CNO cycle . ( See the chart . ) This process uses atoms of carbon , nitrogen and oxygen as intermediaries in the process of fusing hydrogen into helium . 
 At a stellar core temperature of 18 Million Kelvin , the PP process and CNO cycle are equally efficient , and each type generates half of the star 's net luminosity . As this is the core temperature of a star with about 1 @.@ 5 M ☉ , the upper main sequence consists of stars above this mass . Thus , roughly speaking , stars of spectral class F or cooler belong to the lower main sequence , while A @-@ type stars or hotter are upper main @-@ sequence stars . The transition in primary energy production from one form to the other spans a range difference of less than a single solar mass . In the Sun , a one solar @-@ mass star , only 1 @.@ 5 % of the energy is generated by the CNO cycle . By contrast , stars with 1 @.@ 8 M ☉ or above generate almost their entire energy output through the CNO cycle . 
 The observed upper limit for a main @-@ sequence star is 120 – 200 M ☉ . The theoretical explanation for this limit is that stars above this mass can not radiate energy fast enough to remain stable , so any additional mass will be ejected in a series of pulsations until the star reaches a stable limit . The lower limit for sustained proton – proton nuclear fusion is about 0 @.@ 08 M ☉ or 80 times the mass of Jupiter . Below this threshold are sub @-@ stellar objects that can not sustain hydrogen fusion , known as brown dwarfs . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Because there is a temperature difference between the core and the surface , or photosphere , energy is transported outward . The two modes for transporting this energy are radiation and convection . A radiation zone , where energy is transported by radiation , is stable against convection and there is very little mixing of the plasma . By contrast , in a convection zone the energy is transported by bulk movement of plasma , with hotter material rising and cooler material descending . Convection is a more efficient mode for carrying energy than radiation , but it will only occur under conditions that create a steep temperature gradient . 
 In massive stars ( above 10 M ☉ ) the rate of energy generation by the CNO cycle is very sensitive to temperature , so the fusion is highly concentrated at the core . Consequently , there is a high temperature gradient in the core region , which results in a convection zone for more efficient energy transport . This mixing of material around the core removes the helium ash from the hydrogen @-@ burning region , allowing more of the hydrogen in the star to be consumed during the main @-@ sequence lifetime . The outer regions of a massive star transport energy by radiation , with little or no convection . 
 Intermediate @-@ mass stars such as Sirius may transport energy primarily by radiation , with a small core convection region . Medium @-@ sized , low @-@ mass stars like the Sun have a core region that is stable against convection , with a convection zone near the surface that mixes the outer layers . This results in a steady buildup of a helium @-@ rich core , surrounded by a hydrogen @-@ rich outer region . By contrast , cool , very low @-@ mass stars ( below 0 @.@ 4 M ☉ ) are convective throughout . Thus the helium produced at the core is distributed across the star , producing a relatively uniform atmosphere and a proportionately longer main sequence lifespan . 
 = = Luminosity @-@ color variation = = 
 As non @-@ fusing helium ash accumulates in the core of a main @-@ sequence star , the reduction in the abundance of hydrogen per unit mass results in a gradual lowering of the fusion rate within that mass . Since it is the outflow of fusion @-@ supplied energy that supports the higher layers of the star , the core is compressed , producing higher temperatures and pressures . Both factors increase the rate of fusion thus moving the equilibrium towards a smaller , denser , hotter core producing more energy whose increased outflow pushes the higher layers further out . Thus there is a steady increase in the luminosity and radius of the star over time . For example , the luminosity of the early Sun was only about 70 % of its current value . As a star ages this luminosity increase changes its position on the HR diagram . This effect results in a broadening of the main sequence band because stars are observed at random stages in their lifetime . That is , the main sequence band develops a thickness on the HR diagram ; it is not simply a narrow line . 
 Other factors that broaden the main sequence band on the HR diagram include uncertainty in the distance to stars and the presence of unresolved binary stars that can alter the observed stellar parameters . However , even perfect observation would show a fuzzy main sequence because mass is not the only parameter that affects a star 's color and luminosity . Variations in chemical composition caused by the initial abundances , the star 's evolutionary status , interaction with a close companion , rapid rotation , or a magnetic field can all slightly change a main @-@ sequence star 's HR diagram position , to name just a few factors . As an example , there are metal @-@ poor stars ( with a very low abundance of elements with higher atomic numbers than helium ) that lie just below the main sequence and are known as <unk> . These stars are fusing hydrogen in their cores and so they mark the lower edge of main sequence fuzziness caused by variance in chemical composition . 
 A nearly vertical region of the HR diagram , known as the instability strip , is occupied by pulsating variable stars known as Cepheid variables . These stars vary in magnitude at regular intervals , giving them a pulsating appearance . The strip intersects the upper part of the main sequence in the region of class A and F stars , which are between one and two solar masses . Pulsating stars in this part of the instability strip that intersects the upper part of the main sequence are called Delta Scuti variables . Main @-@ sequence stars in this region experience only small changes in magnitude and so this variation is difficult to detect . Other classes of unstable main @-@ sequence stars , like Beta Cephei variables , are unrelated to this instability strip . 
 = = Lifetime = = 
 The total amount of energy that a star can generate through nuclear fusion of hydrogen is limited by the amount of hydrogen fuel that can be consumed at the core . For a star in equilibrium , the energy generated at the core must be at least equal to the energy radiated at the surface . Since the luminosity gives the amount of energy radiated per unit time , the total life span can be estimated , to first approximation , as the total energy produced divided by the star 's luminosity . 
 For a star with at least 0 @.@ 5 M ☉ , when the hydrogen supply in its core is exhausted and it expands to become a red giant , it can start to fuse helium atoms to form carbon . The energy output of the helium fusion process per unit mass is only about a tenth the energy output of the hydrogen process , and the luminosity of the star increases . This results in a much shorter length of time in this stage compared to the main sequence lifetime . ( For example , the Sun is predicted to spend 130 million years burning helium , compared to about 12 billion years burning hydrogen . ) Thus , about 90 % of the observed stars above 0 @.@ 5 M ☉ will be on the main sequence . On average , main @-@ sequence stars are known to follow an empirical mass @-@ luminosity relationship . The luminosity ( L ) of the star is roughly proportional to the total mass ( M ) as the following power law : 
 <formula> 
 This relationship applies to main @-@ sequence stars in the range 0 @.@ 1 – 50 M ☉ . 
 The amount of fuel available for nuclear fusion is proportional to the mass of the star . Thus , the lifetime of a star on the main sequence can be estimated by comparing it to solar evolutionary models . The Sun has been a main @-@ sequence star for about 4 @.@ 5 billion years and it will become a red giant in 6 @.@ 5 billion years , for a total main sequence lifetime of roughly 1010 years . Hence : 
 <formula> 
 where M and L are the mass and luminosity of the star , respectively , <formula> is a solar mass , <formula> is the solar luminosity and <formula> is the star 's estimated main sequence lifetime . 
 Although more massive stars have more fuel to burn and might be expected to last longer , they also must radiate a proportionately greater amount with increased mass . Thus , the most massive stars may remain on the main sequence for only a few million years , while stars with less than a tenth of a solar mass may last for over a trillion years . 
 The exact mass @-@ luminosity relationship depends on how efficiently energy can be transported from the core to the surface . A higher opacity has an insulating effect that retains more energy at the core , so the star does not need to produce as much energy to remain in hydrostatic equilibrium . By contrast , a lower opacity means energy escapes more rapidly and the star must burn more fuel to remain in equilibrium . Note , however , that a sufficiently high opacity can result in energy transport via convection , which changes the conditions needed to remain in equilibrium . 
 In high @-@ mass main @-@ sequence stars , the opacity is dominated by electron scattering , which is nearly constant with increasing temperature . Thus the luminosity only increases as the cube of the star 's mass . For stars below 10 M ☉ , the opacity becomes dependent on temperature , resulting in the luminosity varying approximately as the fourth power of the star 's mass . For very low @-@ mass stars , molecules in the atmosphere also contribute to the opacity . Below about 0 @.@ 5 M ☉ , the luminosity of the star varies as the mass to the power of 2 @.@ 3 , producing a flattening of the slope on a graph of mass versus luminosity . Even these refinements are only an approximation , however , and the mass @-@ luminosity relation can vary depending on a star 's composition . 
 = = Evolutionary tracks = = 
 When a main @-@ sequence star consumes the hydrogen at its core , the loss of energy generation causes its gravitational collapse to resume . Stars with less than 0 @.@ 23 M ☉ , are predicted to directly become white dwarfs when energy generation by nuclear fusion of hydrogen at their core comes to a halt . In stars between this threshold and 10 M ☉ , the hydrogen surrounding the helium core reaches sufficient temperature and pressure to undergo fusion , forming a hydrogen @-@ burning shell . In consequence of this change , the outer envelope of the star expands and decreases in temperature , turning it into a red giant . At this point the star is evolving off the main sequence and entering the giant branch . The path which the star now follows across the HR diagram , to the upper right of the main sequence , is called an evolutionary track . 
 The helium core of a red giant continues to collapse until it is entirely supported by electron degeneracy pressure — a quantum mechanical effect that restricts how closely matter can be compacted . For stars of more than about 0 @.@ 5 M ☉ , the core eventually reaches a temperature where it becomes hot enough to burn helium into carbon via the triple alpha process . Stars with more than 5 – 7 @.@ 5 M ☉ can additionally fuse elements with higher atomic numbers . For stars with ten or more solar masses , this process can lead to an increasingly dense core that finally collapses , ejecting the star 's overlying layers in a Type II supernova explosion , Type Ib supernova or Type Ic supernova . 
 When a cluster of stars is formed at about the same time , the life span of these stars will depend on their individual masses . The most massive stars will leave the main sequence first , followed steadily in sequence by stars of ever lower masses . Thus the stars will evolve in order of their position on the main sequence , proceeding from the most massive at the left toward the right of the HR diagram . The current position where stars in this cluster are leaving the main sequence is known as the turn @-@ off point . By knowing the main sequence lifespan of stars at this point , it becomes possible to estimate the age of the cluster . 
 = = = General = = = 
 <unk> , Rudolf , 100 Billion Suns , Basic Books , New York , 1983 . 
 = = = Technical = = = 
 Arnett , David , Supernovae and Nucleosynthesis , Princeton University Press , Princeton , 1996 . 
 Bahcall , John N. , Neutrino Astrophysics , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1989 . 
 Bahcall , John N. , <unk> , M.H. , and Basu , <unk> , " Solar Models : Current Epoch and Time <unk> , Neutrinos , and <unk> Properties , " The Astrophysical Journal , 555 , 990 , 2001 . 
 Barnes , C. A. , Clayton , D. D. , and Schramm , D. N. ( eds . ) , Essays in Nuclear Astrophysics , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1982 . 
 Bowers , Richard L. , and Deeming , Terry , Astrophysics I : Stars , Jones and Bartlett , Publishers , Boston , 1984 . 
 Bradley W. Carroll & Dale A. <unk> ( 2007 ) . An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics . Person Education Addison @-@ Wesley San Francisco . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Chabrier , Gilles , and Baraffe , Isabelle , " Theory of Low @-@ Mass Stars and Substellar Objects , " Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 38 , 337 , 2000 . 
 Chandrasekhar , S. , An Introduction to the study of stellar Structure , Dover Publications , Inc . , New York , 1967 . 
 Clayton , Donald D. , Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1983 . 
 Cox , J. P. , and <unk> , R. T. , Principles of Stellar Structure , Gordon and Breach , New York , 1968 . 
 Fowler , William . , Caughlan , Georgeanne R. , and Zimmerman , Barbara A. , " Thermonuclear Reaction Rates , I , " Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 5 , 525 , 1967 . 
 Fowler , William A. , Caughlan , Georgeanne R. , and Zimmerman , Barbara A. , " Thermonuclear Reaction Rates , II , " Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 13 , 69 , 1975 . 
 Hansen , Carl J. , Kawaler , Steven D. , and Trimble , Virginia Stellar Interiors : Physical Principles , Structure , and Evolution , Second Edition , Springer @-@ Verlag , New York , 2004 . 
 Harris , Michael J. , Fowler , William A. , Caughlan , Georgeanne R. , and Zimmerman , Barbara A. , " Thermonuclear Reaction Rates , III , " Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 21 , 165 , 1983 . 
 Iben , <unk> , Jr , " Stellar Evolution Within and Off the Main Sequence , " Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 5 , 571 , 1967 . 
 Iglesias , Carlos A , and Rogers , Forrest J. , " Updated Opal <unk> , " The Astrophysical Journal , 464 , 943 , 1996 . 
 <unk> , Rudolf , and <unk> , Alfred , Stellar Structure and Evolution , Springer @-@ Verlag , Berlin , 1990 . 
 Liebert , James , and Probst , Ronald G. , " Very Low Mass Stars " , Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics , 25 , 437 , 1987 . 
 Padmanabhan , T. , Theoretical Astrophysics , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2002 . 
 <unk> , Dina , An Introduction to the Theory of Stellar Structure and Evolution , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2000 . 
 Novotny , Eva , Introduction to Stellar Atmospheres and Interior , Oxford University Press , New York , 1973 . 
 Shore , Steven N. , The Tapestry of Modern Astrophysics , John Wiley and Sons , Hoboken , 2003 . 
 = SS Christopher Columbus = 
 The SS Christopher Columbus was an American excursion liner on the Great Lakes , in service between 1893 and 1933 . She was the only whaleback ship ever built for passenger service . The ship was designed by Alexander McDougall , the developer and promoter of the whaleback design . 
 Columbus was built between 1892 and 1893 at Superior , Wisconsin , by the American Steel Barge Company . Initially , she ferried passengers to and from the World 's Columbian Exposition . Later , she provided general transportation and excursion services to various ports around the lakes . 
 At 362 feet ( 110 m ) , the ship was the longest whaleback ever built , and reportedly also the largest vessel on the Great Lakes when she was launched . Columbus is said to have carried more passengers during her career than any other vessel on the Great Lakes . After a career lasting four decades , she was retired during the Great Depression and scrapped in 1936 by the Manitowoc Shipbuilding Company at Manitowoc , Wisconsin . 
 = = Background and proposal = = 
 The history of the Columbus is linked with that of the whalebacks , an innovative but not widely accepted ship design of the late 1880s , and of their designer , Alexander McDougall . A Scottish immigrant , Great Lakes captain , inventor and entrepreneur , McDougall developed the idea of the whaleback as a way to improve the ability of barges to follow a towing vessel in heavy seas . <unk> were characterized by distinctive hull shapes with rounded tops , lacking conventional vertical sides . Waves thus broke across their hulls with considerably less force than when striking a conventional hull . Water could also flow around the rounded turrets which resembled gun turrets on contemporary warships ; the superstructure and deckhouses were mounted on these turrets . The rounded contours of whalebacks gave them an unconventional appearance , and McDougall 's ship and barge designs were received with considerable skepticism , resistance , and derision . As they had porcine @-@ looking snouts for bows , some observers called them " pig boats " . 
 After McDougall was unable to persuade existing shipbuilders to try his designs , he founded the American Steel Barge Company in Superior , Wisconsin in 1888 , and built them himself . McDougall actively promoted his design and company by sending the SS Charles W. Wetmore to London , and starting another shipyard in Everett , Washington , which built the SS City of Everett . When the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , to be held in Chicago , Illinois , was in the planning stages , McDougall recognized another opportunity to publicize his design . The Columbus , conceived as an elaborate ferry , was intended to demonstrate that the whaleback design would work well in passenger service , and would be able to travel at high speed . The ship 's name honored the explorer Christopher Columbus as did the World 's Columbian Exposition itself , timed to coincide with the 400th anniversary of his first voyage to the New World . 
 = = Construction and Columbian Exposition = = 
 The World 's Fair Steamship Company ordered the construction of the Columbus at an estimated cost of $ 360 @,@ 000 . The job was undertaken at McDougall 's American Steel Barge Company works in Superior , Wisconsin , starting in the fall of 1892 . 
 The hull framing , which included nine bulkheads , was completed on September 13 , 1892 . The ship 's propulsion mechanisms were next installed , consisting of a single four @-@ bladed , 14 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) diameter , 19 @-@ foot ( 6 m ) pitch propeller , the two reciprocating triple @-@ expansion steam engines ( with three cylinders of 26 @-@ inch ( 66 cm ) , 42 @-@ inch ( 107 cm ) and 70 @-@ inch ( 178 cm ) diameters in a common frame with a 42 @-@ inch ( 107 cm ) stroke ) manufactured by Samuel F. Hodge & Co. of Detroit , Michigan , and six steel tubular return Scotch boilers , ( 11 @-@ foot ( 3 m ) diameter by 12 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) long ) , built by Cleveland Shipbuilding Company . The rounded hull top was then added , followed by the six turrets , which were substantially larger than those employed on freighter whalebacks . The ship was launched on December 3 , 1892 , after which two superstructure decks were mounted on the turrets along the centerline of her hull to afford access to her two internal decks , one in the turrets and one in the hull below . 
 She was fitted out over the remainder of late 1892 and early 1893 . Electric lighting was used , and she was elegantly furnished . Her grand saloon and <unk> promenade deck contained several fountains and a large aquarium filled with trout and other fish of the lakes . The cabins and public spaces were fitted out with oak paneling , velvet carpets , etched glass windows , leather furniture and marble . Shops and restaurants were provided for the passengers . 
 McDougall 's American Steel Barge Company had committed in the contract that the Columbus would be built and delivered in three months , making her one of the fastest @-@ built large ships of her time . The builders further promised rapid loading and unloading , predicting that the vessel would be able to embark 5 @,@ 000 passengers in five minutes , and disembark the same passengers in even less time . The Columbus was specified to be able run the 6 miles ( 10 km ) from the dock downtown to the fairgrounds at Jackson Park and 64th Street in 20 minutes . 
 McDougall set up another holding company , the Columbian <unk> Steamship Company of Duluth , Minnesota , to own and operate the Columbus . She was commissioned on May 13 , 1893 . Her first captain was John McArthur , who had captained other whalebacks for McDougall 's firms , starting with the first powered whaleback , the Colgate Hoyt , built in 1890 . McDougall was quoted as having said to McArthur , " There is your steamboat ; take her down to Chicago and make a success of her . " 
 McArthur did just that . Painted in all white livery , the Columbus made multiple round trips per day , sailing along the Lake Michigan shoreline from the Randolph Street / Van Buren Street dock to the Jackson Park site of the World 's Columbian Exposition 's Beaux arts " White City " exposition fairgrounds . A contemporary souvenir booklet called her " the greatest marine wonder of its time " , and another publication dubbed her the " Queen of the Lakes . " She had an estimated capacity of 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 passengers on her four decks , but it was reported that she carried 7 @,@ 000 on her maiden voyage . The Goodrich Transit Line steamer Virginia ( later the USS Blue Ridge ) is said to have raced against her . 
 The Columbus carried between 1 @.@ 7 and 2 @.@ 0 million passengers ( sources differ ) during the exposition , with only one fatality , a crew member . In recognition of that success , the commissioners of the exposition presented Captain McArthur with a gold watch engraved with a representation of the ship . McArthur went on to captain other whalebacks including the Frank Rockefeller , which became the SS Meteor , the only whaleback surviving today . 
 = = Regular service = = 
 After the exposition ended the Columbus entered passenger service , and an additional deck ( third superstructure , fifth total ) was added during the 1899 – 1900 winter season . Despite the Columbus ' success at the exposition , and McDougall 's promotional efforts , the whaleback design never caught on . By 1900 , the last whalebacks had been built in Superior : the Alexander McDougall in 1899 ( the last powered ship ) , and the John Smeaton , the last whaleback barge . The American Steel Barge Company was sold to the American Ship Building Company , becoming their Superior Works , and switched to more conventional <unk> designs . 
 In 1899 the Columbus was leased to and operated by the Goodrich Transit Line , whose steamer Virginia had been a perennial racing rival . She changed hands in 1905 to the Milwaukee & Chicago Transportation company – possibly a Goodrich holding company – and again in 1909 to Goodrich Transit Line . Her livery was at some point between 1906 and 1909 changed to a black hull with yellow accents , and she was placed in service on the route between Chicago and Milwaukee , Wisconsin . The Columbus remained with the Goodrich line for several years . Although she was used for excursions elsewhere around the Great Lakes , her regular schedule was a daily trip to Milwaukee , leaving Chicago mid @-@ morning , sailing to Milwaukee for a two @-@ hour stopover , and then returning ( see advertisement right ) . She made daily round @-@ trip excursions from the Goodrich docks at the Rush Street Bridge . 
 Columbus had at least three accidents . In June 1895 she suffered an explosion caused by a steam pipe becoming disconnected while she was underway . Accounts differ , but some claim that this happened during a race with her rival , Virginia . In July 1905 , she collided with the schooner Ralph Campbell in the Chicago River . On June 30 , 1917 , she was involved in her most serious accident , a collision with a water tower . The collision happened in Milwaukee while she was being maneuvered by tugs away from her dock . The Milwaukee River current caught her , spinning her sideways , and her bow sheared off two legs of the Yahr @-@ Lang Drug Company 's water tower , toppling it and flooding Columbus ' decks with about 25 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 95 @,@ 000 l ) . The collision killed 16 passengers and severely damaged her pilot house , putting her out of service for the rest of the year . 
 The Columbus was one of the first ships to be fitted with an on @-@ board radio , installed by 1909 , when she was allocated the call letters " KC " . Columbus and the SS Chicago used radio to help coordinate the rescue of over 200 passengers from the Goodrich liner City of Racine when the Racine was disabled off Waukegan , Illinois , in Lake Michigan . 
 In 1915 , the SS Eastland capsized while docked in the Chicago River , with the loss of over 800 lives . Officials subsequently ordered many passenger ships to undergo stability testing , which the Columbus passed easily . Even with 7 @,@ 500 sandbags ( simulating passengers ) piled on one side , and tugboats pulling in that direction , she listed only 12 degrees . Columbus was featured at the Century of Progress exhibition in Chicago in 1932 – 33 . 
 = = Disposition = = 
 The Columbus was taken out of service in 1933 , and changed hands twice during the Great Depression , in 1933 and again in 1934 . She was scrapped in 1936 at the Manitowoc Shipbuilding Company in Manitowoc , Wisconsin . 
 SS Christopher Columbus carried 1 @.@ 7 – 2 million passengers in her first year alone , and is estimated to have carried more passengers than any other vessel on the Great Lakes . She was one of the most photographed passenger ships on the lakes , and souvenir postcards of her are still widely available . One of her anchors , the design of which was patented by McDougall on February 3 , 1891 , is displayed at the Mariners ' Museum in Newport News , Virginia . 
 = Jim Bottomley = 
 James Leroy Bottomley ( April 23 , 1900 – December 11 , 1959 ) was an American professional baseball player . A first baseman , Bottomley played in Major League Baseball from 1922 through 1937 for the St. Louis Cardinals , Cincinnati Reds , and St. Louis Browns . He also served as player @-@ manager for the Browns in 1937 . Playing for the Cardinals against Brooklyn at Ebbets Field on September 16 , 1924 , he set the all @-@ time single game RBI record with 12 . 
 Born in Oglesby , Illinois , Bottomley grew up in Nokomis , Illinois . He dropped out of high school at the age of 16 to raise money for his family . After playing semi @-@ professional baseball , the Cardinals scouted and signed Bottomley . He won the League Award , given to the most valuable player , in 1928 , and was a part of World Series championship teams in 1926 and 1931 . He played for the Cardinals through the 1932 season , after which he was traded to the Reds . After playing for Cincinnati for three years , he played two more seasons with the Browns . 
 After finishing his playing career with the Browns , Bottomley joined the Chicago Cubs organization as a scout and minor league baseball manager . After suffering a heart attack , Bottomley and his wife retired to raise cattle in Missouri . Bottomley was nicknamed " Sunny Jim " because of his cheerful disposition . Bottomley was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974 by the Veterans Committee and to the Cardinals Hall of Fame in 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bottomley was born on April 23 , 1900 , to Elizabeth ( née Carter ) and John Bottomley in Oglesby , Illinois . His family later moved to Nokomis , Illinois , where Bottomley enrolled in grade school and Nokomis High School . He dropped out when he was 16 years old in order to help support his family financially . Bottomley worked as a coal miner , truck driver , grocery clerk , and railroad clerk . His younger brother , Ralph , died in a mining accident in 1920 . 
 Bottomley also played semi @-@ professional baseball for several local teams to make additional money , earning $ 5 a game ( $ 79 in current dollar terms ) . A police officer who knew Branch Rickey , the general manager of the St. Louis Cardinals , saw Bottomley play , and recommended Bottomley to Rickey . 
