 Early in its existence , Lenny produced large waves and high tides along the Guajira Peninsula in Colombia , sinking two boats and flooding 1 @,@ 200 houses . There were also reports of flooded businesses and damaged crops . In the country , strong winds on the storm 's fringe killed a man by striking him with a beam . Although there were initial reports of nine people missing , only two were counted in the death toll for mainland Colombia . Two sailors were killed offshore when their yacht was lost in the southern Caribbean Sea . 
 Along the ABC Islands off the north coast of Venezuela , the hurricane produced 10 @-@ to @-@ 20 ft ( 3 @-@ to @-@ 6 m ) waves along the southwest coastlines . The waves caused heavy beach erosion and coastal damage to properties and boats . 
 In Jamaica , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall but left little damage . Rains in the Dominican Republic caused flooding in the country 's southwest portion . Flooding around Les Cayes in southwestern Haiti destroyed 60 percent of the rice , corn , and banana plantations , while high waves wrecked several houses in <unk> . 
 Hurricane Lenny was originally forecast to strike Puerto Rico , although it remained south of the island . Beginning on November 17 , Lenny affected Puerto Rico with gusty winds and heavy rainfall . Rainfall in the days prior to Lenny 's approach left areas susceptible to flooding , which caused many rivers in the northeastern portion of the island to overflow their banks following the storm . Such flooding forced towns to evacuate along the rivers , and also resulted in the closure of secondary and primary highways . The heavy rains also caused mudslides and rockslides . The peak rainfall on the island was 14 @.@ 64 in ( 372 mm ) in Jayuya in central Puerto Rico . Tides in San Juan were about 1 @.@ 8 ft ( 0 @.@ 55 m ) above normal . There , high seas washed a 546 @-@ ft ( 166 m ) freighter ashore . Winds in the Puerto Rican mainland were not significant , gusting to 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) in Ceiba . The storm left 22 @,@ 000 people without power and 103 @,@ 000 people without water . Because of the heavy rainfall , about 200 farmers in southeastern Puerto Rico sustained about $ 19 million in crop damage ( 1999 USD ) . In the affected region , the heavy rainfall destroyed 80 percent of the vegetables and 50 percent of the plantains . Damage throughout the island totaled $ 105 million ( 1999 US ) . 
 = = = Virgin Islands = = = 
 After passing southeast of Puerto Rico , Hurricane Lenny struck St. Croix in the United States Virgin Islands , although its strongest winds remained southeast of the island . There , gusts reached 112 mph ( 180 km / h ) , while sustained winds officially peaked around 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Strong winds damaged the roofs of many houses in eastern St. Croix and knocked down trees and power lines . The winds left severe damage to vegetation after fruits and vegetables were blown away . Rainfall peaked at 10 @.@ 47 in ( 266 mm ) , which caused widespread flooding of many properties in the island 's western portion . In <unk> , the hurricane produced a storm surge of 15 – 20 ft ( 4 @.@ 5 – 6 m ) along with high waves that washed out roads and damaged coastal structures . There was also severe beach erosion in western St. Croix ; high waves dumped 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 m ) of sand onto coastal roads about 100 ft ( 30 m ) inland , and also washed several boats ashore . The National Weather Service described the damage as " moderate " . 
 Elsewhere in the U.S. Virgin Islands , Lenny produced a storm surge of about 1 @.@ 8 ft ( 0 @.@ 55 m ) in St. Thomas . Sustained winds on the island reached 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) at the Cyril E. King Airport , with gusts to 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) . On nearby St. John , wind gusts reached 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) . Rains were not as heavy as on St. Croix ; the maximum amounts were 4 @.@ 34 in ( 110 mm ) on St. Thomas and 2 @.@ 95 in ( 75 mm ) on St. John . Both islands reported beach erosion along their southern coastlines . Damage on St. Thomas was minimal , limited to minor flooding and mudslides . The Virgin Islands National Park in St. John reported over $ 1 @.@ 6 million in damage ( 1999 USD ) . In Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands , the hurricane left about $ 330 million in damage ( 1999 USD ) , but caused no deaths . 
 In Virgin Gorda in the nearby British Virgin Islands , the hurricane produced sustained winds of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) , with gusts to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . Rainfall amounted to around 4 in ( 100 mm ) and caused a mudslide near Coxheath . High waves eroded a portion of Sir Francis Drake Highway , and the high winds destroyed the roof of an apartment . Property damage in the British Virgin Islands totaled $ 5 @.@ 6 million ( 1999 USD ) ; however , the damage combined with the loss of tourism and productivity yielded a loss of $ 22 million to the islands ' economy , or 3 @.@ 1 percent of the gross domestic product . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 The eye of Lenny moved over Anguilla , an island located east of the British Virgin Islands . Localized flooding was reported , including in the capital , The Valley , where waters reportedly reached a depth of 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . The hurricane struck only a month after Hurricane Jose had affected the region , causing significant beach erosion along Anguilla 's coastline . Damage from Lenny amounted to $ 65 @.@ 8 million . 
 Saint Barthélemy and the SSS Islands , which include Saba , Sint Eustatius , and Saint Martin , were in the path of Hurricane Lenny on November 18 through 19 . On Saint Barthélemy , the hurricane produced record @-@ breaking precipitation of around 15 in ( 380 mm ) . Waves reached 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) on the island 's western portion . On Saba , there was an unofficial wind gust of 167 mph ( 268 km / h ) before the instrument blew away . The island sustained damage to several buildings , including airport facilities . The highest precipitation related to the storm occurred at the police station on the French side of Saint Martin , where a total of 34 @.@ 12 in ( 867 mm ) was recorded . This included a record 24 @-@ hour total of 18 @.@ 98 in ( 482 mm ) . On the Dutch side of the island , rainfall peaked at 27 @.@ 56 in ( 700 mm ) in Philipsburg . The rains resulted in mudslides and flooding and were the primary form of impact on the island . For 36 hours , Saint Martin experienced tropical storm conditions , and there were three times when the winds surpassed hurricane force . Sustained winds on the island peaked at 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) at the Princess Juliana International Airport ; these were the highest sustained winds observed on land . The airport also reported a wind gust of 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) . 
 Due to the hurricane 's unusual track from the west , it produced unparalleled waves of 10 – 16 ft ( 3 – 5 m ) along the western coast of St. Martin , which damaged or destroyed many boats . During its passage , Lenny left widespread damage to the infrastructure , including to the airport , harbor , resorts , power utilities , schools , and hospitals . As a result , the three SSS Islands sustained power and telephone outages . There was widespread destruction of the roofs of houses across the island , and over 200 houses were destroyed . Damage was estimated at $ 69 million , and there were three deaths on the Dutch side of St. Martin . Two of these deaths were from flying debris , and the other was due to a collapsed roadway . 
 While passing over Antigua , Hurricane Lenny dropped 18 @.@ 32 in ( 465 mm ) of rain at the V. C. Bird International Airport , while locations in the southern portion recorded over 25 in ( 640 mm ) . The rainfall caused severe flooding in Antigua , resulting in landslides in the northwestern and southern portion of the island . Flooding washed out major roadways , including one bridge . Along the coast , the storm caused severe beach erosion . About 65 percent of Barbuda experienced flooding due to the rainfall and the island 's flat topography . The flooding contaminated the water storage facilities and all private wells . About 95 percent of the crops in Barbuda were destroyed . Damage in the country of Antigua and Barbuda totaled $ 51 @.@ 3 million , and there was one death . 
 The hurricane 's waves reached 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) along the coasts of Saint Kitts and Nevis , washing up to 600 ft ( 180 m ) inland . Several businesses were flooded , and some beach erosion was reported . The hurricane destroyed 46 homes and damaged 332 others to varying degree . Home damage forced four families to evacuate . Heavy rains caused mudslides on Saint Kitts , and heavy damage occurred in Old Road Town . Damage in the country amounted to $ 41 @.@ 4 million . In Montserrat , damage was reported along its western coastline . After high waves capsized a boat , a crew of three required rescue . Guadeloupe received record precipitation amounts in some areas , generally ranging from 6 to 12 inches ( 150 to 300 mm ) . On Grande @-@ Terre , the eastern island of Guadeloupe , the hurricane produced a significant wave height of 9 @.@ 8 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , with estimates as high as 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . The extent of damage was from waves in the western portion of the island and from unrelated flooding inland . There were five deaths in Guadeloupe . 
 In Dominica , high waves damaged the island 's western coastal highway , leaving the most heavily traveled road temporarily closed . Road closures cut off links between towns on the island . The hurricane destroyed at least 50 homes , including 3 that were washed away by the waves . Hotels along the island 's west coast sustained heavy damage , and across the nation the hurricane 's impact was worse than that from Hurricane Luis four years prior . Damage on the island totaled $ 21 @.@ 5 million . Rainfall of around 3 in ( 76 mm ) reached as far south as Martinique , where one person was killed . Further south , high waves in Saint Lucia washed away beaches , a seawall , and coastal walkways . At least 40 houses were damaged along the coast , which left several families homeless . Damage in the country totaled $ 6 @.@ 6 million . In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , the hurricane washed away four buildings and damaged five others . About 50 people were left homeless in the country . 
 In western Grenada , high waves affected much of the coastline , destroying 21 small boats and causing significant beach erosion . The waves covered the entire Grand Anse Beach in Saint George Parish . The erosion heavily impacted tourist areas and also threatened the foundation of the runway at the Maurice Bishop International Airport . Storm damage cut off the towns in western Grenada from the capital city of Saint George 's . The cut @-@ off roads resulted in an island @-@ wide fuel shortage . In Saint John Parish , the storm knocked out the water and power supply and forced several families to evacuate their damaged houses . The small island Carriacou , located north of Grenada , sustained damage to the road to its primary airport . At least 10 homes were destroyed in the country , and damage totaled $ 94 @.@ 6 million ; this represented 27 percent of the island 's gross domestic product . Effects from the storm reached as far south as Trinidad and Tobago . In the country , storm surge caused damage to boats and coastal structures , while beach erosion was reported in Tobago . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following heavy damage to the coral reef around Curaçao , workers placed reef balls to assist in replenishing the damaged structure . In Puerto Rico , workers quickly responded to power and water outages . Similarly on Saint Croix , power systems were quickly restored . On November 23 , U.S. President Bill Clinton declared the U.S. Virgin Islands a disaster area . This allocated federal funding for loans to public and private entities and provided 75 percent of the cost of debris removal . By December 10 , nearly 3 @,@ 000 residents had applied for assistance , mostly on St. Croix . In response , the federal government provided about $ 480 @,@ 000 to the affected people . The United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance provided $ 185 @,@ 000 , mostly directed toward the United Nations Development Programme , for aid to other islands in the eastern Caribbean . Other agencies , including the Caribbean Development Bank , the United Kingdom 's Department for International Development , and the European Union , provided $ 1 @.@ 1 million in assistance . 
 In response to the damage on Saint Martin , officials in the Netherlands Antilles issued an appeal to the European Parliament for assistance from the international community . Due to their small population and area , the small islands of the eastern Caribbean required international funding to repair the damage from the hurricane and return to normal . In Antigua and Barbuda , officials worked quickly to repair roads and clean Barbuda 's water system . However , 20 @,@ 000 people in Antigua remained without water for a week after the hurricane , and the stagnant water caused an increase in mosquitoes . The government of Dominica provided 42 families with temporary shelters . With a loan from the Caribbean Development Bank , the government worked to complete a sea wall along a highway south of its capital Roseau . The Saint Lucian government provided housing to 70 families . In Grenada , workers repaired the road system to allow fuel transportation across the island and began to reclaim land near its airport to mitigate erosion . Regions in Antigua and Grenada were declared disaster areas . Across the eastern Caribbean , local Red Cross offices provided food and shelter to affected citizens . High damage to tourist areas caused a decrease in cruise lines . A damaged hotel in Nevis left 800 people unemployed due to its closure . 
 Due to its effects , the name Lenny was retired by the World Meteorological Organization and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . The name was replaced with Lee in the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = The Lucy poems = 
 The Lucy poems are a series of five poems composed by the English Romantic poet William Wordsworth ( 1770 – 1850 ) between 1798 and 1801 . All but one were first published during 1800 in the second edition of Lyrical Ballads , a collaboration between Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge that was both Wordsworth 's first major publication and a milestone in the early English Romantic movement . In the series , Wordsworth sought to write unaffected English verse infused with abstract ideals of beauty , nature , love , longing and death . 
 The poems were written during a short period while the poet lived in Germany . Although they individually deal with a variety of themes , as a series they focus on the poet 's longing for the company of his friend Coleridge , who had stayed in England , and on his increasing impatience with his sister Dorothy , who had travelled with him abroad . Wordsworth examines the poet 's unrequited love for the idealised character of Lucy , an English girl who has died young . The idea of her death weighs heavily on the poet throughout the series , imbuing it with a melancholic , elegiac tone . Whether Lucy was based on a real woman or was a figment of the poet 's imagination has long been a matter of debate among scholars . Generally reticent about the poems , Wordsworth never revealed the details of her origin or identity . Some scholars speculate that Lucy is based on his sister Dorothy , while others see her as a fictitious or hybrid character . Most critics agree that she is essentially a literary device upon whom he could project , meditate and reflect . 
 The " Lucy poems " consist of " Strange fits of passion have I known " , " She dwelt among the untrodden ways " , " I travelled among unknown men " , " Three years she grew in sun and shower " , and " A slumber did my spirit seal " . Although they are presented as a series in modern anthologies , Wordsworth did not conceive of them as a group , nor did he seek to publish the poems in sequence . He described the works as " experimental " in the prefaces to both the 1798 and 1800 editions of Lyrical Ballads , and revised the poems significantly — shifting their thematic emphasis — between 1798 and 1799 . Only after his death in 1850 did publishers and critics begin to treat the poems as a fixed group ; anthologies since have generally presented them as a series . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Lyrical Ballads = = = 
 In 1798 , Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge jointly published Lyrical Ballads , with a Few Other Poems , a collection of verses each had written separately . The book became hugely popular and was published widely ; it is generally considered a herald of the Romantic movement in English literature . In it , Wordsworth aimed to use everyday language in his compositions as set out in the preface to the 1802 edition : " The principal object , then , proposed in these Poems was to choose incidents and situations from common life , and to relate or describe them , throughout , as far as was possible in a selection of language really used by men , and at the same time , to throw over them a certain colouring of imagination , whereby ordinary things should be presented to the mind in an unusual aspect . " 
 The two poets had met three years earlier in either late August or September 1795 in Bristol . The meeting laid the foundation for an intense and profoundly creative friendship , based in part on their shared disdain for the artificial diction of the poetry of the era . Beginning in 1797 , the two lived within walking distance of each other in Somerset , which solidified their friendship . Wordsworth believed that his life before meeting Coleridge was sedentary and dull , and that his poetry amounted to little . Coleridge influenced Wordsworth , and his praise and encouragement inspired Wordsworth to write prolifically . Dorothy , Wordsworth 's sister , related the effect Coleridge had on her brother in a March 1798 letter : " His faculties seem to expand every day , he composes with much more facility than he did , as to the mechanism [ emphasis in original ] of poetry , and his ideas flow faster than he can express them . " With his new inspiration , Wordsworth came to believe he could write poetry rivalling that of John Milton . He and Coleridge planned to collaborate , but never moved beyond suggestions and notes for each other . 
 The expiration of Wordsworth 's Alfoxton House lease soon provided an opportunity for the two friends to live together . They conceived a plan to settle in Germany with Dorothy and Coleridge 's wife , Sara , " to pass the two ensuing years in order to acquire the German language , and to furnish ourselves with a tolerable stock of information in natural science " . In September 1798 , Wordsworth , Coleridge , and Dorothy travelled to Germany to explore proximate living arrangements , but this proved difficult . Although they lived together in Hamburg for a short time , the city was too expensive for their budgets . Coleridge soon found accommodations in the town of <unk> in Schleswig @-@ Holstein , which was less expensive but still socially vibrant . The impoverished Wordsworth , however , could neither afford to follow Coleridge nor provide for himself and his sister in Hamburg ; the siblings instead moved to moderately priced accommodations in Goslar in Lower Saxony , Germany . 
 = = = Separation from Coleridge = = = 
 Between October 1798 and February 1799 , Wordsworth worked on the first draft of the " Lucy poems " together with a number of other verses , including the " Matthew poems " , " Lucy Gray " and The Prelude . Coleridge had yet to join the siblings in Germany , and Wordsworth 's separation from his friend depressed him . In the three months following their parting , Wordsworth completed the first three of the " Lucy poems " : " Strange fits " , " She dwelt " , and " A slumber " . They first appeared in a letter to Coleridge dated December 1798 , in which Wordsworth wrote that " She dwelt " and " Strange fits " were " little Rhyme poems which I hope will amuse you " . Wordsworth characterised the two poems thus to mitigate any disappointment Coleridge might suffer in receiving these two poems instead of the promised three @-@ part philosophical epic The Recluse . 
 In the same letter , Wordsworth complained that : 
 As I have had no books I have been obliged to write in self @-@ defense . I should have written five times as much as I have done but that I am prevented by an uneasiness at my stomach and side , with a dull pain about my heart . I have used the word pain , but uneasiness and heat are words which more accurately express my feelings . At all events it renders writing unpleasant . Reading is now become a kind of luxury to me . When I do not read I am absolutely consumed by thinking and feeling and bodily exertions of voice or of limbs , the consequence of those feelings . 
 Wordsworth partially blamed Dorothy for the abrupt loss of Coleridge 's company . He felt that their finances — insufficient for supporting them both in <unk> — would have easily supported him alone , allowing him to follow Coleridge . Wordsworth 's anguish was compounded by the contrast between his life and that of his friend . Coleridge 's financial means allowed him to entertain lavishly and to seek the company of nobles and intellectuals ; Wordsworth 's limited wealth constrained him to a quiet and modest life . Wordsworth 's envy seeped into his letters when he described Coleridge and his new friends as " more favored <unk> " who may " be chattering and chatter 'd to , through the whole day " . 
 Although Wordsworth sought emotional support from his sister , their relationship remained strained throughout their time in Germany . Separated from his friend and forced to live in the sole company of his sister , Wordsworth used the " Lucy poems " as an emotional outlet . 
 = = = Identity of Lucy = = = 
 Wordsworth did not reveal the inspiration for the character of Lucy , and over the years the topic has generated intense speculation among literary historians . Little biographical information can be drawn from the poems — it is difficult even to determine Lucy 's age . In the mid @-@ 19th century , Thomas <unk> ( 1785 – 1859 ) , author and one @-@ time friend of Wordsworth , wrote that the poet " always preserved a mysterious silence on the subject of that ' Lucy ' , repeatedly alluded to or <unk> in his poems , and I have heard , from gossiping people about Hawkshead , some snatches of tragic story , which , after all , might be an idle semi @-@ fable , improved out of slight materials . " 
 Critic Herbert Hartman believes Lucy 's name was taken from " a neo @-@ Arcadian commonplace " , and argues she was not intended to represent any single person . In the view of one Wordsworth biographer , Mary Moorman ( 1906 – 1994 ) , " The identity of ' Lucy ' has been the problem of critics for many years . But Wordsworth is a poet before he is a biographer , and neither ' Lucy ' nor her home nor his relations with her are necessarily in the strict sense historical . Nevertheless , as the Lyrical Ballads were all of them ' founded on fact ' in some way , and as Wordsworth 's mind was essentially factual , it would be rash to say that Lucy is entirely fictitious . " 
 Moorman suggests that Lucy may represent Wordsworth 's romantic interest Mary Hutchinson , but wonders why she would be represented as one who died . It is possible that Wordsworth was thinking of Margaret Hutchinson , Mary 's sister who had died . There is no evidence , however , that the poet loved any of the Hutchinsons other than Mary . It is more likely that Margaret 's death influenced but is not the foundation for Lucy . 
 In 1980 , Hunter Davies contended that the series was written for the poet 's sister Dorothy , but found the Lucy – Dorothy allusion " bizarre " . Earlier , literary critic Richard Matlak tried to explain the Lucy – Dorothy connection , and wrote that Dorothy represented a financial burden to Wordsworth , which had effectively forced his separation from Coleridge . Wordsworth , depressed over the separation from his friend , in this interpretation , expresses both his love for his sister and fantasies about her loss through the poems . Throughout the poems , the narrator 's mixture of mourning and antipathy is accompanied by denial and guilt ; his denial of the Lucy – Dorothy relationship and the lack of narratorial responsibility for the death of Lucy allow him to escape from questioning his desires for the death of his sister . After Wordsworth began the " Lucy poems " , Coleridge wrote , " Some months ago Wordsworth transmitted to me a most sublime Epitaph / whether it had any reality , I cannot say . — Most probably , in some gloomier moment he had fancied the moment in which his Sister might die . " It is , however , possible that Wordsworth simply feared her death and did not wish it , even subconsciously . 
 Reflecting on the significance and relevance of Lucy 's identity , the 19th @-@ century poet , essayist and literary critic Frederic Myers ( 1843 – 1901 ) observed that : 
 here it was that the memory of some emotion prompted the lines on " Lucy " . Of the history of that emotion , he has told us nothing ; I forbear , therefore , to inquire concerning it , or even to speculate . That it was to the poet 's honour , I do not doubt ; but who ever learned such secrets rightly ? or who should wish to learn ? It is best to leave the sanctuary of all hearts inviolate , and to respect the reserve not only of the living but of the dead . Of these poems , almost alone , Wordsworth in his autobiographical notes has said nothing whatever . 
 Literary scholar Karl Kroeber ( 1926 – 2009 ) argues that Lucy " possesses a double existence ; her actual , historical existence and her idealised existence in the poet 's mind . In the poem , Lucy is both actual and idealised , but her actuality is relevant only insofar as it makes manifest the significance implicit in the actual girl . " Hartman holds the same view ; to him Lucy is seen " entirely from within the poet , so that this modality may be the poet 's own " , but then he argues , " she belongs to the category of spirits who must still become human ... the poet describes her as dying at a point at which she would have been humanized . " The literary historian Kenneth Johnston concludes that Lucy was created as the personification of Wordsworth 's muse , and the group as a whole " is a series of invocations to a Muse feared dead . As epitaphs , they are not sad , a very inadequate word to describe them , but breathlessly , almost aware of what such a loss would mean to the speaker : ' oh , the difference to me ! ' " 
 Scholar John Mahoney observes that whether Lucy is intended to represent Dorothy , Mary or another is much less important to understanding the poems than the fact that she represented " a hidden being who seems to lack flaws and is alone in the world . " Furthermore , she is represented as being insignificant in the public sphere but of the utmost importance in the private sphere ; in " She dwelt " this manifests through the comparison of Lucy to both a hidden flower and a shining star . Neither Lucy nor Wordsworth 's other female characters " exist as independent self @-@ conscious human beings with minds as capable of the poet 's " and are " rarely allowed to speak for themselves . " 
 = = The poems = = 
 The " Lucy poems " are written from the point of view of a lover who has long viewed the object of his affection from afar , and who is now affected by her death . Yet Wordsworth structured the poems so that they are not about any one person who has died ; instead they were written about a figure representing the poet 's lost inspiration . Lucy is Wordsworth 's inspiration , and the poems as a whole are , according to Wordsworth biographer Kenneth Johnston , " invocations to a Muse feared dead " . Lucy is represented in all five poems as sexless ; it is unlikely that the poet ever realistically saw her as a possible lover . Instead , she is presented as an ideal and represents Wordsworth 's frustration at his separation from Coleridge ; the asexual imagery reflects the futility of his longing . 
 Wordsworth 's voice slowly disappears from the poems as they progress , and his voice is entirely absent from the fifth poem . His love operates on the subconscious level , and he relates to Lucy more as a spirit of nature than as a human being . The poet 's grief is private , and he is unable to fully explain its source . When Lucy 's lover is present , he is completely immersed in human interactions and the human aspects of nature , and the death of his beloved is a total loss for the lover . The 20th @-@ century critic Spencer Hall argues that the poet represents a " fragile kind of humanism " . 
 = = = " Strange fits of passion have I known " = = = 
 " Strange fits " is probably the earliest of the poems and revolves around a fantasy of Lucy 's death . It describes the narrator 's journey to Lucy 's cottage and his thoughts along the way . Throughout , the motion of the moon is set in opposition to the motion of the speaker . The poem contains seven stanzas , a relatively elaborate structure which underscores his ambivalent attitude towards Lucy 's imagined death . The constant shifts in perspective and mood reflect his conflicting emotions . The first stanza , with its use of dramatic phrases such as " fits of passion " and " dare to tell " , contrasts with the subdued tone of the rest of the poem . As a lyrical ballad , " Strange fits " differs from the traditional ballad form , which emphasises abnormal action , and instead focuses on mood . 
 The presence of death is felt throughout the poem , although it is mentioned explicitly only in the final line . The moon , a symbol of the beloved , sinks steadily as the poem progresses , until its abrupt drop in the penultimate stanza . That the speaker links Lucy with the moon is clear , though his reasons are unclear . The moon nevertheless plays a significant role in the action of the poem : as the lover imagines the moon slowly sinking behind Lucy 's cottage , he is entranced by its motion . By the fifth stanza , the speaker has been lulled into a <unk> trance — he sleeps while still keeping his eyes on the moon ( lines 17 – 20 ) . 
 The narrator 's conscious presence is wholly absent from the next stanza , which moves forward in what literary theorist Geoffrey Hartman describes as a " motion approaching yet never quite attaining its end " . When the moon abruptly drops behind the cottage , the narrator snaps out of his dream , and his thoughts turn towards death . Lucy , the beloved , is united with the landscape in death , while the image of the retreating , entrancing moon is used to portray the idea of looking beyond one 's lover . The darker possibility also remains that the dream state represents the fulfilment of the lover 's fantasy through the death of the beloved . In falling asleep while approaching his beloved 's home , the lover betrays his own reluctance to be with Lucy . 
 Wordsworth made numerous revisions to each of the " Lucy poems " . The earliest version of " Strange fits " appears in a December 1798 letter from Dorothy to Coleridge . This draft contains many differences in phrasing and does not include a stanza that appeared in the final published version . The new lines direct the narrative towards " the Lover 's ear alone " , implying that only other lovers can understand the relationship between the moon , the beloved and the beloved 's death . Wordsworth also removed from the final stanza the lines : 
 This final stanza lost its significance with the completion of the later poems in the series , and the revision allowed for a sense of anticipation at the poem 's close and helped draw the audience into the story of the remaining " Lucy poems " . Of the other changes , only the description of the horse 's movement is important : " My horse <unk> 'd on " becomes " With quickening pace my horse drew nigh " , which heightens the narrator 's vulnerability to fantasies and dreams in the revised version . 
 = = = " She dwelt among the untrodden ways " = = = 
 " She dwelt among the untrodden ways " presents Lucy as having lived in solitude near the source of the River Dove . According to literary critic Geoffrey Durrant , the poem charts her " growth , perfection , and death " . To convey the dignified , unaffected naturalness of his subject , Wordsworth uses simple language , mostly words of one syllable . In the opening quatrain , he describes the isolated and untouched area where Lucy lived , as well as her innocence and beauty , which he compares to that of a hidden flower in the second . The poem begins in a descriptive rather than narrative manner , and it is not until the line " When Lucy ceased to be " that the reader is made aware that the subject of the verse has died . Literary scholar Mark Jones describes this effect as finding the poem is " over before it has begun " , while according to writer Margaret Oliphant ( 1828 – 1897 ) , Lucy " is dead before we so much as heard of her " . 
 Lucy 's " untrodden ways " are symbolic of both her physical isolation and the unknown details of her thoughts and life . The third quatrain is written with an economy intended to capture the simplicity the narrator sees in Lucy . Her femininity is described in girlish terms . This has drawn criticism from those who see the female icon , in the words of literary scholar John Woolford , " represented in Lucy by condemning her to death while denying her the actual or symbolic fulfillment of maternity " . To evoke the " loveliness of body and spirit " , a pair of complementary but paradoxical images are employed in the second stanza : the solitary , hidden violet juxtaposed to the publicly visible Venus , emblem of love and first star of evening . Wondering if Lucy more resembles the violet or the star , the critic Cleanth Brooks ( 1906 – 1994 ) concludes that while Wordsworth likely views her as " the single star , completely dominating [ his ] world , not arrogantly like the sun , but sweetly and modestly " , the metaphor is a conventional compliment with only vague relevance . For Wordsworth , Lucy 's appeal is closer to the violet and lies in her seclusion and her perceived affinity with nature . 
 Wordsworth acquired a copy of the antiquarian and churchman Thomas Percy 's ( 1729 – 1811 ) collection of British ballads <unk> of Ancient English Poetry ( 1765 ) in Hamburg a few months before he began to compose the series . The influence of the traditional English folk ballad is evident in the metre , rhythm and structure of " She dwelt " . It follows the variant ballad stanza a4 – b3 – a4 – b3 , and in keeping with ballad tradition tells a dramatic story . As Durrant observed , " To confuse the mode of the ' Lucy ' poems with that of the love lyric is to overlook their structure , in which , as in the traditional ballad , a story is told as boldly and briefly as possible . " Kenneth and Warren Ober compare the opening lines of " She dwelt " to the traditional ballad " Katharine Jaffray " and note similarities in rhythm and structure , as well as in theme and imagery : 
 The narrator of the poem is less concerned with the experience of observing Lucy than with his reflections and meditations on his observations . Throughout the poem sadness and ecstasy are intertwined , a fact emphasised by the exclamation marks in the second and third verses . The critic Carl Woodring writes that " She dwelt " and the Lucy series can be read as elegiac , as " sober meditation [ s ] on death " . He found that they have " the economy and the general air of epitaphs in the Greek Anthology ... [ I ] f all elegies are mitigations of death , the Lucy poems are also meditations on simple beauty , by distance made more sweet and by death preserved in distance " . 
 An early draft of " She dwelt " contained two stanzas which had been omitted from the first edition . The revisions exclude many of the images but emphasise the grief that the narrator experienced . The original version began with floral imagery , which was later cut : 
 A fourth stanza , also later removed , included an explanation of how Lucy was to die : " But slow distemper checked her bloom / And on the Heath she died . " 
 = = = " I travelled among unknown men " = = = 
 The last of the " Lucy poems " to be composed , " I travelled among unknown men " , was the only one not included in the second edition of Lyrical Ballads . Although Wordsworth claimed that the poem was composed while he was still in Germany , it was in fact written during April 1801 . Evidence for this later date comes from a letter Wordsworth wrote to Mary Hutchinson referring to " I travelled " as a newly created poem . In 1802 , he instructed his printer to place " I travelled " immediately after " A slumber did my spirit seal " in Lyrical Ballads , but the poem was omitted . It was later published in Poems , in Two Volumes in 1807 . 
 The poem has frequently been read as a declaration of Wordsworth 's love for his native England and his determination not to live abroad again : 
 The first two stanzas seem to speak of the poet 's personal experience , and a patriotic reading would reflect his appreciation and pride for the English landscape . The possibility remains , however , that Wordsworth is referring to England as a physical rather than a political entity , an interpretation that gains strength from the poem 's connections to the other " Lucy poems " . 
 Lucy only appears in the second half of the poem , where she is linked with the English landscape . As such , it seems as if nature joins with the narrator in mourning for her , and the reader is drawn into this mutual sorrow . 
 Although " I travelled " was written two years after the other poems in the series , it echoes the earlier verses in both tone and language . Wordsworth gives no hint as to the identity of Lucy , and although he stated in the preface to Lyrical Ballads that all the poems were " founded on fact " , knowing the basis for the character of Lucy is not necessary to appreciating the poem and understanding its sentiment . Similarly , no insight can be gained from determining the exact geographical location of the " springs of Dove " ; in his youth , Wordsworth had visited springs of that name in Derbyshire , Patterdale and Yorkshire . 
 = = = " Three years she grew in sun and shower " = = = 
 " Three years she grew in sun and shower " was composed between 6 October and 28 December 1798 . The poem depicts the relationship between Lucy and nature through a complex opposition of images . <unk> couplings of words — " sun and shower " , " law and impulse " , " earth and heaven " , " kindle and restrain " — are used to evoke the opposing forces inherent in nature . A conflict between nature and humanity is described , as each attempts to possess Lucy . The poem contains both <unk> and elegiac characteristics ; Lucy is shown as wedded to nature , while her human lover is left alone to mourn in the knowledge that death has separated her from humanity . 
 = = = " A slumber did my spirit seal " = = = 
 Written in spare language , " A slumber did my spirit seal " consists of two stanzas , each four lines long . The first stanza is built upon even , soporific movement in which figurative language conveys the nebulous image of a girl who " seemed a thing that could not feel / The touch of earthly years " . The second maintains the quiet and even tone of the first but serves to undermine its sense of the eternal by revealing that Lucy has died and that the calmness of the first stanza represents death . The narrator 's response to her death lacks bitterness or emptiness ; instead he takes consolation from the fact that she is now beyond life 's trials , and " at last ... in inanimate community with the earth 's natural fixtures " . The lifeless rocks and stones depicted in the concluding line convey the finality of Lucy 's death . 
 = = Grouping as a series = = 
 Although the " Lucy poems " share stylistic and thematic similarities , it was not Wordsworth but literary critics who first presented the five poems as a unified set called the " Lucy poems " . The grouping was originally suggested by critic Thomas Powell in 1831 and later advocated by Margaret Oliphant in an 1871 essay . The 1861 Golden Treasury , compiled by the English historian Francis Palgrave ( 1788 – 1861 ) , groups only four of the verses , omitting " Strange fits " . The poems next appeared as a complete set of five in the collection of Wordsworth 's poems by English poet and critic Matthew Arnold ( 1822 – 1888 ) . 
 The grouping and sequence of the " Lucy poems " has been a matter of debate in literary circles . Various critics have sought to add poems to the group ; among those proposed over the years are " Alcaeus to Sappho " , " Among all lovely things " , " Lucy Gray " , " Surprised by joy " , " Tis said , that some have died for love " , " Louisa " , " Nutting " , " <unk> " , " She was a Phantom of delight " , " The Danish Boy " , " The Two April Mornings " , " To a Young Lady " , and " Written in Very Early Youth " . None of the proposals have met with widespread acceptance . The five poems included in the Lucy " canon " focus on similar themes of nature , beauty , separation and loss , and most follow the same basic ballad form . Literary scholar Mark Jones offers a general characterisation of a Lucy poem as " an untitled lyrical ballad that either mentions Lucy or is always placed with another poem that does , that either explicitly mentions her death or is susceptible of such a reading , and that is spoken by Lucy 's lover . " 
 With the exception of " A slumber " , all of the poems mention Lucy by name . The decision to include this work is based in part on Wordsworth 's decision to place it in close proximity to " Strange fits " and directly after " She dwelt " within Lyrical Ballads . In addition , " I travelled " was sent to the poet 's childhood friend and later wife , Mary Hutchinson , with a note that said it should be " read after ' She dwelt ' " . Coleridge biographer J. Dykes Campbell records that Wordsworth instructed " I travelled " to be included directly following " A slumber " , an arrangement that indicates a connection between the poems . Nevertheless , the question of inclusion is further complicated by Wordsworth 's eventual retraction of these instructions and his omission of " I travelled " from the two subsequent editions of Lyrical Ballads . 
 The 1815 edition of Lyrical Ballads organised the poems into the Poems Founded on the Affections ( " Strange fits " , " She dwelt " , and " I travelled " ) and Poems of the Imagination ( " Three years she grew " and " A slumber " ) . This arrangement allowed the two dream @-@ based poems ( " Strange fits " and " A slumber " ) to frame the series and to represent the speaker 's different sets of experiences over the course of the longer narrative . In terms of chronology , " I travelled " was written last , and thus also served as a symbolic conclusion — both emotionally and thematically — to the " Lucy poems " . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 = = = Nature = = = 
 According to critic Norman Lacey , Wordsworth built his reputation as a " poet of nature " . Early works , such as " Tintern Abbey " , can be viewed as odes to his experience of nature . His poems can also be seen as lyrical meditations on the fundamental character of the natural world . Wordsworth said that , as a youth , nature stirred " an appetite , a feeling and a love " , but by the time he wrote Lyrical Ballads , it evoked " the still sad music of humanity " . 
 The five " Lucy poems " are often interpreted as representing Wordsworth 's opposing views of nature as well as meditations on the cycle of life . They describe a variety of relationships between humanity and nature . For example , Lucy can be seen as a connection between humanity and nature , as a " boundary being , nature sprite and human , yet not quite either . She reminds us of the traditional mythical person who lives , ontologically , an intermediate life , or mediates various realms of existence . " Although the poems evoke a sense of loss , they also hint at the completeness of Lucy 's life — she was raised by nature and survives in the memories of others . She became , in the opinion of the American poet and writer David Ferry ( b . 1924 ) , " not so much a human being as a sort of compendium of nature " , while " her death was right , after all , for by dying she was one with the natural processes that made her die , and fantastically ennobled thereby " . 
 Cleanth Brooks writes that " Strange fits " presents " Kind Nature 's gentlest boon " , " Three years " its duality , and " A slumber " the clutter of natural object . Other scholars see " She dwelt " , along with " I travelled " , as representing nature 's " rustication and disappearance " . Mahoney views " Three years " as describing a masculine , benevolent nature similar to a creator deity . Although nature shapes Lucy over time and she is seen as part of nature herself , the poem shifts abruptly when she dies . Lucy appears to be eternal , like nature itself . Regardless , she becomes part of the surrounding landscape in life , and her death only verifies this connection . 
 The series presents nature as a force by turns benevolent and malign . It is shown at times to be oblivious to and uninterested in the safety of humanity . Hall argues , " In all of these poems , nature would seem to betray the heart that loves her " . The imagery used to evoke these notions serves to separate Lucy from everyday reality . The literary theorist Frances Ferguson ( b . 1947 ) notes that the " flower similes and metaphors become impediments rather than aids to any imaginative visualization of a woman ; the flowers do not simply locate themselves in Lucy 's cheeks , they expand to absorb the whole of her ... The act of describing seems to have lost touch with its goal — description of Lucy . " 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The poems Wordsworth wrote while in Goslar focus on the dead and dying . The " Lucy poems " follow this trend , and often fail to delineate the difference between life and death . Each creates an ambiguity between the sublime and nothingness , as they attempt to reconcile the question of how to convey the death of a girl intimately connected to nature . They describe a rite of passage from innocent childhood to corrupted maturity and , according to Hartman , " center on a death or a radical change of consciousness which is expressed in semi @-@ mythical form ; and they are , in fact , Wordsworth 's nearest approach to a personal myth . " The narrator is affected greatly by Lucy 's death and cries out in " She dwelt " of " the difference to me ! " . Yet in " A slumber " he is spared from trauma by sleep . 
 The reader 's experience of Lucy is filtered through the narrator 's perception . Her death suggests that nature can bring pain to all , even to those who loved her . According to the British classical and literary scholar H. W. Garrod ( 1878 – 1960 ) , " The truth is , as I believe , that between Lucy 's perfection in Nature and her death there is , for Wordsworth , really no tragic antithesis at all . " Hartman expands on this view to extend the view of death and nature to art in general : " Lucy , living , is clearly a guardian spirit , not of one place but of all English places ... while Lucy , dead , has all nature for her monument . The series is a deeply humanized version of the death of Pan , a lament on the decay of English natural feeling . Wordsworth fears that the very spirit presiding over his poetry is ephemeral , and I think he refuses to distinguish between its death in him and its historical decline . " 
 = = Critical assessment = = 
 The first mention of the poems came from Dorothy , in a letter sent to Coleridge in December 1798 . Of " Strange fits " , she wrote , " [ this ] next poem is a favorite of mine — i.e. of me Dorothy — " . The first recorded mention of any of the " Lucy poems " ( outside of notes by either William or Dorothy ) occurred after the April 1799 death of Coleridge 's son Berkeley . Coleridge was then living in Germany , and received the news through a letter from his friend Thomas Poole , who in his condolences mentioned Wordsworth 's " A slumber " : 
 But I cannot truly say that I grieve — I am perplexed — I am sad — and a little thing , a very trifle would make me weep ; but for the death of the Baby I have not wept ! — Oh ! this strange , strange , strange Scene @-@ shifter , Death ! that <unk> one with insecurity , & so <unk> the living Things that one has grasped and handled ! — / Some months ago Wordsworth transmitted to me a most sublime Epitaph / whether it had any reality , I cannot say . — Most probably , in some gloomier moment he had fancied the moment in which his sister might die . 
 Later , the essayist Charles Lamb ( 1775 – 1834 ) wrote to Wordsworth in 1801 to say that " She dwelt " was one of his favourites from Lyrical Ballads . Likewise Romantic poet John Keats ( 1795 – 1821 ) praised the poem . To the diarist and writer Henry Crabb Robinson ( 1775 – 1867 ) , " She dwelt " gave " the powerful effect of the loss of a very obscure object upon one tenderly attached to it — the opposition between the apparent strength of the passion and the insignificance of the object is delightfully conceived . " 
 Besides word of mouth and opinions in letters , there were only a few published contemporary reviews . The writer and journalist John Stoddart ( 1773 – 1856 ) , in a review of Lyrical Ballads , described " Strange fits " and " She dwelt " as " the most singular specimens of <unk> , yet irresistible pathos " . An anonymous review of Poems in Two Volumes in 1807 had a less positive opinion about " I <unk> 'd " : " Another string of flat lines about Lucy is succeeded by an ode to Duty " . Critic Francis Jeffrey ( 1773 – 1850 ) claimed that , in " Strange fits " , " Mr Wordsworth , however , has thought fit to compose a piece , illustrating this copious subject by one single thought . A lover trots away to see his mistress one fine evening , staring all the way at the moon : when he comes to her door , ' O mercy ! to myself I cried , / If Lucy should be dead ! ' And there the poem ends ! " On " A slumber did my spirit seal " , Wordsworth 's friend Thomas Powell wrote that the poem " stands by itself , and is without title prefixed , yet we are to know , from the penetration of Mr. Wordsworth 's admirers , that it is a sequel to the other deep poems that precede it , and is about one Lucy , who is dead . From the table of contents , however , we are informed by the author that it is about ' A Slumber ; ' for this is the actual title which he has condescended to give it , to put us out of pain as to what it is about . " 
 Many Victorian critics appreciated the emotion of the " Lucy poems " and focused on " Strange fits " . John Wilson , a personal friend of both Wordsworth and Coleridge , described the poem in 1842 as " powerfully pathetic " . In 1849 , critic Rev. Francis <unk> , writing under the pseudonym " Parson Frank " , remarked that " Strange fits " contained " true pathos . We are moved to our soul 's centre by sorrow expressed as that is ; for , without <unk> or wordy anguish , without <unk> of officious and obtrusive , and therefore , artificial grief ; the mourner gives sorrow words ... But he does it in words as few as may be : how intense their beauty ! " A few years later , John Wright , an early Wordsworth commentator , described the contemporary perception that " Strange fits " had a " deep but subdued and ' silent fervour ' " . Other reviewers emphasised the importance of " She dwelt among the untrodden ways " , including Scottish writer William Angus Knight ( 1836 – 1916 ) , when he described the poem as an " incomparable twelve lines " . 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , literary critic David <unk> praised the poems as a whole : " that strange little lovely group , which breathe a passion unfamiliar to Wordsworth , and about which he — so ready to talk about the genesis of his poems — has told us nothing [ ... ] Let a poet keep some of his secrets : we need not grudge him the privacy when the poetry is as beautiful as this ; when there is such celebration of girlhood , love , and death [ ... ] The poet 's sense of loss is sublime in its utter simplicity . He finds harmony rather than harshness in the contrast between the illusion of love and the fact of death . " Later critics focused on the importance of the poems to Wordsworth 's poetic technique . Durrant argued that " The four ' Lucy ' poems which appeared in the 1800 edition of Lyrical Ballads are worth careful attention , because they represent the clearest examples of the success of Wordsworth 's experiment . " Alan Grob ( 1932 – 2007 ) focused less on the unity that the poems represent and believed that " the principal importance of the ' Matthew ' and ' Lucy ' poems , apart from their intrinsic achievement , substantial as that is , is in suggesting the presence of seeds of discontent even in a period of seemingly assured faith that makes the sequence of developments in the history of Wordsworth 's thought a more orderly , evolving pattern than the chronological leaps between stages would seem to imply . " 
 Later critics de @-@ emphasised the significance of the poems in Wordsworth 's artistic development . Hunter Davies ( b . 1936 ) concluded that their impact relies more on their popularity than importance to Wordsworth 's poetic career . Davies went on to claim , " The poems about Lucy are perhaps Wordsworth 's best @-@ known work which he did in Germany , along with ' Nutting ' and the Matthew poems , but the most important work was the beginning of The Prelude " ( emphasis in original ) . Some critics emphasised the importance behind Lucy as a figure , including Geoffrey Hartman ( b . 1929 ) , when he claimed , " It is in the Lucy poems that the notion of spirit of place , and particularly English spirit of place , reaches its purest form . " Writer and poet Meena Alexander ( b . 1951 ) believed that the character of Lucy " is the impossible object of the poet 's desire , an iconic representation of the Romantic feminine . " 
 = = Parodies and allusions = = 
 The " Lucy poems " have been parodied numerous times since their first publication . These were generally intended to ridicule the simplification of textual complexities and deliberate ambiguities in poetry . They also questioned the way many 19th @-@ century critics sought to establish definitive readings . According to Jones , such parodies commented in a " meta @-@ critical " manner and themselves present an alternative mode of criticism . Among the more notable is the one by Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's son Hartley Coleridge ( 1796 – 1849 ) , called " On William Wordsworth " or simply " Imitation " , as in the 1827 version published for The Inspector magazine ( " He lived amidst th ' untrodden ways / To <unk> Lake that lead ; / A Bard whom there were none to praise / And very few to read " lines 1 – 4 ) . Parody also appears in the 1888 murder @-@ mystery reading of the poem by Victorian author Samuel Butler ( 1835 – 1902 ) . Butler believed Wordsworth 's use of the phrase " the difference to me ! " was overly terse , and remarked that the poet was " most careful not to explain the nature of the difference which the death of Lucy will occasion him to be ... The superficial reader takes it that he is very sorry she was dead ... but he has not said this . " Not every work referring to the " Lucy poems " is intended to mock , however ; the novelist and essayist Mary Shelley ( 1797 – 1851 ) drew upon the poems to comment on and re @-@ imagine the Romantic portrayal of femininity . 
 = = Settings = = 
 The " Lucy poems " ( omitting " I travelled among unknown men " but adding " Among all lovely things " ) have been set for voice and piano by the composer Nigel Dodd . The settings were first performed at St George 's , Brandon Hill , Bristol , in October 1995 at a concert marking the bicentenary of the first meeting of Wordsworth and Coleridge . 
 Among settings of individual poems is Benjamin Britten 's " Lucy " ( " I travelled among unknown men " ) composed in 1926 . 
 = Indianapolis ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Indianapolis " is the sixth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 36th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 24 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie and Ron travel to Indianapolis to receive a commendation , while Ann suspects Chris is cheating on her . Meanwhile , Tom tries to pitch his personal fragrance to a cologne maker while simultaneously bonding with Ben . 
 Written by Katie Dippold and directed by Randall Einhorn , " Indianapolis " was the last of six episodes filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate actress Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . The episodes were ultimately held for several months due to a scheduling hiatus . It was originally intended to be the last episode featuring guest star Rob Lowe , but he became a permanent cast member after it was filmed . 
 The episode features a guest appearance by actor Jason Mantzoukas as fragrance maker Dennis Feinstein . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Indianapolis " was seen by 4 @.@ 59 million household viewers , an increase in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Media Blitz " . The episode received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and Ron ( Nick Offerman ) head up to Indianapolis to receive a commendation at the Indiana Statehouse for reestablishing the Pawnee Harvest Festival , although Ron is only interested in eating at Charles Mulligan 's Steak House , his favorite restaurant . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) tells Leslie her last talk with Chris ( Rob Lowe ) reassured her their relationship was fine , but he has been acting distant since then . She asks Leslie to look for signs of whether Chris is cheating on her , since he has since returned to Indianapolis . 
 Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) is attending a launch party for cologne maker Dennis Feinstein ( Jason Mantzoukas ) at the Snakehole Lounge , where Tom hopes to pitch his own cologne " Tommy Fresh " to him . Ben ( Adam Scott ) initially turns down the invitation because he does not want to get too attached to anybody , since his job will require him move soon . However , Ben relents when Tom invites him again at Leslie 's urging ( Ben also notes that " Dennis Feinstein " is an oddly ordinary name for a cologne designer , but Tom explains that Dennis ' real name , " Dante Fiero " , is considered less exotic here ) . Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) are now dating , but Andy is worried he is too broke to take her out . 
 Leslie and Ron visit Chris ' apartment , where Leslie discovers a woman 's razor and a pink swimming cap in the bathroom . Upon hearing this , Ann decides to drive up to Indianapolis to confront Chris . To Ron 's horror , Charles Mulligan 's has been shut down by the health department , so Chris invites everyone back to his place for food . To Ron 's further horror , Chris prepares vegetarian dishes , and Ron nearly passes out as he had been starving himself with the expectation of eating at Mulligan 's . At the launch party , Tom approaches Dennis , who insults " Tommy Fresh " and quickly dismisses Tom . Ben cheers him up and tells him not to give up on his dreams , admitting that he considers Tom his friend . Ben is happy when it is apparent that the parks department feels the same way . Andy and April , who are both broke , hold a contest to see how much free stuff they can get at the party , earning $ 218 by posing as staff and accepting tips . However , they both feel guilty and give the money to the bartender . 
 Ann eventually shows up at Chris ' apartment and lashes out at him , but he explains he shaves his legs with the razor for swimming , and the pink shower cap was for swimming in a breast cancer awareness triathlon . However , he tells Ann they broke up last week during their talk ; Ann realizes that Chris was so positive in how he ended the relationship that she was totally oblivious to it . Leslie decides not to attend the commendation ceremony so she can drive Ann home that night , cheering her up during the trip by telling her all the numerous embarrassing ways she has been dumped over the years . They end up at the Snakehole Lounge for the party to rendezvous with everyone else . As they all leave the party , Ben avenges Tom by pouring " Tommy Fresh " all over the inside of Dennis ' parked SUV . Meanwhile , a starving Ron goes to a diner and orders all of the eggs and bacon they have . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Indianapolis " was written by Katie Dippold and directed by Randall Einhorn . It was the last of six third season episodes that were written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . However , although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date , the series ' third season was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011 , many months after production on " Indianapolis " was finished . The episode " Time Capsule " was actually the last of the six to be filmed because it afforded the most opportunities for actress Amy Poehler to conceal her pregnant belly behind a variety of props , but " Indianapolis " as planned was the sixth episode of the season . Because of this , " Time Capsule " has an " easter egg " reference to the character Dennis Feinstein on the time capsule idea sheet before he appears in the show later in the season . " Indianapolis " was originally expected to be the final episode starring Rob Lowe , who was first scheduled to make only a string of guest appearances throughout the third season . However , after the episode was filmed , Lowe was signed as a permanent Parks and Recreation cast member , so his character returned in future episodes . 
 Jason Mantzoukas made a guest appearance in " Indianapolis " as the fragrance maker Dennis Feinstein . The character and some of his fragrance brands have been mentioned in previous Parks and Recreation episodes , but this marked his first on @-@ screen appearance . Mantzoukas portrays the character Rafi in the FX comedy series The League ; he is the third character from that show to appear on Parks and Recreation , as Nick Kroll previously guest @-@ starred in the episode " Media Blitz " , and Paul Scheer appeared in the episode " Kaboom " . " Indianapolis " included a scene in which Leslie comforts Ann with stories about multiple times Leslie was dumped in the past , all of which were edited together in a series of jump cuts . The technique has been commonly used throughout the series to condense multiple takes of improvisation from Poehler . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Tom said Blackout , one of Dennis Feinstein 's fragrances , was named one of the " top 100 ways to trick someone into sex " by Maxim , an international men 's magazine . While proposing possible date activities to April , Andy suggests watching television at Best Buy , a consumer electronics retailer store . While describing one of his past meals at the steakhouse restaurant , Ron recalled having drunk a 16 @-@ year @-@ old Lagavulin Single Malt , a type of Scotch whisky . Ben claims that his signature drink is Miller Lite , a very common brand of lager beer . Leslie reveals her nickname in high school was Angela Lansbury , an actress best known for her role on the television series Murder , She Wrote . Ben says because he moves around so much due to work , he does not become close with many people , and considers the acquaintances he makes the equivalent of Facebook friends , a reference to the social network service website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Indianapolis " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 59 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with an overall 2 @.@ 7 rating / 4 share , and a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It constituted a 9 percent increase over the previous week 's episode " Media Blitz " , which was seen by 4 @.@ 33 million households . Along with 30 Rock , Parks was the only show from the NBC Thursday comedy block on February 24 to see an increase in ratings over the previous week : Community , Perfect Couples , Outsourced and The Office were all flat , with the latter two shows matching their lowest ratings of the season . Parks and Recreation was outperformed in its 9 : 30 p.m. timeslot by the Fox reality series American Idol and the CBS crime drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which were seen by an average 21 @.@ 82 million and 12 @.@ 48 million household viewers , respectively . " Indianapolis " , however , earned higher ratings than the CW Network drama series Nikita , which was seen by 3 @.@ 4 million household viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Indianapolis " received generally positive reviews . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow called it " a very funny , very sweet episode of a show that 's been consistently great this season " . Meslow said the transition of April and Andy from courting to dating was handled especially well , and liked how the Ben and Tom subplot allowed Ben 's character to " loosen up a little " , but said Ron 's character seemed too much like a " self @-@ parody " in the episode . Alan Sepinwall of Hitfix said the episode reminded him of the first season finale " Rock Show " , which he called " the show that was capable of living up to the talent in front of and behind the camera " . Sepinwall said the characters were now so well @-@ developed that he enjoyed simply getting to " hang out with them " , and he particularly liked the rapport between Tom and Ben , the latter of whom he said was becoming better integrated into the cast . IGN writer said the episode perfectly highlighted all the characters various eccentricities , and enjoyed that the show took the characters out of the usual parks department office setting and placed them into the " wonderful , lovable world that this show has created for itself " . 
 Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called the episode " one of the finest in this first season three batch and a solid showcase for all the characters " . He praised the show for going in directions atypical for sitcoms , like having the Ann and Chris break @-@ up off @-@ screen , and said " Ann 's character defies all the expectations heaped on her from two previous seasons " . Steve Kandell of New York magazine said " Indianapolis " was not as strong as other third season episodes , but that it " proves to be as emblematic of the show ’ s soft , gooey heart as any the series has done " . In particular , Kandell praised how Ben is growing to love Pawnee , and how April and Andy donated their tips at the end of the episode . Hollywood.com writer Eric Sundermann said the writers took " some risks outside of the characters ' comfort zone " in " Indianapolis " and that they worked , especially with Ann 's character , who he felt opened up more than in past episodes . He also said Andy and April work well together because the characters seem so genuine with each other . Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic declared " Indianapolis " a great episode . He particularly enjoyed the April and Andy date , which he called , " downright adorable " , and the Ron Swanson subplot , which he called " so ridiculous and hilarious " . 
 Rick Porter of Zap2it called the episode a " pretty low @-@ key affair " and " a nice pause in the harvest festival story " . Porter praised Rashida Jones ' performance and said Adam Scott and Aziz Ansari played well off each other . Joel Keller of TV Squad called the steakhouse subplot " Ron Swanson at his best " and enjoyed the Andy and April scenes , but said he did not like how the Ann and Chris romance had been handled throughout the season , and hoped it would end with " Indianapolis " . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis said she liked seeing Ben interact with characters other than Leslie , and enjoyed the development between Ann and Chris . However , Busis found the other subplots of the episode " a little flimsy " and found it lacking compared to recent episodes like " Ron and Tammy : Part Two " and " Media Blitz " . 
 = The Pirates of Orion = 
 " The Pirates of Orion " is the first episode of the second season of the American animated science fiction television series Star Trek : The Animated Series , the 17th episode overall . It first aired on NBC on September 7 , 1974 . It was directed by Bill Reed , and written by Howard Weinstein . The episode was Weinstein 's first professional sale at the age of 19 . 
 Set in the 23rd century , the series follows the adventures of Captain James T. Kirk ( voiced by William Shatner ) and the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise . In this episode , Kirk and the Enterprise must contend with pirates who have stolen a load of cargo that includes medicine crucial to save a dying Spock ( voiced by Leonard Nimoy ) . 
 The story was developed from Weinstein out of a Star Trek @-@ based short story he had previously published in a school science fiction publication . After it failed to be read on the first submission , it was resubmitted and purchased by the production team . The episode featured the first appearance of male members of the Orion species in the Star Trek franchise ; male Orions would not appear in a live action episode until 2004 . Critical reception to the episode was mixed , and it has been released in several forms of home media , including VHS , LaserDisc and DVD . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On stardate <unk> @.@ 1 , the Federation starship Enterprise is on its way to planet Deneb 5 when the Vulcan First Officer , Spock ( voiced by Leonard Nimoy ) , contracts the disease <unk> and is diagnosed by Chief Medical Officer Leonard McCoy ( voiced by DeForest Kelley ) with having only days to live . The Starfleet freighter SS Huron is to rendezvous with the Enterprise and deliver medicine <unk> needed for the cure , when it is attacked by Orion pirates who steal its cargo , which turns out to be primarily a sizable load of dilithium crystals . 
 The Enterprise follows back on the rendezvous course and finds the battered Huron and its surviving crew . Analysis of the attack leads Captain Kirk ( voiced by William Shatner ) and his crew to chase the Orion ship in a desperate attempt to recover the cure before time runs out . The Orions , knowing they cannot escape the Enterprise or best them in a fight , plan to destroy both themselves and the Enterprise in order to protect the lie of " Orion neutrality " . Kirk meets with the Orion Captain ( voiced by James Doohan ) on a highly unstable asteroid which the Orions plan to detonate to carry out their plot . Kirk and the Enterprise crew realize the Orion Captain is carrying an explosive trigger in his pack and are able to neutralize it . They recover the medicine to save Spock , capture the Orion Captain ( who orders his crew to abort the self @-@ destruct , which would now be a pointless loss of life , and surrender ) and retrieve the dilithium crystals . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Howard Weinstein had been a fan of space exploration following the flight of NASA astronaut Alan Shepard on Mercury @-@ Redstone 3 . He recalled that his first experience of Star Trek was in middle school , where he mixed elements of the show up with Lost in Space . He began watching the show and was inspired to write for television after reading The Making of Star Trek by Gene Roddenberry and Stephen E. Whitfield . While in the 11th grade , he had a Star Trek short story published in the fanzine Probe , which was a yearly publication in East Meadow High School . Weinstein also wrote a script for Mission : Impossible , but the script was turned down as it was not submitted via an agent . It was returned with a list of suggested agents , and his father recognised Bill Cooper 's name on the list from their school years together . 
 Cooper agreed to take on Weinstein , who decided to redevelop his Probe published short story into a script for the animated Star Trek . Cooper addressed the script to D.C. Fontana , who had recently left the show . When it arrived at the production office , it was forwarded to Fontana unread , who sent it back to Cooper as she had left the show . The script was subsequently resubmitted by Weinstein under his agent 's name for the second season of the show . Producer Lou Scheimer contacted Weinstein and informed him that they wanted to purchase the script if the ending could be modified , which Weinstein agreed to . Weinstein was 19 at the time and staying in the dormitory at the University of Connecticut , and Scheimer was surprised to find out that Weinstein was so young . 
 The script sold in April 1973 . It was Weinstein 's first professional sale and credit as a writer . He found out later that year that it would be used as the opening episode of the second season . Weinstein organized a get together in his dormitory to watch the episode when it aired , which some thirty people and a dog attended . After the script was used , Weinstein found that it enabled him to write the Star Trek novel The Covenant of the Crown for Pocket Books ; he said in a later interview that it gave him " instant credibility " with the company . He also began to appear at science fiction conventions and later wrote several further Star Trek books and comic books . Weinstein received a " Thank You " credit on Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home after introducing that film 's director , Leonard Nimoy , to the idea of including whales in the film . 
 This episode features the first appearance of male Orions . While a surgically altered agent who appeared as an Andorian in the original @-@ series episode " Journey to Babel " was speculated to be of Orion origin by Spock , the only members of the race which had previously been represented in Star Trek were the Orion slave girls . Male Orions would not be seen in a live action Star Trek production until 2004 with the episode " Borderland " in the fourth season of Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Pirates of Orion " was first broadcast on September 7 , 1974 on NBC . Several reviewers watched the episode after the end of the series . In Trek Navigator , a book by Mark A. Altman and Edward Gross which reviewed every episode and film of Star Trek up until 1998 , Altman gave " The Pirates of Orion " a score of two out of four , while Gross gave a score of three out of four . Michelle Erica Green watched the episode for the website TrekNation , saying that it included " precisely the sort of character interaction that made the original Star Trek such a success " . She felt that given the ability of The Animated Series to show things that couldn 't be seen in The Original Series due to the budget restrictions , that the appearance of the Orions could have been increased and if the attack on the Huron had been shown then it would have given " a stronger opinion as viewers of the relative evils of the Orions , whether they are an honorable enemy or mere vicious thugs . " 
 " The Pirates of Orion " was released on VHS cassette alongside " The Practical Joker " during the initial release of tapes by Paramount Home Video in 1989 . It has also been released on LaserDisc as part of the series set . The first release of Star Trek : The Animated Series on DVD was through fan made productions . The official DVD release was on November 21 , 2006 in the United States , which was a single release containing all episodes from both seasons of the television show . 
 = Hippopotamus = 
 The common hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus amphibius ) , or hippo , is a large , mostly herbivorous mammal in sub @-@ Saharan Africa , and one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae , the other being the pygmy hippopotamus ( Choeropsis liberiensis or Hexaprotodon liberiensis ) . The name comes from the ancient Greek for " river horse " ( <unk> ) . After the elephant and rhinoceros , the common hippopotamus is the third @-@ largest type of land mammal and the heaviest extant artiodactyl . Despite their physical resemblance to pigs and other terrestrial even @-@ toed ungulates , the closest living relatives of the Hippopotamidae are cetaceans ( whales , porpoises , etc . ) from which they diverged about 55 million years ago . The common ancestor of whales and hippos split from other even @-@ toed ungulates around 60 million years ago . The earliest known hippopotamus fossils , belonging to the genus Kenyapotamus in Africa , date to around 16 million years ago . 
 Common hippos are recognisable by their barrel @-@ shaped torsos , wide @-@ opening mouths revealing large canine tusks , nearly hairless bodies , columnar @-@ like legs and large size ; adults average 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) and 1 @,@ 300 kg ( 2 @,@ 900 lb ) for males and females respectively , making them the largest species of land mammal after the three species of elephants and the white and Indian rhinoceros . Despite its stocky shape and short legs , it is capable of running 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) over short distances . The hippopotamus is a highly aggressive and unpredictable animal and is ranked among the most dangerous animals in Africa . Nevertheless , they are still threatened by habitat loss and poaching for their meat and ivory canine teeth . 
 The common hippopotamus is semiaquatic , inhabiting rivers , lakes and mangrove swamps , where territorial bulls preside over a stretch of river and groups of five to thirty females and young . During the day , they remain cool by staying in the water or mud ; reproduction and childbirth both occur in water . They emerge at dusk to graze on grasses . While hippopotamuses rest near each other in the water , grazing is a solitary activity and hippos are not territorial on land . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " hippopotamus " is derived from the ancient Greek <unk> , <unk> , from ἵππος , hippos , " horse " , and <unk> , <unk> , " river " , meaning " horse of the river " . In English , the plural is hippopotamuses , but " hippopotami " is also used ; " hippos " can be used as a short plural . Hippopotamuses are gregarious , living in groups of up to thirty animals . A group is called a pod , herd , dale , or bloat . 
 In Africa , the hippo is known by various names , including <unk> ( Afrikaans ) , <unk> ( Venda ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( Xhosa , <unk> and Zulu ) in the south ; kiboko ( Swahili ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Luhya ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Kalenjin ) and <unk> ( Maasai ) in the African Great Lakes region ; and <unk> / <unk> ( Amharic ) and jeer ( Somali ) in the Horn of Africa . 
 = = Taxonomy and origins = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 The hippopotamus is the type genus of the family Hippopotamidae . The pygmy hippopotamus belongs to a different genus in Hippopotamidae , either Choeropsis or Hexaprotodon . Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids . Sometimes , the subfamily <unk> is used . Further , some taxonomists group hippopotamuses and anthracotheres in the superfamily <unk> . Hippopotamidae are classified along with other even @-@ toed ungulates in the order Artiodactyla . Other artiodactyls include camels , cattle , deer and pigs , although hippopotamuses are not closely related to these groups . 
 Five subspecies of hippos have been described based on morphological differences in their skulls and geographical differences : 
 Great northern hippopotamus or Nile hippopotamus H. a. amphibius – ( the nominate subspecies ) which stretched from Egypt , where they are now extinct , south up the Nile River to Tanzania and Mozambique 
 East African hippopotamus H. a. kiboko – in Kenya in the African Great Lakes region , and in Somalia in the Horn of Africa . Broader nasals and more hollowed interorbital region 
 Cape hippopotamus or South African hippopotamus H. a. capensis – from Zambia to South Africa , most flattened skull of the subspecies 
 West African hippopotamus or Tchad hippopotamus H. a. tschadensis – throughout Western Africa to , as the name suggests , Chad , slightly shorter and wider face , with prominent orbits 
 Angola hippopotamus H. a. constrictus – in Angola , the southern Democratic Republic of Congo and Namibia , named for its deeper preorbital constriction 
 The suggested subspecies were never widely used or validated by field biologists ; the described morphological differences were small enough that they could have resulted from simple variation in <unk> samples . Genetic analyses have tested the existence of three of these putative subspecies . A study examining mitochondrial DNA from skin biopsies taken from 13 sampling locations , considered genetic diversity and structure among hippo populations across the continent . The authors found low , but significant , genetic differentiation among H. a. amphibius , H. a. capensis , and H. a. kiboko . Neither H. a. tschadensis nor H. a. constrictus has been tested . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Until 1909 , naturalists grouped hippos with pigs , based on molar patterns . Several lines of evidence , first from blood proteins , then from molecular systematics and DNA and the fossil record , show that their closest living relatives are cetaceans – whales , dolphins and porpoises . The common ancestor of hippos and whales branched off from Ruminantia and the rest of the even @-@ toed ungulates ; the cetacean and hippo lineages split soon afterwards . 
 The most recent theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common semiaquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around 60 million years ago . This hypothesized ancestral group likely split into two branches around 54 million years ago . One branch would evolve into cetaceans , possibly beginning about 52 million years ago , with the <unk> Pakicetus and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti , which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans . The other branch became the anthracotheres , a large family of four @-@ legged beasts , the earliest of which in the late Eocene would have resembled skinny hippopotamuses with comparatively small and narrow heads . All branches of the anthracotheres , except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae , became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants . 
 A rough evolutionary lineage can be traced from Eocene and Oligocene species : <unk> and <unk> to the Miocene species <unk> and Libycosaurus and the very latest anthracotheres in the Pliocene . <unk> , Libycosaurus and all hippopotamids can be considered to form a clade , with Libycosaurus being more closely related to hippos . Their common ancestor would have lived in the Miocene , about 20 million years ago . <unk> are therefore deeply nested within the family <unk> . The Hippopotamidae are believed to have evolved in Africa ; the oldest known hippopotamid is the genus Kenyapotamus , which lived in Africa from 16 to 8 million years ago . While hippopotamid species spread across Asia and Europe , no hippopotamuses have ever been discovered in the Americas , although various <unk> genera emigrated into North America during the early Oligocene . From 7 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 8 million years ago , an ancestor to the modern hippopotamus , <unk> , lived in Africa and the Middle East . 
 While the fossil record of hippos is still poorly understood , the two modern genera , Hippopotamus and Choeropsis ( sometimes Hexaprotodon ) , may have diverged as far back as 8 million years ago . Taxonomists disagree whether or not the modern pygmy hippopotamus is a member of Hexaprotodon – an apparently paraphyletic genus , also embracing many extinct Asian hippopotamuses , that is more closely related to Hippopotamus – or of Choeropsis , an older and basal genus . 
 = = = Extinct species = = = 
 Three species of Malagasy hippopotamus became extinct during the Holocene on Madagascar , one of them within the past 1 @,@ 000 years . The Malagasy hippos were smaller than the modern hippopotamus , likely through the process of insular dwarfism . Fossil evidence indicates many Malagasy hippos were hunted by humans , a likely factor in their eventual extinction . Isolated members of Malagasy hippopotamus may have survived in remote pockets ; in 1976 , villagers described a living animal called the kilopilopitsofy , which may have been a Malagasy hippopotamus . 
 Three species of hippopotamus , the European hippopotamus ( H. antiquus ) , H. major and H. <unk> , ranged throughout continental Europe and the British Isles . All three species became extinct before the last glaciation . Ancestors of European hippos found their way to many islands of the Mediterranean during the Pleistocene . The Pleistocene also saw a number of dwarf species evolve on several Mediterranean islands , including Crete ( H. <unk> ) , Cyprus ( H. minor ) , Malta ( H. melitensis ) , and Sicily ( H. <unk> ) . Of these , the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus survived until the end of the Pleistocene or early Holocene . Evidence from an archaeological site , <unk> , continues to cause debate on whether or not the species was encountered , and was driven to extinction , by man . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hippopotamuses are among the largest living land mammals , being only smaller than elephants and some rhinoceroses . Mean adult weight is around 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) and 1 @,@ 300 kg ( 2 @,@ 900 lb ) for males and females respectively , very large males can reach 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) and an exceptional male weighing almost 2 @,@ 700 kg ( 6 @,@ 000 lb ) has been reported . Male hippos appear to continue growing throughout their lives while females reach maximum weight at around age 25 . 
 Different from all other large land mammals , hippos are of semiaquatic habits , spending the day in lakes and rivers . The eyes , ears , and nostrils of hippos are placed high on the roof of their skulls . This allows these organs to remain above the surface while the rest of the body submerges . Their barrel @-@ shaped bodies have graviportal skeletal structures , adapted to carrying their enormous weight , and their specific gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of a river . Hippopotamuses have small legs ( relative to other megafauna ) because the water in which they live reduces the weight burden . Though they are bulky animals , hippopotamuses can gallop at 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) on land but normally trot . They are incapable of jumping but do climb up steep banks . Despite being semiaquatic and having webbed feet , an adult hippo is not a particularly good swimmer nor can it float . It is rarely found in deep water ; when it is , the animal moves by porpoise @-@ like leaps from the bottom . The testes of the males descend only partially and a scrotum is not present . In addition , the penis retracts into the body when not erect . The genitals of the female are unusual in that the vagina is ridged and two large diverticula protrude from the <unk> vestibule . The function of these is unknown . 
 The hippo 's jaw is powered by a large masseter and a well @-@ developed <unk> ; the latter loops up behind the former to the hyoid . The jaw hinge is located far back enough to allow the animal to open its mouth at almost 180 ° . A moderate folding of the orbicularis <unk> muscle allows the hippo to achieve such a gape without tearing any tissue . On the National Geographic Channel television program , " Dangerous Encounters with Brady Barr " , Dr. Brady Barr measured the bite force of an adult female hippo at 8 @,@ 100 newtons ( 1 @,@ 800 lbf ) ; Barr also attempted to measure the bite pressure of an adult male hippo , but had to abandon the attempt due to the male 's aggressiveness . Hippopotamus teeth sharpen themselves as they grind together . The lower canines and lower incisors are enlarged , especially in males , and grow continuously . The incisors can reach 40 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 ft ) , while the canines reach up to 50 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) . The canines and incisors are used for combat and play no role in feeding . Hippos rely on their broad horny lips to grasp and pull grasses which are then ground by the molars . The hippo is considered to be a <unk> ; it has a complex three @-@ chambered stomach but does not " chew cud " . 
 Unlike most other semiaquatic animals , the hippopotamus has very little hair . The skin is 6 cm ( 2 in ) thick , providing it great protection against conspecifics and predators . By contrast , its subcutaneous fat layer is thin . The animals ' upper parts are purplish @-@ gray to blue @-@ black , while the under parts and areas around the eyes and ears can be brownish @-@ pink . Their skin secretes a natural sunscreen substance which is red @-@ coloured . The secretion is sometimes referred to as " blood sweat " , but is neither blood nor sweat . This secretion is initially colourless and turns red @-@ orange within minutes , eventually becoming brown . Two distinct pigments have been identified in the secretions , one red ( <unk> acid ) and one orange ( <unk> acid ) . The two pigments are highly acidic compounds . Both pigments inhibit the growth of disease @-@ causing bacteria ; as well , the light absorption of both pigments peaks in the ultraviolet range , creating a sunscreen effect . All hippos , even those with different diets , secrete the pigments , so it does not appear that food is the source of the pigments . Instead , the animals may synthesize the pigments from precursors such as the amino acid tyrosine . Nevertheless , this natural sunscreen cannot prevent the animal 's skin from cracking if it stays out of water too long . 
 A hippo 's lifespan is typically 40 – 50 years . Donna the Hippo was the oldest living hippo in captivity . She lived at the <unk> Park Zoo in Evansville , Indiana in the US until her death in 2012 at the age of 61 . The oldest hippo ever recorded was called Tanga ; she lived in Munich , Germany , and died in 1995 at the age of 61 . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Hippopotamus amphibius was widespread in North Africa and Europe during the Eemian and late Pleistocene until about 30 @,@ 000 years ago . Archaeological evidence exists of its presence in the Levant , dating to less than 3 @,@ 000 years ago . The species was common in Egypt 's Nile region during antiquity , but has since been extirpated . Pliny the Elder writes that , in his time , the best location in Egypt for capturing this animal was in the Saite nome ; the animal could still be found along the Damietta branch after the Arab Conquest in 639 . Hippos are still found in the rivers and lakes of the northern Democratic Republic of the Congo , Uganda , Tanzania and Kenya , north through to Ethiopia , Somalia and Sudan , west to The Gambia , and south to South Africa . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Genetic evidence suggests that common hippos in Africa experienced a marked population expansion during or after the Pleistocene epoch , attributed to an increase in water bodies at the end of the era . These findings have important conservation implications as hippo populations across the continent are currently threatened by loss of access to fresh water . Hippos are also subject to unregulated hunting and poaching . In May 2006 , the hippopotamus was identified as a vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List drawn up by the World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) , with an estimated population of between 125 @,@ 000 and 150 @,@ 000 hippos , a decline of between 7 % and 20 % since the IUCN 's 1996 study . Zambia ( 40 @,@ 000 ) and Tanzania ( 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 ) possess the largest populations . 
 The hippo population declined most dramatically in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The population in Virunga National Park had dropped to 800 or 900 from around 29 @,@ 000 in the mid @-@ 1970s . The decline is attributed to the disruptions caused by the Second Congo War . The poachers are believed to be Mai @-@ Mai rebels , poorly paid Congolese soldiers , and local militia groups . Reasons for poaching include the belief that hippos are harmful to society , as well as financial gain . The sale of hippo meat is illegal , but black @-@ market sales are difficult for Virunga National Park officers to track . Hippo meat is considered a delicacy in some areas of central Africa and the teeth have become a valued substitute for elephant ivory . 
 = = = Invasive potential = = = 
 In the late 1980s , Pablo Escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at his residence in Hacienda Nápoles , 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) east of Medellín , Colombia , after buying them in New Orleans . They were deemed too difficult to seize and move after Escobar 's death , and hence left on the untended estate . By 2007 , the animals had multiplied to 16 and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby Magdalena River . In 2009 , two adults and one calf escaped the herd and , after attacking humans and killing cattle , one of the adults ( called " Pepe " ) was killed by hunters under authorization of the local authorities . As of early 2014 , 40 hippos have been reported to exist in Puerto Triunfo , Antioquia from the original four belonging to Escobar . The National Geographic Channel produced a documentary about them titled Cocaine Hippos . 
 = = Behaviour and life history = = 
 Hippos can be found both savannah and forest areas . Proper habitat requires enough water to submerge in and grass nearby . Larger densities of the animals inhabit quiet waters with mostly firm , smooth sloping beaches . Males may be found in very small number in rapid waters in rocky gorges . With the exception of eating , most of hippopotamuses ' lives – from fighting with other hippos , mating , to parturition – occurs in the water . Hippos leave the water at dusk and travel inland , sometimes up to 10 km ( 6 mi ) , to graze on short grasses , their main source of food . They spend four to five hours grazing and can consume 68 kg ( 150 lb ) of grass each night . Like almost any herbivore , they consume other plants if presented with them , but their diet in nature consists almost entirely of grass , with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants . Hippos are born with sterile intestines , and require bacteria obtained from their mothers ' feces to digest vegetation . Hippos have ( rarely ) been filmed eating carrion , usually close to the water . There are other reports of meat @-@ eating , and even cannibalism and predation . The stomach anatomy of a hippo is not suited to carnivory , and meat @-@ eating is likely caused by aberrant behaviour or nutritional stress . 
 Hippo defecation creates allochthonous deposits of organic matter along the river beds . These deposits have an unclear ecological function . A 2015 study suggests that hippo dung provides nutrients from terrestrial material for fish and aquatic invertebrates . Because of their size and their habit of taking the same paths to feed , hippos can have a significant impact on the land across which they walk , both by keeping the land clear of vegetation and depressing the ground . Over prolonged periods , hippos can divert the paths of swamps and channels . Adult hippos move at speeds up to 8 km / h ( 5 mph ) in water ; typically resurfacing to breathe every three to five minutes . The young have to breathe every two to three minutes . The process of surfacing and breathing is automatic . A hippo sleeping underwater rises and breathes without waking . A hippo closes its nostrils when it submerges into the water . As with fish and turtles on a coral reef , hippos occasionally visit cleaning stations and signal , by opening their mouths wide , their readiness for being cleaned of parasites by certain species of fishes . This is an example of mutualism in which the hippo benefits from the cleaning , while the fish receive food . 
 = = = Social life = = = 
 Studying the interaction of male and female hippopotamuses has long been complicated because hippos are not sexually dimorphic ; thus females and young males are almost indistinguishable in the field . Although hippos lie close to each other , they do not seem to form social bonds except between mothers and daughters , and they are not social animals . The reason they huddle close together is unknown . Hippopotamuses are territorial only in water , where a bull presides over a small stretch of river , on average 250 m ( 270 yd ) in length , and containing 10 females . The largest pods can contain over 100 hippos . Younger bachelors are allowed in a bull 's stretch , as long as they behave submissively toward the bull . The territories of hippos exist to establish mating rights . Within the pods , the hippos tend to segregate by gender . Bachelors lounge near other bachelors , females with other females , and the bull on his own . When hippos emerge from the water to graze , they do so individually . 
 Hippopotamuses appear to communicate vocally , through grunts and bellows , and they may practice echolocation , but the purpose of these vocalizations is currently unknown . Hippos have the unique ability to hold their heads partially above the water and send out a cry that travels through both water and air ; individuals respond above and under water . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Female hippos reach sexual maturity at five to six years and have a gestation period of eight months . A study of endocrine systems revealed that female hippopotamuses may begin puberty as early as three or four years . Males reach maturity at around 7 @.@ 5 yr . A study of hippopotamus reproductive behaviour in Uganda showed that peak conceptions occurred during the end of the wet season in the summer , and peak births occurred toward the beginning of the wet season in late winter . This is because of the female 's oestrous cycle ; as with most large mammals , male hippopotamus spermatozoa is active year round . Studies of hippos in Zambia and South Africa also showed evidence of births occurring at the start of the wet season . After becoming pregnant , a female hippopotamus will typically not begin ovulation again for 17 months . 
 Mating occurs in the water , with the female submerged for most of the encounter , her head emerging periodically to draw breath . Baby hippos are born underwater at a weight between 25 and 50 kg ( 55 and 110 lb ) and an average length of around 127 cm ( 4 @.@ 17 ft ) , and must swim to the surface to take their first breaths . A mother typically gives birth to only one calf , although twins also occur . The young often rest on their mothers ' backs when the water is too deep for them , and they swim under water to suckle . They suckle on land when the mother leaves the water . Weaning starts between six and eight months after birth , and most calves are fully weaned after a year . Like many other large mammals , hippos are described as K @-@ strategists , in this case typically producing just one large , well @-@ developed infant every couple of years ( rather than many small , poorly developed young several times per year as is common among small mammals such as rodents ) . 
 = = = Aggression = = = 
 Hippopotamuses are aggressive animals . Hippos that attack other animals are often either territorial bulls or females protecting their calves . Hippopotamus coexist with a variety of formidable predators . Nile crocodiles , lions and spotted hyenas are known to prey on young hippos . However , due to their aggression and size , adult hippopotamus are not usually preyed upon by other animals . Cases where large lion prides or cooperating groups of Nile crocodiles have successfully preyed on adult hippopotamus have been reported ; however , this predation is exceptionally rare . Crocodiles are frequent targets of hippo aggression , probably because they often inhabit the same riparian habitats ; crocodiles may be either aggressively displaced or killed by hippopotamuses . Hippos are also very aggressive towards humans , whom they sometimes attack whether in boats or on land , commonly with no apparent provocation , and are widely considered to be one of the most dangerous large animals in Africa . 
 Hippos mark their territory by defecation . While depositing the faeces , hippos spin their tails to distribute their excrement over a greater area . " <unk> " serves as a threat display . When fighting , male hippos use their incisors to block each other 's attacks and their large canines to inflict injuries . When hippos become over @-@ populated or a habitat is reduced , bulls sometimes attempt infanticide , but this behaviour is not common under normal conditions . Incidents of hippo cannibalism have been documented , but this is believed to be the behaviour of distressed or sick hippos . 
 = = Hippos and humans = = 
 The earliest evidence of human interaction with hippos comes from butchery cut marks on hippo bones at <unk> Formation dated around 160 @,@ 000 years ago . Later rock paintings and engravings showing hippos being hunted have been found in the mountains of the central Sahara dated 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 years ago near <unk> in the Tassili n 'Ajjer Mountains . The ancient Egyptians recognised the hippo as a ferocious denizen of the Nile . 
 The hippopotamus was also known to the Greeks and Romans . The Greek historian Herodotus described the hippopotamus in The Histories ( written circa 440 BC ) and the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder wrote about the hippopotamus in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia ( written circa 77 AD ) . 
 Zulu warriors preferred to be as brave as a hippopotamus , since even lions were not considered to match its courage . " In 1888 , Captain Baden @-@ Powell was part of a column searching for the Zulu chief Dinuzulu , who was leading the <unk> people in revolt against the British colonists . The column was joined by John Dunn , a white Zulu chief , who led an impi ( army ) of 2 @,@ 000 Zulu warriors to join the British . " 
 The words of the Zulu anthem sounded like this : 
 " Een @-@ <unk> <unk> ! <unk> ! Yah @-@ bo ! Yah @-@ bo ! <unk> ! 
 " John Dunn was at the head of his impi . [ Baden Powell ] asked him to translate the Zulu anthem his men had been singing . Dunn laughed and replied : ' He is a lion . Yes , he is better than a lion – he is a hippopotamus . ' " 
 In the U.S. , Representative Robert F. Broussard of Louisiana introduced the " American Hippo bill " in 1910 to authorize the importation and release of hippopotamus into the bayous of Louisiana . Broussard argued that the hippopotamus would eat the invasive water hyacinth that was clogging the rivers and also produce meat to help solve the American meat crisis . The chief collaborators and proponents of Broussard 's bill were Major Frederick Russell Burnham and Captain Fritz Duquesne Former President Theodore Roosevelt backed the plan , as did the U.S. Department of Agriculture , The Washington Post , and The New York Times which praised the taste of hippopotamus as " lake cow bacon " . The " American Hippo Bill " fell just short of being passed . 
 = = = Attacks on humans = = = 
 The hippopotamus is considered to be very aggressive and has frequently been reported as charging and attacking boats . Small boats can be capsized by hippos and passengers can be injured or killed by the animals or drown . In one case in Niger , a boat was capsized by a hippo and 13 people were killed . As hippopotamuses will often engage in raiding nearby crops if the opportunity arises , humans may also come in conflict with them on these occasions , with potential for fatalities on both sides . 
 = = = Hippos in zoos = = = 
 Hippopotamuses have long been popular zoo animals . The first zoo hippo in modern history was Obaysch , which arrived at the London Zoo on May 25 , 1850 , where he attracted up to 10 @,@ 000 visitors a day and inspired a popular song , the " Hippopotamus Polka " . Hippos have remained popular zoo animals since Obaysch , and generally breed well in captivity . Their birth rates are lower than in the wild , but this is attributed to zoos not wanting to breed as many hippos as possible , since hippos are large and relatively expensive animals to maintain . 
 Like many zoo animals , hippos were traditionally displayed in concrete exhibits . In the case of hippos , they usually had a pool of water and patch of grass . In the 1980s , zoo designers increasingly designed exhibits that reflected the animals ' native habitats . One of these , the Toledo Zoo <unk> , features a 360 @,@ 000 gallon pool for hippos . In 1987 , researchers were able to record for the first time an underwater birth as in the wild at the Toledo Zoo . The exhibit was so popular , the hippos became the logo of the Toledo Zoo . 
 = = = Cultural depictions = = = 
 A red hippo represented the Ancient Egyptian god Set ; the thigh is the " phallic leg of Set " symbolic of virility . Set 's consort <unk> was also seen as part hippo and was a goddess of protection in pregnancy and childbirth , because ancient Egyptians recognised the protective nature of a female hippopotamus toward her young . The <unk> people of the Niger Delta wore masks of aquatic animals like the hippo when practicing their water spirit cults . The Behemoth from the Book of Job , 40 : 15 – 24 is thought to be based on a hippo . 
 Hippos have been the subjects of various African folktales . According to a San story ; when the Creator assigned each animal its place in nature , the hippos wanted to live in the water , but were refused out of fear that they might eat all the fish . After begging and pleading , the hippos were finally allowed to live in the water on the conditions that they would eat grass instead of fish and would fling their dung so that it can be inspected for fish bones . In a Ndebele tale , the hippo originally had long , beautiful hair , but was set on fire by a jealous hare and had to jump into a nearby pool . The hippo lost most of his hair and was too embarrassed to leave the water . 
 Ever since Obaysch inspired the " Hippopotamus Polka " , hippos have been popular animals in Western culture for their rotund appearance that many consider comical . Stories of hippos such as Huberta , which became a celebrity in South Africa in the 1930s for trekking across the country ; or the tale of Owen and <unk> , a hippo and tortoise which developed an intimate bond ; have amused people who have bought hippo books , merchandise , and many stuffed hippo toys . Hippos were mentioned in the novelty Christmas song " I Want a Hippopotamus for Christmas " that became a hit for child star Gayla <unk> in 1953 . They also feature in the songs " The Hippopotamus " and " Hippo Encore " by Flanders and Swann , with the famous refrain " Mud , Mud , Glorious Mud " . They even inspired a popular board game , Hungry Hungry Hippos . 
 Hippos have also been popular cartoon characters , where their rotund frames are used for humorous effect . For example , the Disney film Fantasia featured a ballerina hippopotamus dancing to the opera La Gioconda , and Hanna @-@ Barbera created Peter <unk> . 
 The hippopotamus characters " Happy Hippos " were created in 1987 by the French designer André Roche to be hidden in the " Kinder Surprise egg " of the Italian chocolate company Ferrero <unk> . 
 The animated film series Madagascar features a zoo Hippo named Gloria . 
 = Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești = 
 Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești ( Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born Alexandru Bogdan , also known as Ion <unk> , Ion <unk> and Al . Dodan ; June 13 , 1870 – May 12 , 1922 ) was a Romanian Symbolist poet , essayist , and art and literary critic , who was also known as a journalist and left @-@ wing political agitator . A wealthy landowner , he invested his fortune in patronage and art collecting , becoming one of the main local promoters of modern art , and a sponsor of the Romanian Symbolist movement . Together with other Post @-@ Impressionist and Symbolist cultural figures , Bogdan @-@ Pitești established Societatea Ileana , which was one of the first Romanian associations dedicated to promoting the avant @-@ garde and independent art . He was also noted for his friendship with the writers Joris @-@ Karl Huysmans , Alexandru Macedonski , Tudor Arghezi and Mateiu Caragiale , as well as for sponsoring , among others , the painters Ștefan Luchian , Constantin Artachino and Nicolae Vermont . In addition to his literary and political activities , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was himself a painter and graphic artist . 
 Much of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's controversial political career , inaugurated by his support for anarchism , was dedicated to activism and support for revolution . He also had an interest in the occult , and maintained close contacts with Joséphin " Sâr " Péladan — sponsoring Péladan 's journey to Bucharest ( 1898 ) . He was detained by the authorities at various intervals , including an arrest for sedition during the 1899 election , and was later found guilty of having blackmailed the banker Aristide Blank . Late in his life , he led Seara , a Germanophile daily , as well as a literary and political circle which came to oppose Romania 's entry into World War I on the Entente Powers ' side . He was arrested one final time upon the end of the war , by which time he had become the object of public hatred . The enduring mysteries and contradictions of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's career have since drawn interest from several generations of art and literary historians . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and anarchism = = = 
 A native of Pitești , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was the son of a landowner from Olt , and , on his father 's side , the descendant of immigrants from the Epirote area of Ioannina , whose ethnicity was either Aromanian or Albanian . His father became a local leader of the Conservative Party . His mother was a boyaress , and , as art collector and memoirist Krikor Zambaccian recounted , may have been a descendant of the <unk> boyar clan . Bogdan @-@ Pitești also had a sister , Elena Constanța Bogdan ; both she and her mother reportedly survived his death . As one of his eccentricities , Bogdan @-@ Pitești encouraged the — unsustainable — rumor that he was a direct descendant of an ancient Wallachian ruling house , the Basarab Princes . 
 According to at least one account , Bogdan @-@ Pitești was educated in Geneva , at a local Catholic institution . Raised in the Romanian Orthodox faith , he converted to Catholicism in his twenties , but was no longer a practicing Catholic by the time of his death . He supposedly attended medical school at the University of Montpellier , without ever graduating , and afterwards left to join the bohemian milieu of Paris . He may have enrolled at the University of Paris , studying Law and Letters , but probably withdrew after a short while . Art historian Sanda Miller recounts that Bogdan @-@ Pitești attended the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in the French capital , but that he was ultimately expelled . Other sources express doubt that the Romanian aristocrat was ever affiliated with any university or college , in either France or Switzerland . 
 According to literary historian Tudor Vianu , at that stage , the young man began associating with the criminal underworld . He soon established a connection with the French anarchist circles , while also associating with a branch of the growing Symbolist movement . Like others in his generation , he may have been driven by a desire for shocking and morbid experiences . According to art historian Theodor Enescu , these ranged from erotic experimentation to the " boisterous shivers of anarchism " , and from criminal enterprise to decadent poetry . Bogdan @-@ Pitești was a presence in the anarchist group of Auguste Vaillant ( later guillotined for plotting a terrorist coup ) , and was possibly acquainted with some of the more prestigious anarchist intellectuals : Élisée Reclus , Laurent <unk> and ( especially influential on him ) Félix <unk> . 
 Reports exist that Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's politics were already a merger of opposite or hardly compatible doctrines . He respected Catholicism and Judaism as the most elevated religious cultures , rejected Orthodoxy , atheism and communism as ideologies for the mediocre , and depicted himself as a Catholic anarchist . He believed in <unk> , and took scientific racism at face value . At some stage during the late 1880s , Bogdan @-@ Pitești became a supporter of General Boulanger , who attempted to gain power in France with support from the Orléanist , Bonapartist and socialist camps ; he reputedly befriended the prominent <unk> and Romantic nationalist thinker Maurice Barrès . 
 In parallel , he himself became a representative of literary and artistic Symbolism , and supposedly maintained contacts with authors such as Joris @-@ Karl Huysmans , Maurice Maeterlinck , Octave Mirbeau , Jean <unk> , and Paul Verlaine . Another influence on him was the occultist and novelist Joséphin Péladan , whose Rosicrucian salon he attended several times . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești debuted as a writer and political essayist . It was later reported , but not confirmed , that he published his pieces in newspapers and magazines of diverse backgrounds — Le Figaro , Le Gaulois , Gil Blas , L <unk> and La Libre Parole among them . A lover and protector of actresses in both France and Switzerland , he also claimed to have played a part in staging the first Genevan showing of Richard Wagner 's Die Walküre . 
 = = = Salonul Independenților = = = 
 Placed under surveillance due to his involvement in revolutionary politics by 1894 , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was eventually expelled from France , despite Huysmans ' intervention in his favor . Reputedly , the deportation document identified him as a " threat to public order " . One urban legend recounts that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was present at Vaillant 's public execution and leaned over to kiss Vaillant 's mangled body , which both disgusted and alarmed the judicial establishment . Zambaccian suggests that the decision to deport the Romanian provocateur was not politically motivated . He writes that Bogdan @-@ Pitești had exhausted the patience of French authorities by trafficking in stolen bicycles . 
 From France , Bogdan @-@ Pitești had contemplated the idea of revolutionizing Romanian art , and , upon his arrival to Bucharest , began organizing artists ' reunions at the Kübler and <unk> coffeehouses . In 1896 , with Post @-@ Impressionist artists Constantin Artachino , Ștefan Luchian and Nicolae Vermont , he founded Salonul Independenților , the Romanian replica of the French Société des Artistes Indépendants . They were soon joined by painter Nicolae Grant and caricaturist Nicolae Petrescu @-@ Găină . 
 The exhibits featured some of Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's own drawings , which he intended to use as illustrations for his book of French @-@ language poems , Sensations <unk> ( " Internal Sensations " ) . He planned for his art movement to reach outside Romania , and , also in 1896 , financed an international exhibition of independent and avant @-@ garde artists . Salonul was known for its public protest against academic art : located just outside the Romanian Athenaeum building ( a main venue for local Neoclassicism ) , it put up Petrescu Găină 's huge caricature of academic artist C. I. Stăncescu , and flew a red flag next to it . This call to socialist rebellion attracted public attention , and the flag was urgently taken down by agents of the Romanian Police . The subsequent exhibitions were viewed with sympathy by a section of the press , including the leftist newspaper Adevărul . It republished pieces ridiculing Stăncescu in his role of official curator , and made favorable comments on all of the Salonul Independenților artists . Noting the leader 's own anarchist past , Adevărul art columnist Gal wrote : " Bogdan has all the qualities and flaws of a sincere French revolutionary , but one who is not entirely clear and scientific . He has an extraordinary love for all things independent and hates to the point of excess all sectarian people , and all schools . " In June 1896 , the group of " secessionists " was commissioned to decorate <unk> Garden , where Romania 's press held its annual fair . The show , attended by Bogdan @-@ Pitești , prominently featured Stăncescu 's caricature at the entrance . 
 Despite rhetoric , the new art club was not entirely opposed to tradition , and occasionally appealed to it as a basis for cultural reconstruction . Salonul boasted among its honorary members the lionized oil painter Nicolae Grigorescu , who had trained with the Barbizon school . Bogdan @-@ Pitești was especially fond of Luchian 's work , and , in an 1896 article for the cultural magazine Revista <unk> , spoke of him as " an admirable colorist " , a " free spirit " , and a purveyor of " revolutionary ideas " . He boosted Luchian 's self @-@ confidence , urging him to apply his talents to illustrating " an idea " , and was entirely adverse to Grigorescu 's traditionalist manner . Luchian still used Grigorescu as a source of inspiration in his own work , prompting scholars to argue that Grigorescu 's Salonul Independenților reception was Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's unwilling concession to his star protégé . 
 = = = Literatorul , Bronzes , Ileana = = = 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești was by then an inspiration for the blooming Romanian Symbolist movement . In effect , he was the first Romanian expert on the work of Symbolist celebrities like Odilon Redon , Gustave Moreau , and ( his favorite ) Alexandre <unk> . He soon became a contributor to Literatorul , a Symbolist magazine , and was close friends with its founder , Alexandru Macedonski . In 1897 , he was chosen by the latter to edit and promote his book of French @-@ language poems , Bronzes . In the end , Bogdan @-@ Pitești provided the funds needed for Bronzes to be published in Paris . It came out with an introductory note , in which Bogdan @-@ Pitești favorably compared Macedonski with arch @-@ rival Mihai Eminescu . In more general terms , the preface showed Bogdan @-@ Pitești as an unyielding Francophile , who reported with alarm that Romania risked being seduced and then engulfed by German culture . Himself a disciple of Macedonski , T. Vianu comments that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was probably unsuited for the task of introducing Bronzes , and that , despite expectations , the volume failed to impress the French public . He notes the virtually complete lack of press reviews — with the notable exception of a May 1898 article in Mercure de France , written by the Symbolist @-@ anarchist Pierre <unk> . 
 Later in 1898 , back in Romania , Bogdan @-@ Pitești and the other Salonul Independenților initiators joined up with author Ioan Bacalbașa and architect Ștefan <unk> . This diverse group established Societatea Ileana , an association dedicated to supporting innovative artists . Its steering committee was later joined by the intellectual and political figures Constantin Rădulescu @-@ Motru , Nicolae Xenopol , and Nicolae Filipescu , as well as by the painter Jean Alexandru Steriadi . The society took up the effort to uproot against academic salons , organizing a large and provocative exhibit in 1898 , and , at the height of its popularity , enlisted in its ranks some 300 people . Despite such consolidation , various Ileana affiliates were not entirely committed to the cause , and never severed their links with <unk> 's official section . 
 The new circle held meetings in a <unk> Street studio which was also its patron 's home . Its feminine name Ileana was probably a borrowing from Romanian folklore , and may reference the fairy tale character Ileana <unk> . The group 's press organ , also known as Ileana , was edited by Bacalbașa and illustrated by Luchian . Described by Vianu as a " refined art magazine " , it is also considered the first one of its kind in Romania . 
 In parallel , Bogdan @-@ Pitești began frequenting the country 's first socialist pressure group , the Romanian Social Democratic Workers ' Party ( <unk> ) , and attending meetings between Bucharest workers . The <unk> denounced him as an agent provocateur of the Conservative Party , and he stood accused of breaking the party into tolerant and antisemitic halves . 
 = = = Péladan 's visit = = = 
 As head of Ileana , Bogdan @-@ Pitești organized Joséphin Péladan 's 1898 visit to Bucharest . It was a much @-@ publicized event , which attracted the attention of high society and received ample coverage in the press ; Bogdan @-@ Pitești accompanied Péladan on visits to various Bucharest landmarks , including the Athenaeum , the Chamber of Deputies , the Orthodox Metropolitan and <unk> <unk> churches , as well as the Roman Catholic Saint Joseph Cathedral . Among the politicians who attended the ceremonies were Nicolae Filipescu , Constantin Dissescu , Take Ionescu , Ioan Lahovary , and Constantin C. Arion ; prominent intellectuals ( Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea , Rădulescu @-@ Motru etc . ) were in the audience . 
 Péladan agreed to lecture in front of Societatea Ileana at the Atheneum , and his subject of choice was The Genius of the Latin Race . His mystical doctrine was received with much skepticism and amusement by the Romanian literary chroniclers . The visit then turned to scandal : Péladan issued a call for all Romanians to embrace Catholicism , and left the country on pain of being deported . 
 Various commentators are entirely dismissive of the visit and its importance . Th . Enescu describes its impact as " amazing " , since Péladan was merely an " unusual [ <unk> in the original ] representative of French culture " . He also proposes that the reception , with its " noisy " and " exacerbated " fanfare , shows the " complexes of a provincial culture , confronted with the promiscuous <unk> of a great culture " . This assessment is quoted by literary historian Paul Cernat , who also notes Péladan 's " rather modest value " should not have allowed such reactions . Cernat concedes that the Péladan visit was important for promoting new cultural trends , specifically the notions of art for art 's sake and decadence , even though this was done " through the means of politics [ italics in the original ] " . 
 Cultural historian Angelo <unk> proposes that , modelling himself on Péladan , Bogdan @-@ Pitești was becoming the " <unk> " of oriental Symbolism . As Ion <unk> ( or <unk> ) , he contributed to Ileana essays praising various contemporary painters : Arthur Verona , George Demetrescu Mirea , and , most of all , Luchian . Ileana only published a few issues before closing down in 1901 . Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's collaborator Bacalbașa , known by then as a dramatist , also attended , but drifted away from the group in 1900 , giving up his position as editor of Ileana . A similar split occurred between Luchian and his patron , sparked when Bogdan @-@ Pitești made some favorable comments on Stăncescu 's work , and probably took several years to mend . Over that decade , Bogdan @-@ Pitești had also become one of Literatorul 's main financial backers . 
 Writing in 1910 , at a time when Romanian art came to be me more familiar with new artistic trends ( including Cubism and Fauvism , both advocated locally by art critic Theodor Cornel ) , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești adapted his discourse to the new trends . The art patron , who probably exercised considerable influence over Cornel , publicly complained that , instead of keeping up with the times , his fellow Romanian intellectuals still regarded Impressionism as the ultimate novelty . On the occasion , he hailed the Post @-@ Impressionist French artists Paul Gauguin and Paul Cézanne as the models to follow . He was actively seeking to mend his split with Luchian , and , although he called the painter " inconsistent " , again stated that he found him to be Romania 's best young artist . 
 = = = Slatina revolt and Vlaici colony = = = 
 After his return to Romania , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was still noted for his political activities , although these shifted to the background during his Ileana years . According to some reports , he spent some of his free time touring the countryside , rallying up peasants , inciting them to rebel , and mapping out a radical land reform . During the general election of 1899 , he ran for a deputy seat in both Olt and Ilfov , without registering success . There was confusion as to Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's political affiliation . He was known as " the peasants ' candidate " , but both sides of the Romanian two @-@ party system , the National Liberal Party and the Conservative group , accused the other of secretly supporting his bid . 
 During such campaigns , he is said to have misled his voters into believing that he was a son of the deposed Domnitor Alexandru Ioan Cuza , and therefore a natural champion of land reform . His activity in Olt is credited with having sparked some violent incidents : in at least one account , he instigated the peasants of Slatina area to riot , and their revolt was only suppressed with use of force . Others however claim that the Romanian Land Forces randomly shot at , then charged upon , the peaceful mass of demonstrators , killing at least 35 of them . 
 The Slatina crisis reverberated in the capital and posed problems for the Conservative cabinet of Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino . Reportedly , both the Minister of Agriculture Nicolae Fleva and the Minister of Justice Dissescu were ready to hand in their resignations . Bogdan @-@ Pitești himself was arrested for sedition , but soon after checked himself into <unk> Hospital . He averted sentencing when the prosecutors were unable to conclusively prove this involvement . 
 Overall , Bogdan @-@ Pitești claimed to have been held in judicial custody for some forty separate incidents , stressing that all these convictions were owed to political crimes — while reporting this statement , T. Vianu noted that at least some should in fact be considered punishments for various misdemeanors . In time , the anarchist boyar had also come to be known as an inveterate criminal and jailbird , which attracted him the disparaging moniker Bogdan @-@ Văcărești ( after Văcărești prison in Bucharest ) . Others twisted his birth name into the parodic Bogdan @-@ <unk> ( from a <unk> , " to <unk> " ) . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești consolidated his own estate when he inherited a manor in Vlaici village ( part of Colonești ) . It was , beginning in 1908 , the center of his activities and home to his sizable art collection , as well as one of the first locations in Romania acting as a summer camp for painters and sculptors . The events he planned were attended by the Ileana regulars , and , in time , attracted virtually all other major en plein air painters of the day : Nicolae <unk> , Ștefan Dimitrescu , Iosif Iser , M. H. Maxy , Theodor Pallady , Camil Ressu . 
 In his recollections from that period , writer Victor Eftimiu suggested that the relationship was not entirely harmonious : " Camil Ressu , like other young unknown painters , found a lot of support and encouragement with Bogdan @-@ Pitești . Truth be told , the <unk> was rather thrifty , it profited from the needs of the debuting and impoverished artist . But without it things would 've been much worse , since others did not even offer as much " . He also argued that , contrary to speculation about his wealth , Bogdan @-@ Pitești " maybe paid up so little because that is all he had to spare " . Reputedly , the Ileana boss was losing a fortune on maintaining the Vlaici manor , surrounded as it was by barren land . 
 = = = Știrbey @-@ Vodă circle = = = 
 Circa 1908 , the Bogdan @-@ Pitești villa on Bucharest 's Știrbey @-@ Vodă Street ( near the Cișmigiu Gardens ) began hosting regular gatherings of intellectuals . Among those who attended in successive stages were the writers Macedonski , Eftimiu , Tudor Arghezi , Mateiu Caragiale , Benjamin Fondane , Gala Galaction , George Bacovia , Ion Minulescu , Claudia Millian , N. D. Cocea , Ion Vinea , F. <unk> @-@ Fox , Eugeniu Ștefănescu @-@ Est , A. de Herz , Ion Călugăru , and Adrian Maniu . It also hosted the artists Luchian , Artachino , Verona , Maxy , Iser , Steriadi , Dimitrescu , Pallady , Ressu , <unk> , Nina Arbore , Constantin Brâncuși , Constantin <unk> , Dimitrie Paciurea , Maria <unk> <unk> , Oscar Han , Nicolae <unk> , Ion Theodorescu @-@ Sion , Friedrich Storck and Cecilia <unk> @-@ Storck , as well as Abgar Baltazar , Alexandru <unk> , Alexandru Poitevin @-@ <unk> , George Demetrescu Mirea , <unk> Maniu , and Marcel Janco . Also in 1908 , following Iser 's proposal , Bogdan @-@ Pitești sponsored a Bucharest exhibit showcasing works by the renowned European painters Demetrios <unk> , Jean @-@ Louis <unk> and André <unk> . 
 After 1910 , his patronage took on new forms . Literary critic Șerban Cioculescu notes that , at least initially , his relationship with Mateiu Caragiale included a financial aspect , since Bogdan @-@ Pitești inviting the destitute poet to dinner and provided him with funds . He was also granting lodging and material to various disadvantaged painters , as reported by his close friend Arghezi , and took a special interest in promoting the poetry of Ștefan <unk> ( as well as that of Arghezi himself ) . Arghezi claimed that such influence and moral support were also " decisive " in at least one other case , that of Luchian . In his memoir of the period , linguist Alexandru Rosetti mentioned that , on a daily basis , Bogdan @-@ Pitești invited " over a dozen artists " for supper at his home . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's renewed his attacks on the Orthodox Church . Paul Cernat sees them as efforts to fabricate a religious alternative to the Orthodox mainstream , included in the larger phenomenon that was Symbolist cosmopolitanism . However , Galaction , who was to end his life as an Orthodox priest , recorded that the Știrbey @-@ Vodă circle accommodated people of very diverse backgrounds . At one time , they included , alongside Galaction himself , the Roman Catholic priest Carol <unk> , the Protestant sculptor Storck , and the anarchist activist Panait <unk> . According to Cernat , Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's bohemian society also grouped people believed associated with the illegal activities , and was noted for its " libertine " atmosphere . Galaction backed such interpretations , writing that the salon was also home to " a dozen con artists and prostitutes . " The atmosphere was colloquial and free @-@ spirited , to the point of being demeaning : story goes that the artists and writers were sometimes told licentious jokes , or had to endure grotesque farces . 
 A dandy , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești himself led a life of luxury , marked by excess , and had by then become a drug addict . He was a proud homosexual ( or bisexual ) , which did not prevent him from keeping as his concubine a younger woman , commonly referred to as Domnica ( " Little Lady " ) or Mica ( " Little One " ) . Born Alexandra <unk> , she was born in 1894 to Romanian Poles from Bessarabia , and , according to memoirist Constantin Beldie , had previously been a prostitute at a nightclub . 
 Herself a libertine , Domnica was described by researchers as an androgynous or cross @-@ dressing presence . To other members of the Știrbey @-@ Vodă circle , painter @-@ designer Alexandru <unk> was introduced as Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's male lover . Theirs was a " degenerate " affair , according to Oscar Han ; Han also quotes Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's admiration for the male body , including male genitalia , as the only physical beauties which could withstand time . 
 = = = Cantacuzino Conservative and Seara = = = 
 Around 1912 , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's political influence was on the rise . He had begun associating with an inner faction of the Conservative Party , which had as its leader Grigore Gheorghe Cantacuzino , the Mayor of Bucharest . Afterward , Bogdan @-@ Pitești became the publisher of Seara , but was reportedly a front for Cantacuzino , who used him to test the impact of his agenda on the Romanian public . Seara 's main negative campaign at the time focused on Take Ionescu and his Conservative @-@ Democrats , who , to Cantacuzino 's displeasure , had been co @-@ opted in government by the other mainstream Conservatives . The paper published gossip columns and lampoons having Ionescu , Alexandru Bădărău and Nicolae Titulescu for their main targets . 
 By then , like many " Germanophile " Conservatives , Bogdan @-@ Pitești had come to support the Romanian Kingdom 's alliance with the German Empire and Austria @-@ Hungary . This view was popularized by means of his literary club , and support for the Central Powers was also voiced by Arghezi at Seara . In September 1914 , a German consortium purchased the paper ( together with Cantacuzino 's other gazette , Minerva ) , and Bogdan @-@ Pitești was kept on as a simple columnist . Throughout the interval , Bogdan @-@ Pitești was himself an outspoken Germanophile . His circle , which was already hostile to the National Liberal cabinet of Ion I. C. Brătianu , welcomed the diverse groups who were alarmed by Romania 's probable entry into the war : the pro @-@ German Conservatives , the supporters of proletarian internationalism , and the committed pacifists . The artistic clientele was also represented in the Germanophile group at large , but , Cernat 's writes , did so for sheer dependency rather than actual convictions . 
 Suspicions soon arose that Bogdan @-@ Pitești had become a veritable agent of influence . According to Zambaccian , it was Bogdan @-@ Pitești who actually dropped a hint that his support for Germany was a lucrative employment . Through various notes in scattered diaries , most of which have been lost , Caragiale reputedly accused Bogdan @-@ Pitești taking Germany 's money to promote her interests in Romania , and to assist her foreign propaganda effort . Such assessments , like Caragiale 's allegation that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was not knowledgeable in art , reflected conflicts between the two figures , and their overall reliability remains doubtful . It is however possible that Caragiale himself borrowed , and never returned , some 10 @,@ 000 lei , siphoned out of the German propaganda funds by Bogdan @-@ Pitești . 
 = = = Libertatea and propaganda wars = = = 
 Between October 1915 and June 1916 , Bogdan @-@ Pitești managed another press venue , Libertatea ( " Freedom " ) . Its political director was retired statesman Nicolae Fleva , later replaced by Arghezi . In February 1916 , Galaction and Arghezi launched Cronica , another review with a pro @-@ German agenda , and which may itself have been published with discreet assistance from Bogdan @-@ Pitești . Although Bogdan @-@ Pitești , Domnica and Caragiale paid a mysterious visit to Berlin in early 1916 , they were never listed as foreign spies by <unk> <unk> counter @-@ intelligence . Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's name then surfaced in a February 1916 conversation between German statesman Matthias Erzberger and Raymund <unk> , the Catholic Archbishop of Bucharest . Erzberger asked if the Vlaici landowner could ever help advance the Germanophile cause ; the Archbishop , a loyal German subject , replied that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was unreliable . Allegations later surfaced that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was one of the men receiving payoffs from the German spy Albert E. Günther , manager of Steaua Română company . The dossier attesting this was lost , but secondary sources have it that Bogdan @-@ Pitești alone received 840 @,@ 000 lei from Günther 's hands . 
 The contributors to Seara and Libertatea were , in general , outspoken social and cultural critics , with diverse grievances against the establishment . Historian Lucian Boia argues that , even though Bogdan @-@ Pitești was on the German payroll , his switch from the Francophiles could have been a genuine form of conservatism . Boia thus notes that Seara was supportive of the Central Powers from the 1914 build @-@ up to the war , that is even before Cantacuzino had come to decide which side he liked best . The core group of Seara men included socialists of various hues : Arghezi , who claimed that Serbian nationalism was the spark of the war ; Felix Aderca , who depicted the German Empire as the more progressive belligerent ; and Rodion , who rendered the complains of Germanophile intellectuals from Moldavia . Others were left @-@ wing refugees from the Russian Empire , who wanted Romania to join the Central Powers and help liberate Bessarabia : Alexis Nour , from the <unk> faction , and the old anarchist Zamfir Arbore . Seara was also a platform for some disgruntled Romanians from Transylvania region , a Romanian irredenta under Austro @-@ Hungarian rule . They included a mainstream Conservative commentator , Ilie Bărbulescu , who advised Romanians to not to focus on Transylvania , and prioritized action against the Russians . Two distinct voices were those of poet Dumitru Karnabatt , who identified the Entente Powers with Pan @-@ Slavism or British imperialism ; and Ion Gorun , the Transylvanian writer and Habsburg loyalist . Beyond politics , Seara came out with news on culture , selected for publishing by Ion Vinea and poet Jacques G. Costin . 
 The left @-@ wing preoccupations were also an important feature of Libertatea . Its opening manifesto called for a large @-@ scale social reform , which it claimed was more important to Romanians than any National Liberal project to recover Transylvania from its Austro @-@ Hungarian overlord . It enlisted contributions , generally less political than those at Seara , from literary figures such as Vinea , <unk> <unk> , I. Dragoslav , Adrian Maniu and I. C. Vissarion . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești regularly published his own articles in the two newspapers he directed , signing them with the pseudonym Al . Dodan . The early texts express his Russophobia and <unk> over France 's alliance with Tsarist autocracy , the world 's " most savage , most ignorant and bloodiest oligarchy " . By 1915 , assessing that Romania 's national interest rested with the Habsburgs and the Germans , and arguing that Romanian peasants were worse off than their counterparts in Transylvania , he was urging his countrymen to ponder the benefits of Bessarabia 's annexation to Romania . 
 = = = Wartime , disgrace and death = = = 
 The neutrality years also rekindled controversy over Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's daily affairs . A scandal erupted in 1913 , after banker Aristide Blank brought Bogdan @-@ Pitești to court on charges of blackmail . The plaintiff enlisted the services of lawyer Take Ionescu , and the defendant , represented by Fleva , was ultimately sentenced to a jail term . Throughout the scandal , Seara hosted articles by Arghezi , professing Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's innocence . In 1916 , just before Romania entered the war as an Entente country , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was again involved in a legal dispute with the Francophiles Take Ionescu and Barbu Ștefănescu @-@ Delavrancea , with Constantin Dissescu as his lawyer . 
 The Ententist bid resulted in major initial defeats , and a Romanian theater of war was opened . The country suffered heavily , and Bucharest was taken by the Central Powers . Reputedly , the occupation forces picked up Bogdan @-@ Pitești from his cell at Văcărești , where he was still serving time . Like Arghezi , Macedonski , Galaction and Mateiu Caragiale , he remained in German @-@ occupied territory . Despite his apparent triumph over the Ententist lobby , he kept a low profile : according to popular but unverifiable rumors , he was even arrested once the occupation authorities angrily discovered his uselessness for the cause . He was however a free man as of April 12 , 1917 , the date of his marriage to Domnica <unk> . One account has it that Bogdan @-@ Pitești proceeded to denounce his Ileana colleague , Petrescu Găină , who had published a set of anti @-@ German cartoons . As a result , the Romanian draftsman spent the war years in German captivity . 
 Once Romania recovered possession over its southern areas , Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was reportedly prosecuted for treason and was again sent to Văcărești . Others however note that this last sentence , passed in 1919 , was not in fact related to his wartime dealings , but merely to his fraudulent activities , and that only by coincidence did Bogdan @-@ Pitești share a prison with the convicted collaborationist journalists ( Arghezi , Karnabatt , Ioan Slavici ) . 
 T. Vianu notes that Bogdan @-@ Pitești spent his last years " in ignominy " , while Cernat describes his definitive fall to the status of " a pariah " . The art promoter died four years after the war ended , at his house in Bucharest , having suffered a myocardial infarction . According to Cernat , his " grotesque " death was sudden , catching him in the middle of a telephone conversation . Reportedly , Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's last wish had been for his collection to pass into state property and be kept as a museum . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Role and influence = = = 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești was the subject of fascination in the literary and artistic community . Lucian Boia writes about his seductive " legend " , which fused an " imaginative and generous intellectual " with a " con artist " who " lived life as he saw fit " . Art historian Corina Teacă notes that , like Félix <unk> , Bogdan @-@ Pitești was in fact fabricating his own myth : " every part of his public image was a removable mask . " The art institutions he helped establish were , nevertheless , reputable . According to Paul Cernat , his influential circle was " an excellent medium of transmission for the modern spirit , an informal institution and one of the first coagulant factors for [ Romania 's ] first post @-@ symbolist modernism . " Writing earlier , Theodor Enescu proposed that , like own group , the Știrbey @-@ Vodă Street salon and Macedonski 's circle were the only trend @-@ setters active between the decline of Junimea society ( ca . 1900 ) and the establishment of the modernist literature magazine Sburătorul ( 1919 ) . Cernat additionally notes that , while the writer Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești was " neglectful and improvident " when it came to preserving his own works , those essays and prose poems that survived have a genuine value . Such judgments were also passed on his topical art essays . Art historian Petru Comarnescu writes that Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's " critical intuitions " were superior to those of fellow collectors Zambaccian and Ioan <unk> ; critic Nicolae <unk> also assesses that , without Bogdan @-@ Pitești , Ștefan Luchian would be lost to Romanian art . 
 The Romanian art environment cherished , then despised , its anarchist patron . In his moments of glory , he received homages from many of his writer friends , as notebooks and albums compiled especially for him . At a later date , all sides of the dispute were united in expressing criticism for at least some of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's deeds . According to Galaction , he was a " <unk> " , who " robbed away and gave away . " Zambaccian portrayed him as one " created from a mold in which the evil and the good genius were present in equal measure . [ ... ] Cynical and suave , generous on one side , a con artist on the other , Al . Bogdan @-@ Pitești relished the abjection that he served with cynicism " . As Teacă notes , both Zambaccian and sculptor Oscar Han were among those forever " seduced " by Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's duplicity . In 1970 , Han wrote : " we cannot judge [ him ] under common law . He remains an absurdity . " While nationalist journalist <unk> <unk> dismissed him as " a scoundrel " , Macedonski argued that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was " a wonderful prose writer and an admirable poet " . Benjamin Fondane , the modernist poet @-@ philosopher , praised Bogdan @-@ Pitești as a man of exquisite taste , concluding that : " He was made of the greatest of joys , in the most <unk> of bodies . How many generations of ancient boyars had come to pass , like unworthy dung , for this singular earth to be generated ? " 
 Writer and critic Eugen Lovinescu , also a modernist , was bitterly opposed to the views of Bogdan @-@ Pitești and most other intellectuals who sided with Germany : in 1922 , he published the article <unk> morale ( " Moral Revisions " ) , which reminded the public about the controversy surrounding the art collector and his associates ( Arghezi , N. D. Cocea ) . A socialist acquaintance and an oral historian , Constantin Bacalbașa was convinced that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was the prototype " inferior degenerate " and , in his political life , a manipulator of " the uncultured minds . " Retrospective criticism of Bogdan @-@ Pitești was also voiced by Comarnescu and co @-@ author Ionel <unk> . Although they pay homage to Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's artistic qualities , the two speak of his " <unk> faults " and " con artist coups " , finding in him " an exhibitionist determined to trick and <unk> " , or an " enfant terrible " . 
 Commentators have been tempted to compare Bogdan @-@ Pitești with some controversial characters in world history , most often the prototype of self @-@ seekers , Alcibiades . Others likened Bogdan @-@ Pitești to the Renaissance writer and notorious blackmailer Pietro <unk> ( Zambaccian stresses that , unlike <unk> , Bogdan @-@ Pitești never duped his artists ) . Comarnescu proposed that Bogdan @-@ Pitești and the equally controversial Arghezi were better understood through the logic of Hinduism ( " the ancient Indian ethics " ) : " good and evil are not opposed , but collocated , combined , in a state of confusion " . Taking in view Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's preference for orality , his shady political connections , and his mostly informal channels of influence , Cernat concluded that , " the necessary changes having been made " , one could compare Bogdan @-@ Pitești with Nae Ionescu , a philosopher and far right activist whose career spanned the interwar period , and who had also debuted as a Symbolist . 
 = = = Anecdotes = = = 
 Several anecdotes concerning Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's morals and extravagant lifestyle were in circulation from his lifetime . In 1912 , Macedonski published an autobiographical Christmas story . It tells how , inspired by Macedonski 's desire to feed his family a traditional turkey feast , Bogdan @-@ Pitești sent him the bird stuffed with 50 gold lei . As T. Vianu writes , such " attitudes of a grand feudal lord " made Bogdan @-@ Pitești into an " indisputably picturesque " person . The account was partly confirmed by Constantin Beldie , who also noted that , during those years , Alexandru Macedonski was " starving " and had to provide for " a house full of children " . Zambaccian however cites a contrasting story once told by actor Ion <unk> . It suggests that , during the wartime famine , Macedonski asked Bogdan @-@ Pitești to pay him 1 million lei for one of the few surviving copies of Bronzes ; Bogdan @-@ Pitești bluntly offered him 5 lei — Macedonski gave in , commenting that " he is capable of changing his mind , that con artist ! " Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's mood swings were also discussed by memoirist Radu Rosetti . He writes that the boyar scarcely minded when his fortune was being siphoned away by some members of his retinue , but that he publicly humiliated Galaction , and even Domnica , over random expenses . 
 The relationship between Mateiu Caragiale and his one @-@ time patron has attracted special interest from period historians . Early on , the aspiring poet wrote a special piece in honor of his senior friend — called <unk> ( " The Mandarin " ) , it is included in one of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's albums . That accord degenerated during the late 1910s , to the point where Caragiale , whose diary spoke of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's homosexuality in dismissive terms ( calling him " a <unk> of the anti @-@ natural vice " ) , laid out a plan to loot the Știrbey @-@ Vodă Street villa . According to the same author , Bogdan @-@ Pitești turned to passive homosexuality because he was impotent . Caragiale 's diary also sketched a portrait of Domnica Bogdan , questioning her morality in harsh terms . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's other relationships with his other protégés could also fluctuate between extremes . According to an anecdote of the time , he advanced Luchian a large sum of money , which the painter used for a trip to Sinaia . Luchian then upset Bogdan @-@ Pitești by not inviting him over , and was punished with a telegram addressed " To the ugliest tourist in Sinaia " ( a pun on Luchian 's proverbial bad looks ) . In the mid @-@ 1910s , Luchian had been incapacitated by multiple sclerosis . Bogdan @-@ Pitești was one of the last to visit him before his death in June 1916 , recording for posterity Luchian 's resigned remark : " I 'm going away " . 
 The main first @-@ hand account of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's 1919 imprisonment comes from Ioan Slavici 's <unk> <unk> ( " My Prisons " ) . According to Slavici , the art patron had a luxury cell with a view over Bucharest . Alexandru Rosetti , citing Arghezi , records one of Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's witticisms on the issue of prison life . When a <unk> wrongly attempted to push him into Arghezi 's line of suspected traitors , Bogdan @-@ Pitești snapped : Pardon , eu sunt <unk> ! ( " Pardon me , [ but ] I 'm a con artist ! " ) . Zambaccian writes that , during the first of his legal battles with Take Ionescu , Bogdan @-@ Pitești commented on Ionescu 's deposition : " He sure is talented , that crook ! " The pro @-@ Entente nationalist Octavian Goga was especially upset by Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's stances , and , in his record of 1916 events ( including the Ionescu trial ) , wrote him off as a " bandit " fed with " German money " . 
 = = = Fictional character = = = 
 After the World War , according to Beldie , actor <unk> introduced impressions of Bogdan @-@ Pitești to his cabaret routine . It showed the convicted <unk> and an unnamed German official , who looked into the <unk> of propaganda funds on supporting petty " henchmen " . To this charge , the fictional Bogdan @-@ Pitești replies : " I have consumed your money , this much is true , but I did not pull one on you ! For how is it that you could imagine me , a traitor of my country , not also being a con artist ? " According to Beldie , the account has a grain of truth : instead of using money to revive the Germanophile cause , Bogdan @-@ Pitești directed them into his art collection . A somewhat similar version of this urban legend is included in the memoirs of a National Liberal adversary , I. G. Duca , who sees Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's retort as a paradoxical sign of injured patriotism : " Did you perhaps think that you might buy off some of Romania 's honest people ? You would be dead wrong , in this land one can only buy off the con artists , only con artists such as myself . " Duca concludes : " this reply , with its admirable and atavistic national dignity , tempts me to forget , though not to forgive , the utter turpitude that we call Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's life . " 
 Despite their relationship having declined from friendship to hatred , Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's style and his mundane interests are occasionally seen as sources of inspiration for Caragiale 's only novel , Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche ( completed in 1928 ) . Some have noted that Bogdan @-@ Pitești has a lot in common with at least one of the three protagonists . He and his wife were both characters in Ion Vinea 's novels <unk> de mai ( " May Venom " ) and <unk> ( " The Lunatics " ) — Alexandru as Adam Gună , Domnica as wife <unk> Gună . Both novels portray the <unk> ' cultural circle , allude to their influence in making young people reject all <unk> , and show them promoting vice as virtue . This lifestyle has taken its toll on Adam Gună , who is a physical ruin and slowly loses his hold on reality . Vinea 's books repeat claims that Bogdan @-@ Pitești was abusing drugs , and that Domnica was originally a prostitute . 
 More fiction work dealing with the Bogdan @-@ Pitești circle was published from a casual contributor to Seara , Lucrezzia Karnabatt . In her 1922 novel , <unk> , she portrays her employer as " Basile Dan " , a sinister traitor of his country and a cynical pornographer . Ion Călugăru used Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești as the inspiration for " Alexandru Lăpușneanu " , the boyar character in his novel Don Juan <unk> ( " Don Juan the Hunchback " ) . Literary historian George Călinescu notes that this fictional portrait shows : " The dignity in gossip , the boyar carriage , the refinement that the apparent vulgarity cannot bring to ruin , the blasé and cynical lechery [ ... ] . " In one episode in the book , Lăpușneanu simulates agony and receives a Catholic confession that ( he insists ) must be read in Latin instead of French ; elsewhere , Lăpușneanu 's eccentric and adulterous wife <unk> ( " Little Girl " ) shows up on a battlefield , wearing nothing more than a swimsuit . 
 Tudor Arghezi dedicated Bogdan @-@ Pitești some of his first poetry writings . As art critics , Arghezi and Theodor Cornel published a comprehensive biographical study on their patron ( part of their <unk> <unk> din România dictionary , 1909 ) . However , according to Corina Teacă , the encomium @-@ like and conveniently imprecise entry may have been sent in , or at least approved of , by Bogdan @-@ Pitești . Arghezi also made his sponsor the hero of a small eponymous poem , wherein he is called Lombard bastard cu <unk> de <unk> ( " bastard Lombard with the eyes of dew " ) . 
 = = = Collection and estate = = = 
 By the 1910s , Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's art interests gave birth to a collection of as few as 967 or as many as 1 @,@ 500 individual works , most of them hosted by his estate in Colonești . They comprised objects created by prominent Romanian visual artists , including , alongside his early associates , Nina Arbore , Constantin Brâncuși , Oscar Han , Aurel <unk> , Maria <unk> <unk> , Constantin <unk> , Ary <unk> , Dimitrie Paciurea , Nicolae Petrescu @-@ Găină , Alexandru <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Cecilia <unk> @-@ Storck , Jean Alexandru Steriadi , Friedrich Storck , Ion Theodorescu @-@ Sion , and Nicolae <unk> . Of the total , around 900 works were of Romanian provenance . Among the foreign artists whose work was featured in the collection were Georges <unk> and Frank Brangwyn . The section dedicated to newer works of art was designed and opened as the first the modern art museum in Romania . 
 The Bogdan @-@ Pitești trust included many samples of Luchian 's art . Two of his famous paintings featured there were <unk> ( " Washing the Hair " ) — which Bogdan @-@ Pitești is said to have likened to the luminous oil paintings of Paolo Veronese , and <unk> <unk> ( " <unk> the Flower Girl " ) — originally part of the Luchian family collection . Also included was the 1907 oil portrait of Luchian 's cousin , Alecu <unk> ( " Alecu the Literary Man " ) . They were accompanied by the 1906 pastel <unk> ( " Pain " ) , which had been reproduced in a 1914 issue of Seara , and by the paintings De <unk> ( " Lunchtime " ) and <unk> , <unk> cu <unk> ( " <unk> , the Girl with the Orange " ) . Among the works in the series were two portraits of Bogdan @-@ Pitești : an ink drawing , copies of which were circulated with Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's election manifesto of 1899 , and a since @-@ lost oil painting . 
 Bogdan @-@ Pitești was the subject of several anonymous sketches , including two 1896 vignettes , published in Adevărul , and a 1917 drawing signed Correggio . He is also depicted in an affectionate cartoon published in 1914 by Petrescu Găină . Domnica Bogdan herself sat as a model for various artists , and was notably depicted in works by Camil Ressu , Pallady and the Bulgarian @-@ born painter <unk> . In 1920 , Bogdan @-@ Pitești commissioned Paciurea to complete a portrait bust of Domnica . The same year , Dimitrescu painted her an oil @-@ on @-@ cardboard portrait in dominant shades of brown ( with touches of red and gray ) . Artists who illustrated works by Bogdan @-@ Pitești include , in addition to himself , George Demetrescu Mirea , Ion Georgescu and <unk> . 
 The Colonești manor and its art fund fell victim to neglect . According to T. Vianu , the collection was " blown over by the wind of devastation " even during the interwar years . In 1924 , in defiance of its owner 's final request , it was subject to a hasty public auction . This drew protests from literary figures such as Cezar Petrescu , Perpessicius and Victor Eftimiu . As a result of the auction , many works passed into the collections of Zambaccian , Alexandru G. Florescu , Iosif Dona and several others . Of them , Zambaccian attributed the incident to the National Liberal government 's unwillingness to accept donations from " a compromised person " . He and several other commentators place responsibility for the sales on Finance Minister Ion <unk> , who is believed to have either hesitated in assessing the collection or to have plotted with businessmen who wanted it sold cheaply . Zambaccian was to be the eventual owner of <unk> . It became a feature of his own Bucharest museum , and appears with Zambaccian in an oil portrait by Pallady . 
 Under the communist regime , the Vlaici building was transformed into a branch for the state @-@ owned producer of agricultural machinery , and , in 2004 , belonged to its successor , <unk> ( although still largely unused ) . Beldie recounts that , under communism , the destitute Domnica Bogdan worked as a hygienist at Bucharest Central Hospital . 
 = Showmance ( Glee ) = 
 " Showmance " is the second episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on September 9 , 2009 . It was written by series co @-@ creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan and directed by Murphy . The episode sees the glee club attempt to recruit new members by performing Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa 's " Push It " in a school assembly . It advances the love triangles between Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) and Emma ( Jayma Mays ) , Will ( Matthew Morrison ) and Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , and sees antagonist Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) begin to conspire against the club . 
 The episode features covers of six songs . Studio recordings of three of the songs performed were released as singles , available for digital download . Three of the tracks also appear on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . " Showmance " introduces recurring cast members Jennifer Aspen , Kenneth Choi , and Heather Morris , and guest @-@ stars Valorie Hubbard . 
 The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 3 million US viewers , and was the best @-@ received scripted premiere by Fox in three years . The performance of Kanye West 's " Gold Digger " in particular drew positive reviews from critics , with Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack comparing the episode favorably to the series ' pilot episode . Brian Lowry for Variety , however , received the episode poorly , deeming the show a one @-@ hit wonder , while Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times noted weaknesses in the adult characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) informs glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) that New Directions must have twelve members to be eligible to compete at Regionals . Will decides to have New Directions perform in a school assembly , hoping to recruit new members . The group is opposed to his choice of song — " Le Freak " by Chic — so as a compromise , Will suggests they also learn " Gold Digger " by Kanye West . Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) crush on Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) leads her to join the celibacy club , which he attends with his girlfriend , Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) , who is head of the Cheerios . Rachel soon realizes that the celibacy club is really a place where teens try to get as physically close to each other as possible without technically engaging in any kind of sexual activity , and she impresses Finn by saying celibacy club doesn 't work because it is normal for teenagers to want to have sex . 
 Rachel also convinces the Glee club members to secretly change their performance to " Push It " by Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa to give audience members what they want , " sex " . The song is well received by the student body , however complaints from parents lead Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) to compile a list of pre @-@ approved , sanitary songs which New Directions must choose from in future . Will is angry with Rachel for her actions , and when Quinn and fellow cheerleaders Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) audition for the club with a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek rendition of " I Say a Little Prayer " , he gives Rachel 's solo on " Don 't Stop Believin ' " to Quinn . Sue later recruits Quinn to help her bring the glee club down from the inside , angered because Figgins has cut some of her funds to finance the club . 
 At home , Will is being pushed by his wife , Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , to find a second job so that they can afford to move into a new house before the birth of their child . He begins working at the school as a janitor after hours , and shares a romantic moment with guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . Football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) observes them , and warns Emma not to become Will 's rebound girl . When Will asks her to meet with him after school again , Emma turns him down , having accepted a date with Ken . Terri discovers that she is actually experiencing a hysterical pregnancy , but she cannot bring herself to tell Will , so she lies to him that they are having a son . She tells him to quit working as a janitor , offering up use of her craft room as a nursery for the baby so they do not need to move . 
 Following a private rehearsal , Finn and Rachel kiss , and he is suddenly overwhelmed and experiences premature ejaculation . Embarrassed , he leaves , telling her to forget that their tryst happened , and goes back to Quinn . A dismayed Rachel later sings Rihanna 's " Take a Bow " with Glee club members Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) and Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) singing backup . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first public screening of " Showmance " occurred in July 2009 , at the Glee Comic @-@ Con panel . Scott Collins of the Los Angeles Times wrote that turnout for the panel was standing @-@ room only , and deemed the reception " enthusiastic " . Recurring cast members who appear in the episode are Gallagher as football coach Ken Tanaka , Iqbal Theba as Principal Figgins , Jennifer Aspen as Terri 's sister Kendra Giardi , Romy Rosemont as Finn 's mother Carole Hudson , Ken Choi as Terri 's OB / GYN Dr. Wu , and Rivera and Morris as new glee club members Santana Lopez and Brittany Pierce . Valorie Hubbard guest stars as Peggy . 
 It was revealed at the 2011 Glee Comic @-@ Con panel that a scene had been written for this episode that featured Rachel 's fathers , but it was subsequently cut from the script even though the actors had already been cast and reported for shooting . 
 = = Music = = 
 The episode features cover versions of Kanye West 's " Gold Digger " , Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa 's " Push It " , " Take a Bow " by Rihanna , " I Say a Little Prayer " by Dionne Warwick , Chic 's " Le Freak " , and " All by Myself " by Eric Carmen . Studio recordings of " Gold Digger " , " Take a Bow " and " Push It " were released as singles , available for download . " Gold Digger " charted at number 59 in Australia , " Take a Bow " at number 38 in Australia , 73 in Canada and 46 in America , and " Push It " at number 60 in Australia . " Gold Digger " and " Take a Bow " are included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , with a studio recording of " I Say a Little Prayer " included as a bonus track on discs purchased from iTunes . " Take a Bow " was offered for use in the episode at a reduced licensing rate , something which surprised Murphy , who believed he would not be able to secure the rights to the song . He stated : " Usually , people who have no . 1 hits , even if they give it to you , want hundreds of thousands of dollars , in my experience . But Rihanna gave it to us for a really good price . That 's been one of the cool and surprising things about this experience , that these people that the cast and we really admire and respect have found out about the show and are supportive . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Showmance " averaged 7 @.@ 3 million US viewers , making Glee the second most watched show of the evening after NBC 's America 's Got Talent . It achieved a 3 @.@ 5 / 9 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , making it Fox 's best scripted premiere in three years . However , as Scott Collins for the Los Angeles Times noted , the other major networks besides Fox all opened the evening by airing a speech by President Barack Obama , disrupting regular viewing patterns . Furthermore , the official fall season had yet to begin , placing Glee against weaker competition in the ratings than the remainder of the season would experience . " Showmance " was the third most watched show in Canada for the week of broadcast , with 1 @.@ 77 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was shown straight after the pilot episode , and was watched by 1 @.@ 45 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 22 million on E4 , and 227 @,@ 000 on timeshift ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Shawna Malcom for the Los Angeles Times wrote that with " Showmance " , Glee : " admirably lived up to the promise of its pilot " . Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post wrote that " Showmance " " actually trumps the pilot in terms of sheer brilliance , laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments and heart " , while Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack called the episode " really really fun " , observing that : " The quality seen in the pilot definitely does not waver . If anything , the show seems to be finding its footing and tone . " David Hinckley of the Daily News rated the episode 4 out of 5 stars and commented : " Glee could have a hard time sustaining what it has set up . But the opening number gives us a rousing good show . " The episode 's musical numbers attracted positive reviews , particularly Will 's rendition of " Gold Digger " . Raymund Flandez for The Wall Street Journal praised this performance , also describing the group performance of " Push It " as " glorious in encapsulating every teenage horror " . Discussing the performance of " Gold Digger " , Dave Itzkoff for The New York Times wrote : " Outside of the catalog of 2 Live Crew , it 's hard to imagine a song more inappropriate for a high school glee club [ ... ] but the young misfits of the Fox comedy Glee somehow made it work . " 
 Brian Lowry for Variety , however , criticized the episode . He wrote that Lynch 's performance was " fitfully funny but usually just plain annoying " , calling the pregnancy subplot " credulity @-@ straining " . Lowry praised Colfer and Michele , however stated that the show 's talent was squandered by its " jokey , cartoonish , wildly uneven tone " . He deemed the show a " one @-@ hit wonder " , writing that : " the musical numbers — generally less infectious and buoyant than the first time out — can ’ t compensate for overly broad characterizations and absurdly soapy situations . " Robert Bianco for USA Today gave a mixed review , commenting : " It would be better if Glee had more control and fewer abrupt tonal shifts , but that 's not the Glee we 're getting — and maybe it wouldn 't be Glee at all . It 's not perfect , but in a sea of procedural conformity , Glee is its own weird , often enchanting little island escape . " While Hank Stuever for The Washington Post praised the show 's inclusion of adult storylines alongside teenage drama , Robert Lloyd for the Los Angeles Times felt that the adult characters " tend more to caricature than character " , writing of Sue that : " the writing flattens her toward a single note . She 's funny from line to line , but there is little to her besides tin @-@ pot <unk> . " The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan commented similarly : " there 's one big flaw in Glee [ ... ] and it may be a harbinger of bad things to come . Will 's wife , Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , manages to drain all the fun out of Glee every time she appears . " Ryan received the younger cast more positively , stating that there were " no weak links " , and praising Colfer and Michele in particular . 
 = Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour = 
 The Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour was the third concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears . It supported her second studio album Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) and visited North America , Europe and Brazil . It marked the first time Spears toured outside North America . The tour was announced in February 2000 , while Spears was in the midst of the ( You Drive Me ) Crazy Tour . The stage was much more elaborate than her previous tours and featured video screens , pyrotechnics and moving platforms . The setlist was composed by songs from her first two studio albums , ... Baby One More Time and Oops ! ... I Did It Again . Showco was the sound company , who used the PRISM system to adapt the show to each venue . Spears used a handheld microphone and a headset during the shows , while an ADAT was used to replace her voice during energetic dance routines . All of the equipment came from the United States . 
 The show consisted of four segments with each segment being followed by an interlude to the next segment , and it ended with an encore . The show began with Spears descending from a giant orb . Most of the songs displayed energetic dance routines with the exception of the second segment , which featured mostly ballads . The encore consisted of a performance with pyrotechnics . The Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour received positive reviews from critics , who praised Spears 's energy onstage as well as the band . It was also a commercial success , grossing $ 40 @.@ 5 million and becoming one of the highest grossing tours of 2000 . The Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour was broadcast by many channels around the world . 
 = = Background = = 
 On February 22 , 2000 , Spears announced a summer tour in support of her second studio album , Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) . The tour marked the first time Spears toured Europe . She commented , " I 'm going to go to Europe , and just basically go everywhere for six months , [ ... ] I 've never toured outside of the U.S. I 've never experienced other fans in other places , and performing in front of them is going to be so exciting . " Before the tour began , Forbes reported that concert promoter SFX Entertainment guaranteed her a minimum of $ 200 @,@ 000 per show . Tour sponsors from the 2000 leg of the ... Baby One More Time Tour , Got Milk ? , and Polaroid , remained . <unk> 's Herbal Essences was also added as a sponsor . Spears recorded a song for the latter called " I 've Got the Urge to Herbal " to be used on their radio campaign , though she chose to not attend a photoshoot for the product when she decided to support an 86 @-@ day strike by the Screen Actors Guild ( SAG ) . She later donated $ 1 from each ticket sold from her Inglewood , California show on July 28 , 2000 to the union . 
 For the European Leg of the Tour , Spears originally was going joint with ' N Sync following their No Strings Attached Tour , as a co @-@ headlining tour . 
 = = Development = = 
 Jamie King was chosen as tour director . Tim Miller and Kevin Antunes served as director of production and musical director , respectively . Mark <unk> was chosen as the lightning director . Spears described the tour as " like a Broadway show " . The setlist included material from her first studio album ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) as well as seven songs from Oops ! ... I Did It Again . Spears explained , " I 've been singing the same material for so long now . It 'll be nice to change it up a little bit . " She also talked about her expectations for the tour , saying , " I can 't wait . I 'll have a world tour . I 'm going to have more dancers , a bigger stage , more pyro ... just a lot bigger " . The proscenium stage was much more elaborate than the stage of her previous tour and included video screens , movable platforms and different props . It cost $ 2 @.@ 2 million to build . The tone of the show variated from the beginning : for the performance of " Born to Make You Happy " , Spears sang in a set resembling a children 's bedroom , complete with large toys and a pillow fight routine . On the contrary , she unveiled a more sophisticated image for " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " , and followed it with raunchy performances for " ... Baby One More Time " and " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " . 
 The sound equipment was provided by Showco who used the PRISM system , which adapted the show for each venue according to its height , width and the coverage required . The sound was mixed by Front of house engineer Monty Lee Wilkes on a combination of Yamaha <unk> and <unk> consoles , an unusual choice for Spears 's shows . He used <unk> 903 compressors for kick and snare drums . The compressors were also used on Spears 's microphones , a Shure Beta 58A handheld and a Crown CM @-@ <unk> headset @-@ mounted capsule . Spears 's vocals were mostly live — pre @-@ recorded vocals ran in parallel on an ADAT machine during the shows , and were used to replace her live microphone when the dance routines became too energetic for good voice control . Spears 's band , backline technicians and monitor engineer Raza Sufi were all fitted with in @-@ ear monitors and headset mics , enabling rapid and clear communications around the stage area . Spears did not use them , preferring the ambient sound of a battery of eight Showco SRM wedges spread across the downstage area . These were augmented by Showco SS full @-@ range <unk> and a pair of one @-@ by @-@ 18 @-@ inch subs on each side of the stage . Sufi also used a <unk> <unk> to limit Spears 's louder moments , while backing vocalists were controlled by a duo of BSS <unk> dynamic equalizers . Effects were limited to vocal and drum reverbs . Amplification for the wedges and the FOH system were all Crown @-@ based , with a pair of drum stool shakers completing the line @-@ up . All the cables used during the tour were brought from the US , even in Europe , something unusual in audio production . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show began with the video introduction " The Britney Spears Experience " , in which three images of Spears welcomed spectators to the show . Then , a giant metal orb was lowered onstage and lifted again to reveal Spears standing behind it , wearing a pink halter top ( some shows she wore an orange halter @-@ top ) , a side silver jacket , and glittery jeans . Spears started with two dance @-@ oriented performances of " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " and " Stronger " . This was followed by " What U See ( Is What U Get ) " in which she removed her silver side jacket and she danced in a stripper pole wearing a pink cowboy hat . The act ended with Spears talking to the audience and sitting on a stool to perform " From The Bottom of My Broken Heart " with her guitarist Skip . 
 After she left the stage , there was a video interlude hosted by * NSYNC ( via screen ) and Spears ' 2 background singers ( 2 female background dancers in Europe ) in which contestants did different games in order to meet Spears . She appeared onstage to meet the chosen fan and then welcomed the audience into her bedroom . Wearing white pajamas and slippers , she performed " Born to Make You Happy " , which included a dance segment near the end . She then continued with " Lucky " featuring her 2 background singers ( 2 female background dancers during all the European show ) helping Spears getting ready for a typical day . Halfway through the song during the dance break , her male dancers all dressed in navy sailor costumes do a routine before Spears continues the remainder of the song dressed as a ship captain . " Sometimes " , in which changed back into her white pajamas and slippers ( coincidentally an outfit similar to the one she wore in the music video of the song ) and featured Spears ' and her dancers throwing teddy bears , beach balls , and squirting the audience with water guns . At the end , she climbed the staircase and briefly spoke to the audience before moving into a performance of " Don 't Let Me Be The Last To Know " , for which she wore a long white dress trimmed with boa feathers ( pretty much dressed up like in the music video as Lucky ) . 
 A band interlude showcasing a mix of funk and progressive rock from her band followed , and Spears reappeared to perform her cover of Sonny & Cher 's " The Beat Goes On . " During the performance , she was lifted into the air wearing a kimono that covered most of the stage . She continued with " Don 't Go Knockin ' On My Door " ( loosing the kimono wearing a full purple jumpsuit ) and her cover of The Rolling Stones 's " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " , which ended with a dance sequence set to the original version . 
 Next , there was a dance interlude in which the dancers showed their individual moves while their names appeared on the screens . Spears took the stage again in a conservative schoolgirl outfit to perform " ... Baby One More Time . " She ripped it off halfway through the song to reveal a cheerleader ensemble . Spears then thanked the audience and left the stage . She returned shortly after ( wearing a black 2 piece jumpsuit imprinted with orange flames ) to perform " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , that included an extended dance break after the 2nd chorus , pyrotechnics and other special effects . She ended the performance disappearing through a tunnel of fire . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The show received generally positive reviews from critics . Andrew Miller of The Pitch stated " [ the concert ] at Sandstone proved that many [ of Spears 's ] criticisms are off @-@ base observations from people who have never actually attended one of these stars ' shows . The music came from a talented band , not a DAT , and the bass lines to such songs as " ... Baby One More Time " and " The Beat Goes On " rose to a funky growl in the live setting . For another , Spears ' vocals were the real thing , as she sang in an <unk> low tone [ ... ] but capably hit the high notes [ ... ] , however , she left the upper @-@ octave duties to her background singers [ ... ] during Spears ' most strenuous dance routines " . Richard <unk> of The Washington Post believed that the show " [ was ] great " . Dan Aquilante of the New York Post said that Spears " seemed to be enjoying the show as much as her fans . Maybe it was the Mariah @-@ like cowboy hat pushed back on her noggin or possibly the stripper 's pole borrowed from Madonna 's prop closet , [ ... ] Spears was in her element and having a ball " . <unk> Tayler of Newsday said " For half the show , she remained the old Britney , the budding teen who dreamed of romance . But the rest of the time , she was a full @-@ throttle tease , with <unk> on clothes , a hard @-@ edged attitude and a harder edge to her techno and hip @-@ <unk> coated pop to match " . 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated " What you get from this 18 @-@ year @-@ old singer is a big smile , a little voice , gushes of sincerity , hardworking dance routines , shameless advertising and a determination to play both sides of pubescence for all they 're worth " . Jim Farber of New York Daily News commented that " Despite such spicy bits , the core of Britney 's concert suffered from the familiarity and cheesiness of all teen road shows these days . The sparklers , explosions and mandatory flying dancers conformed to the corniness of theme park entertainment " . The ticket prices were set at $ 32 in North America . The reported dates averaged $ 507 @,@ 786 in grosses and 15 @,@ 841 in attendance . Susanne Ault of Billboard also reported that many of the shows sold out in one day . The tour had a total gross of $ 40 @.@ 5 million . It became the tenth highest @-@ grossing tour of the year in North America , as well as the second highest grossing tour by a solo artist , only behind Tina Turner 's Twenty Four Seven Tour . Roger Moore of The Orlando Sentinel analyzed Spears to emulate " a lot of Janet Jackson 's old concert act and cleaned it up for a younger audience " , also noting choreography resembling " Rhythm Nation " precision . " 
 = = Broadcasts = = 
 On November 30 , 2000 , the September 20 concert at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans aired on Fox . The special was titled There 's No Place Like Home . The show at London Arena was filmed and broadcast by Sky1 . The show at Rock In Rio was broadcast on DirecTV . 
 = = Setlist = = 
 " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " 
 " Stronger " 
 " What U See ( Is What U Get ) " 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " 
 " Born to Make You Happy " 
 " Lucky " 
 " Sometimes " 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " 
 " The Beat Goes On " 
 " Don 't Go Knockin ' on My Door " 
 " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " 
 " ... Baby One More Time " 
 " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Box office score data = = 
 = = Cancelled shows = = 
 = Technology Center ( Washington & Jefferson College ) = 
 The Technology Center is an academic building on the campus of Washington & Jefferson College housing the Information Technology Leadership program . It houses over 200 instructional computers for use by the Information Technology Leadership and related classes . A statue of a coal miner , representing the work ethic and spirit of Western Pennsylvania , sits in the green space in front of the building . 
 The building was known as the Vilar Technology Center , in honor of alum Alberto Vilar , who had pledged $ 18 @.@ 1 million to construct the building . After he reneged on that pledge in 2003 , the building was renamed the Technology Center and plans for it were scaled back . It is the sister building to The Burnett Center , sharing the same architect and general contractor . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The Technology Center is a four floor Gothic granite building with 74 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 900 m2 ) of floor space , including a " Global Learning Unit , " classrooms , seminar rooms , and faculty and administrative offices . " The building had over 200 instructional computers for use by the Information Technology Leadership and related classes The ground floor has an " Open Lab " of 39 computers for use by the campus community . 
 In 2007 , a statue of a coal miner sculpted by local artist Alan <unk> was erected outside the Technology Center . It is intended to represent the work ethic and spirit of Western Pennsylvania , as well as the dream that an education can allow people a chance to escape the coal mines . 
 = = Information Technology Leadership = = 
 The building was designed for , and is primarily used by , the Information Technology Leadership program . This academic discipline studies the traditional Information Technology field as a liberal art , where the core principles and interdisciplinary connections of the field are examined . Students in this program take a standard curriculum , augmented with focused study in one of 4 possible fields : computer science , data discovery , information systems , and new media technologies . 
 In 2002 , Pennsylvania Congressman and former student John Murtha , who was a long @-@ time chair of the House Appropriations Defense Subcommittee , procured a $ 2 @.@ 7 million defense appropriation for the Information Technology Leadership program to develop a remote educational program to would train members of the National Guard in technology skills , ranging from basic computer literacy to advanced applications . 
 = = Funding and name change = = 
 In 1999 , the college announced that it would build a new building , to be called the Vilar Technology Center , named after billionaire alum and well @-@ known opera philanthropist Alberto Vilar , who had pledged $ 15 million to the project , a pledge that would have been the largest in the college 's history . His pledges for the building eventually reached $ 18 @.@ 1 million . Amid Vilar 's falling fortunes during the stock market decreases in 2001 and 2002 , Vilar had reneged on a pledges to a number of organizations , including his pledge to the college . By 2003 , plans for the building were scaled back and the building had been opened as the Technology Center , without reference to Vilar . In 2005 , Vilar was charged with fraud and theft of money from his financial company . In a statement in 2005 , the college declined to release how much of Vilar 's pledge had been fulfilled . 
 Other , more successful , fundraising vehicles for the construction cost include donations through the " Revolutionary ! The Campaign for Washington & Jefferson College " fundraising campaign . Several charitable foundations donated money to the campaign , including the Eden Hall Foundation and the Hillman Foundation . Construction costs for the building were reportedly $ 29 @.@ 6 million . The college was able to issue a municipal bond through the Allegheny County Higher Education Building Authority to finance a portion of the building 's construction . 
 = = Planning , design , and construction = = 
 The plans for the four @-@ story Gothic granite building took place during the tenure of President Brian C. Mitchell . Like its sister building , The Burnett Center , the architectural plans for the Technology Center were designed by MacLachlan Cornelius & <unk> and the general contracting services were performed by The Landau Building Company . 
 In 2003 , the building was awarded the IMI <unk> Award and was a finalist for the Master Builders ’ Association 's Excellence in Craftsmanship Award . Construction on the building was completed in fall 2003 . 
 = The Well of Loneliness = 
 The Well of Loneliness is a 1928 lesbian novel by the British author Radclyffe Hall . It follows the life of Stephen Gordon , an Englishwoman from an upper @-@ class family whose " sexual inversion " ( homosexuality ) is apparent from an early age . She finds love with Mary Llewellyn , whom she meets while serving as an ambulance driver in World War I , but their happiness together is marred by social isolation and rejection , which Hall depicts as typically suffered by " inverts , " with predictably debilitating effects . The novel portrays inversion as a natural , God @-@ given state and makes an explicit plea : " Give us also the right to our existence " . 
 The novel became the target of a campaign by James Douglas , editor of the Sunday Express newspaper , who wrote , " I would rather give a healthy boy or a healthy girl a phial of prussic acid than this novel . " Although its only sexual reference consists of the words " and that night , they were not divided " , a British court judged it obscene because it defended " unnatural practices between women " . In the United States the book survived legal challenges in New York state and in Customs Court . 
 Publicity over The Well 's legal battles increased the visibility of lesbians in British and American culture . For decades it was the best @-@ known lesbian novel in English , and often the first source of information about lesbianism that young people could find . Some readers have valued it , while others have criticized it for Stephen 's expressions of self @-@ hatred and seen it as inspiring shame . Its role in promoting images of lesbians as " mannish " or cross @-@ dressed women has also been controversial . 
 Although few critics rate The Well highly as a work of literature , its treatment of sexuality and gender continues to inspire study and debate . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1926 , Radclyffe Hall was at the height of her career . Her novel Adam 's Breed , about the spiritual awakening of an Italian headwaiter , had become a bestseller ; it would soon win the Prix Femina and the James Tait Black Prize . She had long thought of writing a novel about sexual inversion ; now , she believed , her literary reputation would allow such a work to be given a hearing . Since she knew she was risking scandal and " the shipwreck of her whole career " , she sought and received the blessing of her partner , Una Troubridge , before she began work . Her goals were social and political ; she wanted to end public silence about homosexuality and bring about " a more tolerant understanding " – as well as to " spur all classes of inverts to make good through hard work ... and sober and useful living " . 
 In April 1928 she told her editor that her new book would require complete commitment from its publisher and that she would not allow even one word to be altered . " I have put my pen at the service of some of the most persecuted and misunderstood people in the world .... So far as I know nothing of the kind has ever been attempted before in fiction . " 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The book 's protagonist , Stephen Gordon , is born in the late Victorian era to upper @-@ class parents in Worcestershire who are expecting a boy and who christen her with the boy 's name they had already chosen . Even at birth she is physically unusual , a " narrow @-@ hipped , wide @-@ shouldered little tadpole of a baby " . As a girl she hates dresses , wants to cut her hair short , and longs to be a boy . At seven , she develops a crush on a housemaid named Collins , and is devastated when she sees Collins kissing a footman . 
 Stephen 's father , Sir Phillip , dotes on her ; he seeks to understand her through the writings of Karl Heinrich <unk> , the first modern writer to propose a theory of homosexuality , but does not share his findings with Stephen . Her mother , Lady Anna , is distant , seeing Stephen as a " blemished , unworthy , maimed reproduction " of Sir Phillip . At eighteen , Stephen forms a close friendship with a Canadian man , Martin Hallam , but is horrified when he declares his love for her . The following winter , Sir Phillip is crushed by a falling tree ; at the last moment he tries to explain to Lady Anna that Stephen is an invert , but dies without managing to do so . 
 Stephen begins to dress in masculine clothes made by a tailor rather than a dressmaker . At twenty @-@ one she falls in love with Angela Crossby , the American wife of a new neighbor . Angela uses Stephen as an " anodyne against boredom " , allowing her " a few rather <unk> kisses " . Then Stephen discovers that Angela is having an affair with a man . Fearing exposure , Angela shows a letter from Stephen to her husband , who sends a copy to Stephen 's mother . Lady Anna denounces Stephen for " <unk> [ ing ] to use the word love in connection with ... these unnatural cravings of your unbalanced mind and undisciplined body . " Stephen replies , " As my father loved you , I loved ... It was good , good , good – I 'd have laid down my life a thousand times over for Angela Crossby . " After the argument , Stephen goes to her father 's study and for the first time opens his locked bookcase . She finds a book by Krafft @-@ Ebing – assumed by critics to be Psychopathia Sexualis , a text about homosexuality and paraphilias – and , reading it , learns that she is an invert . 
 Stephen moves to London and writes a well @-@ received first novel . Her second novel is less successful , and her friend the playwright Jonathan Brockett , himself an invert , urges her to travel to Paris to improve her writing through a fuller experience of life . There she makes her first , brief contact with urban invert culture , meeting the lesbian salon hostess Valérie Seymour . During World War I she joins an ambulance unit , eventually serving at the front and earning the Croix de Guerre . She falls in love with a younger fellow driver , Mary Llewellyn , who comes to live with her after the war ends . They are happy at first , but Mary becomes lonely when Stephen returns to writing . Rejected by polite society , Mary throws herself into Parisian nightlife . Stephen believes Mary is becoming hardened and embittered and feels powerless to provide her with " a more normal and complete existence " . 
 Martin Hallam , now living in Paris , rekindles his old friendship with Stephen . In time , he falls in love with Mary . Persuaded that she cannot give Mary happiness , Stephen pretends to have an affair with Valérie Seymour to drive her into Martin 's arms . The novel ends with Stephen 's plea to God : " Give us also the right to our existence ! " 
 = = Autobiographical and other sources = = 
 Although some writers in the 1970s and 1980s treated The Well of Loneliness as a thinly veiled autobiography , Hall 's childhood bore little resemblance to Stephen 's . Angela Crossby may be a composite of various women with whom Hall had affairs in her youth , but Mary , whose lack of outside interests leaves her idle when Stephen is working , does not resemble Hall 's partner Una Troubridge , an accomplished sculptor who translated Colette 's novels into English . Hall said she drew on herself only for the " fundamental emotions that are characteristic of the inverted " . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Although Hall 's Author 's Note disclaims any real @-@ world basis for the ambulance unit that Stephen joins , she drew heavily on the wartime experiences of her friend <unk> Lowther , co @-@ commander of the only women 's unit to serve on the front in France . Lowther , like Stephen , came from an aristocratic family , adopted a masculine style of dress , and was an accomplished fencer , tennis player , motorist and jujitsu enthusiast . In later years she said the character of Stephen was based on her , which may have been partly true . 
 In The Well of Loneliness , war work provides a publicly acceptable role for inverted women . The narrative voice asks that their contributions not be forgotten and predicts that they will not go back into hiding : " a battalion was formed in those terrible years that would never again be completely disbanded " . This military metaphor continues later in the novel when inverts in postwar Paris are repeatedly referred to as a " miserable army " . Hall invokes the image of the shell @-@ shocked soldier to depict inverts as psychologically damaged by their outcast status : " for bombs do not trouble the nerves of the invert , but rather that terrible silent bombardment from the batteries of God 's good people " . 
 = = = Paris lesbian and gay subculture = = = 
 In Hall 's time , Paris was known for having a relatively large and visible gay and lesbian community – in part because France , unlike England , had no laws against male homosexuality . Marcel Proust 's ( d . 1922 ) novels continued in their influence upon 1920s Parisian society depicting lesbian and gay subculture . When Stephen first travels to Paris , at the urging of her friend Jonathan Brockett – who may be based on Noël Coward – she has not yet spoken about her inversion to anyone . Brockett , acting as tour guide , hints at a secret history of inversion in the city by referring to Marie Antoinette 's rumored relationship with the Princesse de <unk> . 
 Brockett next introduces Stephen to Valérie Seymour , who – like her prototype , Natalie Clifford Barney – is the hostess of a literary salon , many of whose guests are lesbians and gay men . Immediately after this meeting Stephen announces she has decided to settle in Paris at 35 Rue Jacob ( purchased at Seymour 's recommendation ) , with its temple in a corner of an overgrown garden . Barney lived and held her salon at 20 Rue Jacob . Stephen is wary of Valérie , however , and does not visit her salon until after the war , when Brockett persuades her that Mary is becoming too isolated . She finds Valérie to be an " indestructible creature " capable of bestowing a sense of self @-@ respect on others , at least temporarily : " everyone felt very normal and brave when they gathered together at Valérie Seymour 's " . With Stephen 's misgivings " drugged " , she and Mary are drawn further into the " desolate country " of Paris gay life . At Alec 's Bar – the worst in a series of depressing nightspots – they encounter " the battered remnants of men who ... despised of the world , must despise themselves beyond all hope , it seemed , of salvation " . 
 Many of those familiar with the subculture she described , including her own friends , disagreed with her portrayal of it ; Romaine Brooks called her " a digger @-@ up of worms with the pretension of a distinguished archaeologist " . Hall 's correspondence shows that the negative view of bars like Alec 's that she expressed in The Well was sincerely meant , but she also knew that such bars did not represent the only homosexual communities in Paris . It is a commonplace of criticism that her own experience of lesbian life was not as miserable as Stephen 's . By focusing on misery and describing its cause as " ceaseless persecution " by " the so @-@ called just and righteous " , she intensified the urgency of her plea for change . 
 = = Religious , philosophical and scientific content = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Hall wrote The Well of Loneliness in part to popularize the ideas of sexologists such as Richard von Krafft @-@ Ebing and Havelock Ellis , who regarded homosexuality as an inborn and <unk> trait : congenital sexual inversion . In Krafft @-@ Ebing 's Psychopathia Sexualis ( 1886 ) , the first book Stephen finds in her father 's study , inversion is described as a degenerative disorder common in families with histories of mental illness . Exposure to these ideas leads Stephen to describe herself and other inverts as " hideously maimed and ugly " . However , later texts such as Sexual Inversion ( 1896 ) by Havelock Ellis – who contributed a foreword to The Well – described inversion simply as a difference , not as a defect . By 1901 Krafft @-@ Ebing had adopted a similar view . Hall championed their ideas over those of the psychoanalysts , who saw homosexuality as a form of arrested psychological development , and some of whom believed it could be changed . 
 The term sexual inversion implied gender role reversal . Female inverts were , to a greater or lesser degree , inclined to traditionally male pursuits and dress ; according to Krafft @-@ Ebing , they had a " masculine soul " . Krafft @-@ Ebing believed that the most extreme inverts also exhibited reversal of secondary sex characteristics ; Ellis 's research had not demonstrated any such physical differences , but he devoted a great deal of study to the search for them . The idea appears in The Well in Stephen 's unusual proportions at birth and in the scene set at Valerie Seymour 's salon , where " the timbre of a voice , the build of an ankle , the texture of a hand " reveals the inversion of the guests . 
 = = = Christianity and spiritualism = = = 
 Hall , who had converted to the Roman Catholic Church in 1912 , was devoutly religious . She was also a believer in communication with the dead who had once hoped to become a medium – a fact that brought her into conflict with the church , which condemned spiritualism . Both these beliefs made their way into The Well of Loneliness . 
 Stephen , born on Christmas Eve and named for the first martyr of Christianity , dreams as a child that " in some queer way she [ is ] Jesus " . When she discovers that Collins , object of her childhood crush , has housemaid 's knee , she prays that the affliction be transferred to her : " I would like to wash Collins in my blood , Lord Jesus – I would like very much to be a Saviour to Collins – I love her , and I want to be hurt like You were " . This childish desire for martyrdom prefigures Stephen 's ultimate self @-@ sacrifice for Mary 's sake . After she tricks Mary into leaving her – carrying out a plan that leads Valérie to exclaim " you were made for a martyr ! " – Stephen , left alone in her home , sees the room thronged with inverts , living , dead and unborn . They call on her to intercede with God for them , and finally possess her . It is with their collective voice that she demands of God , " Give us also the right to our existence " . 
 After Stephen reads Krafft @-@ Ebing in her father 's library , she opens the Bible at random , seeking a sign , and reads Genesis 4 : 15 , " And the Lord set a mark upon Cain ... " Hall uses the mark of Cain , a sign of shame and exile , throughout the novel as a metaphor for the situation of inverts . Her defence of inversion took the form of a religious argument : God had created inverts , so humanity should accept them . The Well 's use of religious imagery outraged the book 's opponents , but Hall 's vision of inversion as a God @-@ given state was an influential contribution to the language of LGBT rights . 
 = = Publication and contemporary response = = 
 Three publishers praised The Well but turned it down . Hall 's agent then sent the manuscript to Jonathan Cape , who , though cautious about publishing a controversial book , saw the potential for a commercial success . Cape tested the waters with a small print run of 1500 copies , priced at 15 shillings – about twice the cost of an average novel – to make it less attractive to sensation @-@ seekers . Publication , originally scheduled for autumn 1928 , was moved up when he discovered that another novel with a lesbian theme , Compton Mackenzie 's Extraordinary Women , was to be published in September . Though the two books would prove to have little in common , Hall and Cape saw Extraordinary Women as a competitor and wanted to beat it to market . The Well appeared on July 27 , in a black cover with a discreet plain jacket . Cape sent review copies only to newspapers and magazines he thought would handle the subject matter non @-@ sensationally . 
 Early reviews were mixed . Some critics found the novel too preachy ; some , including Leonard Woolf , thought it was poorly structured ; some complained of sloppiness in style . Others , however , praised both its sincerity and its artistry , and some expressed sympathy with Hall 's moral argument . In the three weeks after the book appeared in bookstores , no reviewer called for its suppression or suggested that it should not have been published . A review in T.P. ' s & Cassell 's Weekly foresaw no difficulties for The Well : " One cannot say what effect this book will have on the public attitude of silence or derision , but every reader will agree with Mr. Havelock Ellis in the preface , that ' the poignant situations are set forth with a complete absence of offence . ' " 
 = = = Sunday Express campaign = = = 
 James Douglas , editor of the Sunday Express newspaper , did not agree . Douglas was a dedicated moralist , an exponent of muscular Christianity , which sought to reinvigorate the church by promoting physical health and manliness . His colorfully worded editorials on subjects such as " the flapper vote " ( that is , the extension of suffrage to women under 30 ) and " modern sex novelists " helped the Express family of papers prosper in the cutthroat circulation wars of the late 1920s . These leader articles shared the pages of the Sunday Express with gossip , murderers ' confessions , and features about the love affairs of great men and women of the past . 
 Douglas 's campaign against The Well of Loneliness began on Saturday , August 18 , with poster and billboard advertising and a teaser in the Daily Express promising to expose " A Book That Should Be Suppressed " . In his editorial the next day , Douglas wrote that " sexual inversion and perversion " had already become too visible and that the publication of The Well brought home the need for society to " cleans [ e ] itself from the leprosy of these lepers " . For Douglas the sexological view of homosexuality was pseudoscience , incompatible with the Christian doctrine of free will ; instead , he argued , homosexuals were damned by their own choice – which meant that others could be corrupted by " their propaganda " . Above all , children must be protected : " I would rather give a healthy boy or a healthy girl a phial of prussic acid than this novel . Poison kills the body , but moral poison kills the soul . " He called on the publishers to withdraw the book and the Home Secretary to take action if they did not . 
 In what Hall described as an act of " imbecility coupled with momentary panic " , Jonathan Cape sent a copy of The Well to the Home Secretary for his opinion , offering to withdraw the book if it would be in the public interest to do so . The Home Secretary was William Joynson @-@ Hicks , a Conservative known for his crackdowns on alcohol , nightclubs and gambling , as well as for his opposition to a revised version of The Book of Common Prayer . He took only two days to reply that The Well was " gravely detrimental to the public interest " ; if Cape did not withdraw it voluntarily , criminal proceedings would be brought . 
 Cape announced that he had stopped publication , but he secretly leased the rights to Pegasus Press , an English language publisher in France . His partner Wren Howard took papier @-@ mâché molds of the type to Paris , and by September 28 , Pegasus Press was shipping its edition to the London bookseller Leopold Hill , who acted as distributor . With publicity increasing demand , sales were brisk , but the reappearance of The Well on bookstore shelves soon came to the attention of the Home Office . On October 3 Joynson @-@ Hicks issued a warrant for shipments of the book to be seized . 
 One consignment of 250 copies was stopped at the port of Dover . Then the Chairman of the Board of Customs balked . He had read The Well and considered it a fine book , not at all obscene ; he wanted no part of suppressing it . On October 19 he released the seized copies for delivery to Leopold Hill 's premises , where the Metropolitan Police were waiting with a search warrant . Hill and Cape were summoned to appear at Bow Street Magistrates ' Court to show cause why the book should not be destroyed . 
 = = = = Response = = = = 
 From its beginning , the Sunday Express 's campaign drew the attention of other papers . Some backed Douglas , including the Sunday Chronicle , the People and Truth . The Daily News and Westminster Gazette ran a review that , without commenting on Douglas 's action , said the novel " present [ ed ] as a martyr a woman in the grip of a vice " . However , most of the British press defended The Well . The Nation suggested that the Sunday Express had only started its campaign because it was August , the journalistic silly season when good stories are scarce . Country Life and Lady 's Pictorial both ran positive reviews . Arnold Dawson of the Daily Herald , a Labour newspaper , called Douglas a " stunt journalist " ; he said no one would give the book to a child , no child would want to read it , and any who did would find nothing harmful . Dawson also printed a scathing condemnation of the Home Office by H. G. Wells and George Bernard Shaw and started a counter @-@ campaign that helped Hall obtain statements of support from the National Union of Railwaymen and the South Wales Miners ' Federation . 
 Leonard Woolf and E. M. Forster drafted a letter of protest against the suppression of The Well , assembling a list of supporters that included Shaw , T. S. Eliot , Arnold Bennett , Vera Brittain and Ethel Smyth . According to Virginia Woolf , the plan broke down when Hall objected to the wording of the letter , insisting it mention her book 's " artistic merit – even genius " . The Well 's sentimental romanticism , traditional form , and lofty style – using words like withal , <unk> and hath – did not appeal to Modernist aesthetics ; not all those willing to defend it on grounds of literary freedom were equally willing to praise its artistry . The petition dwindled to a short letter in the Nation and Athenaeum , signed by Forster and Virginia Woolf , that focused on the chilling effects of censorship on writers . 
 Mary Renault 's The Friendly Young ladies was a response , showing lesbian relationships in a more positive light . 
 = = = UK trial = = = 
 The obscenity trial began on 9 November 1928 . Cape 's solicitor Harold Rubinstein sent out 160 letters to potential witnesses . Many were reluctant to appear in court ; according to Virginia Woolf , " they generally put it down to the weak heart of a father , or a cousin who is about to have twins " . About 40 turned up on the day of the trial , including Woolf herself , Forster and such diverse figures as biologist Julian Huxley , Laurence Housman of the British <unk> Society , Robert Cust JP of the London Morality Council , Charles Ricketts of the Royal Academy of Art and Rabbi Joseph Frederick Stern of the East London Synagogue . Norman Haire , who was the star witness after Havelock Ellis bowed out , declared that homosexuality ran in families and a person could no more become it by reading books than if he could become syphilitic by reading about syphilis . None were allowed to offer their views of the novel . Under the Obscene Publications Act of 1857 , Chief Magistrate Sir Chartres Biron could decide whether the book was obscene without hearing any testimony on the question . " I don 't think people are entitled to express an opinion upon a matter which is the decision of the court " , he said . Since Hall herself was not on trial , she did not have the right to her own counsel , and Cape 's barrister Norman Birkett had persuaded her not to take the stand herself . 
 Birkett arrived in court two hours late . In his defence , he tried to claim that the relationships between women in The Well of Loneliness were purely Platonic in nature . Biron replied , " I have read the book . " Hall had urged Birkett before the trial not to " sell the inverts in our defence " . She took advantage of a lunch recess to tell him that if he continued to maintain her book had no lesbian content she would stand up in court and tell the magistrate the truth before anyone could stop her . Birkett was forced to retract . He argued instead that the book was tasteful and possessed a high degree of literary merit . James Melville , appearing for Leopold Hill , took a similar line : the book was " written in a reverend spirit " , not to inspire libidinous thoughts but to examine a social question . The theme itself should not be forbidden , and the book 's treatment of its theme was unexceptionable . 
 In his judgment , issued 16 , November , Biron applied the Hicklin test of obscenity : a work was obscene if it tended to " deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences " . He held that the book 's literary merit was irrelevant because a well @-@ written obscene book was even more harmful than a poorly written one . The topic in itself was not necessarily unacceptable ; a book that depicted the " moral and physical degradation which indulgence in those vices must necessary involve " might be allowed , but no reasonable person could say that a plea for the recognition and toleration of inverts was not obscene . He ordered the book destroyed , with the defendants to pay court costs . 
 = = = = Appeal = = = = 
 Hill and Cape appealed to the London Court of Quarter Sessions . The prosecutor , Attorney General Sir Thomas Inskip , solicited testimony from biological and medical experts and from the writer Rudyard Kipling . But when Kipling appeared on the morning of the trial , Inskip told him he would not be needed . James Melville had wired the defence witnesses the night before to tell them not to come in . The panel of twelve magistrates who heard the appeal had to rely on passages Inskip read to them for knowledge of the book , since the Director of Public Prosecutions had refused to release copies for them to read . After deliberating for only five minutes , they upheld Biron 's decision . 
 = = = The Sink of Solitude = = = 
 The Sink of Solitude , an anonymous lampoon in verse by " several hands " , appeared in late 1928 . It satirized both sides of the controversy over The Well of Loneliness , but its primary targets were Douglas and Joynson @-@ Hicks , " Two Good Men – never mind their intellect " . Though the introduction , by journalist P. R. <unk> , described The Well 's moral argument as " feeble " and dismissed Havelock Ellis as a " psychopath " , The Sink itself endorsed the view that lesbianism was innate : 
 Though <unk> burned with a peculiar flame 
 God understands her , we must do the same , 
 And of such eccentricities we say 
 " ' Tis true , ' tis pity : she was made that way . " 
 It portrayed Hall , however , as a humorless moralist who had a great deal in common with the opponents of her novel . One illustration , picking up on the theme of religious martyrdom in The Well , showed Hall nailed to a cross . The image horrified Hall ; her guilt at being depicted in a drawing that she saw as blasphemous led to her choice of a religious subject for her next novel , The Master of the House . 
 = = = US publication and trial = = = 
 Alfred A. Knopf , Inc. had planned to publish The Well of Loneliness in the United States at the same time as Cape in the United Kingdom . But after Cape moved up the publication date , Knopf found itself in the position of publishing a book that had already been withdrawn in its home country . They refused , telling Hall that nothing they could do would keep the book from being treated as pornography . 
 Cape sold the US rights to the recently formed publishing house of Pascal Covici and Donald Friede . Friede had heard gossip about The Well at a party at Theodore Dreiser 's house and immediately decided to acquire it . He had previously sold a copy of Dreiser 's An American Tragedy to a Boston police officer to create a censorship test case , which he had lost ; he was awaiting an appeal , which he would also lose . He took out a $ 10 @,@ 000 bank loan to outbid another publisher that had offered a $ 7 @,@ 500 advance , and enlisted Morris Ernst , co @-@ founder of the American Civil Liberties Union , to defend the book against legal challenges . Friede invited John Saxton Sumner of the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice to buy a copy directly from him , to ensure that he , not a bookseller , would be the one prosecuted . He also travelled to Boston to give a copy to the Watch and Ward Society , hoping both to further challenge censorship of literature and to generate more publicity ; he was disappointed when they told him they saw nothing wrong with the book . 
 In New York , Sumner and several police detectives seized 865 copies of The Well from the publisher 's offices , and Friede was charged with selling an obscene publication . But Covici and Friede had already moved the printing plates out of New York in order to continue publishing the book . By the time the case came to trial , it had already been reprinted six times . Despite its price of $ 5 – twice the cost of an average novel – it sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies in its first year . 
 In the US , as in the UK , the Hicklin test of obscenity applied , but New York case law had established that books should be judged by their effects on adults rather than on children and that literary merit was relevant . Ernst obtained statements from authors including Dreiser , Ernest Hemingway , F. Scott Fitzgerald , Edna St. Vincent Millay , Sinclair Lewis , Sherwood Anderson , H. L. Mencken , Upton Sinclair , Ellen Glasgow and John Dos Passos . To make sure these supporters did not go unheard , he incorporated their opinions into his brief . His argument relied on a comparison with Mademoiselle de Maupin by Théophile Gautier , which had been cleared of obscenity in the 1922 case Halsey v. New York . Mademoiselle de Maupin described a lesbian relationship in more explicit terms than The Well did . According to Ernst , The Well had greater social value because it was more serious in tone and made a case against misunderstanding and intolerance . 
 In an opinion issued on 19 February 1929 , Magistrate Hyman Bushel declined to take the book 's literary qualities into account and said The Well was " calculated to deprave and corrupt minds open to its immoral influences " . Under New York law , however , Bushel was not a trier of fact ; he could only remand the case to the New York Court of Special Sessions for judgment . On 19 April , that court issued a three @-@ paragraph decision stating that The Well 's theme – a " delicate social problem " – did not violate the law unless written in such a way as to make it obscene . After " a careful reading of the entire book " , they cleared it of all charges . 
 Covici @-@ Friede then imported a copy of the Pegasus Press edition from France as a further test case and to solidify the book 's U.S. copyright . Customs barred the book from entering the country , which might also have prevented it from being shipped from state to state . The United States Customs Court , however , ruled that the book did not contain " one word , phrase , sentence or paragraph which could be truthfully pointed out as offensive to modesty " . 
 = = = Subsequent publication and availability = = = 
 The Pegasus Press edition of the book remained available in France , and some copies made their way into the UK . In a " Letter from Paris " in The New Yorker , Janet Flanner reported that it sold most heavily at the news vendor 's cart that served passengers travelling to London on La Fleche D 'Or . 
 In 1946 , three years after Hall 's death , Troubridge wanted to include The Well in a Collected Memorial Edition of Hall 's works . Peter Davies of the Windmill Press wrote to the Home Office 's legal advisor to ask whether the post @-@ war Labour administration would allow the book to be republished . Unknown to Troubridge , however , he added a postscript saying " I am not really anxious to do The Well of Loneliness and am rather relieved than otherwise by any lack of enthusiasm I may encounter in official circles . " Home Secretary James Chuter Ede told Troubridge that any publisher reprinting the book would risk prosecution . In 1949 , however , Falcon Press brought out an edition with no legal challenge . The Well has been in print continuously ever since and has been translated into at least 14 languages . In the 1960s it was still selling 100 @,@ 000 copies a year in the United States alone . Looking back on the controversy in 1972 , Flanner remarked on how unlikely it seemed that a " rather innocent " book like The Well could have created such a scandal . In 1974 , it was read to the British public on BBC Radio 4 's Book at Bedtime . 
 = = = Copyright status = = = 
 The copyright protection for The Well of Loneliness expired in the European Union on January 1 , 2014 . Because of the <unk> , copyright protection in the United States will continue until at least 2024 . 
 = = Other 1928 lesbian novels = = 
 Three other novels with lesbian themes were published in England in 1928 : Elizabeth Bowen 's The Hotel , Virginia Woolf 's Orlando and Compton MacKenzie 's satirical novel Extraordinary Women . None were banned . The Hotel , like earlier English novels in which critics have identified lesbian themes , is marked by complete reticence , while Orlando may have been protected by its Modernist playfulness . The Home Office considered prosecuting Extraordinary Women , but concluded that it lacked the " earnestness " of The Well and would not inspire readers to adopt " the practices referred to " . Mackenzie was disappointed ; he had hoped a censorship case would increase his book 's sales . Despite advertising that tried to cash in on the controversy over The Well by announcing that Radclyffe Hall was the model for one of the characters , it sold only 2 @,@ 000 copies . 
 A fourth 1928 novel , Ladies Almanack by the American writer Djuna Barnes , not only contains a character based on Radclyffe Hall but includes passages that may be a response to The Well . Ladies Almanack is a roman à clef of a lesbian literary and artistic circle in Paris , written in an archaic , Rabelaisian style and starring Natalie Barney as Dame Evangeline Musset . Much as Sir Phillip paces his study worrying about Stephen , Dame Musset 's father " <unk> [ es ] his library in the most normal of Night @-@ Shirts " . When , unlike Sir Phillip , he confronts his daughter , she replies confidently : " Thou , good Governor , wast expecting a Son when you lay atop of your Choosing .... Am I not doing after your very Desire , and is it not the more commendable , seeing that I do it without the Tools for the Trade , and yet nothing complain ? " Ladies Almanack is far more overtly sexual than The Well ; its cryptic style , full of in @-@ jokes and ornate language , may have been intended to disguise its content from censors . It could not in any case be prosecuted by the Home Office , since it was published only in France , in a small , privately printed edition . It did not become widely available until 1972 . 
 = = Social impact and legacy = = 
 In 1921 , Lord Birkenhead , the Lord Chancellor of Great Britain , had opposed a bill that would have criminalized lesbianism on the grounds that " of every thousand women ... 999 have never even heard a whisper of these practices " . Actually , awareness of lesbianism had been gradually increasing since World War I , but it was still a subject most people had never heard of , or perhaps just preferred to ignore . The Well of Loneliness made sexual inversion a subject of household conversation for the first time . The banning of the book drew so much attention to the very subject it was intended to suppress that it left British authorities wary of further attempts to censor books for lesbian content . In 1935 , after a complaint about a health book entitled The Single Woman and Her Emotional Problems , a Home Office memo noted : " It is notorious that the prosecution of the Well Of Loneliness resulted in infinitely greater publicity about lesbianism than if there had been no prosecution . " 
 James Douglas illustrated his denunciation of The Well with a photograph of Radclyffe Hall in a silk smoking jacket and bow tie , holding a cigarette and monocle . She was also wearing a straight knee @-@ length skirt , but later Sunday Express articles cropped the photo so tightly that it became difficult to tell she was not wearing trousers . Hall 's style of dress was not scandalous in the 1920s ; short hairstyles were common , and the combination of tailored jackets and short skirts was a recognized fashion , discussed in magazines as the " severely masculine " look . Some lesbians , like Hall , adopted variations of the style as a way of signalling their sexuality , but it was a code that only a few knew how to read . With the controversy over The Well of Loneliness , Hall became the public face of sexual inversion , and all women who favored masculine fashions came under new scrutiny . Lesbian journalist Evelyn Irons – who considered Hall 's style of dress " rather effeminate " compared to her own – said that after the publication of The Well , truck drivers would call out on the street to any woman who wore a collar and tie : " Oh , you 're Miss Radclyffe Hall " . Some welcomed their newfound visibility : when Hall spoke at a luncheon in 1932 , the audience was full of women who had imitated her look . But in a study of lesbian women in Salt Lake City in the 1920s and ' 30s , nearly all regretted the publication of The Well because it had drawn unwanted attention to them . 
 In a study of a working class lesbian community in Buffalo , New York in the 1940s and ' 50s , The Well of Loneliness was the only work of lesbian literature anyone had read or heard of . For many young lesbians in the ' 50s , it was the only source of information about lesbianism . The Well 's name recognition made it possible to find when bookstores and libraries did not yet have sections devoted to LGBT literature . As late as 1994 , an article in Feminist Review noted that The Well " regularly appears in coming @-@ out stories – and not just those of older lesbians " . It has often been mocked : Terry Castle says that " like many bookish lesbians I seem to have spent much of my adult life making jokes about it " , and Mary Renault , who read it in 1938 , remembered laughing at its " earnest <unk> " and " impermissible allowance of self @-@ pity " . Yet it has also produced powerful emotional responses , both positive and negative . One woman was so angry at the thought of how The Well would affect an " isolated emerging lesbian " that she " wrote a note in the library book , to tell other readers that women loving women can be beautiful " . A Holocaust survivor said , " Remembering that book , I wanted to live long enough to kiss another woman . " 
 In the 1970s and early ' 80s , when lesbian feminists rejected the butch and femme identities that Hall 's novel had helped to define , writers like Jane Rule and Blanche Wiesen Cook criticized The Well for defining lesbianism in terms of masculinity , as well as for presenting lesbian life as " joyless " . However , the novel has had its defenders among feminists in the academy as well , notably Alison Hennegan , pointing to the fact that the novel did raise awareness of homosexuality among the British public and cleared the way for later work that would tackle gay and lesbian issues . 
 In more recent criticism , critics have tended to focus on the novel 's historical context , but The Well 's reputation as " the most depressing lesbian novel ever written " persists and is still controversial . Some critics see the book as reinforcing homophobic beliefs , while others argue that the book 's tragedy and its depiction of shame are its most compelling aspects . Additionally , some critics claim that The Well 's queer significance extends beyond lesbianism , arguing that the novel provides important bisexual representation in literature . 
 The Well 's ideas and attitudes now strike many readers as dated , and few critics praise its literary quality . Nevertheless , it continues to compel critical attention , to provoke strong identification and intense emotional reactions in some readers , and to elicit a high level of personal engagement from its critics . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 <unk> Kershaw , an American actress who was staging banned plays in Paris , proposed a dramatization of The Well of Loneliness . Hall accepted a £ 100 advance , but when she and Troubridge saw Kershaw act , they found her too feminine for the role of Stephen . Hall tried to void the contract on a technicality , but Kershaw refused to change her plans . The play opened on 2 September 1930 . No playwright was credited , implying that Hall had written the adaptation herself ; it was actually written by one of Kershaw 's ex @-@ husbands , who reworked the story to make it more upbeat . According to Janet Flanner , who reported on the opening night for The New Yorker , Kershaw " made up in costume what she lacked in psychology " , with designer boots , breeches and riding crop . Then she changed into a white dress for a final speech in which she " begged humanity , ' already used to earthquakes and murderers , ' to try to put up with a minor calamity like the play 's and the book 's Lesbian protagonist , Stephen Gordon " . Hall threatened a lawsuit to stop the production , but the issue soon became moot , since the play closed after only a few nights . The public skirmish between Hall and Kershaw increased sales of the novel . 
 A 1951 French film set in a girls ' boarding school was released in the United States as The Pit of Loneliness to capitalize on the notoriety of The Well , but was actually adapted from the novel Olivia , now known to have been written by Dorothy Bussy . A mid @-@ 1930s exploitation film , Children of Loneliness , claimed to be " inspired by " The Well . However , little of Hall 's novel can be discerned in its story of a butch lesbian who is blinded with acid and run over by a truck , freeing the naïve young roommate she seduced to find love with a fullback . A critic for the Motion Picture Herald reported that during the film 's run in Los Angeles in 1937 – as a double feature with Love Life of a Gorilla – a self @-@ identified " doctor " appeared after the screening to sell pamphlets purporting to explain homosexuality . He was arrested for selling obscene literature . 
 = David M. Shoup = 
 David Monroe Shoup ( 30 December 1904 – 13 January 1983 ) was a decorated general of the United States Marine Corps who was awarded the Medal of Honor in World War II , became the 22nd Commandant of the Marine Corps , and , after retiring , became one of the most prominent critics of the Vietnam War . 
 Born in Indiana to an impoverished family , Shoup joined the military for financial reasons . Rising through the ranks in the interwar era , he was twice deployed to China during the Chinese Civil War . He served in Iceland at the beginning of U.S. involvement in World War II , and as a staff officer during the Pacific War . He was unexpectedly given command of the 2nd Marines , and led the initial invasion of Tarawa , for which he was awarded the Medal of Honor and the Distinguished Service Order . He served in the Marianas campaign , and later became a high @-@ level military logistics officer . 
 <unk> his reputation as a hard @-@ driving and assertive leader , Shoup rose through the senior leadership of the Marine Corps , overhauling fiscal affairs , logistics , and recruit training . He was selected as commandant by President Dwight D. Eisenhower , and later served in the administration of John F. Kennedy . He reformed the Corps , emphasizing combat readiness and fiscal efficiency , against what was perceived as politicking among its officers . 
 Shoup opposed the military escalation in response to events such as the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion , but his strongest opposition was to U.S. involvement in South Vietnam . His opposition grew in strength after he retired from the military in 1963 ; he was hostile to both the strategy of the conflict and the excessive influence of corporations and military officials upon foreign policy . His high @-@ profile criticism later spread to include the military industrial complex and what he saw as a pervasive militarism in American culture . Historians consider Shoup 's statements opposing the war to be among the most pointed and high @-@ profile leveled by a veteran against the Vietnam War . 
 = = Early years = = 
 David Monroe Shoup was born on 30 December 1904 in Battle Ground , Indiana . His family lived on a farm in Ash Grove , but moved to Covington to live on a new farm in 1916 . At age 12 he was enrolled in Covington High School , a competitive high school with an advanced curriculum . Shoup was an excellent student , maintaining high marks in French , English , physics , and history . Additionally , he was involved in several extracurricular activities , including basketball , and was class president in his senior year . He graduated in 1921 . He later affectionately referred to his impoverished upbringing as that of an " Indiana <unk> . " Regarded by friends as very sociable , he met Zola De Haven in his freshman year and later said he had been instantly attracted to her . They were both very competitive in academics and athletics , and the two dated throughout high school ; they were married in 1931 . 
 After high school , Shoup attended DePauw University where he was one of 100 awarded the Edward Rector Scholarship , giving him full tuition . <unk> in mathematics , he joined the Delta Upsilon fraternity and maintained high marks , narrowly failing the selection criteria for Phi Beta Kappa Society . He was on the track and field and rifle teams , and also competed in the wrestling and football teams . He won the Indiana and Kentucky Amateur Athletic Union marathon in 1925 . He waited tables , washed dishes and worked in a cement factory to help pay his expenses . Lack of funds compelled him to take a year off after his junior year to teach school , and his expenses were further strained when he contracted a severe case of pneumonia and incurred hospital bills . He opted to enroll in the Reserve Officers Training Corps ( ROTC ) to offset his living expenses , and later recalled that this was the only reason he joined the military . He graduated from DePauw in 1926 . 
 From an early age , Shoup was molded by the progressive ideas of Indiana politicians , sympathizing with rural progressives fighting against the interests of big businesses . He developed an anti @-@ imperialist attitude , and his skepticism about American foreign policy , influenced by his small @-@ town background , made him an outspoken opponent of the unnecessary use of military force . He felt the use of troops for economic or imperialist consideration was wrong , a viewpoint he would carry for his entire career . 
 = = Junior officer = = 
 While at a <unk> and Blade honors society conference in New Orleans , Louisiana , Shoup heard a speech by Major General John A. Lejeune , the Commandant of the Marine Corps , offering commissions in the U.S. Marine Corps to interested officer candidates . Shortly after being commissioned as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Reserve in May 1926 , Shoup applied , and was offered a commission in the Marine Corps . In August 1926 he resigned his commission in the Army and traveled from Camp Knox , Kentucky , to Chicago , Illinois , for physical exams . On 25 August 1926 , he arrived at the Marine Corps barracks at the Philadelphia Navy Yard , where he was commissioned as a second lieutenant , and commenced Marine Officers Basic School . Shoup maintained that he had never previously considered a military career and had only chosen to become a military officer for the pay . Throughout his service , he excelled in athletics and marksmanship , and during his early career he would coach recreational athletic teams in addition to his regular assignments . He quickly established himself as an assertive and demanding leader , impressing both his commanders and his subordinates . Despite his no @-@ nonsense demeanor , those he commanded later recalled his ability to keep morale with his sense of humor . He often sported a clenched cigar , which became something of a trademark during his front @-@ line service . 
 On 1 April 1927 , Shoup and nine other officers were pulled from training to accompany a detachment of Marines sent to China to protect American interests during the instability of the Chinese Civil War . Embarking from San Diego with the 2nd Battalion , 10th Marines , Shoup 's contingent was to play a primarily defensive role , and not engage in military action . Still , he was personally opposed to the mission , feeling that Americans in China were exploiting its people . The contingent landed in Shanghai on 10 June aboard USS Chaumont . Initially , they conducted shore patrol around American sections of the city . On 5 July the battalion was moved to Tientsin to protect American interests there should Chinese Nationalist troops threaten them . Shoup became seriously ill there , and remained hospitalized until it was announced U.S. troops would leave . He briefly returned to Shanghai to oversee foreign troop departures with the 4th Marines , before he departed from China on 7 December 1928 . 
 Following this assignment , Shoup returned to the United States and completed his training . He then spent short stints at Marine bases in Quantico , Virginia , Pensacola , Florida , and San Francisco , California . From June 1929 to September 1931 he served with the Marine detachment aboard USS Maryland , where he coached the boxing and wrestling squads . Following this duty he was assigned to the Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego . In May 1932 he was ordered to Puget Sound Navy Yard in Bremerton , Washington , where he was promoted to first lieutenant one month later . He served on temporary duty with the Civilian Conservation Corps in Idaho and New Jersey from June 1933 to May 1934 , after which he returned to Bremerton . 
 Shoup went back to China in November 1934 , again serving briefly with the 4th Marines in Shanghai . He was soon reassigned as a legation guard in <unk> , where he taught the post 's pistol and rifle teams to shoot competitively . They won at least one major competition . He also had time to observe the troops of the Empire of Japan , gaining great respect for their discipline . In 1936 , he came down with a serious case of pneumonia and had to be evacuated from China . His next duty was at Puget Sound Navy Yard . In October 1936 , he was promoted to captain . In July 1937 he entered Junior Course , Marine Corps Schools in Quantico , which he completed in May 1938 . He then served as an instructor at Quantico for two years . In June 1940 he joined the 6th Marines in San Diego , and was promoted to major in April 1941 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Staff officer = = = 
 Shoup was assigned to the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade , which was moved to Iceland in May 1941 , supporting an occupation there to prevent Nazi German forces from threatening it . Replacing the outgoing British 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division , the brigade continued to garrison the country for several months , and he was there with the Headquarters Company at the time of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . For his service in Iceland , he was awarded the Letter of Commendation with Commendation Ribbon . In February 1942 he was given command of the 2nd Battalion , 6th Marines . With the United States at war , 1st Provisional Marine Brigade moved to New York City , New York , in March , and was disbanded . Shoup moved with his battalion to Camp Elliott in San Diego . 
 In July 1942 , Shoup was named as operations and training officer ( G3 ) of the 2nd Marine Division , and he was promoted to lieutenant colonel in August 1942 . The following month accompanied the division to Wellington , New Zealand , aboard SS Matsonia and oversaw much of its training there . He was also briefly attached to the 1st Marine Division in October 1942 as an observer during the Guadalcanal campaign , then to the 43rd Infantry Division on Rendova Island during New Georgia Campaign in June 1943 . During the latter assignment , Shoup was wounded in action and evacuated . Still , from these experiences he observed amphibious warfare techniques which would be useful later in the war . 
 = = = Tarawa = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1943 , Shoup was transferred to the staff of Major General Julian C. Smith , commander of the 2nd Marine Division , and tasked to help plan the invasion of Betio on Tarawa Atoll . Shoup 's aggressive leadership style would complement the offensive strategy his superiors were seeking in taking the atoll . He was tasked with drawing up initial plans , designating the landing beaches on Betio for the 2nd Marines , and overseeing some rehearsals at Efate . However , after Colonel William W. Marshall , commander of the 2nd Marines , suffered a nervous breakdown before invasion , Smith promoted Shoup to Colonel and gave him command of the regiment in spite of Shoup 's lack of combat experience . 
 The invasion commenced on 20 November 1943 , with Shoup disembarking from Maryland , the flagship for the invasion . His force met heavy resistance on the beaches . His LVT was destroyed by shore fire , and he had to proceed without transportation . As he was wading ashore at around 11 : 00 , he was struck by shrapnel in the legs and received a grazing wound from a bullet in the neck . In spite of these wounds , he rallied the Marines and led them ashore . He was able to coordinate the troops on the beaches and organize them as they began to push inland against an anticipated Japanese counterattack . He continuously organized aggressive attacks on the defenders , and was noted for his bravery and vigour during the conflict . On the second day of the attack , he organized an advance inland , despite heavy casualties among the American troops . By the afternoon , they were winning the battle , and reinforcements began to arrive in force . That night , Shoup was relieved by Colonel Merritt A. Edson , the division 's Chief of Staff , who commanded the 2nd Marines for the remainder of the campaign . Six years later , Shoup made a cameo appearance in the movie " Sands of Iwo Jima " reprising his actions that first night on Tarawa , although he had originally been brought onto the movie as a technical advisor . 
 For his leadership during the assault and the push inland Shoup was awarded the Medal of Honor and the British Distinguished Service Order . For his role in planning the invasion he was awarded the Legion of Merit with " V " device . He also was awarded the Purple Heart for the combat wounds he suffered during the course of the campaign . Ten years after the assault , Shoup remarked of the operation , " there was never a doubt in the minds of those ashore what the final outcome of the battle for Tarawa would be . There was for some seventy @-@ six hours , however , considerable haggling with the enemy over the exact price we would have to pay . " In 1968 , he returned to Tarawa to dedicate a memorial to the battle and to the American and Japanese troops who had died there . 
 = = = Subsequent wartime service = = = 
 In December 1943 , Shoup became Chief of Staff of the 2nd Marine Division , which was then refitting and training in Hawaii for the upcoming invasion of the Marianas in June . Shoup performed well as a staff officer , assisting in the planning for the battles for Saipan and Tinian . Though a divisional staff officer , he still managed to find occasion to be forward in the fighting . In one instance on Saipan he became trapped in a forward observer post with fellow officer Wallace M. Greene . Greene later recalled in the midst of the Japanese attack Shoup remained impressively calm . Shoup was awarded a second Legion of Merit with " V " device for his work in this campaign . At the end of operations on the Mariana Islands , Shoup returned to the United States in October 1944 . He served as a logistics officer in the Division of Plans and Policies at Marine Headquarters in Washington , D.C. He remained at this post for the rest of the war . 
 = = Cold War era = = 
 In August 1947 , Shoup became Commanding Officer , Service Command , Fleet Marine Force , Pacific . In June 1949 , he was assigned to the 1st Marine Division at Camp Pendleton as its chief of staff . In July 1950 , he was then transferred to Quantico where he served as Commanding Officer of the Basic School . 
 In April 1952 , Shoup became Assistant Fiscal Director in the Office of the Fiscal Director , Headquarters Marine Corps . In this capacity , Shoup served under Major General William P. T. Hill , the Quartermaster General . Shoup was ordered by the Marine Corps Commandant General Lemuel C. Shepherd to establish a new fiscal office independent of Hill 's authority . Shoup and Hill clashed frequently , but Shoup was nonetheless able to establish a new , independent Fiscal Division . He was promoted to brigadier general in April 1953 , and in July he became Fiscal Director of the Marine Corps . He was involved in fiscal strategy hearings before the U.S. Congress , and established a programming system where officers researched and thought out programs before bringing them to Congress . This idea met with resistance from Marine leaders who favored going to the Hill to figure out the details of programs . While serving in this capacity , he was promoted to major general in September 1955 . 
 Shoup began a brief assignment as Inspector General for Recruit Training in May 1956 after being ordered to do so by Commandant Randolph M. Pate following the Ribbon Creek incident , which involved the accidental drowning of six recruits during a training march . As Marine leaders were investigating , they favored Shoup 's recommendation of not covering up the incident . He supported an overhaul of recruit training for the Marine Corps in response . 
 Following this , he served as Inspector General of the Marine Corps from September 1956 until May 1957 . He returned to Camp Pendleton in June to become commanding general of the 1st Marine Division . He became Commanding General of the 3rd Marine Division on Okinawa in March 1958 . Following his return to the United States in May 1959 , he served as Commanding General of the Marine Corps Recruit Depot , Parris Island , until October 1959 . During this time , he also served as president of the 2nd Marine Division Association . 
 = = Commandant of the Marine Corps = = 
 While still a major general , Shoup was unexpectedly nominated to become Commandant of the Marine Corps by President Dwight D. Eisenhower at the behest of Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates , Jr .. To prepare for this duty he was promoted to lieutenant general on 2 November 1959 , and briefly assigned duties as Chief of Staff , Headquarters Marine Corps . He was elevated to general on 1 January 1960 , upon assuming the post as the 22nd Commandant of the Marine Corps . He would later serve under the administration of John F. Kennedy from 1961 to 1963 , and the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson in 1963 . 
 = = = Leadership overhaul = = = 
 By 1959 , Gates and other officials viewed the Corps as fraught with internal squabbling and alienated from the other services . Because of this condition , combined with the reputation gained from the Ribbon Creek incident , it was decided that Pate needed to be replaced . Gates believed Shoup was a strong leader who could steer the Corps in the right direction . Shoup was selected over five lieutenant generals and four major generals senior to him in rank . Lieutenant General Merrill B. Twining was considered the likely appointee to the position ; Lieutenant Generals Edward Pollock and Vernon E. <unk> also aspired to the position of Commandant . Twining openly vied for the position and retired immediately after Shoup was selected , reportedly in protest , as did several other officers . Shoup emphasized military readiness , training , and inter @-@ service cooperation , which differed from the political climate of the time . He rapidly gained a reputation as being extremely demanding and critical of poor performance , especially by Marine generals and leaders . He was sometimes blunt in his criticism of what he saw as poorly performing officers , to the extent that some considered him a bully . 
 Eisenhower favored Shoup because he feared other officers spent too much time in political affairs , and felt Shoup would reduce the influence of the military industrial complex . Immediately after his appointment , Shoup sought to place new officers in key positions , in an attempt to overhaul the leadership of the Marine Corps . He and Pate disagreed over some of the new appointments , as Shoup transferred many senior officers and encouraged others to retire . Shoup later wrote he felt the Joint Chiefs of Staff had an undue weight in the direction of military strategy . He also sought to curtail politicking by lower @-@ level Marine officers seeking career advancement . 
 = = = Budget strategy = = = 
 During the first year of Shoup 's service as Commandant , he served under the Eisenhower administration , in which military budget policy was dominated by the " New Look " policy , under which a strong nuclear deterrent was favored over conventional warfare forces . Eisenhower focused on containment without entangling the United States in proxy wars such as the Korean War . The end result of this was spending cuts and force reductions within the Marine Corps . The 1960 election of Kennedy ushered in a major change in military strategy with the adoption of the " Flexible Response " strategy , which saw a return to conventional military forces as a deterrent to nuclear war . Under the Kennedy administration there was increased civilian participation in defense policy @-@ building , and the new Secretary of Defense , Robert McNamara , sought more inter @-@ service cooperation . 
 Shoup favored a more frugal approach to the military budget , feeling the military was too susceptible to influence from large corporations arguing for expensive and unnecessary programs . As the Kennedy administration brought more emphasis on conventional warfare , Shoup sought to use increased funds to improve military logistics . He is credited with formulating an entirely new system of financial management , supply , and inventory management . He also created a new Data Processing Division to centralize the data processing functions of several combat service support branches . 
 = = = Cold War conflicts = = = 
 Shoup 's outlook on Cold War conflicts was greatly influenced by his upbringing , and he was frequently an opponent of military action against the Soviet Union . He refused to fall into what he referred to as the " hate the Communists movement " , indicating he would fight them if required by circumstances , but avoided undue prejudice . When U.S. Senator Strom Thurmond criticized the military for not training its troops about communism , Shoup regarded the criticism as interference . He appealed to Secretary of the Navy Fred <unk> , and the matter was dropped . At the behest of the Kennedy administration , Shoup integrated counterinsurgency warfare into combat doctrine . Though he was not in favor of the idea , he appointed Major General Victor H. Krulak as an adviser on counterinsurgency . 
 Shoup opposed military action against Cuba , warning against any attempt to intervene militarily against Fidel Castro . He was initially not involved or aware of the plans for the Bay of Pigs invasion . He was asked by the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) to furnish an officer , but became furious when he learned the CIA was requisitioning Marine supplies without his permission . He finally learned the intent of the CIA when the officer , Colonel Jack Hawkins , contacted him on the night of the invasion , pleading with him to appeal to Kennedy for air support . Following the failure of the operation , the Joint Chiefs of Staff were blamed , which Shoup thought was unfair , as they had not been aware of the early planning . 
 Shoup later warned against an armed response during the Cuban Missile Crisis , noting how difficult it would be to invade the country . Still , he prepared a team of Marines to invade Cuba should it be necessary . He and the other Joint Chiefs unanimously recommended a quick airstrike to knock out the missiles once they were discovered there . Kennedy subsequently sought Shoup 's advice in evaluating the implications of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . While his position in the Joint Chiefs of Staff was intended to be limited , he had gained Kennedy 's confidence and was often called on for private consultations . Shoup supported the test ban , seeing it as a deterrent to nuclear war . 
 Shoup was strongly opposed to military intervention in Indochina from the beginning . In 1961 , when the Pathet Lao threatened the American @-@ backed government of Laos , he rejected calls for armed intervention . He deployed Task Unit <unk> to Saigon in 1962 only because he was ordered to , and cautioned against further involvement in South Vietnam , which he toured in October 1962 . He opposed the Strategic Hamlet program , as well as efforts to train the Army of the Republic of Vietnam . He opposed any plans for combat in Vietnam , and later said " every responsible military man to my knowledge " was against the war as well . Shoup 's staunch opposition to involvement there had a great impact on Kennedy , who , before his assassination on 22 November 1963 , indicated that he wanted to end U.S. involvement in South Vietnam , seeing it as an internal struggle . 
 While Eisenhower appreciated Shoup 's fiscal experience and apolitical outlook , Shoup was called upon most often by Kennedy . With Kennedy 's relations with the Joint Chiefs of Staff strained , particularly following the Cuban Missile Crisis , he called upon Shoup privately for many consultations . Shoup 's biographer Howard <unk> wrote that Shoup was Kennedy 's favorite general . In turn , Shoup was the most supportive of Kennedy of all of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Kennedy had asked Shoup to remain as Commandant for a second term in 1963 , but Shoup declined in order to allow the advancement of other Marine generals . 
 = = Later life and opposition to the Vietnam War = = 
 Retiring from the military in December 1963 , Shoup took a job at a life insurance company , but remained influential in the administration . Johnson considered taking Shoup as an adviser on a February 1964 trip to Vietnam , but did not , either because he never made the invitation or because Shoup declined . Johnson appointed Shoup to the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service in early 1966 . It disbanded on 1 January 1967 after submitting a report . 
 Shoup was unable to directly influence the Johnson administration , which expanded U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . He became increasingly wary of what he felt was undue influence by the CIA and big businesses on foreign policy . In 1964 during the debate over the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution , Senator Wayne Morse wanted to call Shoup to testify against the measure , but was blocked by Senator J. William Fulbright . On 14 May 1966 , Shoup began publicly attacking the policy in a speech delivered to community college students at Pierce College in Woodland Hills , California , for their World Affairs Day . 
 I believe that if we had and would keep our dirty , bloody , dollar @-@ soaked fingers out of the business of these nations so full of depressed , exploited people , they will arrive at a solution of their own — and if unfortunately their revolution must be of the violent type because the " haves " refuse to share with the " have @-@ nots " by any peaceful method , at least what they get will be their own , and not the American style , which they don 't want and above all don 't want crammed down their throats by Americans . 
 The forum was relatively small and initially received little publicity , but in February 1967 Shoup submitted the speech to Senator Rupert Vance Hartke , who entered it into the Congressional Record . The speech grew in popularity , and Shoup did an interview for ABC News where he elaborated that , while he was not a pacifist , he felt the war was " not worth the life or limb of a single American . " He remained firmly opposed to the involvement in Vietnam for the rest of his life . 
 Although other retired high @-@ ranking officers , including generals James Gavin and Matthew Ridgway , joined Shoup in this , it was Shoup 's pointed criticisms that regularly made the front pages of newspapers , because they went beyond the war to American government , business , and military leadership . He feared the conflict had endangered the nation 's historical identity , and argued increasing the troop levels in Vietnam would only aggravate the strategic problems there . Historian Robert <unk> noted that Shoup may have been the most vocal former military member to oppose the war . 
 Shoup argued that among the Vietnamese forces involved in the civil war there were nationalists opposed to foreign military intervention . He opposed many of the strategies associated with troop escalation , notably the air campaign over North Vietnam , which he saw as an aggressive measure causing civilian casualties that could draw the People 's Republic of China or the Soviet Union into the conflict . He also feared that other American interests , including the economy , were suffering through U.S. involvement in the war , and that the U.S. was losing prestige internationally . 
 Shoup 's opposition to the war only increased over time ; he initially pushed for a negotiated settlement but later supported a unilateral pullout from the country . As the Vietnamization strategy took effect and the U.S. increased its air operations , he remained opposed to any strategy that risked a nuclear war with China or the Soviet Union . His criticism attracted more press as the war became a stalemate . It also became highly publicized through discourse among the anti @-@ war movement . 
 In 1968 , in testimony before Congress , Shoup made many of the same points as he had in his 1966 speech , saying he felt opposition to the war had likely increased since then . In April 1969 , along with retired Colonel James Donovan , he broadened his criticism to national security policy . In an article published in Atlantic Monthly , he accused America of becoming militaristic and aggressive , and was a country ready to " execute military contingency plans and to seek military solutions to problems of political disorder and potential Communist threats in areas of our interest . " He said that anticommunism had given way to a new , aggressive defense establishment in the United States . 
 In a book titled Militarism U.S.A. ( 1970 ) , Shoup and Donovan elaborated their criticisms . Shoup said the country was seeking military solutions to issues that could be resolved politically . He accused military leaders of propagating the war for their own career advancement , and accused the veterans group Veterans of Foreign Wars of propagandizing for the armed forces establishment . Shoup blamed the American education system for what he saw as discouraging independent thought and stressing obedience . 
 Shoup joined the Business Executives Move for Vietnam Peace . By 1971 , Shoup publicly endorsed the anti @-@ war veteran group Vietnam Veterans Against the War . As Vietnamization had reduced the visibility of the anti @-@ war movement , and Shoup 's criticism was not as prominent in the public arena . Fulbright and other senators urged the White House to listen to his criticisms , but Shoup 's broader critique of American society and militarism was seen as more extreme than other officers who had simply criticized the strategy of the war . 
 Shoup 's opposition to the war garnered resentment from many of the other officers in the Marine Corps , and was met with criticism that he was becoming mentally unfit or was treasonous in his actions . He was sharply criticized by journalist and former Marine Robert <unk> in several articles of the Detroit News where <unk> said Shoup was " going sour . " General Rathvon M.C. Thompkins , one of Shoup 's close friends , stopped speaking to him for several years . By December 1967 , he had lost favor with the Johnson administration , his activities were monitored by the Federal Bureau of Investigation , and his patriotism was called into question in the media . 
 After 1971 , Shoup 's speaking and writing diminished , and he faded from the public eye after the U.S. military withdrawal from Vietnam in 1973 . After the war , he stayed out of the public spotlight . He suffered from illness late in life , and he died on 13 January 1983 in Alexandria , Virginia . He was buried in section 7 @-@ A of Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 One of General Shoup 's service dress uniforms is on display at the armory of the Artillery Company of Newport . 
 = = Honors and decorations = = 
 The Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyer USS Shoup ( DDG @-@ 86 ) was named for Shoup in 1999 . Additionally , he received the following decorations : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 Rank and organization : Colonel , U.S. Marine Corps , commanding officer of all Marine Corps troops on Betio Island , Tarawa Atoll , and Gilbert Islands , from 20 to November 22 , 1943 . 
 The President of the United States takes pride in presenting the MEDAL OF HONOR to 
 <unk> <unk> M. <unk> 
 UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS 
 for service as set forth in the following CITATION : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty as commanding officer of all Marine Corps troops in action against enemy Japanese forces on Betio Island , Tarawa Atoll , Gilbert Islands , from 20 to November 22 , 1943 . Although severely shocked by an exploding enemy shell soon after landing at the pier and suffering from a serious , painful leg wound which had become infected , Col. Shoup fearlessly exposed himself to the terrific and relentless artillery , machine gun , and rifle fire from hostile shore emplacements . Rallying his hesitant troops by his own inspiring heroism , he gallantly led them across the fringing reefs to charge the heavily fortified island and reinforce our hard @-@ pressed , thinly held lines . Upon arrival on shore , he assumed command of all landed troops and , working without rest under constant , withering enemy fire during the next 2 days , conducted smashing attacks against unbelievably strong and fanatically defended Japanese positions despite innumerable obstacles and heavy casualties . By his brilliant leadership , daring tactics , and selfless devotion to duty , Col. Shoup was largely responsible for the final decisive defeat of the enemy , and his indomitable fighting spirit reflects great credit upon the U.S. Naval Service . 
 = PRR 4859 = 
 PRR 4859 is a GG1 @-@ class electric locomotive located in the Harrisburg Transportation Center in Harrisburg in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . It was operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad and its successors , Penn Central and Conrail . 4859 pulled the first electrically powered train from Philadelphia to Harrisburg on January 15 , 1938 . It was used in various freight and passenger service until November 22 , 1979 , when it pulled the last GG1 @-@ powered freight train on November 22 , 1979 . Originally located in Strasburg , it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1982 and was moved to its current location in 1986 . It was designated the state electric locomotive of Pennsylvania in 1987 by the Pennsylvania General Assembly and was re @-@ listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2004 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The GG1 was developed in 1930s by General Electric as the replacement for the Pennsylvania Railroad 's then standard electric locomotive , the <unk> , and was based largely on the New Haven EP3 . The GG1 was capable of a top speed of 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , powered by its twelve 385 horsepower ( 287 kW ) traction motors . The prototype GG1 , PRR 4800 , was tested against Westinghouse 's submission , the R1 . The Pennsylvania selected the GG1 over the R1 , as the R1 was not articulated and the GG1 's traction motors were similar to ones already in use . An order for 57 GG1s was placed in November 1934 and the first locomotives were delivered in April 1935 . 
 Raymond Loewy was hired by the Pennsylvania to " enhance the GG1 's aesthetics . " Loewy had the production locomotives ' bodies be welded together , instead of riveted the way 4800 was , to give the GG1 a more streamlined appearance . Loewy also formulated the Brunswick green paint scheme and the gold pinstripes , nicknamed " cat 's whiskers " , which was eventually applied by the Pennsylvania to all of its locomotives for the next 20 years . 
 = = History = = 
 4859 was built in December 1937 at the Pennsylvania Railroad 's Altoona Works in Altoona , Pennsylvania . The Philadelphia – Harrisburg line was opened on January 15 , 1938 , with 4859 pulling the inaugural train , Train # 25 The Metropolitan . Its departure from Philadelphia was accompanied by a cacophony of various train whistles and fire sirens leading some residents , who were unaware of the event , to believe that Nazi Germany was invading . 
 4859 was <unk> to have a top speed of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) when it was shifted to freight duty in 1964 . Although used primarily for freight , 4859 <unk> to pull " <unk> " , or short @-@ haul passenger trains , from New York to Philadelphia and commuter trains on the New York and Long Branch Railroad . 4859 , accompanied by PRR <unk> , pulled the last freight train to be powered by a GG1 from the Enola Yard in Enola , Pennsylvania to Edgemoor , Delaware , before being retired by Conrail on November 29 , 1979 . 
 = = = Preservation = = = 
 After its retirement , 4859 was purchased in for $ 13 @,@ 000 by the Harrisburg chapter of the National Railroad Historical Society and donated to the Harrisburg Redevelopment Authority . It was sent to the Pennsylvania Railroad Museum in Strasburg in the early 1980s , where restoration of 4859 was carried by the workshops of the nearby Strasburg Rail Road . The body and chassis were sandblasted , primed and repainted back to its original 1938 appearance . The main transformer was removed and drained of the hazardous polychlorinated biphenyl ( PCBs ) used as coolant . 
 4859 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on August 19 , 1982 , while still in Strasburg . The deed to 4859 was transferred from Redevelopment Authority to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission on November 13 , 1986 . Two days later , the engine was moved into the Transportation Center and rededicated . The Pennsylvania General Assembly designated 4859 the official state electric locomotive on December 18 , 1987 , while also designating two K4s locomotives as the state steam locomotives in the same bill . 4859 was listed on National Register of Historic Places for a second time on May 5 , 2004 . " Soft " materials , like insulation , were removed from the cab in 2005 on orders from the United States Environmental Protection Agency to remove residual contamination from the PCBs . In 2010 , 4859 received some cosmetic restoration of its truck assemblies which were re @-@ painted black to eliminate a noticeable coating of rust . On April 5 , 2014 , the locomotive and its caboose were temporarily moved west of the Transportation Center , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) , to a siding , and covered with tarpaulins to allow Amtrak to perform renovation work on the station 's catenary , signals , switches and tracks . By October 17 , 2015 , the renovations were complete enough to allow 4859 to return to the station , though the project overall remains in progress . 
 = Obsidian Entertainment = 
 Obsidian Entertainment is an American video game developer whose corporate headquarters is located in Irvine , California . It was founded in 2003 by ex @-@ Black Isle employees Feargus Urquhart , Chris Avellone , Chris Parker , Darren Monahan , and Chris Jones after the closure of Black Isle Studios . 
 Although they have created original intellectual property , many of their games are sequels based on licensed properties . Early projects include Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic II : The Sith Lords and Neverwinter Nights 2 , both sequels to BioWare @-@ developed games . The team then developed their first original game , Alpha Protocol , in 2010 . It was met with generally mixed reviews . Other notable works from Obsidian include Fallout : New Vegas , Dungeon Siege III , and South Park : The Stick of Truth , all also licensed properties . 
 Throughout the studio 's history , many projects — including Futureblight , Dwarves , Aliens : Crucible , and a project codenamed North Carolina — were cancelled . Due to having so many projects cancelled , the company entered a severe financial crisis in 2012 . As a result , Obsidian decided to <unk> their next game , Pillars of Eternity , a role @-@ playing game played from an isometric perspective , which ultimately became a success and saved the studio from closure . The team 's focus then changed from developing licensed titles to creating original games based on the studio 's own intellectual property . Obsidian has developed a close relationship with another studio that was founded by ex @-@ Interplay Entertainment employees , inXile Entertainment . The company is currently working on Tyranny , a role @-@ playing game set in a world where the war between good and evil has been fought with evil coming out on top , and Armored Warfare , a massively multiplayer online game with a focus on controlling tanks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2003 : Founding = = = 
 Obsidian Entertainment was founded by Feargus Urquhart , Chris Avellone , Chris Parker , Darren Monahan and Chris Jones . Prior to the establishment of Obsidian , they worked for Interplay Entertainment 's subsidiary Black Isle Studios . At Black Isle they created several role @-@ playing games including Icewind Dale , Planescape : Torment , and Fallout 2 , and collaborated with BioWare on Neverwinter Nights , Baldur 's Gate , and Baldur 's Gate II . Most of these games were critically and commercially successful , but Interplay 's financial situation was poor and the studio lost its license to produce Dungeons & Dragons @-@ based games . This led to the cancellation of Baldur 's Gate III : The Black Hound . Urquhart and most of the staff members were dissatisfied and frustrated with the cancellation , as the game had already been under development for a year and a half . Urquhart became convinced that staying in Black Isle was no longer a " viable option " for the team , and decided to leave the company . He was in his early thirties at the time , and thought that if he did not start a new company soon , he may become too old to do so . Urquhart officially left Interplay in 2003 with Avellone , Parker , Monahan , and Jones , and founded Obsidian Entertainment with them the same year . 
 At the time of the company 's establishment there were seven employees , including the company 's five founders . Parker , Urquhart , and Monahan invested $ 100 @,@ 000 to $ 125 @,@ 000 into their newly founded company . When choosing the name of the company , they had prepared a short list of names for them to choose . The list included " Scorched Earth " and " Three Clown Software " . The team eventually chose " Obsidian Entertainment " , which they thought was strong , memorable , and felt similar to name of their old studio , Black Isle . 
 Upon its establishment , the studio needed more capital in order to keep its operation running , and thus needed to gain support from publishers . They approached Electronic Arts , but it did not result in a project . The studio also contacted Ubisoft looking to make a Might & Magic game , but Ubisoft instead ended up contracting with Arkane Studios on that project , which became Dark Messiah of Might & Magic . Obsidian pitched a game to Take @-@ Two Interactive called Futureblight , which was described as a Fallout @-@ style game powered by the Neverwinter Nights engine . Similar to the EA and Ubisoft projects , Futureblight was never made . 
 = = = Late 2003 – 08 : The Sith Lords and Neverwinter Nights 2 = = = 
 Towards the end of 2003 the team was contacted by LucasArts president Simon Jeffrey , who requested that Obsidian make an action role @-@ playing game set in the Star Wars universe . The team suggested a game concept which featured first @-@ person lightsaber melee combat and that included established characters like R2 @-@ D2 . Their idea was rejected , and Jeffrey instead asked Obsidian to create a follow @-@ up to the BioWare @-@ developed Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic , as the team at Obsidian was familiar with the technology that the original game used . The partnership between the two companies finalized in late 2003 , and development of the game , which became Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic II : The Sith Lords , began in October 2003 . Obsidian was given 15 months to develop The Sith Lords . Originally set for a holiday 2004 release , LucasArts gave the studio an extension into 2005 , before shifting the release date back to holiday 2004 following the Electronic Entertainment Expo . While LucasArts did dispatch members of its own staff to help get the game out on time , a number of features wound up being cut due to time constraints . Due to the moved deadline , Obsidian also did not have enough time to polish the game , and The Sith Lords suffered from crashes and other technical issues . Despite its issues , The Sith Lords was released to positive critical reception . The cut features were eventually restored by modders , who began their effort in 2009 and finished in 2012 . 
 From the beginning , the studio 's goal was to be able develop multiple projects simultaneously , and the decision led the company to expand very quickly . Soon after the development of The Sith Lords began the team expanded to 20 employees . As of July 2004 it had expanded to 27 , with 18 from Black Isle , and others from Blizzard Entertainment , Electronic Arts , <unk> , Totally Games , Treyarch , and Troika . 
 Prior to the launch of The Sith Lords , Obsidian was approached by Atari . Atari acquired the license to produce Dungeons & Dragons @-@ based games , and wanted Obsidian to create a sequel to Neverwinter Nights , which became Neverwinter Nights 2 . Development of the game began in July 2005 with team of ten people . The development of the game was headed by Monahan and Avellone . Obsidian became the game 's lead developer , while Neverwinter Nights creator BioWare provided technical assistance . While they were developing the game , the team 's size grew to about 50 people . The team were given sufficient time for the game 's development , and Atari was willing to delay the project 's targeted release window from Christmas 2005 to October 31 , 2006 . Neverwinter Nights 2 received a generally positive critical reception . Two expansions , Mask of the Betrayer and Storm of Zehir , were released in 2007 and 2008 . 
 During Neverwinter Nights 2 's development , the team approached other publishers to work on additional projects . Disney Interactive Studios commissioned Obsidian to develop a prequel to Snow White and the Seven Dwarves called Dwarves , which was set to be a third @-@ person action game for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The team developed a prototype and was a year into development when the CEO of Disney was replaced . The change of CEO led Disney to head in a completely different direction , which made the Snow White franchise " untouchable " and resulted in the cancellation of the project . According to Urquhart , the team loved the game and its cancellation was a " heartbreaking " experience for them . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Alpha Protocol , Fallout : New Vegas , and Dungeon Siege III = = = 
 With the development of Neverwinter Nights II coming to an end , Obsidian was contacted by three different publishers . Electronic Arts wanted Obsidian to develop a role @-@ playing game to compete with The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , and another publisher was also interested in having Obsidian develop a fantasy RPG . The third publisher was Sega , who wanted the studio to develop an action role @-@ playing game set within the Alien franchise . The game , titled Aliens : Crucible , was to feature base @-@ building , dialogue choices , and character customization . In February 2009 Obsidian sent a prototype to Sega . Sega decided to cancel the game three weeks later without inspecting the demo . The cancellation was officially confirmed in June of that year . At around the same time , Atari again approached Obsidian , this time to revive Baldur 's Gate III . Obsidian requested a large budget , which Atari could not afford , and the deal between the two companies fell apart when Atari Europe was sold to Namco Bandai Games . 
 Despite the cancellation of Aliens : Crucible , Sega was still interested in working with Obsidian to develop another project . Instead of developing a sequel , they were asked to develop a role @-@ playing game based on a new intellectual property . The team came up with an idea of a " spy RPG " . Sega approved the idea and decided to help with the game 's funding and serve as its publisher . The game would go on to become Alpha Protocol . The game 's development was troubled ; the team did not have a precise vision for Alpha Protocol and struggled to settle on what gameplay elements to include and what the target audience should be . As a result , it suffered from an identity crisis and featured elements from multiple genres . Sega , for its part , was also unable to make decisions quickly and the publisher cut features from the game after their completion . This resulted in numerous delays and excessively long production time ; Alpha Protocol took four years to develop . It was finally released in June 2010 . 
 Their first original game , Alpha Protocol received mostly mixed reviews from critics . It was also a commercial failure for Sega , which led to their decision to put any plans for a sequel on hold . After the game 's launch , Urquhart admitted that there was still room for improvements . Even though the game was a commercial failure , it was well received by the community , which has often demanded that Obsidian make a sequel . Urquhart responded by saying that the team hoped that they can develop Alpha Protocol 2 , and " do better " with it . Avellone later added that they were unable to develop a sequel because the rights to the game were owned by Sega and crowdfunding would not be a suitable option . 
 On February 11 , 2010 , Red Eagle Games and Obsidian announced that they would co @-@ develop one or more games based on The Wheel of Time fantasy novel series by Robert Jordan . On April 25 , 2014 , however , Urquhart told Computer & Video Games that the agreement between the companies had dissolved after Red Eagle had failed to secure the necessary funding . 
 At the same time that Alpha Protocol was in development , Obsidian was also working on Fallout : New Vegas . Prior to working on New Vegas , they were contacted by Bethesda Softworks about developing a Star Trek game , but the idea never gained traction . After Bethesda released Fallout 3 and began to shift its own focus back towards its Elder Scrolls series , it approached Obsidian with the idea of having the later studio develop another game in the Fallout series , as several of Obsidian 's founders had worked on the franchise while at Black Isle . In developing New Vegas , the Obsidian looked at fan requests , which led to New Vegas giving a more prominent role to the in @-@ game factions . When the concept was pitched to Bethesda , it was immediately approved . The development of New Vegas began soon after the cancellation of Aliens : Crucible , and it was released in October 2010 . It received generally positive reviews , with some critics saying that the game 's quality exceeded that of the critically acclaimed Fallout 3 . 
 As was the case with The Sith Lords , the development team did not thoroughly assess New Vegas for bugs and glitches before it was released . Some players were unable to play the game due to constant crashes . These problems were later patched and fixed . Obsidian considered New Vegas to be a learning experience ; it was the studio 's first AAA game , and it taught the studio how to manage quality assurance . Between The Sith Lords and New Vegas , Obsidian had built a reputation for creating games with technical problems . The team was determined to change this with future titles , and made improvements to their bug @-@ tracking system , These improvements were applied to the studio 's next project , Dungeon Siege III , a sequel to the Gas Powered Games @-@ developed Dungeon Siege , published by Square Enix . The game received mixed reviews upon release in 2011 , but it enjoyed a stable launch . Dungeon Siege III was the first game to use Obsidian 's own in @-@ house Onyx engine . 
 In 2011 , the company began working on a third @-@ person open world game code named " North Carolina " . It was rumored that the game was being produced for the then @-@ unannounced successor to the Xbox 360 . The title was ultimately cancelled in 2012 by its publisher , Microsoft Studios , causing Obsidian to lay off between 20 and 30 people . 
 = = = 2012 – 15 : The Stick of Truth , financial troubles , and Pillars of Eternity = = = 
 In October 2009 , Obsidian was contacted by South Park Digital Studios to develop a game set within the South Park universe . The team originally thought the phone call from South Park Digital Studios was a prank carried out by another company located in the same building . Obsidian met with South Park 's creators , Matt Stone and Trey Parker , with the two parties agreeing that it was critical that the game share the television show 's construction paper @-@ like visual aesthetic . Funding was originally provided by Viacom , the parent company of the television channel that South Park is broadcast on . In 2011 , Viacom decided to let the video game publisher THQ take over as the game 's publisher . Shortly after THQ took over , they entered into financial crisis , eventually going bankrupt in late 2011 . With THQ unable to continue its publishing and funding roles , an auction was held for other publishers to acquire their titles . Obsidian was worried about that if the project were cancelled , they too would face severe financial difficulties . Eventually Ubisoft acquired the game , which was released as South Park : The Stick of Truth in March 2014 . 
 Obsidian has also maintained a friendly relationship with inXile Entertainment . Like Obsidian , inXile was founded by former employees of Interplay Entertainment . The two companies signed an agreement to share their technology with each other . Obsidian assisted in the development of inXile 's Wasteland 2 after its Kickstarter campaign raised $ 2 @.@ 1 million , Wasteland 2 was released in late 2014 and received generally positive reviews upon release . 
 While the studio managed to complete South Park : The Stick of Truth , the company faced a precarious financial position . The studio received only a small " kill fee " for their work on North Carolina . They also lost their bonus for Fallout : New Vegas , as the game failed to meet Bethesda 's standard — an aggregate review score of 85 at Metacritic — by 1 point . The team lacked sufficient resources to keep the company 's operation running . According to Adam <unk> , an executive producer at Obsidian , if they failed to pitch a project to a publisher in time they would have exhausted their money and gone bankrupt . At that time , the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter was growing popular and Josh Sawyer , creative director of New Vegas , proposed that the studio put their cancelled game on Kickstarter and attempt to secure funding for it there . Some team members were skeptical about the idea and feared that they may not even be able to raise $ 100 @,@ 000 through the platform . The question of whether to pursue a Kickstarter campaign led to numerous debates between key members of the company . The debates ended when Double Fine Adventure 's campaign launched and saw huge success . Secure in the belief that Kickstarter was a viable funding option , the team decided to use it to fund the development a game they wanted to make for a very long time : a spiritual successor to Baldur 's Gate . The Kickstarter campaign for Pillars of Eternity was launched in September 2012 under the working name " Project Eternity " , with Obsidian requesting $ 1 @.@ 1 million . The studio approached Kickstarter with the mindset that if their campaign was successful the game could eventually be turned into a franchise , while if they were unsuccessful , they would attempt to refine their ideas and try again with another campaign . Obsidian 's campaign was hugely successful , raising $ 4 million and breaking the record set by Double Fine Adventure . Pillars of Eternity was released in March 2015 to a positive critical reception . Paradox Interactive served as the game 's publisher . Obsidian planned an expansion pack , called The White March . It was divided into two different parts , one of which was released on August 25 , 2015 , and the other on February 16 , 2016 . A board game for Pillars of Eternity titled Pillars of Eternity : Lords of the Eastern Reach was announced on May 19 , 2015 . It was developed by Zero Radius Games with input provided by Obsidian . Like the main game , it was funded through a Kickstarter campaign , and it reached its funding goal within a day . 
 In June 2015 , studio co @-@ founder Chris Avellone announced his departure from Obsidian . In August 2015 , Obsidian partnered with inXile and Double Fine to launch a new funding website named Fig , with Urquhart serving as a member of the company 's advising board . The new platform 's aim is to offer " equity crowdfunding " , and it will only focus exclusively on video games @-@ related projects . Obsidian is set to use Fig as its future crowdfunding platform . 
 = = = 2016 : Tyranny , Armored Warfare , and Pathfinder = = = 
 Obsidian Entertainment is currently working on three projects ; the westernization of <unk> , and the free @-@ to @-@ play multiplayer military shooter Armored Warfare . On August 13 , 2014 , Obsidian announced that they had licensed the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game to make electronic games , starting with a tablet adaptation of the Pathfinder Adventure Card Game , which is scheduled to be released on March 29 , 2016 for iOS and Android , with releases for other platforms to be announced . Paizo CEO Lisa Stevens also confirmed plans for an Obsidian @-@ developed computer role @-@ playing game . Urquhart had stated a desire to collaborate with BioWare again on a new Star Wars game . After the release of New Vegas , there is also a desire to work on another Fallout game . 
 On March 15 , 2016 , Obsidian announced their new project called Tyranny , an isometric RPG set in a world where evil has already won . The game was announced for release in 2016 on Microsoft Windows , Mac and Linux , and will be published by Paradox Interactive . In April 2016 , Leonard Boyarsky joined Obsidian , becoming the second Troika Games co @-@ founder to work for the company . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Obsidian built its reputation making sequels in well @-@ established franchises including Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic , Neverwinter Nights , Fallout , and Dungeon Siege . Urquhart has stated that the company is fine with developing sequels , as they are often fun to make since the studio can " get to go play in someone else 's world " and further explore and expand upon the original games ' ideas . The studio also believes that such licensed projects are easier to develop . Obsidian considered the making of these sequels as stepping stones towards eventually making original games based on their own intellectual property . The studio 's focus did later shift towards developing their own games , which allowed Obsidian to maximize their creative freedom and escape the constraints imposed by publishers . The studio has used the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter as an indicator to see whether a game or genre is popular or not . 
 As an independent company , Obsidian believes that they must act and react quickly to market changes and not stagnate on any certain point . While the core focus of Obsidian was still developing character @-@ driven role @-@ playing games , the team were willing to try out projects that are smaller and are in different genres . The decision to develop Armored Warfare is one result of this strategy . 
 A dungeon crawler game based on the story of the company 's five founders was made . The game was housed in an arcade cabinet inside Obsidian . 
 = Mary Herring = 
 Dame Mary Ranken Herring , DBE , <unk> ( née Lyle ; 31 March 1895 – 26 October 1981 ) was an Australian medical practitioner and community worker . 
 A graduate of the University of Melbourne , where she studied medicine and excelled at sports , Mary qualified as a general practitioner in 1921 and became a resident surgeon at Royal Melbourne Hospital . Her work was mainly with poor women , many of whom lived in unsanitary conditions and had inadequate diets . The social mores of the time often kept young women ignorant of matters dealing with sex and pregnancy . She recognised that pregnant women in particular needed more information about what was happening to them , and provided information on birth control at a time when many doctors and a large segment of the community were opposed to it . " She broke taboos " , Della Hilton later wrote , and " made forbidden subjects not only matters for discussion , but for action " . 
 In addition to her medical work , Mary supported women 's sports and was patron of many charities . During World War II she helped form the AIF Women 's Association . She served on its Welfare Subcommittee , looking after the needs of soldiers ' families , and was president of the association from 1943 to 1946 . In recognition of her medical and charitable work , she was made a Commander of the Order of St John in 1953 , and a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1960 " for services to nursing in Victoria " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mary Ranken Lyle was born in the Melbourne suburb of Carlton on 31 March 1895 , the eldest of four children of Sir Thomas Ranken Lyle , a mathematical physicist , and his wife , Frances Isobel Clare née <unk> . She attended Toorak College between 1906 and 1912 , where she excelled both academically and at sport , playing tennis , hockey , netball and cricket , and competing in swimming . She was head girl in 1911 and 1912 . 
 In 1913 she entered the University of Melbourne as a medical student . She was captain of the women 's tennis and hockey teams , obtaining University Sporting Blue in both sports . In 1918 she had met Edmund ( Ned ) Herring , then a young Australian captain in the British Army on leave from the Macedonian front of the Great War . 
 During her training , she worked with the district nurses , visiting families in the Melbourne 's less affluent suburbs . Her ambition was to become a doctor who improved the lives of women and children . Women of her own social class did not normally work after they married , so marriage was not something she had intended . In 1919 , with the war over , she wrote to Ned urging him to complete his Rhodes Scholarship studies before returning to Australia . 
 She met her future husband , Ned Herring , when he arrived back in Melbourne at last on 26 November 1920 . She graduated with her dual Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery ( MB , BS ) degree in March 1921 , achieving first @-@ class honours in all subjects , with a first in medicine and fourth in surgery . She won the Keith Levi Memorial Scholarship in medicine and the <unk> Prize in clinical medicine , and became a resident surgeon at Royal Melbourne Hospital under Sir Alan Newton . 
 Ned was so supportive of her career plans that Mary reconsidered marriage , although she knew both their parents would disapprove . With her studies completed , Mary and Ned became formally engaged at Easter in 1921 , and they were married on 6 April 1922 at Toorak Presbyterian Church . They had three daughters : Mary Cecile ( Molly ) in 1924 , Judith Ann ( Judy ) in 1926 , and Margaret Lyle in 1933 . Molly would later become a doctor like her mother . 
 = = Career = = 
 Richard <unk> had established a Baby Health Center in Prahran in 1920 that provided post @-@ natal care . His experience soon showed that his workload would be greatly reduced if ante natal care were provided , with mothers being monitored throughout their pregnancies . He asked Mary if she would be willing to establish such a clinic , which would be open one day a week . 
 The new clinic opened in Prahran , not far from the shopping centre in Chapel Street in 1926 . Mary had the district nurses spread word of the clinic . The clinic was the first of its kind in Melbourne , and became a model for a similar clinic established by Mary in South Melbourne in 1940 . At the time she started work at the Prahran clinic , she was a mother herself and pregnant with Judy , a circumstance of great interest to the women who sought advice or treatment at the clinic . Her work was mainly with poor women , many of whom lived in unsanitary conditions and had inadequate diets . 
 Mary joined the Melbourne District Nursing Society in 1931 and was its vice president from 1943 to 1953 . She banded together with George Simpson and Victor Wallace to establish the Women 's Welfare Clinic to offer advice on birth control , at a time when many doctors and a large segment of the community were opposed to it . This clinic functioned for one day a week until 1945 when it was discontinued , as the advice it offered could by then be obtained elsewhere . The social mores of the time often kept young women ignorant of matters dealing with sex and pregnancy , but she recognised that pregnant women in particular needed more information about what was happening to them . " She broke taboos " , Della Hilton later wrote , and " made forbidden subjects not only matters for discussion , but for action " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Ned joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) soon after the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , and Mary banded together with a number of soldiers ' wives to form the AIF Women 's Association in 1940 . She served on its Welfare Subcommittee , looking after the needs of soldiers ' families , and was president of the association from 1943 – 46 . 
 She became Lady Herring in May 1943 when Ned was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire . On 2 February 1944 , the Premier of Victoria , Albert Dunstan , appointed Ned as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria . For much of the next 30 years he would also serve as lieutenant governor of Victoria , this being a common additional function of the chief justice . When Ned became acting governor for eight months in February 1949 , Mary found Government House to be in a state of disrepair . She successfully lobbied James Kennedy for funds for its refurbishment , and supervised the work personally . 
 A foundation member of the Toorak College council in 1927 , Mary served as its president from 1947 to 1948 and again from 1960 to 1970 . She played tennis and golf , and when her two eldest daughters began playing hockey at school , Mary 's interest in hockey was rekindled . A strong believer in the principle that women and not men should administer women 's sports , she became a member of the Victorian Women 's Amateur Sports Council , and was later the patron of the Victorian Women 's Hockey Association . Players visiting from interstate would often stay at her home . This was extended to overseas visitors during the 1956 Summer Olympics , which were held in Melbourne . 
 In 1953 , Mary travelled to London to attend the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II , which she viewed from a seat inside Westminster Abbey . In a ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 10 July 1953 , the new Queen made Mary a Commander of the Order of St John in recognition of her charity work . This charity work was extensive . Mary was a foundation member and first president of the Victorian Council of Social Service when it was formed in 1946 , and chairman of the Vera Scantlebury Brown Memorial Trust from 1946 to 1979 . Mary and Vera Scantlebury Brown had both attended Toorak College and were medical students at the University of Melbourne together . 
 She was a deputy @-@ president of the Victorian division of the Australian Red Cross from 1944 to 1963 , of the Victoria League from 1945 to 1972 , and of the Australian council of the Save the Children Fund from 1962 to 1967 . On 11 June 1960 , she was created a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire " for services to nursing in Victoria " . Mary Herring Hall at Toorak College was named in her honour in 1964 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Before her death on 26 October 1981 , aged 86 , following a long illness , Mary planned her own funeral service , requesting that no announcements be made until after she was buried . In her final days , she moved to Ned 's nursing home in Camberwell , Victoria , to be with him . A small private service was held on 28 October 1981 . She also planned a state funeral at St Paul 's Cathedral for Ned , who died a few months after her on 5 January 1982 . 
 = P. S. Krøyer 's paintings of Marie = 
 Peder Severin Krøyer painted various portraits of his wife , Marie Krøyer née Triepcke , a fellow Danish artist who was said to be one of the most beautiful women in Copenhagen . Norwegian @-@ born Peder had met and painted Marie in Copenhagen but fell in love with her when they met in Paris in 1889 . After a honeymoon in northern Jutland and Italy , the couple settled in Skagen on the northern tip of Jutland in 1891 , joining the group of artists that became known as the Skagen Painters . 
 The first few years of their marriage were reasonably happy , leading to the birth of their daughter Vibeke in 1895 , but as a result of P. S. Krøyer 's periods of mental illness , by the early 1900s they spent ever more time apart . In 1902 , Marie began an affair with the Swedish composer Hugo Alfvén , with whom she became pregnant in 1905 . Thereafter she spent most of her time with Alfvén in Sweden , marrying him in 1912 , three years after Krøyer had died in Skagen . 
 Krøyer 's paintings of Marie between 1888 and 1906 present a record of the years they spent together . They show some of their most enjoyable times but also hint at the marital tension that increased as time went by . Among the most notable paintings of her are Summer Evening at Skagen . The Artist 's Wife and Dog by the Shore ( 1892 ) , one of Denmark 's most popular works , which shows Marie on the beach with their dog and with the moonlight reflected in the sea , Roses ( 1893 ) , which depicts her relaxing in the garden , and Summer Evening at Skagen Beach – The Artist and his Wife ( 1899 ) . Also of note are the depictions of Marie on holiday in Ravello on the Amalfi Coast of Italy in 1890 ; the portrait for the frieze in the dining room at Skagen 's Brøndums Hotel ; Chez Moi , a series of watercolours of Marie and the couple 's daughter Vibeke in the family homes in Copenhagen and Skagen ; and Midsummer Eve Bonfire on Skagen Beach , his last painting of her in which she is shown captured in the firelight with Alfvén . 
 = = Background and early relationship = = 
 The Skagen Painters were a close @-@ knit group of mainly Danish artists who gathered each summer from the late 1870s in the fishing village of Skagen in the far north of Jutland , painting the local fishermen and their own family life and celebrations . Peder Severin Krøyer ( 1851 – 1909 ) , who was born in Stavanger , Norway , but brought up in Copenhagen , first arrived in Skagen in 1882 and returned almost every summer . He had already gained a reputation for his paintings of the fishermen in Hornbæk on the north coast of Zealand and had been influenced by the Impressionist movement during his travels to France . In Skagen , he became one of the central and most enthusiastic members of the artistic community . 
 Marie Krøyer ( 1867 – 1940 ) came from an affluent German family who had moved to Copenhagen . From an early age she aspired to become an artist and after private training she went to study in Paris where Krøyer began to court her . It is believed Marie was subsequently reluctant to paint as she looked up to Krøyer as a far more accomplished artist . A few of her works have nevertheless survived . 
 Krøyer had visited the atelier where Marie was studying on several occasions , but the first of his works in which she appears is A Duet , painted in Heinrich Hirschsprung 's Copenhagen home in 1887 where she had been invited to model for him . She can be seen seated on the left of the painting in a red dress . 
 Krøyer next met Marie in early 1889 in Paris where she was continuing her studies . Although he was 16 years her senior , he fell madly in love with her . That July , they were married in Augsburg in southern Germany , where Marie 's parents were residing . Rather than joining the artists ' colony in Skagen directly , the Krøyers chose to spend their honeymoon alone in the little fishing village of Stenbjerg in Thy in the northwest of Jutland . They stayed at the local inn for two months , taking their <unk> down to the beach each day to paint . In addition to portraits of Marie in the inn , one of Krøyer 's paintings shows her seated at her easel on the beach . Measuring 35 x 24 cm , the picture of Marie in her room at the inn is titled Interior with the Artist 's Wife and signed " Til Marie . S. Krøyer , Stenbjerg <unk> 1889 " . It is now in the Hirschsprung Collection of Copenhagen . 
 The portrait of Marie in a midnight blue dress is believed to have been painted shortly before their stay in Stenbjerg . Krøyer presented it to his new parents @-@ in @-@ law on the occasion of their silver wedding on 17 October 1889 . Marie commented on Stenbjerg in a letter to her friends Agnes and Harald Slott @-@ Møller : " I would certainly recommend Stenbjerg to you . It is a really pleasant place for a stay , such nice people ; and the nature is impressive — but not at all pretty . Indeed it is rather desolate and saddening . " 
 In 1890 , the couple created the double portrait ( pictured above ) in which they painted each other . The same year they travelled to Italy where they continued their honeymoon in Ravello and Amalfi . The small oil @-@ on @-@ canvas work Interior . Marie Krøyer painting . Ravello shows Marie painting while they were there . They also visited the artist Kristian <unk> who spent his summers in the house he had bought in Civita d <unk> , high up in the mountains in the Abruzzo region some 150 km ( 90 miles ) south of Rome . Thanks to his enthusiasm , the town became a favourite destination for Scandinavian painters . In addition to Marie , the lunch scene includes <unk> and Krøyer himself . 
 = = In Skagen = = 
 Most of Krøyer 's paintings featuring Marie were painted in Skagen , which attracted a considerable number of artists who preferred to paint " en plein air " rather than to be constrained by the rather rigid approaches of the Scandinavian art academies . Both Krøyers had already visited Skagen independently before they married . The summers Krøyer spent with his wife in the 1890s were clearly a source of inspiration for him , especially as Marie had a strong sense of beauty herself , often quoting Keats ' " Beauty is truth , truth beauty " . 
 From 1891 to 1894 , they spent their summers renting Madam Bendsen 's house in Skagen Vesterby where the writer Otto Benzon paid them a visit in 1893 . In A luncheon . The artist , his wife and the writer Otto Benzon ( 1893 ) , Marie and her husband can be seen listening to Benzon attentively . Krøyer 's own presence at the table indicates that the painting might well have been based on a photograph . He had bought his first camera in 1885 and by the 1890s had become a keen photographer . The English title of the painting is certainly a mistranslation from the Danish Ved <unk> . <unk> , hans hustru og <unk> Otto Benzon . At the time " <unk> " meant breakfast rather than lunch as can be seen here from the coffee pot , coffee cups and boiled eggs . 
 = = = Frieze portrait = = = 
 A portrait of Marie closely resembling a photograph by Krøyer was completed in 1891 . The following year , it was added to the frieze in the dining room at Skagen 's Brøndums Hotel which had become the artists ' favourite meeting place . Placed next to Krøyer 's own portrait , it confirmed Marie 's position as an accepted member of the Skagen Painters . The dining room was designed by the architects Ulrik Plesner and Thorvald Bindesbøll in connection with the first major expansion of the hotel in 1892 . At Krøyer 's suggestion , it was decided to incorporate Degn Brøndum 's art collection into its decoration . Over the years it became a custom that visiting artists donated portraits of each other to the hotel owner and these were placed in a frieze just under the ceiling . Today the dining room together with its frieze forms part of Skagens Museum . 
 = = = Roses = = = 
 In 1893 , Krøyer included Marie in Roses , in which she is shown relaxing in the garden at Madam Bendsen 's house . The original title is <unk> . <unk> fra Skagen med <unk> hustru <unk> i en <unk> ( Roses . Garden Scene from Skagen with the Artist 's Wife Sitting in a Deckchair ) . It too , may be based on photographs ; the Hirschsprung Collection has a number of shots showing a very similar scene . The painting is interesting in that its treatment of light and shadow shows how Krøyer had been influenced by the French Impressionists while he was in Paris . Marie , framed by the overhanging roses , is shown reading a newspaper ; to her left is another empty deckchair which was probably where Krøyer would have sat . The Krøyers ' dog , Rap , who features in a number of Krøyer 's works , lies sleeping at Marie 's feet . 
 The painting was sold for 3 @.@ 1 million Danish kroner in 1985 and was donated anonymously to the Skagens Museum in 2008 . 
 = = = On the beach = = = 
 Summer Evening at Skagen . The Artist 's Wife and Dog by the Shore , one of Denmark 's most popular works , was painted in 1892 . It shows Marie standing on the beach with Rap by her side and the moonlight reflected in the sea . She is shown in profile and her melancholy face and bright dress glow under the light of the setting sun . The painting is one of the works in which Krøyer tries to capture the light and mood on the Skagen shore during what he called " l 'heure bleue " ( the blue hour ) , the short period at dusk when the light casts a blue tint over the landscape . The Symbolists believed the twilight hour heralded the coming of death . The moon 's reflection adds a slight feeling of depth to the otherwise flat background which consists mostly of the monolithic blue sea . Marie is depicted as being at a similar height to the viewer , but the horizon rises above her head , emphasizing her radiance against the muted , nearly monochrome background . 
 Although it is an open @-@ air scene , the painting Anna Ancher and Marie Krøyer on the beach at Skagen was completed in the studio from photographs Krøyer took one evening on the beach . Krøyer was not altogether happy with the results as he had needed to illuminate the photograph in the studio and hence felt that the light in the scene was not true to nature and that the mishmash of natural and artificial light had rendered the picture " two paintings in one " . In 1990 , an exhibition by the Hirschsprung Collection revealed a number of photographs Krøyer had used as a basis for his paintings , including the one behind Anna Ancher and Marie Krøyer on the beach at Skagen . 
 In 1895 , Krøyer wrote to his friend Oscar Björck : " I am also thinking of painting a large portrait of my wife and me together — but for that I shall definitely need good weather , so it won 't be this year . " In fact it was four years later , in the summer of 1899 , that he finally created the large painting Summer Evening at Skagen Beach – The Artist and his Wife . The result nevertheless has a rather melancholic tone . Despite the beautiful surroundings , Marie appears distant , disappearing into the blue moonlight . Even Krøyer 's own weak figure seems to be experiencing difficulty in supporting her on his arm while the closest figure of all is Rap the dog . The painting again presents the blue half @-@ light . Krøyer particularly appreciated " l 'heure bleue " : " Skagen can look so terribly dull in the bright sunlight ... but when the sun goes down , when the moon rises up out of the sea ... in recent years this has been the time I like most of all . " 
 = = Watercolours of home life = = 
 In 1898 , Krøyer started Chez Moi , a series of watercolours of Marie and their daughter Vibeke in the family homes in Copenhagen and Skagen in a style inspired by the Art Nouveau approach adopted by Carl Larsson whom Krøyer probably met during his time in Paris . Larsson had started painting in watercolours while a member of the Grez @-@ sur @-@ Loing artists ' colony in France . On returning to Sweden , he had begun a series of pictures of family life with his wife and children in Sundborn in the mid @-@ 1890s , publishing it as Ett hem ( A home ) in 1899 . Krøyer 's paintings display no signs of disturbance or frustration but leave an impression of a happy family environment , no doubt in accordance with Krøyer 's own desires . He exhibited the three from Skagen in 1889 at Den <unk> – the exhibition of the artists ' association that had been formed in 1891 with Krøyer 's support – under the collective title Fra mit <unk> ( From my Skagen Home ) . 
 = = Sankt Hans bonfire = = 
 Krøyer 's Midsummer Eve Bonfire on Skagen Beach , one of the best known of his works , shows many of the Skagen artists standing around the traditional Sankt Hans Aften bonfire . He had been working on the huge painting ( 149 @.@ 5 cm × 257 cm ( 58 @.@ 9 in × 101 @.@ 2 in ) ) for years before he finally completed it in 1906 . Marie is standing next to a fishing boat with her new lover , Hugo Alfvén , the Swedish composer , just to the left of the flames that seem to stream towards them . Despite Alfvén 's affair with Marie , Krøyer had welcomed him to the house in Skagen and appeared to tolerate their relationship . The painting is Krøyer 's last major work . The preparatory pastel sketch on which it is based was produced in a couple of hours , but the painting was completed with difficulty as not only had Krøyer spent several lengthy periods in a mental hospital from 1900 but he had also begun to lose his sight , particularly in one eye . He was not altogether happy with the finished product ; he thought it had become " too dark " and felt it did not capture the " pale radiance " of the sky over Skagen on Midsummer Eve . Although it is an important work in the Skagens Museum collection it is not considered to be among the best of the group portraits produced by the Skagen Painters or even by Krøyer himself . In contrast , writing in <unk> Dagblad , Morten Rasmussen reports that the work is considered by many to be Krøyer 's " Magnum Opus " , representing a reflection of his own life and a tribute to the people who contributed to his success . Marie left Krøyer for Alfvén in 1902 , but it was not until 1905 when she was pregnant with Alfvén 's child that Krøyer finally agreed to a divorce . 
 = = Literature = = 
 Arnold , <unk> ( 2010 ) . <unk> om Marie : en <unk> om Marie Krøyer ( in Danish ) . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ 638 @-@ 1229 @-@ 0 . 
 Arnold , <unk> ( 2003 ) . Kunsten i Marie Krøyers liv . <unk> <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> Jensen , Mette ( 2012 ) . Marie Krøyer : der skal mod til at have talent ( in Danish ) . Skagens Museum . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 30 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Katrine ( 2011 ) . Krøyer : An International Perspective . Hirschsprung Collection . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 17 @-@ 7 . 
 Hornung , Peter Michael ( 2005 ) . Peder Severin Krøyer ( in Danish ) . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 551 @-@ 5 . 
 Krøyer , Peder Severin ( 1992 ) . P. S. Krøyer : Tradition , Modernity . Aarhus Kunstmuseum . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 31 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Margrethe ( 1980 ) . Marie Krøyer : <unk> af <unk> hustru ( in Danish ) . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 928 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Lise ( 2006 ) . <unk> på Skagen ( in Danish ) . Gyldendal A / S. ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ 02 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Jacob ; <unk> , Gl . ( 1997 ) . Portraits of a Marriage : Marie and P.S. Krøyer . Skagens Museum . ISBN 978 @-@ 87 @-@ <unk> @-@ 34 @-@ 6 . 
 Olsen , Claus ; Ireland , National Gallery of ( 1998 ) . Krøyer and the artists ' colony at Skagen . National Gallery of Ireland . 
 = Henry Taube = 
 Henry Taube , Ph.D , M.Sc , B.Sc. , FRSC ( November 30 , 1915 – November 16 , 2005 ) was a Canadian @-@ born American chemist noted for having been awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for " his work in the mechanisms of electron @-@ transfer reactions , especially in metal complexes . " He was the second Canadian @-@ born chemist to win the Nobel Prize , and remains the only <unk> @-@ born Nobel laureate . Taube completed his undergraduate and Masters degrees at the University of Saskatchewan , and his Ph.D from the University of California , Berkeley . After finishing graduate school , Taube worked at Cornell University , the University of Chicago and Stanford University . 
 In addition to the Nobel Prize , Taube also received many other major scientific awards , including the Priestley Medal in 1985 and two Guggenheim Fellowships early in his career ( 1949 and 1955 ) , as well as numerous honorary doctorates . His research focused on redox reactions , transition metals and the use of isotopically labeled compounds to follow reactions . He had over 600 publications including one book , and had mentored over 200 students during his career . Taube and his wife Mary had three children , his son Karl is an anthropologist at the University of California Riverside . 
 = = Education = = 
 At 12 , Taube left his hometown and moved to Regina to attend Luther College where he completed high school . After graduating , Taube stayed at Luther College and worked as laboratory assistant for Paul Liefeld , allowing him to take first year university classes . Taube attended the University of Saskatchewan , receiving his B.Sc. in 1935 and his M.Sc in 1937 . His thesis advisor at the University of Saskatchewan was John Spinks . While at the University of Saskatchewan , Taube studied with Gerhard Herzberg , who would be awarded the 1971 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . He moved to University of California , Berkeley , where he completed his Ph.D studies in 1940 . His Ph.D mentor was William Bray . Taube 's graduate research focused on the <unk> of chlorine dioxide and hydrogen peroxide in solution . 
 = = Research and academic career = = 
 = = = Academic posts = = = 
 After completing his education , Taube remained in the United States , becoming an instructor in chemistry at Berkeley until 1941 . He initially wanted to return to Canada to work , but did not receive a response when he applied for jobs at the major Canadian universities . From Berkeley , he served as an instructor and assistant professor at Cornell University until 1946 . During World War II , Taube served on the National Defense Research Committee . Taube spent time at the University of Chicago as an assistant professor , associate professor and as a full professor from 1946 – 61 . He served as chair of the chemistry department in Chicago from 1956 – 59 , but did not enjoy administrative work . After leaving Chicago , Taube worked as a professor at Stanford University until 1986 , a position that allowed him to focus on research , while also teaching classes at the undergraduate and graduate levels . He became a Professor Emeritus at Stanford in 1986 , but he continued to perform research until 2001 , and visited his labs every day until his death in 2005 . In addition to his academic duties , Taube also served as a consultant at Los Alamos National Laboratory from 1956 until the 1970s . 
 = = = Research interests = = = 
 Taube 's initial research at Cornell University focused on the same areas he studied as a graduate student , oxidizing agents containing oxygen and halogens , and redox reactions featuring these species . He used isotopically labeled oxygen @-@ 18 and radioactive chlorine to study these reactions . He was recognized by the American Chemical Society in 1955 for his isotope studies . 
 Taube 's interest in coordination chemistry was sparked when he was chosen to develop a course on advanced inorganic chemistry while at the University of Chicago . He was unable to find much information in the textbooks available at the time . Taube realized that his work on the substitution of carbon in organic reactions could be related to inorganic complexes . In 1952 , Taube published a key paper relating the rates of chemical reactions to electronic structure in Chemical Reviews . This research was the first to recognize the correlation between the rate of ligand substitution and the d @-@ electron configuration of the metal . Taube 's key discovery was the way molecules build a type of " chemical bridge " rather than simply exchanging electrons , as previously thought . Identifying this intermediate step explained why reactions between similar metals and ions occurred at different rates . His paper in Chemical Reviews was developed while on sabbatical in the late 1940s . An article in Science called this paper " one of the true classics in inorganic chemistry " after his Nobel Prize was announced . Taube researched ruthenium and osmium , both elements have a high capacity for back bonding . This type of electron donation was key when studying the way electrons are transferred between molecules in a chemical reaction . 
 When looking back on his research , Taube explained that he sometimes had difficulty finding graduate students willing to work on electron transfer reactions , as they preferred to work on more " exciting " projects in his laboratory focusing on the effects of isotopic tracers and kinetics . Taube felt that a " primary flaw " with his correlation between electron configuration and ligand substitution was that it was described mainly in terms of valence bond theory , as crystal field theory and ligand field theory were not well established when he published his work in 1952 . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 = = = = Nobel Prize = = = = 
 Taube was awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Chemistry " for his work on the mechanisms of electron transfer reactions , especially in metal complexes . " He received his award on December 8 , 1983 , with the presentation speech being delivered by Ingvar Lindqvist of the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences . Taube 's Nobel Lecture was entitled " Electron Transfer between Metal Complexes - Retrospective . " His Nobel Prize was the first awarded to a Canadian @-@ born chemist . Taube 's win was the first for an inorganic chemist since 1913 ( Alfred Werner ) , breaking a long string of awards to organic chemists . His initial paper in Chemical Reviews was 30 years old at the time of his Nobel Prize victory , but the correlation he described between the rate of ligand substitution and electronic configuration for transition metal coordination complexes was still the predominant theory about the reaction chemistry of these compounds . After being awarded the Nobel Prize , Taube noticed a side benefit to the prestigious award - his students paid better attention in class . 
 = = = = Other awards = = = = 
 Taube was accepted as a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1959 . President Jimmy Carter presented Taube with the 1976 President 's National Medal of Science " in recognition of contributions to the understanding of reactivity and reaction mechanisms in inorganic chemistry . " In 1985 , Taube received the American Chemical Society 's highest honor , the Priestley Medal , which is awarded to recognize " distinguished services to chemistry " . He was awarded Guggenheim Fellowships in 1949 and 1955 . Taube was made an honorary member of the College of Chemists of Catalonia and <unk> ( 1984 ) , the Canadian Society of Chemists ( 1986 ) , and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences ( 1988 ) . He was also awarded an honorary fellowship in the Royal Society of Chemistry ( 1989 ) and the Indian Chemical Society ( 1989 ) and elected a Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) in 1988 . Taube received honorary degrees from many institutions , including the University of Saskatchewan ( 1973 ) , the University of Chicago ( 1983 ) , the Polytechnic Institute of New York ( 1984 ) , the State University of New York Stony Brook ( 1985 ) , the University of Guelph ( 1987 ) , Seton Hall University ( 1988 ) , the Lajos Kossuth University of Debrecen in Hungary ( 1988 ) and Northwestern University ( 1990 ) . A Nobel Laureate Plaza on the University of Saskatchewan 's campus in honour of Taube and Gerhard Herzberg was dedicated in 1997 . 
 = = = = Legacy = = = = 
 As of 1997 , Taube had over 600 publications , and had worked with over 250 students . He published a book , Electron Transfer Reactions of Complex Ions in Solution ( Current Chemical Concepts ) in 1970 . His students have had faculty positions at many prestigious universities , including Cornell , Rutgers , Georgetown and Georgia Tech . Together with graduate student Carol Creutz , he is the namesake of the Creutz @-@ Taube complex , a metal complex with the formula [ Ru ( NH3 ) 5 ] 2 ( <unk> ) 5 + . His research contributions have been honored in several ways , including a symposium at the 1982 annual American Chemical Society meeting . The annual series Progress in Inorganic Chemistry dedicated its 30th volume to Taube , entitled " An Appreciation of Henry Taube . " Luther College in Regina , Saskatchewan offers an annual scholarship to an entering science student in honour of Taube and his science teacher , Paul Liefeld . A seminar series was created in honor of his work at Stanford . Taube gave the inaugural lecture in the series . 
 Colleagues remember Taube as a dedicated scientist , Jim <unk> of Stanford said " Henry was a scientist 's scientist and a dominant figure in the field of inorganic chemistry . " Harry Gray , a professor at California Institute of Technology said , " He was in a class by himself , a role model and leader whom we all admired and loved . " Former student Peter Ford remembers that Taube " made chemistry not only challenging and stimulating , but a lot of fun as well . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Taube was born November 30 , 1915 in <unk> , Saskatchewan as the youngest of four boys . His parents were German ethnics from Ukraine which had immigrated to Saskatchewan from the Ukraine in 1911 . Growing up , his first language was Low German . In the 1700s , Catherine the Great encouraged Central European farmers to settle in Russia . As the rights afforded to these settlers by Catherine were gradually diminished , many of the settlers headed to North America , with Saskatchewan offering good farmland , and other incentives for immigrants . Taube reflected fondly on his experiences growing up in Saskatchewan , noting : " Certainly , there is nothing about my first 21 years in Saskatchewan , taken in the context of those times that I would wish to be changed . The advantages that I enjoyed include : the marvelous experience of growing up on a farm , which taught me an appreciation of nature , and taught me also to discipline myself to get necessary jobs done ... " 
 After completing his graduate studies , Taube became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1942 . Taube married his wife , Mary in 1952 . They had three children , Karl , Heinrich and Linda . His stepdaughter , Marianna died of cancer in 1998 . When he stopped his active research projects in 2001 , Taube continued to be available as a reviewer and consultant , but his main goal was " enjoying life " . Away from chemistry , Taube had varied interests including gardening and classical music , mainly opera . In 2003 he was one of 22 Nobel Laureates who signed the Humanist Manifesto . 
 Henry Taube died in his home in Palo Alto , California on November 16 , 2005 , at the age of 89 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Taube , H. , Jackson , J. A. & J. F. Lemons . " Oxygen @-@ 17 NMR Shifts Caused by Cr { Sup + + } in Aqueous Solutions " , Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( 1962 ) . 
 Taube , H. " Reactions of <unk> Ions Final Report " , University of Chicago , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( September 24 , 1962 ) . 
 Taube , H. & A. <unk> . " Isotopic Discrimination of Some <unk> in Liquid Ammonia " , University of Chicago , Stanford University , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( 1966 ) . 
 Taube , H. " Final Technical Report of Research " , Stanford University , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( April 3 , 1972 ) . 
 = Influence of Sesame Street = 
 The children 's television program Sesame Street premiered in 1969 to high ratings , positive reviews , and some controversy , which have continued during its history . Even though the show aired on only 67 % of American televisions at the time of its premiere , it earned a 3 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating , or 1 @.@ 9 million households . By its tenth anniversary in 1979 , 9 million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily . Its ratings declined in the 1990s , due to societal changes . A survey conducted in 1993 found that by the age of three , 95 % of all American children had watched it . By its fortieth anniversary in 2009 , it was ranked the fifteenth most popular children 's show . 
 According to writer Michael Davis , Sesame Street is " perhaps the most vigorously researched , vetted , and fretted @-@ over program " . By 2001 , there were over 1 @,@ 000 research studies regarding its efficacy , impact , and effect on American culture . Two landmark summative evaluations , conducted by the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) in 1970 and 1971 , demonstrated that Sesame Street had a significant educational impact on its viewers . Additional studies conducted throughout the show 's history demonstrated that the show continued to have a positive effect on its young viewers . 
 Sesame Street has also been the subjects of many controversies throughout its long run on television . In May 1970 , a commission in Mississippi voted to ban the show . The controversy surrounding the show stemmed from cultural and historical reasons regarding children and television 's effect on them . Latino and feminists groups criticized Sesame Street for its depictions of some groups , but its producers have worked to address their concerns throughout the years . By 2009 , Sesame Street had received 118 Emmy Awards , more than any other television series . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 When Sesame Street premiered in 1969 , it aired on only 67 @.@ 6 % of American televisions , but it earned a 3 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating , or 1 @.@ 9 million households . The Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) , the organization that oversaw the production of Sesame Street , insisted that its seemingly low ratings were misleading . They found that although a small percentage of all viewers watched Sesame Street , approximately a quarter of all preschoolers watched it regularly . Ninety percent of households who viewed the show had children under the age of six . 
 In the winter of 1970 , partly as a response to criticism that they were not reaching their intended audience , the CTW conducted a poll of four urban neighborhoods in New York , Chicago , and Washington , D.C. The results of the poll were positive in three out of the four neighborhoods and confirmed the show 's high viewership . Sesame Street 's high ratings increased during its second season , and Nielsen reported high audience loyalty . Gerald S. Lesser , CTW 's first advisory board chair , reported rumors about the show becoming a fad among college students . Its ratings steadily increased for the first five seasons , and Nielsen reported that Sesame Street had the highest ratings of any PBS program . In 1985 , the Workshop estimated that 20 % of its regular viewers consisted of adults . 
 By the show 's tenth anniversary in 1979 , 9 million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily . Four out of five children had watched it over a six @-@ week period , and 90 % of children from low @-@ income inner @-@ city homes regularly viewed the show . According to a 1993 survey conducted by the US Department of Education , out of the show 's 6 @.@ 6 million viewers , 2 @.@ 4 million kindergartners regularly watched it . 77 % of preschoolers watched it once a week , and 86 % of kindergartners , first- , and second @-@ grade students had watched it once a week before starting school . The show reached most young children in almost all demographic groups , most significantly economically disadvantaged children ; 88 % of children from low @-@ income families and 90 % of both African @-@ American and Latino children watched the show before entering kindergarten . Over 80 % of children from all minority language groups watched it before starting school . Children from the poorest communities were most likely to be regular viewers , as were younger children . Children whose parents did not read to them regularly were less likely to be regular viewers , and children of highly educated parents stopped viewing earlier than children from disadvantaged households . 
 The show 's ratings significantly decreased in the early 1990s , when children ' viewing habits and the television marketplace had changed . In 1969 , the choices in children 's programming were limited , but the growth of the home @-@ video industry during the 1980s and the boom in children 's programming during the 90s on cable channels like Nickelodeon , which were directly influenced by Sesame Street , resulted in lower ratings for Sesame Street . In 2002 , The New York Times reported that " learning to click the remote control has become a developmental milestone , like crawling and walking " . The producers responded to these societal changes by making large @-@ scale structural changes to the show . 
 By 2006 , Sesame Street had become " the most widely viewed children 's television show in the world " , with 20 international independent versions and broadcasts in over 120 countries . A 1996 survey found that 95 % of all American preschoolers had watched the show by the time they were three years old . In 2006 , it was estimated that 75 million Americans had watched the series as children . By the show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , it was ranked the fifteenth most popular children 's show on television . 
 = = Effect = = 
 According to Davis , Sesame Street is " perhaps the most vigorously researched , vetted , and fretted @-@ over program " . By 2001 , there were over 1 @,@ 000 research studies regarding its efficacy , impact , and effect on American culture . The CTW solicited the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) to conduct its summative research . ETS ' two " landmark " summative evaluations , conducted in 1970 and 1971 , demonstrated that Sesame Street had a significant educational impact on its viewers . These studies provided the majority of the early educational effects of Sesame Street and have been cited in other studies of the effects of television on young children . Additional studies conducted throughout Sesame Street 's history demonstrated that the show continued to have a positive effect on its young viewers . 
 Lesser believed that Sesame Street research " may have conferred a new respectability upon the studies of the effects of visual media upon children " . He also believed that the show had the same effect on the prestige in the television industry of producing shows for children . Historian Robert Morrow , in his book Sesame Street and the Reform of Children 's Television , which chronicled the show 's influence on children 's television and on the television industry as a whole , reported that many critics of commercial television saw Sesame Street as a " straightforward illustration for reform " . Les Brown , a writer for Variety , saw in Sesame Street " a hope for a more substantial future " for television . 
 The networks responded by creating more high @-@ quality television programs , but that many saw them as " appeasement gestures " . In spite of the CTW 's effectiveness in creating a popular show , commercial television " made only a limited effort to emulate CTW 's methods " , and did not use a curriculum or evaluate what children learned from them . Morrow reported that by the mid @-@ 1970s , commercial television abandoned their experiments with creating better children 's programming . Other critics hoped that Sesame Street , with its depiction of a functioning , multicultural community , would nurture racial tolerance in its young viewers . 
 As critic Richard Roeper has stated , perhaps one of the strongest indicators of the influence of Sesame Street have been the enduring rumors and urban legends surrounding the show and its characters , especially about Bert and Ernie . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sesame Street was praised from its debut in 1969 . Newsday reported that several newspapers and magazines had written " glowing " reports about CTW and co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney . Although the series had been on the air for less than a year , Time Magazine featured Big Bird , who had received more fan mail than any of the show 's human hosts , on its cover and declared , " ... It is not only the best children 's show in TV history , it is one of the best parents ' shows as well " . The press overwhelmingly praised the new show ; several popular magazines and niche magazines lauded it . A 2010 survey found that most parents supported their children 's viewing of Sesame Street and other PBS educational shows , and many educators used them as aides in the classroom . 
 " Sesame Street is ... with lapses , the most intelligent and important program in television . That is not anything much yet " . 
 <unk> Adler , The New Yorker , 1972 
 David Frost declared Sesame Street " a hit everywhere it goes " . An executive at ABC , while recognizing that Sesame Street was not perfect , stated that the show " opened children 's TV to taste and wit and substance " ... and " made the climate right for improvement " . By the end of the show 's first season , ratings were high , the song " Rubber Duckie " was on the music charts for nine weeks , and Big Bird appeared on The Flip Wilson Show . Also in 1970 , Sesame Street won twenty awards , including a Peabody Award , three Emmys , an award from the Public Relations Society of America , a Clio , and the Prix Jeunesse award . President Richard Nixon sent Cooney a congratulatory letter . Dr. Benjamin Spock predicted that the program would result in " better trained citizens , fewer <unk> in the next generation , fewer people on welfare , and smaller jail populations " . By 1995 , the show had won two Peabody Awards and four Parents ' Choice Awards . In addition , it was the subject of retrospectives at the Smithsonian Institution and the Museum of Modern Art . In 2011 , puppeteer Kevin Clash was the subject of the documentary Being Elmo : A Puppeteer 's Journey . The documentary , directed by Constance Marks , received several awards , including the 2011 Black Film Critics Circle Award and the Special Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival , where it premiered . By 2009 , the series had received 118 Emmy Awards , more than any other television series . 
 Sesame Street was not without its detractors , however . In May 1970 , a state commission in Mississippi voted to ban Sesame Street . A member of the commission leaked the vote to the New York Times , stating that " Mississippi was not yet ready " for the show 's integrated cast . Cooney called the ban " a tragedy for both the white and black children of Mississippi " . The Mississippi commission later reversed its decision , after the vote had made national news . 
 According to Children and Television , Lesser 's account of the development and early years of Sesame Street , there was little criticism of the show in the months following its premiere , but it increased at the end of its first season and beginning of the second season . Lesser put the early criticism into four categories : educational goals , how the goals were chosen and obtained , the show 's possible unintended effects , and its portrayal of minorities and women . Historian Robert W. Morrow suggested that much of the early criticism , which he called " surprisingly intense " , stemmed from cultural and historical reasons in regards to , as he put it , " the place of children in American society and the controversies about television 's effects on them " . 
