 The " most important " studies that found negative effects of Sesame Street were conducted by educator Herbert A. Sprigle and psychologist Thomas D. Cook during its first two seasons . Both studies found that the show increased the educational gap between poor and middle @-@ class children . Morrow reported that these studies had little impact on the public discussion about Sesame Street . Social scientist and Head Start founder Urie <unk> criticized the show for being too wholesome , stating , " The old , the ugly or the unwanted is simply made to disappear through a manhole " . He also criticized the show for presenting bland and unrealistic characters , and for failing to teach children about social relationships and how to become a part of the society around them . Psychologist Leon Eisenberg saw Sesame Street 's urban setting as " superficial " and having little to do with the problems confronted by the inner @-@ city child . 
 Head Start director Edward Zigler was probably Sesame Street 's most vocal critic in the show 's early years . He withdrew Head Start 's funding of the show , becoming the first of CTW 's original investors to do so . Morrow stated that the basis of Zigler 's criticism was concern that the federal government would transfer their funding of Head Start to CTW . Also according to Morrow , these studies were utilized by critics in Sesame Street 's later years , especially by child development psychologists Jerome and Dorothy G. Singer , who insisted the television shortened children 's attention spans , and by author Neil Postman in his book Amusing Ourselves to Death , who believed that television could not teach children . Postman claimed that Sesame Street also introduced children to a shallow pop culture , undermined American education , and relieved parents of their responsibility of teaching their children how to read . 
 Since federal funds had been used to produce the show , more segments of the population insisted upon being represented on Sesame Street . Morrow credited CTW 's commitment to multiculturalism as one source for their conflicts with the leadership of minority groups , especially Latino groups and feminists . These conflicts were resolved when the CTW added or substituted offending segments and characters . By 1977 , the cast consisted of two African American women , one of whom was single , two African American men , a Chicano man , two white men , an American Indian woman , a Puerto Rican woman , and a Deaf white woman . 
 Latino groups criticized the show for the lack of Hispanic characters during its early years . A committee of Hispanic activists , commissioned by the CTW in 1970 , called Sesame Street " racist " and said that the show 's bilingual aspects were of " poor quality and patronizing " . According to Morrow , Cooney admitted that the show 's bilingual elements were " not well thought out " . By 1971 , the CTW hired Hispanic actors , production staff , and researchers , and by the mid @-@ 70s , Morrow reported that " the show included Chicano and Puerto Rican cast members , films about Mexican holidays and foods , and cartoons that taught Spanish words " . In 1989 , Sesame Street created a four @-@ year " race relations curriculum " that focused on introducing its viewers to various cultural backgrounds . 
 The New York Times reported that creating strong female characters " that make kids laugh , but not ... as female stereotypes " has been a challenge for the producers of Sesame Street . Davis reported that the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) expressed concerns that the show needed to be " less male @-@ oriented " . Members of NOW were " rankled by the portrayal of Susan , whom they saw as a subservient , powerless dispenser of milk and cookies " . In the spring of 1970 , Boston Globe columnist Ellen Goodman objected to what she considered Sesame Street 's portrayal of women and girls as passive . In late 1970 , the NOW threatened to boycott the show . The show 's producers satisfied these critics by making Susan a nurse and by hiring a female writer . 
 According to Morrow , change regarding how women and girls were depicted on Sesame Street occurred slowly . CTW 's research staff , which were mostly made up of women , worked with the mostly male production staff to raise their consciousnesses about how women and girls were portrayed in their scripts . Another source of friction between the CTW and feminists were the lack of female Muppets , for which they held Jim Henson responsible , as well as his organization of all @-@ male puppeteers , who tended to create male characters . The demanding production schedule tended to attract only men , and Henson expressed his opinion that women were incapable of withstanding it . Gikow believed that the difficulty creating breakout Muppet characters was due to children 's viewing styles : girls have tended to become attached to male characters they like , but boys did not tend to form the same attachments to female characters . The show 's inventory of material , some of which many feminists found sexist and which were shown over and over , were slowly replaced by new , less sexist segments . As more female Muppets performers like Fran Brill , Stephanie D 'Abruzzo , and Leslie Carrara @-@ Rudolph were hired and trained , stronger female characters like Abby Cadabby were created . As an interesting contrast , Sesame Street was also chastised by a Louisiana critic for the presence of strong single women on the show . 
 In 1995 , journalist Kay Hymowitz called Sesame Street " a triumph of appearance over substance " and credited its success not with quality , but with " a combination of savvy timing , sophisticated image making , and vigorous promotion " . She held the show partly responsible for the declining verbal abilities of American students , and accused the show of affirming negative stereotypes about women . According to Hymowitz , the show 's creators discouraged children 's natural curiosity about the world . She criticized the show for , instead of transforming television , being " devoured " by it . She took issue with its use of cultural references , stating that the show taught young children to embrace the negative values of commercialism , celebrity , and anti @-@ intellectualism . She insisted that by using television 's production values , the producers of Sesame Street emphasized their " jazzy medium " more than the educational content they were supposed to convey . Hymowitz took issue with the show 's educational claims , stating that Sesame Street diminished young children 's readiness for reading by limiting their abilities to engage in analytical and creative thinking . She reported that most of the positive research conducted on the show has been done by the CTW , and then sent to a sympathetic press . She charged that the studies conducted by the CTW " hint at advocacy masquerading as social science " . 
 In 2003 , one of Sesame Street 's international co @-@ productions , Takalani Sesame , caused some controversy in the US when the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , was created in response to South Africa 's AIDS epidemic . It marked the first time AIDS and the goal of confronting the disease 's stigma was included in a preschool curriculum . According to the documentary , The World According to Sesame Street , the reaction of many in the US surprised Sesame Workshop . Some members of Congress attacked Sesame Street , Sesame Workshop , and PBS . According to co @-@ producer Naila Farouky , " The reaction we got in the US blew me away . I didn 't expect people to be so horrible ... and hateful and mean " . The controversy in the US was short @-@ lived , and died down when the public discovered the facts about the South African co @-@ production , and when United Nations Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan and prominent minister and conservative political commentator Jerry Falwell praised the Workshop 's efforts . Kami went on to be named UNICEF 's Champion for Children in November 2003 . 
 = SMS Regensburg = 
 SMS Regensburg was a light cruiser of the Graudenz class built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . She had one sister ship , SMS Graudenz . The ship was built by the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , laid down in 1912 , launched in April 1914 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in January 1915 . She was named for the German town of Regensburg . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) , though in 1917 she was rearmed with seven 15 cm SK L / 45 guns . 
 Regensburg served in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet during World War I. She saw significant action at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , where she served as the leader of the torpedo boat flotillas that screened for the I Scouting Group battlecruisers . After the end of the war , she was ceded to France in 1920 and renamed Strasbourg . In 1928 she took part in the Arctic rescue operations searching for the Airship Italia . Removed from service in 1936 , she was used as a barracks ship in Lorient until 1944 , when she was seized by the Germans and scuttled in the harbor to protect the U @-@ boat pens there . 
 = = Design = = 
 Regensburg was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Irene " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1912 and was launched on 25 April 1914 ; the mayor of Regensburg , <unk> Josef <unk> , christened the ship . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 3 January 1915 . The ship was 142 @.@ 7 meters ( 468 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 8 m ( 45 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 75 m ( 18 @.@ 9 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 382 t ( 6 @,@ 281 long tons ; 7 @,@ 035 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Regensburg carried 1 @,@ 280 t ( 1 @,@ 260 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 375 t ( 369 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 21 officers and 364 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two in a superfiring pair aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . These were later replaced with seven 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . Four deck @-@ mounted launchers were added when the gun armament was upgraded , and the submerged tubes were removed . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Regensburg completed her trials on 10 March 1915 , and was then assigned to the II Scouting Group . Eleven days later , she bombarded Russian positions near <unk> and <unk> ; the operation lasted until the 24th . Captain Hans Zenker proposed that Regensburg and the liner Cap Polonio — which was to be armed with 15 cm guns — should be sent out into the Atlantic to replace the commerce raiding cruisers that had been destroyed in the early months of the war . The fleet commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , argued the ships would eventually be sunk as well , and that any possible successes for the raiders would not equal the loss of a modern light cruiser or a large passenger liner . The suggested plan was therefore abandoned . On 17 – 18 May , Regensburg took part in a mine @-@ laying operation in the area of the Dogger Bank . On 25 August , she went into the Baltic to bombard Russian positions again , this time on the island of Dagö , including the lighthouse in St. <unk> and the signal station on Cap Ristna . On 11 – 12 May , Regensburg participated in another mine @-@ laying operation , this time off Texel . In September , she took part in anti @-@ shipping sweeps in the Skagerrak and the Kattegat . In early 1916 , she continued supporting mine @-@ laying operations and reconnaissance sweeps into the North Sea . On 23 – 24 April , she participated in the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft , conducted by the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 In May 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the fleet commander , planned to lure a portion of the British fleet away from its bases and destroy it with the entire High Seas Fleet . For the planned operation , Regensburg , commanded by Commodore Paul Heinrich , was assigned to serve as the leader of the torpedo boat flotillas that screened for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . The squadron left the Jade roadstead at 02 : 00 on 31 May , bound for the waters of the Skagerrak . The main body of the fleet followed an hour and a half later . At around 15 : 30 , the cruiser screens of the I Scouting Group and the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron engaged ; Regensburg was on the disengaged side of the German formation , but steamed to reach the head of the line of battle . As she was moving into position , the opposing battlecruisers opened fire ; Regensburg was some 2 @,@ 200 yd ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) from the German battlecruisers , still on the disengaged side . Her crew noted that the British shells were falling well over their targets , which placed Regensburg in greater danger than the battlecruisers at which the British were aiming . By 17 : 10 , Regensburg had reached the head of the line , and the battlecruiser HMS Tiger fired several salvos at her , mistaking her for a battlecruiser . 
 As the battlecruiser squadrons closed on each other , Regensburg ordered the torpedo boats to make a general attack on the British formation . The British had similarly ordered an attack with their destroyers , which led to a hard @-@ fought battle at close range between the opposing destroyer forces , supported by light cruisers and the battlecruisers ' secondary guns . Shortly after 19 : 00 , Regensburg led an attack with several torpedo boats on the cruiser Canterbury and four destroyers . She disabled the destroyer Shark and then shifted fire to Canterbury , which turned away into the mist . By 20 : 15 , the British and German main fleets had engaged , and Scheer sought a withdrawal ; he therefore ordered the I Scouting Group to charge the British line while the rest of the fleet turned away . This was in turn covered by a massed torpedo boat attack , which forced the British to turn away as well . Regensburg and her torpedo boats were ordered to join the attack , but the I Scouting Group had passed in front of his ships , and he realized the British had turned away , which put them out of range of his torpedoes . 
 Having successfully disengaged , Scheer ordered Regensburg to organize three torpedo boat flotillas to make attacks on the British fleet during the night . At 21 : 10 , Heinrich dispatched the II Flotilla and XII Half @-@ Flotilla from the rear of the German line to attack the British formation . In the night , the High Seas Fleet successfully passed behind the British fleet and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . At 09 : 45 , Regensburg and three torpedo boats turned around to rendezvous with the torpedo boats carrying the crew of the scuttled battlecruiser Lützow . In the course of the battle , Regensburg had fired 372 rounds of 10 @.@ 5 cm ammunition and emerged completely unscathed . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 By 1917 , Regensburg had been assigned to the IV Scouting Group , along with Stralsund and Pillau . In late October 1917 , the IV Scouting Group steamed to Pillau , arriving on the 30th . They were tasked with replacing the heavy units of the fleet that had just completed Operation Albion , the conquest of the islands in the Gulf of Riga , along with the battleships of the I Battle Squadron . The risk of mines that had come loose in a recent storm , however , prompted the naval command to cancel the mission , and Regensburg and the rest of the IV Scouting Group was ordered to return to the North Sea on 31 October . 
 By October 1918 , Regensburg was serving as the flagship of Commodore Johannes von Karpf , commander of the IV Scouting Group . The unit was to participate in a final , climactic attack by the High Seas Fleet . Admirals Reinhard Scheer and Hipper intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 27 October , days before the operation was scheduled to begin , Karpf ordered Regensburg 's crew to take on a full load of coal and oil . One division of sailors refused to work and a watch from the engine room personnel changed into their shore @-@ going uniforms and refused to work as well . The ship 's First Lieutenant arrested the ringleader of the strike , after which the crew returned to work . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on the battleship Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . 
 As the mutinies spread , Regensburg was sent to Swinemünde , arriving on 7 November . That night , false reports of torpedo boats manned by Communist revolutionaries had sailed to attack his ships reached Karpf . He ordered his ships to be laid up ; the confidential materials carried aboard were destroyed and their ammunition magazines were flooded . When the fleet command learned of the incident , they replaced Karpf with Commodore Rohardt , who set about restoring the ships to seagoing condition . During this process , the IV Scouting Group moved to Stettin . The abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II on 9 November , however , which indicated to Rohardt that his ships could no longer fly the Imperial ensign . He therefore placed Regensburg and Brummer out of commission . A new officer arrived in Stettin to serve as Regensburg 's commander , but he had few officers and no crew . In December 1918 , Regensburg escorted the British battleship HMS Hercules , which was carrying the Allied Armistice Commission , to Kiel . 
 = = = French service = = = 
 Regensburg served in the newly reorganized Reichsmarine after the end of the war , through 1919 . She was stricken from the naval register on 10 March 1920 and placed out of service . On 4 June 1920 , the ship was surrendered to the Allies in the port of Cherbourg , France and transferred under the name " J " to the French Navy . She was renamed Strasbourg and served with the French fleet . She was initially home @-@ ported in Brest , until she was transferred to Toulon in 1923 , where she remained for the next three years . In 1925 , she underwent a major overhaul , after which she made 26 kn ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) on speed trials . Strasbourg participated in the Rif War in the mid 1920s ; on 7 September 1925 , she and the battleship Paris and the cruiser Metz supported a landing of French troops in North Africa . The three ships provided heavy gunfire support to the landing troops . In early 1928 , a major earthquake struck Corinth , Greece ; Strassbourg was among the vessels sent to aid in the relief effort . The international effort provided assistance to 15 @,@ 000 people . 
 Also in 1928 , she assisted in the search effort for the wrecked airship Italia , which had crashed on the polar ice northeast of Svalbard . In addition , Roald Amundsen , who had also joined the search effort , went missing himself . Strassbourg arrived in Tromsø , Norway , on 19 June , to search for both Italia and Amundsen 's aircraft . The ship 's bow was not designed to operate in an Arctic environment , and so the crew had to continually fix wood planks to the hull to protect it from the ice . While refueling from the tanker Durance , Strassbourg took on two FBA 17 seaplanes to assist in the search effort . On 30 August , Strassbourg located one of the floats from Amundsen 's aircraft , confirming the loss of the plane . The search effort was called off on 17 September , and Strassbourg returned to Brest by way of Reykjavík , arriving back in France by mid October . 
 She remained in service until 14 June 1936 , when she was placed in reserve . Her name was reused for the new battleship Strasbourg , so the old cruiser was renamed Strassbourg II . The cruiser was subsequently used as a barracks ship in Lorient until 1944 , when she was seized by the Germans and scuttled in the harbor to protect the U @-@ boat pens in the harbor from torpedo attack . Barrage balloons and anti @-@ torpedo nets were attached to the ship to strengthen the defenses of the U @-@ boat pens . Her wreck remains in the harbor , and is visible at low tide . 
 = Amazing Grace = 
 " Amazing Grace " is a Christian hymn published in 1779 , with words written by the English poet and clergyman John Newton ( 1725 – 1807 ) . 
 Newton wrote the words from personal experience . He grew up without any particular religious conviction , but his life 's path was formed by a variety of twists and coincidences that were often put into motion by his recalcitrant insubordination . He was pressed ( conscripted ) into service in the Royal Navy , and after leaving the service , he became involved in the Atlantic slave trade . In 1748 , a violent storm battered his vessel off the coast of County Donegal , Ireland , so severely that he called out to God for mercy , a moment that marked his spiritual conversion . He continued his slave trading career until 1754 or 1755 , when he ended his seafaring altogether and began studying Christian theology . 
 Ordained in the Church of England in 1764 , Newton became curate of Olney , Buckinghamshire , where he began to write hymns with poet William Cowper . " Amazing Grace " was written to illustrate a sermon on New Year 's Day of 1773 . It is unknown if there was any music accompanying the verses ; it may have simply been chanted by the congregation . It debuted in print in 1779 in Newton and Cowper 's Olney Hymns but settled into relative obscurity in England . In the United States , however , " Amazing Grace " was used extensively during the Second Great Awakening in the early 19th century . It has been associated with more than 20 melodies , but in 1835 it was joined to a tune named " New Britain " to which it is most frequently sung today . 
 With the message that forgiveness and redemption are possible regardless of sins committed and that the soul can be delivered from despair through the mercy of God , " Amazing Grace " is one of the most recognizable songs in the English @-@ speaking world . Author Gilbert Chase writes that it is " without a doubt the most famous of all the folk hymns , " and Jonathan Aitken , a Newton biographer , estimates that it is performed about 10 million times annually . It has had particular influence in folk music , and has become an emblematic African American spiritual . Its universal message has been a significant factor in its crossover into secular music . " Amazing Grace " saw a resurgence in popularity in the U.S. during the 1960s and has been recorded thousands of times during and since the 20th century , occasionally appearing on popular music charts . 
 = = John Newton 's conversion = = 
 According to the Dictionary of American Hymnology " Amazing Grace " is John Newton 's spiritual autobiography in verse . 
 In 1725 , Newton was born in Wapping , a district in London near the Thames . His father was a shipping merchant who was brought up as a Catholic but had Protestant sympathies , and his mother was a devout Independent unaffiliated with the Anglican Church . She had intended Newton to become a clergyman , but she died of tuberculosis when he was six years old . For the next few years , Newton was raised by his emotionally distant stepmother while his father was at sea , and spent some time at a boarding school where he was mistreated . At the age of eleven , he joined his father on a ship as an apprentice ; his seagoing career would be marked by headstrong disobedience . 
 As a youth , Newton began a pattern of coming very close to death , examining his relationship with God , then relapsing into bad habits . As a sailor , he denounced his faith after being influenced by a shipmate who discussed Characteristics of Men , Manners , Opinions , Times , a book by the Third Earl of Shaftesbury , with him . In a series of letters he later wrote , " Like an unwary sailor who quits his port just before a rising storm , I renounced the hopes and comforts of the Gospel at the very time when every other comfort was about to fail me . " His disobedience caused him to be pressed into the Royal Navy , and he took advantage of opportunities to overstay his leave and finally deserted to visit Mary " Polly " Catlett , a family friend with whom he had fallen in love . After enduring humiliation for deserting , he managed to get himself traded to a slave ship where he began a career in slave trading . 
 Newton often openly mocked the captain by creating obscene poems and songs about him that became so popular the crew began to join in . He entered into disagreements with several colleagues that resulted in his being starved almost to death , imprisoned while at sea and chained like the slaves they carried , then outright enslaved and forced to work on a plantation in Sierra Leone near the Sherbro River . After several months he came to think of Sierra Leone as his home , but his father intervened after Newton sent him a letter describing his circumstances , and a ship found him by coincidence . Newton claimed the only reason he left was because of Polly . 
 While aboard the ship Greyhound , Newton gained notoriety for being one of the most profane men the captain had ever met . In a culture where sailors commonly used oaths and swore , Newton was admonished several times for not only using the worst words the captain had ever heard , but creating new ones to exceed the limits of verbal debauchery . In March 1748 , while the Greyhound was in the North Atlantic , a violent storm came upon the ship that was so rough it swept overboard a crew member who was standing where Newton had been moments before . After hours of the crew emptying water from the ship and expecting to be capsized , Newton and another mate tied themselves to the ship 's pump to keep from being washed overboard , working for several hours . After proposing the measure to the captain , Newton had turned and said , " If this will not do , then Lord have mercy upon us ! " Newton rested briefly before returning to the deck to steer for the next eleven hours . During his time at the wheel he pondered his divine challenge . 
 About two weeks later , the battered ship and starving crew landed in Lough Swilly , Ireland . For several weeks before the storm , Newton had been reading The Christian 's Pattern , a summary of the 15th @-@ century The Imitation of Christ by Thomas à Kempis . The memory of his own " Lord have mercy upon us ! " uttered during a moment of desperation in the storm did not leave him ; he began to ask if he was worthy of God 's mercy or in any way redeemable as he had not only neglected his faith but directly opposed it , mocking others who showed theirs , deriding and denouncing God as a myth . He came to believe that God had sent him a profound message and had begun to work through him . 
 Newton 's conversion was not immediate , but he contacted Polly 's family and announced his intentions to marry her . Her parents were hesitant as he was known to be unreliable and impetuous . They knew he was profane , but they allowed him to write to Polly , and he set to begin to submit to authority for her sake . He sought a place on a slave ship bound for Africa , and Newton and his crewmates participated in most of the same activities he had written about before ; the only immorality from which he was able to free himself was profanity . After a severe illness his resolve was renewed , yet he retained the same attitude towards slavery as was held by his contemporaries . Newton continued in the slave trade through several voyages where he sailed up rivers in Africa – now as a captain – procured slaves being offered for sale in larger ports , and subsequently transported them to North America . In between voyages , he married Polly in 1750 and he found it more difficult to leave her at the beginning of each trip . After three shipping experiences in the slave trade , Newton was promised a position as ship 's captain with cargo unrelated to slavery when , at the age of thirty , he collapsed and never sailed again . 
 = = Olney curate = = 
 Working as a customs agent in Liverpool starting in 1756 , Newton began to teach himself Latin , Greek , and theology . He and Polly immersed themselves in the church community , and Newton 's passion was so impressive that his friends suggested he become a priest in the Church of England . He was turned down by John Gilbert , Archbishop of York , in 1758 , ostensibly for having no university degree , although the more likely reasons were his leanings toward evangelism and tendency to socialize with Methodists . Newton continued his devotions , and after being encouraged by a friend , he wrote about his experiences in the slave trade and his conversion . George Legge , 3rd Earl of Dartmouth , impressed with his story , sponsored Newton for ordination by John Green , Bishop of Lincoln , and offered him the curacy of Olney , Buckinghamshire , in 1764 . 
 = = = Olney Hymns = = = 
 Olney was a village of about 2 @,@ 500 residents whose main industry was making lace by hand . The people were mostly illiterate and many of them were poor . Newton 's preaching was unique in that he shared many of his own experiences from the pulpit ; many clergy preached from a distance , not admitting any intimacy with temptation or sin . He was involved in his parishioners ' lives and was much loved , although his writing and delivery were sometimes unpolished . But his devotion and conviction were apparent and forceful , and he often said his mission was to " break a hard heart and to heal a broken heart " . He struck a friendship with William Cowper , a gifted writer who had failed at a career in law and suffered bouts of insanity , attempting suicide several times . Cowper enjoyed Olney – and Newton 's company ; he was also new to Olney and had gone through a spiritual conversion similar to Newton 's . Together , their effect on the local congregation was impressive . In 1768 , they found it necessary to start a weekly prayer meeting to meet the needs of an increasing number of parishioners . They also began writing lessons for children . 
 Partly from Cowper 's literary influence , and partly because learned vicars were expected to write verses , Newton began to try his hand at hymns , which had become popular through the language , made plain for common people to understand . Several prolific hymn writers were at their most productive in the 18th century , including Isaac Watts – whose hymns Newton had grown up hearing – and Charles Wesley , with whom Newton was familiar . Wesley 's brother John , the eventual founder of the Methodist Church , had encouraged Newton to go into the clergy . Watts was a pioneer in English hymn writing , basing his work after the Psalms . The most prevalent hymns by Watts and others were written in the common meter in 8 @.@ 6 @.@ 8 @.@ 6 : the first line is eight syllables and the second is six . 
 Newton and Cowper attempted to present a poem or hymn for each prayer meeting . The lyrics to " Amazing Grace " were written in late 1772 and probably used in a prayer meeting for the first time on January 1 , 1773 . A collection of the poems Newton and Cowper had written for use in services at Olney was bound and published anonymously in 1779 under the title Olney Hymns . Newton contributed 280 of the 348 texts in Olney Hymns ; " 1 Chronicles 17 : 16 – 17 , Faith 's Review and Expectation " was the title of the poem with the first line " Amazing grace ! ( how sweet the sound ) " . 
 = = = Critical analysis = = = 
 The general impact of Olney Hymns was immediate and it became a widely popular tool for evangelicals in Britain for many years . Scholars appreciated Cowper 's poetry somewhat more than Newton 's plaintive and plain language driven from his forceful personality . The most prevalent themes in the verses written by Newton in Olney Hymns are faith in salvation , wonder at God 's grace , his love for Jesus , and his cheerful exclamations of the joy he found in his faith . As a reflection of Newton 's connection to his parishioners , he wrote many of the hymns in first person , admitting his own experience with sin . Bruce Hindmarsh in Sing Them Over Again To Me : Hymns and <unk> in America considers " Amazing Grace " an excellent example of Newton 's testimonial style afforded by the use of this perspective . Several of Newton 's hymns were recognized as great work ( " Amazing Grace " was not among them ) while others seem to have been included to fill in when Cowper was unable to write . Jonathan Aitken calls Newton , specifically referring to " Amazing Grace " , an " unashamedly middlebrow lyricist writing for a lowbrow congregation " , noting that only twenty @-@ one of the nearly 150 words used in all six verses have more than one syllable . 
 William Phipps in the Anglican Theological Review and author James Basker have interpreted the first stanza of " Amazing Grace " as evidence of Newton 's realization that his participation in the slave trade was his wretchedness , perhaps representing a wider common understanding of Newton 's motivations . Newton joined forces with a young man named William Wilberforce , the British Member of Parliament who led the Parliamentarian campaign to abolish the slave trade in the British Empire , culminating in the Slave Trade Act 1807 . However , Newton became an ardent and outspoken abolitionist after he left Olney in the 1780s ; he never connected the construction of the hymn that became " Amazing Grace " to anti @-@ slavery sentiments . The lyrics in Olney Hymns were arranged by their association to the Biblical verses that would be used by Newton and Cowper in their prayer meetings and did not address any political objective . For Newton , the beginning of the year was a time to reflect on one 's spiritual progress . At the same time he completed a diary – which has since been lost – that he had begun 17 years before , two years after he quit sailing . The last entry of 1772 was a recounting of how much he had changed since then . 
 The title ascribed to the hymn , " 1 Chronicles 17 : 16 – 17 " , refers to David 's reaction to the prophet Nathan telling him that God intends to maintain his family line forever . Some Christians interpret this as a prediction that Jesus Christ , as a descendant of David , was promised by God as the salvation for all people . Newton 's sermon on that January day in 1773 focused on the necessity to express one 's gratefulness for God 's guidance , that God is involved in the daily lives of Christians though they may not be aware of it , and that patience for deliverance from the daily trials of life is warranted when the glories of eternity await . Newton saw himself a sinner like David who had been chosen , perhaps undeservedly , and was humbled by it . According to Newton , unconverted sinners were " blinded by the god of this world " until " mercy came to us not only undeserved but undesired ... our hearts endeavored to shut him out till he overcame us by the power of his grace . " 
 The New Testament served as the basis for many of the lyrics of " Amazing Grace " . The first verse , for example , can be traced to the story of the Prodigal Son . In the Gospel of Luke the father says , " For this son of mine was dead and is alive again ; he was lost , and is found " . The story of Jesus healing a blind man who tells the Pharisees that he can now see is told in the Gospel of John . Newton used the words " I was blind but now I see " and declared " Oh to grace how great a debtor ! " in his letters and diary entries as early as 1752 . The effect of the lyrical arrangement , according to Bruce Hindmarsh , allows an instant release of energy in the exclamation " Amazing grace ! " , to be followed by a qualifying reply in " how sweet the sound " . In An Annotated Anthology of Hymns , Newton 's use of an exclamation at the beginning of his verse is called " crude but effective " in an overall composition that " suggest ( s ) a forceful , if simple , statement of faith " . Grace is recalled three times in the following verse , culminating in Newton 's most personal story of his conversion , underscoring the use of his personal testimony with his parishioners . 
 The sermon preached by Newton was his last , of those that William Cowper heard in Olney , since Cowper 's mental instability returned shortly thereafter . Steve Turner , author of Amazing Grace : The Story of America 's Most Beloved Song , suggests Newton may have had his friend in mind , employing the themes of assurance and deliverance from despair for Cowper 's benefit . 
 = = Dissemination = = 
 Although it had its roots in England , " Amazing Grace " became an integral part of the Christian tapestry in the United States . More than 60 of Newton and Cowper 's hymns were republished in other British hymnals and magazines , but " Amazing Grace " was not , appearing only once in a 1780 hymnal sponsored by the Countess of Huntingdon . Scholar John Julian commented in his 1892 A Dictionary of Hymnology that outside of the United States , the song was unknown and it was " far from being a good example of Newton 's finest work " . Between 1789 and 1799 , four variations of Newton 's hymn were published in the U.S. in Baptist , Dutch Reformed , and Congregationalist <unk> ; by 1830 Presbyterians and Methodists also included Newton 's verses in their hymnals . 
 The greatest influences in the 19th century that propelled " Amazing Grace " to spread across the U.S. and become a staple of religious services in many denominations and regions were the Second Great Awakening and the development of shape note singing communities . A tremendous religious movement swept the U.S. in the early 19th century , marked by the growth and popularity of churches and religious revivals that got their start in Kentucky and Tennessee . Unprecedented gatherings of thousands of people attended camp meetings where they came to experience salvation ; preaching was fiery and focused on saving the sinner from temptation and backsliding . Religion was stripped of ornament and ceremony , and made as plain and simple as possible ; sermons and songs often used repetition to get across to a rural population of poor and mostly uneducated people the necessity of turning away from sin . Witnessing and testifying became an integral component to these meetings , where a congregation member or even a stranger would rise and recount his turn from a sinful life to one of piety and peace . " Amazing Grace " was one of many hymns that punctuated fervent sermons , although the contemporary style used a refrain , borrowed from other hymns , that employed simplicity and repetition such as : 
 Simultaneously , an unrelated movement of communal singing was established throughout the South and Western states . A format of teaching music to illiterate people appeared in 1800 . It used four sounds to symbolize the basic scale : fa @-@ sol @-@ la @-@ fa @-@ sol @-@ la @-@ mi @-@ fa . Each sound was accompanied by a specifically shaped note and thus became known as shape note singing . The method was simple to learn and teach , so schools were established throughout the South and West . Communities would come together for an entire day of singing in a large building where they sat in four distinct areas surrounding an open space , one member directing the group as a whole . Most of the music was Christian , but the purpose of communal singing was not primarily spiritual . Communities either could not afford music accompaniment or rejected it out of a Calvinistic sense of simplicity , so the songs were sung a cappella . 
 = = = " New Britain " tune = = = 
 When originally used in Olney , it is unknown what music , if any , accompanied the verses written by John Newton . Contemporary <unk> did not contain music and were simply small books of religious poetry . The first known instance of Newton 's lines joined to music was in A Companion to the Countess of Huntingdon 's Hymns ( London , 1808 ) , where it is set to the tune " <unk> " by English composer John Jenkins Husband . Common meter hymns were interchangeable with a variety of tunes ; more than twenty musical settings of " Amazing Grace " circulated with varying popularity until 1835 when William Walker assigned Newton 's words to a traditional song named " New Britain " , which was itself an amalgamation of two melodies ( " Gallaher " and " St. Mary " ) first published in the Columbian Harmony by Charles H. <unk> and Benjamin Shaw ( Cincinnati , 1829 ) . <unk> and Shaw , both students at Kentucky 's Centre College , compiled their tunebook both for public worship and revivals , to satisfy " the wants of the Church in her triumphal march . " Most of the tunes had been previously published , but " Gallaher " and " St. Mary " had not . As neither tune is attributed and both show elements of oral transmission , scholars can only speculate that they are possibly of British origin . A manuscript from 1828 by Lucius Chapin , a famous hymn writer of that time , contains a tune very close to " St. Mary " , but that does not mean that he wrote it . 
 " Amazing Grace " , with the words written by Newton and joined with " New Britain " , the melody most currently associated with it , appeared for the first time in Walker 's shape note tunebook Southern Harmony in 1847 . It was , according to author Steve Turner , a " marriage made in heaven ... The music behind ' amazing ' had a sense of awe to it . The music behind ' grace ' sounded graceful . There was a rise at the point of confession , as though the author was stepping out into the open and making a bold declaration , but a corresponding fall when admitting his blindness . " Walker 's collection was enormously popular , selling about 600 @,@ 000 copies all over the U.S. when the total population was just over 20 million . Another shape note tunebook named The Sacred Harp ( 1844 ) by Georgia residents Benjamin Franklin White and Elisha J. King became widely influential and continues to be used . 
 Another verse was first recorded in Harriet Beecher Stowe 's immensely influential 1852 anti @-@ slavery novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Three verses were <unk> sung by Tom in his hour of deepest crisis . He sings the sixth and fifth verses in that order , and Stowe included another verse not written by Newton that had been passed down orally in African American communities for at least 50 years . It was originally one of between 50 to 70 verses of a song titled " Jerusalem , My Happy Home " that first appeared in a 1790 book called A Collection of Sacred Ballads : 
 " Amazing Grace " came to be an emblem of a Christian movement and a symbol of the U.S. itself as the country was involved in a great political experiment , attempting to employ democracy as a means of government . Shape note singing communities , with all the members sitting around an open center , each song employing a different director , illustrated this in practice . Simultaneously , the U.S. began to expand westward into previously unexplored territory that was often wilderness . The " dangers , toils , and snares " of Newton 's lyrics had both literal and figurative meanings for Americans . This became poignantly true during the most serious test of American cohesion in the U.S. Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) . " Amazing Grace " set to " New Britain " was included in two hymnals distributed to soldiers and with death so real and imminent , religious services in the military became commonplace . The hymn was translated into other languages as well : while on the Trail of Tears , the Cherokee sang Christian hymns as a way of coping with the ongoing tragedy , and a version of the song by Samuel Worcester that had been translated into the Cherokee language became very popular . 
 = = = Urban revival = = = 
 Although " Amazing Grace " set to " New Britain " was popular , other versions existed regionally . Primitive Baptists in the Appalachian region often used " New Britain " with other hymns , and sometimes sing the words of " Amazing Grace " to other folk songs , including titles such as " In the Pines " , " Pisgah " , " Primrose " , and " Evan " , as all are able to be sung in common meter , of which the majority of their repertoire consists . A tune named " Arlington " accompanied Newton 's verses as much as " New Britain " for a time in the late 19th century . 
 Two musical arrangers named Dwight Moody and Ira Sankey heralded another religious revival in the cities of the U.S. and Europe , giving the song international exposure . Moody 's preaching and Sankey 's musical gifts were significant ; their arrangements were the forerunners of gospel music , and churches all over the U.S. were eager to acquire them . Moody and Sankey began publishing their compositions in 1875 , and " Amazing Grace " appeared three times with three different melodies , but they were the first to give it its title ; hymns were typically published using the first line of the lyrics , or the name of the tune such as " New Britain " . A publisher named Edwin Othello Excell gave the version of " Amazing Grace " set to " New Britain " immense popularity by publishing it in a series of hymnals that were used in urban churches . Excell altered some of Walker 's music , making it more contemporary and European , giving " New Britain " some distance from its rural folk @-@ music origins . Excell 's version was more palatable for a growing urban middle class and arranged for larger church choirs . Several editions featuring Newton 's first three stanzas and the verse previously included by Harriet Beecher Stowe in Uncle Tom 's Cabin were published by Excell between 1900 and 1910 , and his version of " Amazing Grace " became the standard form of the song in American churches . 
 = = Recorded versions = = 
 With the advent of recorded music and radio , " Amazing Grace " began to cross over from primarily a gospel standard to secular audiences . The ability to record combined with the marketing of records to specific audiences allowed " Amazing Grace " to take on thousands of different forms in the 20th century . Where Edwin Othello Excell sought to make the singing of " Amazing Grace " uniform throughout thousands of churches , records allowed artists to improvise with the words and music specific to each audience . AllMusic lists more than 7 @,@ 000 recordings – including re @-@ releases and compilations – as of September 2011 . Its first recording is an a cappella version from 1922 by the Sacred Harp Choir . It was included from 1926 to 1930 in Okeh Records ' catalogue , which typically concentrated strongly on blues and jazz . Demand was high for black gospel recordings of the song by H. R. Tomlin and J. M. Gates . A poignant sense of nostalgia accompanied the recordings of several gospel and blues singers in the 1940s and 1950s who used the song to remember their grandparents , traditions , and family roots . It was recorded with musical accompaniment for the first time in 1930 by <unk> ' John Carson , although to another folk hymn named " At the Cross " , not to " New Britain " . " Amazing Grace " is emblematic of several kinds of folk music styles , often used as the standard example to illustrate such musical techniques as lining out and call and response , that have been practiced in both black and white folk music . 
 Mahalia Jackson 's 1947 version received significant radio airplay , and as her popularity grew throughout the 1950s and 1960s , she often sang it at public events such as concerts at Carnegie Hall . Author James Basker states that the song has been employed by African Americans as the " paradigmatic Negro spiritual " because it expresses the joy felt at being delivered from slavery and worldly miseries . Anthony <unk> , author of The Gospel Sound , states that the " dangers , toils , and snares " of Newton 's words are a " universal testimony " of the African American experience . During the Civil Rights Movement and opposition to the Vietnam War , the song took on a political tone . Mahalia Jackson employed " Amazing Grace " for Civil Rights marchers , writing that she used it " to give magical protection – a charm to ward off danger , an incantation to the angels of heaven to descend ... I was not sure the magic worked outside the church walls ... in the open air of Mississippi . But I wasn 't taking any chances . " Folk singer Judy Collins , who knew the song before she could remember learning it , witnessed Fannie Lou Hamer leading marchers in Mississippi in 1964 , singing " Amazing Grace " . Collins also considered it a talisman of sorts , and saw its equal emotional impact on the marchers , witnesses , and law enforcement who opposed the civil rights demonstrators . According to fellow folk singer Joan Baez , it was one of the most requested songs from her audiences , but she never realized its origin as a hymn ; by the time she was singing it in the 1960s she said it had " developed a life of its own " . It even made an appearance at the Woodstock Music Festival in 1969 during Arlo Guthrie 's performance . 
 Collins decided to record it in the late 1960s amid an atmosphere of counterculture introspection ; she was part of an encounter group that ended a contentious meeting by singing " Amazing Grace " as it was the only song to which all the members knew the words . Her producer was present and suggested she include a version of it on her 1970 album Whales & Nightingales . Collins , who had a history of alcohol abuse , claimed that the song was able to " pull her through " to recovery . It was recorded in St. Paul 's , the chapel at Columbia University , chosen for the acoustics . She chose an a cappella arrangement that was close to Edwin Othello Excell 's , accompanied by a chorus of amateur singers who were friends of hers . Collins connected it to the Vietnam War , to which she objected : " I didn 't know what else to do about the war in Vietnam . I had marched , I had voted , I had gone to jail on political actions and worked for the candidates I believed in . The war was still raging . There was nothing left to do , I thought ... but sing ' Amazing Grace ' . " Gradually and unexpectedly , the song began to be played on the radio , and then be requested . It rose to number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 , remaining on the charts for 15 weeks , as if , she wrote , her fans had been " waiting to embrace it " . In the UK , it charted 8 times between 1970 and 1972 , peaking at number 5 and spending a total of 75 weeks on popular music charts . 
 Although Collins used it as a catharsis for her opposition to the Vietnam War , two years after her rendition , the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards , senior Scottish regiment of the British Army , recorded an instrumental version featuring a bagpipe soloist accompanied by a pipe and drum band . The tempo of their arrangement was slowed to allow for the bagpipes , but it was based on Collins ' : it began with a bagpipe solo introduction similar to her lone voice , then it was accompanied by the band of bagpipes and horns , whereas in her version she is backed up by a chorus . It topped the RPM national singles chart in Canada for three weeks , and rose as high as number 11 in the U.S. It is also a controversial instrumental , as it combined pipes with a military band . The Pipe Major of the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards was summoned to Edinburgh Castle and chastised for demeaning the bagpipes . Funeral processions for killed police , fire , and military personnel have often played a bagpipes version ever since . 
 Aretha Franklin and Rod Stewart also recorded " Amazing Grace " around the same time , and both of their renditions were popular . All four versions were marketed to distinct types of audiences thereby assuring its place as a pop song . Johnny Cash recorded it on his 1975 album Sings Precious Memories , dedicating it to his older brother Jack , who had been killed in a mill accident when they were boys in Dyess , Arkansas . Cash and his family sang it to themselves while they worked in the cotton fields following Jack 's death . Cash often included the song when he toured prisons , saying " For the three minutes that song is going on , everybody is free . It just frees the spirit and frees the person . " 
 The U.S. Library of Congress has a collection of 3 @,@ 000 versions of and songs inspired by " Amazing Grace " , some of which were first @-@ time recordings by folklorists Alan and John Lomax , a father and son team who in 1932 traveled thousands of miles across the South to capture the different regional styles of the song . More contemporary renditions include samples from such popular artists as Sam Cooke and the Soul <unk> ( 1963 ) , the Byrds ( 1970 ) , Elvis Presley ( 1971 ) , Skeeter Davis ( 1972 ) , Mighty Clouds of Joy ( 1972 ) , Amazing Rhythm Aces ( 1975 ) , Willie Nelson ( 1976 ) , and the Lemonheads ( 1992 ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Following the appropriation of the hymn in secular music , " Amazing Grace " became such an icon in American culture that it has been used for a variety of secular purposes and marketing campaigns , placing it in danger of becoming a cliché . It has been mass @-@ produced on souvenirs , lent its name to a Superman villain , appeared on The Simpsons to demonstrate the redemption of a murderous character named Sideshow Bob , incorporated into Hare Krishna chants and adapted for Wicca ceremonies . It can also be sung to the theme from The Mickey Mouse Club and to many other popular songs , as Garrison Keillor has observed . The hymn has been employed in several films , including Alice 's Restaurant , Coal Miner 's Daughter , and Silkwood . It is referenced in the 2006 film Amazing Grace , which highlights Newton 's influence on the leading British abolitionist William Wilberforce , and in the upcoming film biography of Newton , Newton 's Grace . The 1982 science fiction film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan used " Amazing Grace " amid a context of Christian symbolism , to memorialize Mr. Spock following his death , but more practically , because the song has become " instantly recognizable to many in the audience as music that sounds appropriate for a funeral " according to a Star Trek scholar . Since 1954 when an organ instrumental of " New Britain " became a bestseller , " Amazing Grace " has been associated with funerals and memorial services . It has become a song that inspires hope in the wake of tragedy , becoming a sort of " spiritual national anthem " according to authors Mary Rourke and Emily <unk> . For example , President Barack Obama recited and then sang the hymn at the memorial service for <unk> Pinckney , one of the victims of the 2015 Charleston church shooting . 
 = = Modern interpretations = = 
 In recent years , the words of the hymn have been changed in some religious publications to downplay a sense of imposed self @-@ loathing by its singers . The second line , " That saved a wretch like me ! " has been rewritten as " That saved and strengthened me " , " save a soul like me " , or " that saved and set me free " . Kathleen Norris in her book Amazing Grace : A Vocabulary of Faith characterizes this transformation of the original words as " wretched English " making the line that replaces the original " laughably bland " . Part of the reason for this change has been the altered interpretations of what wretchedness and grace means . Newton 's Calvinistic view of redemption and divine grace formed his perspective that he considered himself a sinner so vile that he was unable to change his life or be redeemed without God 's help . Yet his lyrical subtlety , in Steve Turner 's opinion , leaves the hymn 's meaning open to a variety of Christian and non @-@ Christian interpretations . " Wretch " also represents a period in Newton 's life when he saw himself outcast and miserable , as he was when he was enslaved in Sierra Leone ; his own arrogance was matched by how far he had fallen in his life . 
 The communal understanding of redemption and human self @-@ worth has changed since Newton 's time . Since the 1970s , self @-@ help books , psychology , and some modern expressions of Christianity have viewed this disparity in terms of grace being an innate quality within all people who must be inspired or strong enough to find it : something to achieve . In contrast to Newton 's vision of wretchedness as his willful sin and distance from God , wretchedness has instead come to mean an obstacle of physical , social , or spiritual nature to overcome in order to achieve a state of grace , happiness , or contentment . Since its immense popularity and iconic nature , " grace " and the meaning behind the words of " Amazing Grace " have become as individual as the singer or listener . Bruce Hindmarsh suggests that the secular popularity of " Amazing Grace " is due to the absence of any mention of God in the lyrics until the fourth verse ( by Excell 's version , the fourth verse begins " When we 've been there ten thousand years " ) , and that the song represents the ability of humanity to transform itself instead of a transformation taking place at the hands of God . " Grace " , however , to John Newton had a clearer meaning , as he used the word to represent God or the power of God . 
 The transformative power of the song was investigated by journalist Bill Moyers in a documentary released in 1990 . Moyers was inspired to focus on the song 's power after watching a performance at Lincoln Center , where the audience consisted of Christians and non @-@ Christians , and he noticed that it had an equal impact on everybody in attendance , unifying them . James Basker also acknowledged this force when he explained why he chose " Amazing Grace " to represent a collection of anti @-@ slavery poetry : " there is a transformative power that is applicable ... : the transformation of sin and sorrow into grace , of suffering into beauty , of alienation into empathy and connection , of the unspeakable into imaginative literature . " 
 Moyers interviewed Collins , Cash , opera singer Jessye Norman , Appalachian folk musician Jean Ritchie and her family , white Sacred Harp singers in Georgia , black Sacred Harp singers in Alabama , and a prison choir at the Texas State Penitentiary at Huntsville . Collins , Cash , and Norman were unable to discern if the power of the song came from the music or the lyrics . Norman , who once notably sang it at the end of a large outdoor rock concert for Nelson Mandela 's 70th birthday , stated , " I don 't know whether it 's the text – I don 't know whether we 're talking about the lyrics when we say that it touches so many people – or whether it 's that tune that everybody knows . " A prisoner interviewed by Moyers explained his literal interpretation of the second verse : " ' Twas grace that taught my heart to fear , and grace my fears relieved " by saying that the fear became immediately real to him when he realized he may never get his life in order , compounded by the loneliness and restriction in prison . Gospel singer Marion Williams summed up its effect : " That 's a song that gets to everybody " . 
 The Dictionary of American Hymnology claims it is included in more than a thousand published hymnals , and recommends its use for " occasions of worship when we need to confess with joy that we are saved by God 's grace alone ; as a hymn of response to forgiveness of sin or as an assurance of pardon ; as a confession of faith or after the sermon . " 
 = Roy Phillipps = 
 Roy Cecil Phillipps , MC & Bar , DFC ( 1 March 1892 – 21 May 1941 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War I. He achieved fifteen victories in aerial combat , four of them in a single action on 12 June 1918 . A grazier between the wars , he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in 1940 and was killed in a plane crash the following year . 
 Born in New South Wales but raised in Western Australia , Phillipps joined the Australian Imperial Force as an infantryman in April 1915 , seeing action at Gallipoli and on the Western Front . Wounded twice in 1916 , he transferred to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) and , having falsified his age , was accepted for pilot training in May 1917 . As a member of No. 2 Squadron in France , Phillipps flew mainly S.E.5 fighters , and was awarded two Military Crosses and the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions . He finished the war a major , commanding No. 6 ( Training ) Squadron in England . Returning to Australia in 1919 , he left the AFC and was managing a rural property when he enlisted in the RAAF soon after the outbreak of World War II . At his death he was ranked squadron leader , commanding No. 2 Elementary Flying Training School at Archerfield , Queensland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Phillipps was born on 1 March 1892 in New South Wales , though sources differ on the exact location , which is variously recorded as rural Moree and metropolitan North Sydney . He was the son of William Hargreaves Phillipps , originally of Northumberland , England , and his wife Cecil . After his father died , Phillipps ' mother took him to live in Perth , Western Australia . Educated at Hale School , he studied to be an accountant and was practising on a pastoral property in the Kimberley when war broke out in 1914 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = 28th Battalion = = = 
 Phillipps enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force in April 1915 and joined the 28th Battalion , an infantry unit raised the same month at Blackboy Camp , Western Australia . He successfully applied for a commission and departed for Egypt aboard HMAT Ascanius on 9 June as a second lieutenant . After training in Egypt , he departed with his unit for Gallipoli aboard the transport Ivernia on 4 September . He was promoted to lieutenant on 25 October . The 28th Battalion , which had been sent to Gallipoli late in the campaign as reinforcements , was not heavily engaged on the peninsula , and suffered relatively few casualties before the withdrawal in December 1915 . 
 In March 1916 , Phillipps deployed to France with the 28th Battalion for service on the Western Front . He participated in a raid against the forts of Armentières on the night of 6 / 7 June , and saw action during the Battle of Pozières in July . On 5 August , he was shot through the thigh , requiring evacuation to England for hospital treatment . He was promoted to captain on 12 August . Phillipps rejoined his unit in October but suffered another gunshot wound to the thigh the following month , near Gueudecourt . He returned to England once more to recover , and remained in hospital until 2 March 1917 . 
 = = = Australian Flying Corps = = = 
 Unable to take any further part in the war as an infantryman , Phillipps would normally have been repatriated to Australia , but instead engineered a transfer to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) as adjutant of No. 2 Squadron . After getting a taste of flying as a passenger , the twenty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old applied for pilot training , altering his birthdate from 1892 to 1896 . The official age limit for pilots in the AFC was thirty , but the preferred age was under twenty @-@ three . Phillipps ' application was accepted in May 1917 and , after qualifying for his wings , his proficiency was considered such that in August he was attached to No. 32 Squadron of the Royal Flying Corps to gain operational experience in France . Within three days of arriving he crash @-@ landed his Airco <unk> after it was hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire near Ypres , but he escaped injury ; by the time he completed his attachment in September he was leading combat patrols . 
 Phillipps married Ellen Robinson , daughter of Western Australia 's Attorney @-@ General , at St Mary Abbots in Kensington , London , on 8 September 1917 . Rejoining No. 2 Squadron within the month as a flight commander , he was initially engaged mainly in low @-@ level strafing and bombing missions in DH.5s as his unit , attached to the British Third Army , took part in the Battle of Passchendaele . During the subsequent Battle of Cambrai , on 22 November , he recorded his first aerial victory when he turned the tables on a German fighter that had attacked him from above , forcing it to land . He was recommended for the Military Cross on 3 December , the award being promulgated in The London Gazette on 4 February 1918 , and the full citation appearing on 5 July : 
 Capt. Roy Cecil Phillipps , F.C. 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . He has performed continuous gallant work at very low altitudes in almost impossible weather . Whilst flying alone in a mist he forced an enemy aeroplane to land . On two occasions , flying at an altitude of 200 feet , he made very valuable reconnaissances , and his reports on the general situation were of the greatest value . His leadership is excellent , and he has set a high example to his flight . 
 No. 2 Squadron converted to Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s in January 1918 . The unit generally conducted patrols with flights of six aircraft but found it difficult to lure enemy fighters into combat , so after a lull in fighting early in February it began flying two @-@ plane missions , which yielded better results . The following month , as the German Spring Offensive got under way , Phillipps shot down three German fighters in as many days : a Fokker Triplane on 22 March , an Albatros the next morning , and a two @-@ seater on 24 March ; the official history of Australia in the war recorded that the last @-@ mentioned enemy lost its wings to Phillipps ' machine @-@ gun fire , and " fell like a stone " . With the Allies holding clear superiority over the German fighters , the main danger to the Australians was from ground fire as most combat took place at low level , and " their machines came back full of bullet @-@ holes " . On 27 March , Phillipps achieved two more victories , a Triplane that he sent down in flames near Albert and another German fighter over <unk> . He was recommended for a bar to his Military Cross on 31 March , and the award was gazetted on 22 June : 
 Capt. Roy Cecil Phillipps , M.C. , Aust . F.C. attd . R.F.C. 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . When engaged with hostile aircraft during the recent operations , he has destroyed three enemy machines , and has in addition brought down two hostile planes out of control . He has also brought back accurate and valuable information regarding hostile movements under the most adverse conditions , particularly on one occasion , when he flew through a heavy barrage at a low altitude behind the enemy 's lines . He has shown conspicuous skill and determination when escorting low @-@ flying bombing patrols . 
 During April 1918 , No. 2 Squadron began operating in wide @-@ ranging offensive " circus " patrols made up of large formations of fighters , often drawn from several squadrons . Phillipps destroyed a Pfalz near Bapaume on 16 May , before achieving his greatest success on 12 June when he shot down four German fighters in a single patrol over <unk> . His victims included two Fokker Triplanes , one of which he attacked head @-@ on , an LVG , and a Fokker D.VII flown by Fritz Loerzer , commander of Jasta 26 and an eleven @-@ victory ace , who was captured . The feat also gave Phillipps a total of eleven victories , making him the equal highest @-@ scoring ace in No. 2 Squadron along with Captain Henry Forrest . Phillipps was recommended for the Distinguished Flying Cross on 16 June , and the award was promulgated on 3 August : 
 Capt. Roy Cecil Phillipps , M.C. ( Australian Flying Corps ) . 
 Whilst on offensive patrol this officer destroyed personally four enemy aeroplanes ; he has also shown the greatest gallantry during the recent operations in attacking troops and transports on the roads , and dropping bombs from very low altitudes . 
 On 25 July , Phillipps was leading the escort for a raid on the Lille forts east of Armentières when he spotted a patrol of seven Fokkers . <unk> his bombs to lighten his load , he attacked one of the German fighters and shot away its wing ; the others retreated . During the Allies ' Hundred Days Offensive , on 12 August , he joined fellow No. 2 Squadron ace Adrian Cole and No. 4 Squadron aces Harry Cobby and Roy King to lead their combined forces in support of the British Fourth Army , Phillipps accounting for a Fokker that broke up in mid @-@ air . He was credited with two other victories in August to bring his tally to fifteen , making him No. 2 Squadron 's second most successful ace after Captain Francis Smith , who finished the war with sixteen . Later that month , Phillipps rotated back to England in accordance with Royal Air Force policy , which required pilots to be rested and serve as instructors after nine to twelve months in combat . In October , he was promoted to major and posted to command No. 6 ( Training ) Squadron at Minchinhampton ; the unit was primarily responsible for training new pilots for service with No. 2 Squadron . 
 = = Interbellum and World War II = = 
 Phillipps relinquished command of No. 6 Squadron upon its disbandment in March 1919 . He returned to Australia on 16 June aboard the troopship Kaiser @-@ i @-@ Hind , and was discharged from the Australian Flying Corps on 15 August . That month he was one of several veteran pilots , including Lieutenant Colonel Oswald Watt and Major Bill Anderson , appointed to serve on a committee examining applications for a proposed Australian air service to replace the AFC ; the Australian Air Corps , immediate precursor to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , was duly formed on 1 January 1920 under Anderson 's command . 
 After leaving the military , Phillipps became a grazier in New South Wales . He purchased <unk> station at Moree in 1926 , and was managing the property when Australia declared war in September 1939 . In February 1940 , he enlisted in the RAAF as a flying officer . Raised to flight lieutenant , he was posted as assistant chief ground instructor to No. 2 Elementary Flying Training School ( No. 2 EFTS ) at Archerfield , Queensland , on 27 March . No. 2 EFTS was one of twelve basic flying schools established by the RAAF as part of Australia 's contribution to the Empire Air Training Scheme . Phillipps was appointed chief ground instructor on 17 June . Having been promoted to squadron leader , he assumed command of No. 2 EFTS on 20 October 1940 . 
 Phillipps died on 21 May 1941 , following an accident in a private plane . The aircraft , piloted by its owner , Flight Lieutenant <unk> Collins , was reported to have taken off from Archerfield at night without RAAF or Civil Aviation Department clearance , and collided with trees . Survived by his wife , son and three daughters , Phillipps was cremated at Mount Thompson Crematorium in Brisbane . He is commemorated on the Queensland Cremation Memorial , Brisbane , and on panel 116 of the Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 = Rhodesia 's Unilateral Declaration of Independence = 
 The Unilateral Declaration of Independence ( UDI ) was a statement adopted by the Cabinet of Rhodesia on 11 November 1965 , announcing that Rhodesia , a British territory in southern Africa that had governed itself since 1923 , now regarded itself as an independent sovereign state . The culmination of a protracted dispute between the British and Rhodesian governments regarding the terms under which the latter could become fully independent , it was the first unilateral break from the United Kingdom by one of its colonies since the United States Declaration of Independence nearly two centuries before . Britain , the Commonwealth and the United Nations all deemed Rhodesia 's UDI illegal , and economic sanctions , the first in the UN 's history , were imposed on the breakaway colony . Amid near @-@ complete international isolation , Rhodesia continued as an unrecognised state with the assistance of South Africa and Portugal . 
 The Rhodesian government , which mostly comprised members of the country 's white minority of about 5 % , was indignant when , amid decolonisation and the Wind of Change , less developed African colonies to the north without comparable experience of self @-@ rule quickly advanced to independence during the early 1960s while Rhodesia was refused sovereignty under the newly ascendant principle of " no independence before majority rule " ( " NIBMAR " ) . Most white Rhodesians felt that they were due independence following four decades ' self @-@ government , and that Britain was betraying them by withholding it . This combined with the colonial government 's acute reluctance to hand over power to black nationalists — the manifestation of racial tensions , Cold War anti @-@ communism and the fear that a dystopian Congo @-@ style situation might result — to create the impression that if Britain did not grant independence , Rhodesia might be justified in taking it unilaterally . 
 Stalemate developed between the British and Rhodesian Prime Ministers , Harold Wilson and Ian Smith respectively , between 1964 and 1965 . Dispute largely surrounded the British condition that the terms for independence had to be acceptable " to the people of the country as a whole " ; Smith contended that this was met , while Britain and black nationalist leaders in Rhodesia held that it was not . After Wilson proposed in late October 1965 that Britain might safeguard future black representation in the Rhodesian parliament by withdrawing some of the colonial government 's devolved powers , then presented terms for an investigatory Royal Commission that the Rhodesians found unacceptable , Smith and his Cabinet declared independence . Calling this treasonous , the British colonial Governor Sir Humphrey Gibbs formally dismissed Smith and his government , but they ignored him and appointed an " Officer Administering the Government " to take his place . 
 While no country recognised UDI , the Rhodesian High Court deemed the post @-@ UDI government legal and de jure in 1968 . The Smith administration initially professed continued loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II , but abandoned this in 1970 when it declared a republic in an unsuccessful attempt to win foreign recognition . The Rhodesian Bush War , a guerrilla conflict between the government and two rival communist @-@ backed black nationalist groups , began in earnest two years later , and after several attempts to end the war Smith agreed the Internal Settlement with non @-@ militant nationalists in 1978 . Under these terms the country was reconstituted under black rule as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in June 1979 , but this new order was rejected by the guerrillas and the international community . The Bush War continued until Zimbabwe Rhodesia revoked UDI as part of the Lancaster House Agreement in December 1979 . Following a brief period of direct British rule , the country was granted internationally recognised independence under the name Zimbabwe in 1980 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = A unique case = = = 
 The southern African territory of Rhodesia , officially Southern Rhodesia , was a unique case in the British Empire and Commonwealth — though a colony in name , it was internally self @-@ governing and constitutionally not unlike a dominion . This situation dated back to 1923 , when it was granted responsible government within the Empire as a self @-@ governing colony , following three decades of administration and development by the British South Africa Company . Britain had intended Southern Rhodesia 's integration into the Union of South Africa as a new province , but this having been rejected by registered voters in the 1922 government referendum , the territory was moulded into a prospective dominion instead . It was empowered to run its own affairs in almost all respects , including defence . 
 Whitehall 's powers over Southern Rhodesia under the 1923 constitution were , on paper , considerable ; the British Crown was theoretically able to cancel any passed bill within a year , or alter the constitution however it wished . These reserved powers were intended to protect the indigenous black Africans from discriminatory legislation and to safeguard British commercial interests in the colony , but as Claire Palley comments in her constitutional history of the country , it would have been extremely difficult for Whitehall to enforce such actions , and attempting to do so would have probably caused a crisis . In the event , they were never exercised . A generally co @-@ operative relationship developed between Whitehall and the colonial government and civil service in Salisbury , and dispute was rare . 
 The 1923 constitution was drawn up in non @-@ racial terms , and the electoral system it devised was similarly open , at least in theory . Voting qualifications regarding personal income , education and property , similar to those of the Cape Qualified Franchise , were applied equally to all , but since most blacks did not meet the set standards , both the electoral roll and the colonial parliament were overwhelmingly from the white minority of about 5 % . The result was that black interests were sparsely represented if at all , something that most of the colony 's whites showed little interest in changing ; they claimed that most blacks were uninterested in Western @-@ style political process and that they would not govern properly if they took over . Bills such as the Land Apportionment Act of 1930 , which earmarked about half of the country for white ownership and residence while dividing the rest into black purchase , tribal trust and national areas , were variously biased towards the white minority . White settlers and their offspring provided most of the colony 's administrative , industrial , scientific and farming skills , and built a relatively balanced , partially industrialised market economy , boasting strong agricultural and manufacturing sectors , iron and steel industries and modern mining enterprises . Everyday life was marked by discrimination ranging from job reservation for whites to petty segregation of trains , post office queues and the like . Whites owned most of the best farmland , and had far superior education , wages and homes , but the schooling , healthcare , infrastructure and salaries available to black Rhodesians were nevertheless very good by African standards . 
 In the wider Imperial context , Southern Rhodesia occupied a category unto itself because of the " special quasi @-@ independent status " it held . The Dominions Office , formed in 1925 to handle British relations with the dominions of Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Newfoundland , South Africa and the Irish Free State , also dealt with Southern Rhodesia , and Imperial Conferences included the Southern Rhodesian Prime Minister alongside those of the dominions from 1932 . This unique arrangement continued following the advent of Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conferences in 1944 . Southern Rhodesians of all races fought for Britain in the Second World War , and the colonial government gradually received more autonomy regarding external affairs . During the immediate post @-@ war years , Southern Rhodesian politicians generally thought that they were as good as independent as they were , and that full autonomy in the form of dominionship would make little difference to them . Post @-@ war immigration to Southern Rhodesia , mainly from Britain , Ireland and South Africa , caused the white community to swell from 68 @,@ 954 in 1941 to 221 @,@ 504 in 1961 . The black population grew from 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 over the same period . 
 = = = Federation and the Wind of Change = = = 
 Believing full dominion status to be effectively symbolic and " there for the asking " , Prime Minister Godfrey Huggins ( in office from 1933 to 1953 ) twice ignored British overtures hinting at dominionship , and instead pursued an initially semi @-@ independent Federation with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland , two colonies directly administered from London . He hoped that this might set in motion the creation of one united dominion in south @-@ central Africa , emulating the Federation of Australia half a century before . The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland , defined in its constitution as indissoluble , began in 1953 , mandated by the results of a mostly white referendum , with Southern Rhodesia , the most developed of the three territories , at its head , Huggins as Federal Prime Minister and Salisbury as Federal capital . 
 Coming at the start of the decolonisation period , the Federation of self @-@ governing Southern Rhodesia with two directly ruled British protectorates was later described by the British historian Robert Blake as " an aberration of history — a curious deviation from the inevitable course of events " . The project faced black opposition from the start , and ultimately failed because of the shifting international attitudes and rising black nationalist ambitions of the late 1950s and early 1960s , often collectively called the Wind of Change . Britain , France and Belgium vastly accelerated their withdrawal from Africa during this period , believing colonial rule to be no longer sustainable geopolitically or ethically . The idea of " no independence before majority rule " , commonly abbreviated to " NIBMAR " , gained considerable ground in British political circles . When Huggins ( who had been recently ennobled as Lord Malvern ) asked Britain to make the Federation a dominion in 1956 , he was rebuffed . The opposition Dominion Party responded by repeatedly calling for a Federal unilateral declaration of independence ( UDI ) over the next few years . Following Lord Malvern 's retirement in late 1956 , his successor Sir Roy Welensky pondered such a move on at least three occasions . 
 Attempting to advance the case for Southern Rhodesian independence , particularly in the event of Federal dissolution , the Southern Rhodesian Prime Minister Sir Edgar Whitehead brokered the 1961 constitution with Britain , which he thought would remove all British powers of reservation over Southern Rhodesian bills and acts , and put the country on the brink of full sovereignty . Despite its containing no independence guarantees , Whitehead , Welensky and other proponents of this constitution presented it to the Southern Rhodesian electorate as the " independence constitution " under which Southern Rhodesia would become a Commonwealth realm on a par with Australia , Canada and New Zealand if the Federation dissolved . White dissenters included Ian Smith , MP for <unk> and Chief Whip for the governing United Federal Party ( UFP ) in the Federal Assembly , who took exception to the constitution 's omission of an explicit promise of Southern Rhodesian independence in the event of Federal dissolution , and ultimately resigned his post in protest . A referendum of the mostly white electorate approved the new constitution by a majority of 65 % on 26 July 1961 . The final version of the constitution included a few extra provisions inserted by the British , one of which — Section 111 — reserved full powers to the Crown to amend , add to or revoke certain sections of the Southern Rhodesian constitution by Order in Council at the request of the British government . This effectively negated the relinquishment of British powers described elsewhere in the document , but the Southern Rhodesians did not initially notice it . 
 The black nationalist movement in Southern Rhodesia , founded and organised by urban black elites during the late 1950s , was repeatedly banned by the colonial government because of the political violence , industrial sabotage and intimidation of potential black voters that characterised its campaign . The principal nationalist group , led by the Bulawayo trade unionist Joshua Nkomo , renamed itself with each post @-@ ban reorganisation , and by the start of 1962 was called the Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) . Attempting to win black political support , Whitehead proposed a number of reforms to racially discriminatory legislation , including the Land Apportionment Act , and promised to implement these if his UFP won the next Southern Rhodesian election . But intimidation by ZAPU of prospective black voters impeded the UFP 's efforts to win their support , and much of the white community saw Whitehead as too radical , and soft on what they saw as black extremism . In the December 1962 Southern Rhodesian election , the UFP was defeated by the Rhodesian Front ( RF ) , a newly formed alliance of conservative voices headed by Winston Field and Ian Smith , in what was widely considered a shock result . Field became Prime Minister , with Smith as his deputy . 
 = = = Federal dissolution ; the roots of mistrust = = = 
 Meanwhile , secessionist black nationalist parties won electoral victories in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland , and Harold Macmillan 's Conservative administration in Britain moved towards breaking up the Federation , resolving that it had become untenable . In February 1962 , the British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations , Duncan Sandys , secretly informed the Nyasaland nationalist leader Hastings Banda that secession would be allowed . A few days later , he horrified Welensky by telling him that " we British have lost the will to govern " . " But we haven 't " , retorted Julian Greenfield , Welensky 's Law Minister . Macmillan 's Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State , R A Butler , who headed British oversight of the Federation , officially announced Nyasaland 's right to secede in December 1962 . Four months later , he informed the three territories that he was going to convene a conference to decide the Federation 's future . 
 As Southern Rhodesia had been the UK 's legislative partner in forming the Federation in 1953 , it would be impossible ( or at least very difficult ) for Britain to dissolve the union without Southern Rhodesia 's co @-@ operation . Field could therefore potentially hamstring the British by refusing to attend the conference until they pledged to grant his country full independence . According to Field , Smith and other RF politicians , Butler made several such guarantees orally to ensure their co @-@ operation at the conference , but repeatedly refused to give anything on paper . The Southern Rhodesians claimed that Butler justified his refusal to give a written promise by saying that binding Whitehall to a document rather than his word would be against the Commonwealth 's " spirit of trust " — an argument that Field eventually accepted . " Let 's remember the trust you emphasised " , Smith warned , according to Field 's account wagging his finger at Butler ; " if you break that you will live to regret it . " Southern Rhodesia attended the conference , which was held at Victoria Falls over a week starting from 28 June 1963 , and among other things it was agreed to formally liquidate the Federation at the end of the year . In the House of Commons afterwards , Butler flatly denied suggestions that he had " oiled the wheels " of Federal dissolution with secret promises to the Southern Rhodesians . 
 Field 's government was startled by Britain 's announcement in October 1963 that Nyasaland would become fully independent on 6 July 1964 . While no date was set for Northern Rhodesian statehood , it was generally surmised that it was going to follow shortly thereafter . Smith was promptly sent to London , where he held a round of inconclusive Southern Rhodesian independence talks with the new British Prime Minister , Sir Alec Douglas @-@ Home . Around the same time , the presence and significance of Section 111 of the 1961 constitution emerged in Southern Rhodesia , prompting speculation in political circles that a future British government might , if it were so inclined , go against previous conventions by legislating for Salisbury without its consent , withdrawing devolved powers or otherwise altering the Southern Rhodesian constitution . Fearing what the Labour Party might do if it won the next British general election ( which was projected for late 1964 ) , the Southern Rhodesians stepped up their efforts , hoping to win independence before Britain went to the polls , and preferably not after Nyasaland . The Federation dissolved as scheduled at the end of 1963 . 
 = = Positions and motivations = = 
 = = = British government stance = = = 
 The British government 's refusal to grant independence to Southern Rhodesia under the 1961 constitution was largely the result of the geopolitical and moral shifts associated with the Wind of Change , coupled with the UK 's wish to avoid opprobrium and loss of prestige in the United Nations ( UN ) and the Commonwealth . By the early 1960s , general consensus in the post @-@ colonial UN — particularly the General Assembly , where the communist bloc and the Afro @-@ Asian lobby were collectively very strong — roundly denounced all forms of colonialism , and supported communist @-@ backed black nationalist insurgencies across southern Africa , regarding them as racial liberation movements . Amid the Cold War , Britain opposed the spread of Soviet and Chinese influence into Africa , but knew it would become an international pariah if it publicly expressed reservations or backed down on NIBMAR in the Southern Rhodesia question . Once the topic of Southern Rhodesia came to the fore in the UN and other bodies , particularly the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) , even maintaining the status quo became regarded as unacceptable internationally , causing the UK government a great deal of embarrassment . 
 In the Commonwealth context , too , Britain knew that simply granting independence to Southern Rhodesia was out of the question as many of the Afro @-@ Asian countries were also Commonwealth members . Statehood for Salisbury without majority rule would split the Commonwealth and perhaps cause it to break up , a disastrous prospect for British foreign policy . The Commonwealth repeatedly called on Britain to intervene directly should Southern Rhodesian defiance continue , while liberals in Britain worried that if left unchecked Salisbury might drift towards South African @-@ style apartheid . Anxious to avoid having to choose between Southern Rhodesia and the Commonwealth , Whitehall attempted to negotiate a middle way between the two , but ultimately put international considerations first , regarding them as more important . 
 At party level , the Labour Party , in opposition until October 1964 , was overtly against Southern Rhodesian independence under the 1961 constitution and supportive of the black nationalist movement on ideological and moral grounds . The Liberal Party , holding a handful of parliament seats , took a similar stance . The Conservative Party , while also following a policy of decolonisation , was more sympathetic to the Southern Rhodesian government 's position , and included members who openly supported it . 
 = = = Southern Rhodesian government view = = = 
 The Southern Rhodesian government found it bizarre that Britain was making independent states out of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland , less developed territories with little experience of self @-@ rule , while withholding sovereign statehood from Southern Rhodesia , the Federation 's senior partner , which had already been self @-@ governing for four decades and which was one of the most prosperous and developed countries in Africa . The principle of majority rule , the basis for this apparent inconsistency , was considered irrelevant by the Southern Rhodesians . They had presumed that in the event of Federal dissolution they would be first in line for independence without major adjustments to the 1961 constitution , an impression confirmed to them by prior intergovernmental correspondence , particularly the oral promises they claimed to have received from Butler . When it did not prove forthcoming they felt cheated . Salisbury contended that its predominantly white legislature was more deserving of independence than the untried black nationalist leaders as it had proven its competence over decades of self @-@ rule . 
 The RF claimed that the bloody civil wars , military coups and other disasters that plagued the new majority @-@ ruled African states to the north , many of which had become corrupt , autocratic or communist one @-@ party states very soon after independence , showed that black nationalist leaders were not ready to govern . Influenced strongly by the white refugees who had fled south from the Congo , it presented chaotic doomsday scenarios of what black nationalist rule in Southern Rhodesia might mean , particularly for the white community . Proponents of the RF stand downplayed black nationalist grievances regarding land ownership and segregation , and argued that despite the racial imbalance in domestic politics — whites made up 5 % of the population , but over 90 % of registered voters — the electoral system was not racist as the franchise was based on financial and educational qualifications rather than ethnicity . They emphasised the colony 's proud war record on Britain 's behalf , and expressed a wish in the Cold War context to form an anti @-@ communist , pro @-@ Western front in Africa alongside South Africa and Portugal . 
 These factors combined with what RF politicians and supporters saw as British decadence , chicanery and betrayal to create the case they put forward that UDI , while dubious legally and likely to provoke international uproar , might nevertheless be in their eyes justifiable and necessary for the good of the country and region if an accommodation could not be found with Whitehall . 
 = = Road to UDI = = 
 = = = First steps , under Field = = = 
 Field 's failure to secure independence concurrently with the end of the Federation caused his Cabinet 's support for him to waver during late 1963 and early 1964 . The RF caucus in January 1964 revealed widespread dissatisfaction with him on the grounds that the British seemed to be outwitting him . The Prime Minister was put under immense pressure to win the colony 's independence . Field travelled to England later that month to press Douglas @-@ Home and Sandys for independence , and raised the possibility of UDI on a few occasions , but returned empty @-@ handed on 2 February . 
 The RF united behind Field after Sandys wrote him a terse letter warning him of the likely Commonwealth reaction to a declaration of independence , but the Prime Minister then lost his party 's confidence by failing to pursue a possible route to at least de facto independence devised by Desmond Lardner @-@ Burke , a lawyer and RF MP for Gwelo . During March 1964 , the Legislative Assembly in Salisbury considered and passed Lardner @-@ Burke 's motion that the Governor , Sir Humphrey Gibbs , should submit a petition to the Queen requesting alteration of Section 111 of the 1961 constitution so that the Royal Assent described therein would be exercised at the request of the Southern Rhodesian government rather than that of its British counterpart . This would both remove the possibility of British legislative interference and pave the way for an attempted assumption of independence by Order in Council . 
 The RF 's intention was partly to test whether or not the British would attempt to block this bill after Gibbs had granted Royal Assent to it , but this issue never came to a head because Sandys persuaded Field not to forward it to Gibbs for ratification on the grounds that it had not been unanimously passed . Lord Salisbury , one of Southern Rhodesia 's main supporters in Britain , despaired at Field 's lack of action , telling Welensky that as he saw it " the simple time to have declared independence , whether right or wrong , would have been when the Federation came to an end " . The RF hierarchy interpreted this latest backtrack by Field as evidence that he would not seriously challenge the British on the independence issue , and forced his resignation on 13 April 1964 . Smith accepted the Cabinet 's nomination to take his place . 
 = = = Smith replaces Field ; talks with Douglas @-@ Home = = = 
 Smith , a farmer from the Midlands town of Selukwe who had been seriously wounded while serving in the British Royal Air Force during the Second World War , was Southern Rhodesia 's first native @-@ born Prime Minister . Regarded in British political circles as a " raw colonial " — when he took over , Smith 's personal experience of the UK comprised four brief visits — he promised a harder line than Field in independence talks . The RF 's replacement of Field drew criticism from the British Labour Party , whose leader Harold Wilson called it " brutal " , while Nkomo described the new Smith Cabinet as " a suicide squad ... not interested in the welfare of all the people but only in their own " . Smith said he was pursuing a middle course between black nationalist rule and apartheid so that there would still be " a place for the white man " in Southern Rhodesia ; this would benefit the blacks too , he claimed . He held that the government should be based " on merit , not on colour or nationalism " , and insisted that there would be " no African nationalist government here in my lifetime " . 
 Salisbury 's blunt refusal to be part of the Wind of Change caused the Southern Rhodesian military 's traditional British and American suppliers to impose an informal embargo , and prompted Whitehall and Washington to stop sending Southern Rhodesia financial aid around the same time . In June 1964 , Douglas @-@ Home informed Smith that Southern Rhodesia would not be represented at the year 's Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference , despite Salisbury 's record of attendance going back to 1932 , because of a change in policy to only include representatives from fully independent states . This decision , taken by Britain to preempt the possibility of open confrontation with Asian and black African leaders at the conference , deeply insulted Smith . Lord Malvern equated Britain 's removal of Southern Rhodesia 's conference seat with " kicking us out of the Commonwealth " , while Welensky expressed horror at what he described as " this cavalier treatment of a country which has , since its creation , staunchly supported , in every possible way , Britain and the Commonwealth " . 
 At 10 Downing Street in early September 1964 , impasse developed between Douglas @-@ Home and Smith over the best way to measure black public opinion in Southern Rhodesia . A key plank of Britain 's Southern Rhodesia policy was that the terms for independence had to be " acceptable to the people of the country as a whole " — agreeing to this , Smith suggested that white and urban black opinion could be gauged through a general referendum of registered voters , and that rural black views could be obtained at a national indaba ( tribal conference ) of chiefs and headmen . Douglas @-@ Home told Smith that although this proposal satisfied him personally , he could not accept it as he did not believe the Commonwealth , the United Nations or the Labour Party would also do so . He stressed that such a move towards accommodation with Smith might hurt the Conservatives ' chances in the British general election the next month , and suggested that it might be in Smith 's best interests to wait until after the election to continue negotiations . Smith accepted this argument . Douglas @-@ Home assured Smith that a Conservative government would settle with him and grant independence within a year . 
 Attempting to form a viable white opposition to the Rhodesian Front , the UFP resurrected itself around Welensky , renamed itself the Rhodesia Party , and entered the Arundel and Avondale by @-@ elections that had been called for 1 October 1964 . <unk> by the prospect of having to face the political heavyweight Welensky in parliament at the head of the opposition , the RF poured huge resources into winning both of these former UFP safe seats , and fielded Clifford Dupont , Smith 's deputy , against Welensky in Arundel . The RF won both seats comfortably , and the Rhodesia Party soon faded away . Spurred on by this success , Smith organised the indaba for 22 October , and called a general independence referendum for 5 November 1964 . Meanwhile , Wilson wrote a number of letters to Southern Rhodesian black nationalists , assuring them that " the Labour Party is totally opposed to granting independence to Southern Rhodesia so long as the government of that country remains under the control of the white minority " . 
 = = = Wilson 's Labour government ; Salisbury 's tests of opinion = = = 
 Labour defeated the Conservatives by four seats in the British general election on 15 October 1964 , and formed a government the next day . Both Labour and the Conservatives told Smith that a positive result at the indaba would not be recognised by Britain as representative of the people , and the Conservatives turned down Salisbury 's invitation to send observers . Smith pressed on , telling parliament that he would ask the tribal chiefs and headmen " to consult their people in the traditional manner " , then hold the indaba as planned . On 22 October , 196 chiefs and 426 headmen from across the country gathered at <unk> , just north @-@ east of Salisbury , and began their deliberations . Smith hoped that Britain , having taken part in such <unk> in the past , might send a delegation at the last minute , but none arrived , much to his annoyance , particularly as the British government 's Commonwealth Secretary Arthur Bottomley was only across the Zambezi in Lusaka at the time . 
 While the chiefs conferred , Northern Rhodesia became independent Zambia on 24 October 1964 , emulating Nyasaland , which had achieved statehood as Malawi three months earlier . Reasoning that it was no longer necessary to refer to itself as " Southern " in the absence of a northern counterpart , Southern Rhodesia began calling itself simply Rhodesia . The same day , the commander of the Rhodesian Army , Major @-@ General John " Jock " Anderson , resigned , announcing publicly that he was doing so because of his opposition to UDI , which he said he could not go along with because of his oath of allegiance to the Queen . Interpreting this as a sign that Smith intended to declare independence if a majority backed it in the referendum , Wilson wrote a stiff letter to Smith on 25 October , warning him of the consequences of UDI , and demanding " a categorical assurance forthwith that no attempt at a unilateral declaration of independence on your part will be made " . Smith expressed confusion as to what he had done to provoke this , and ignored it . 
 When the indaba ended on 26 October , the chiefs and headmen returned a unanimous decision to support the government 's stand for independence under the 1961 constitution , attesting in their report that " people who live far away do not understand the problems of our country " . This verdict was rejected by the nationalist movement on the grounds that the chiefs received governmental salaries ; the chiefs countered that the black MPs in parliamentary opposition also received such salaries , but still opposed the government . Malvern , who was becoming perturbed by the RF 's actions , dismissed the indaba as a " swindle " , asserting that the chiefs no longer had any real power ; the British simply ignored the whole exercise . On 27 October , Wilson released a firm statement regarding Britain 's intended response to UDI , warning that Rhodesia 's economic and political ties with Britain , the Commonwealth and most of the world would be immediately severed amid a campaign of sanctions if Smith 's government went ahead with UDI . This was intended to discourage white Rhodesians from voting for independence in the referendum , for which the RF campaign slogan was " Yes means Unity , not UDI " . Wilson was pleased when Douglas @-@ Home , his leading opponent in the House of Commons , praised the statement as " rough but right " . On 5 November 1964 , Rhodesia 's mostly white electorate voted " yes " to independence under the 1961 constitution by a margin of 89 % , prompting Smith to declare that the British condition of acceptability to the people as a whole had been met . 
 = = = Stalemate develops between Smith and Wilson = = = 
 Smith wrote to Wilson the day after the referendum , asking him to send Bottomley to Salisbury for talks . Wilson replied that Smith should instead come to London . The British and Rhodesians exchanged often confrontational letters for the next few months . Alluding to the British financial aid pledged to Salisbury as part of the Federal dissolution arrangements , Wilson 's High Commissioner in Salisbury , J B Johnston , wrote to the Rhodesian Cabinet Secretary Gerald B Clarke on 23 December that " talk of a unilateral declaration of independence is bound to throw a shadow of uncertainty on the future financial relations between the two governments " . Smith was furious , seeing this as blackmail , and on 13 January 1965 wrote to Wilson : " I am so incensed at the line of your High Commissioner 's letter that I am replying directly to you ... It would appear that any undertakings given by the British government are worthless ... such immoral behaviour on the part of the British government makes it impossible for me to continue negotiations with you with any confidence that our standards of fair play , honesty and decency will prevail . " 
 The two premiers were brought together in person in late January 1965 , when Smith travelled to London for Sir Winston Churchill 's funeral . Following an episode concerning Smith 's non @-@ invitation to a luncheon at Buckingham Palace after the funeral — noticing the Rhodesian 's absence , the Queen sent a royal equerry to Smith 's hotel to retrieve him , reportedly causing Wilson much irritation — the two Prime Ministers inconclusively debated at 10 Downing Street . They differed on most matters , but agreed on a visit to Rhodesia the next month by Bottomley and the Lord Chancellor , Lord Gardiner , to gauge public opinion and meet political and commercial figures . Bottomley and Gardiner visited Rhodesia from 22 February to 3 March , collected a wide cross @-@ section of opinions , including some from black nationalists , and on returning to Britain reported to the House of Commons that they were " not without hope of finding a way towards a solution that will win the support of all communities and lead to independence and prosperity for all Rhodesians " . Bottomley also condemned black @-@ on @-@ black political violence , and dismissed the idea of introducing majority rule through military force . 
 The RF called a new general election for May 1965 and , campaigning on an election promise of independence , won all 50 " A " -roll seats ( the voters for which were mostly white ) . Josiah Gondo , leader of the United People 's Party , became Rhodesia 's first black Leader of the Opposition . Opening parliament on 9 June , Gibbs told the Legislative Assembly that the RF 's strengthened majority amounted to " a mandate to lead the country to its full independence " , and announced that the new government had informed him of its intent to open its own diplomatic mission in Lisbon , separate from the British embassy there . The British and Rhodesians argued about this unilateral act by Salisbury , described by the historian J R T Wood as the " veritable straw in the wind " , alongside the independence issue until Portugal accepted the mission in late September , much to Britain 's fury and Rhodesia 's delight . Hoping to bring Smith to heel by stonewalling him , Wilson 's ministers deliberately delayed and frustrated the Rhodesian government in negotiations . Rhodesia was again excluded from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference in 1965 . The UK 's refusal of aid , the Lisbon mission , the informal arms embargo and other issues combined with this to cause the Rhodesian government 's sense of alienation from Britain and the Commonwealth to deepen . In his memoirs , Smith accused the British of " resorting to politics of convenience and appeasement " . Wilson , meanwhile , became exasperated by what he saw as Rhodesian inflexibility , describing the gap between the two governments as " between different worlds and different centuries " . 
 = = = Final steps to UDI = = = 
 Amid renewed rumours of an impending Rhodesian UDI , Smith travelled to meet Wilson in London at the start of October 1965 , telling the press that he intended to resolve the independence issue once and for all . Both the British and the Rhodesians were surprised by the large numbers of Britons who came out to support Smith during his visit . Smith accepted an invitation from the BBC to appear on its Twenty @-@ Four Hours evening news and current affairs programme , but Downing Street blocked this at the last minute . Following largely abortive talks with Wilson , the Rhodesian Prime Minister flew home on 12 October . Desperate to avert UDI , Wilson travelled to Salisbury two weeks later to continue negotiations . 
 During these discussions , Smith referred to the last resort of a UDI on many occasions , though he said he hoped to find another way out of the quandary . He offered to increase black legislative representation by expanding the electorate along the lines of " one taxpayer , one vote " — which would enfranchise about half a million , but still leave most of the nation voteless — in return for a grant of independence . Wilson said this was insufficient , and countered that future black representation might be better safeguarded by Britain 's withdrawal from the colonial government of the power it had held since 1923 to determine the size and makeup of its parliament . The Rhodesians were horrified by this prospect , particularly as Wilson 's suggestion of it seemed to them to have removed the failsafe alternative of keeping the status quo . Before the British Prime Minister left Rhodesia on 30 October 1965 , he proposed a Royal Commission to gauge public opinion in the colony regarding independence under the 1961 constitution , possibly chaired by the Rhodesian Chief Justice Sir Hugh Beadle , which would report its findings to both the British and Rhodesian Cabinets . Wilson confirmed in the House of Commons two days later that he intended to introduce direct British control over the Rhodesian parliamentary structure to ensure that progress was made towards majority rule . 
 Stalemate drew closer as the Rhodesian Cabinet resolved that since Wilson had ruled out maintenance of the status quo , its only remaining options were to trust in the Royal Commission or declare independence . When the terms for the commission 's visit were presented to Smith , he found that contrary to what had been discussed during the British Prime Minister 's visit , the Royal Commission would operate on the basis that the 1961 constitution was unacceptable to the British government , and that Britain would not commit itself to accepting the final report . Smith said these conditions amounted to a " vote of no confidence in [ the commission ] before they commenced " , and therefore rejected them . " The impression you left with us of a determined effort to resolve our constitutional problem has been utterly dissipated " , he wrote to Wilson on 5 November . " It would seem that you have now finally closed the door which you publicly claimed to have opened . " 
 Amid frantic efforts by Beadle and others on both sides to revive the Royal Commission , the Rhodesian government had Gibbs announce a state of emergency the same day on the grounds that black nationalist insurgents were reportedly entering the country . Smith denied that this foreshadowed a declaration of independence , but the publishing of his letter to Wilson in the press provoked a worldwide storm of speculation that UDI was imminent . Smith wrote again to Wilson on 8 November , asking him to appoint the Royal Commission under the terms they had agreed in Salisbury and to commit the British government to accepting its ruling , but Wilson did not immediately reply . On 9 November , the Rhodesian Cabinet sent a letter to Queen Elizabeth II , assuring her that Rhodesia would remain loyal to her personally " whatever happens " . 
 = = Draft , adoption and signing = = 
 The Rhodesian Minister for Justice and Law and Order , Desmond Lardner @-@ Burke , presented the rest of the Cabinet with a draft for the declaration of independence on 5 November 1965 . When Jack Howman , Minister of Tourism and Information , said that he was also preparing a draft , the Cabinet decided to wait to see his version too . The ministers agreed that if an independence proclamation were issued , they would all sign it . On 9 November , the Cabinet jointly devised an outline for the proclamation document and the accompanying statement to be made by Smith . The final version of the declaration of independence was prepared by a sub @-@ committee of civil servants headed by Gerald Clarke , the Cabinet Secretary , with the United States Declaration of Independence of 1776 , the only other such proclamation ever issued by British colonials , used as a model . Strongly alluding to Thomas Jefferson 's text throughout , the Rhodesians used one phrase verbatim — " a respect for the opinions of mankind " — but no reference was made to the assertion that " all men are created equal " , nor to the " consent of the governed " , two omissions later stressed by a number of commentators . 
 Attached to the declaration of independence was a copy of the 1961 constitution amended for the circumstances , which became the 1965 constitution . In the eyes of the Smith administration , this document removed all remaining ties to Whitehall and reconstituted Rhodesia as a realm under the Crown . The new constitution created the concept of allegiance to the " Constitution of Rhodesia " , formed a separate Rhodesian monarchy ( making Elizabeth II " Queen of Rhodesia " ) , and introduced the post of Officer Administering the Government , a figure empowered to sign passed legislation into law on behalf of the monarch if she did not appoint a Governor @-@ General . 
 The Rhodesian Cabinet waited in vain for Wilson 's reply for the rest of 9 November and the next day . After briefly meeting Smith late on 10 November , Johnston warned Wilson that evening that the Rhodesians seemed poised to declare independence in the morning . The British Prime Minister tried repeatedly to call Smith , but did not get through until Smith was already chairing a Cabinet meeting on the independence issue around 08 : 00 Central Africa Time ( 06 : 00 in London ) on 11 November . Wilson attempted to talk Smith out of unilateral action by telling him the status quo could continue , and the two argued inconclusively about the proposed Royal Commission . Returning to his Cabinet meeting , Smith reported the conversation to his ministers , and , after debating for a while , the Cabinet came to the conclusion that Wilson was simply attempting to buy more time and that there was no sign of actual progress . Smith asked if Rhodesia should declare its independence , and had each Cabinet minister answer in turn . According to Smith 's account , " each one , quietly but firmly , without hesitation , said : ' Yes ' . " 
 At 11 : 00 local time on 11 November 1965 , Armistice Day , during the traditional two minutes ' silence to remember the fallen of the two World Wars , Smith declared Rhodesia independent and signed the proclamation document , with Dupont and the other 10 ministers of the Cabinet following . The timing was intended to emphasise the sacrifices Rhodesia had made for Britain in wartime . As Ken Flower later said , " the rebellion was made to appear as though it was not a rebellion " . Smith and his ministers still pledged allegiance to Queen Elizabeth II , whose official portrait hung prominently behind them as they signed ; the declaration even ended " God Save The Queen " . Four junior members of the Cabinet — Lance Smith , Ian Dillon , Andrew Dunlop and P K van der Byl — did not sign , but were included in the official photograph . 
 = = Text of the declaration = = 
 Whereas in the course of human affairs history has shown that it may become necessary for a people to resolve the political affiliations which have connected them with another people and to assume amongst other nations the separate and equal status to which they are entitled : 
 And Whereas in such event a respect for the opinions of mankind requires them to declare to other nations the causes which impel them to assume full responsibility for their own affairs : 
 Now Therefore , We , The Government of Rhodesia , Do <unk> Declare : 
 That it is an indisputable and accepted historic fact that since 1923 the Government of Rhodesia have exercised the powers of self @-@ government and have been responsible for the progress , development and welfare of their people ; 
 That the people of Rhodesia having demonstrated their loyalty to the Crown and to their kith and kin in the United Kingdom and elsewhere through two world wars , and having been prepared to shed their blood and give of their substance in what they believed to be the mutual interests of freedom @-@ loving people , now see all that they have cherished about to be shattered on the rocks of expediency ; 
 That the people of Rhodesia have witnessed a process which is destructive of those very precepts upon which civilization in a primitive country has been built , they have seen the principles of Western democracy , responsible government and moral standards crumble elsewhere , nevertheless they have remained steadfast ; 
 That the people of Rhodesia fully support the requests of their government for sovereign independence but have witnessed the consistent refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom to accede to their entreaties ; 
 That the Government of the United Kingdom have thus demonstrated that they are not prepared to grant sovereign independence to Rhodesia on terms acceptable to the people of Rhodesia , thereby persisting in maintaining an unwarrantable jurisdiction over Rhodesia , obstructing laws and treaties with other states and the conduct of affairs with other nations and refusing assent to laws necessary for the public good , all this to the detriment of the future peace , prosperity and good government of Rhodesia ; 
 That the Government of Rhodesia have for a long period patiently and in good faith negotiated with the Government of the United Kingdom for the removal of the remaining limitations placed upon them and for the grant of sovereign independence ; 
 That in the belief that procrastination and delay strike at and injure the very life of the nation , the Government of Rhodesia consider it essential that Rhodesia should attain , without delay , sovereign independence , the justice of which is beyond question ; 
 Now Therefore , We The Government of Rhodesia , in humble submission to Almighty God who controls the destinies of nations , conscious that the people of Rhodesia have always shown unswerving loyalty and devotion to Her Majesty the Queen and earnestly praying that we and the people of Rhodesia will not be hindered in our determination to continue exercising our undoubted right to demonstrate the same loyalty and devotion , and seeking to promote the common good so that the dignity and freedom of all men may be assured , Do , By This Proclamation , adopt , enact and give to the people of Rhodesia the Constitution annexed hereto ; 
 Given under Our Hand at Salisbury , this eleventh day of November in the Year of Our Lord one thousand nine hundred and sixty @-@ five . 
 = = Announcement and reactions = = 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 Prompted by the government , the Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation told the public to stand by for an important announcement from the Prime Minister at 13 : 15 local time . Smith went first to Government House to inform Gibbs that his Cabinet had declared independence , then to Pockets Hill Studios in east Salisbury to announce UDI to the nation . He read the proclamation aloud , then stated that independence had been declared because it had become " abundantly clear that it is the policy of the British government to play us along with no real intention of arriving at a solution which we could possibly accept ... I promised the people of this country that I would continue to negotiate to the bitter end and that I would leave no stone unturned in my endeavours to secure an honourable and mutually accepted settlement ; it now falls to me to tell you that negotiations have come to an end " . 
 Smith said that he believed that he would be remiss in his duty if he allowed Rhodesia to continue to " drift in its present paralysing state of uncertainty " , and that following Britain 's abandonment of the Federation his government was determined that " the same will never be allowed to happen here " . He claimed that UDI did not mark " a <unk> in the opportunities which our African people have to advance and prosper in Rhodesia " , described " racial harmony in Africa " as part of his agenda and condemned black nationalist activities as attempts to " blackmail the British government into ... handing the country over to irresponsible rule " . He then attempted to assuage fears that economic sanctions might destroy the economy , and asked Rhodesians to stand firm : " The mantle of the pioneers has fallen on our shoulders ... In the lives of most nations there comes a moment when a stand has to be made for principles , whatever the consequences . This moment has come to Rhodesia ... the first Western nation in the last two decades to say ' so far and no further ' . " He concluded with an assertion that the declaration of independence was " a blow for the preservation of justice , civilisation and Christianity " . 
 = = = Domestic reactions = = = 
 By the time Smith and Dupont arrived at Government House to see Gibbs , Whitehall had instructed the Governor to formally dismiss Smith and his ministers . This Gibbs did , accusing them of treason . Smith and his ministers ignored this , holding that under the new 1965 constitution Gibbs " no longer ha [ d ] any executive powers in Rhodesia " , and his reserve power to sack them no longer existed . The Rhodesian government hoped that Gibbs might obligingly resign in light of his impotent situation , but he did not ; following orders from London , he remained at his post at Government House . Gibbs told the Rhodesian military 's senior officers , some of whom were troubled by the perceived choice between Queen and country , to remain at their posts to maintain law and order . Wilson briefly flirted with the idea of sending Lord Mountbatten to Rhodesia to support Gibbs as a direct representative of the Queen , but this was dropped after Gibbs asked for somebody " higher up " in the royal family instead . " Not likely " , Wilson retorted . 
 The Rhodesian government accompanied UDI with emergency measures that it said were intended to prevent alarm , unrest and the flight of people and capital . Press censorship and petrol rationing were imposed , import licences were cancelled and emigration allowances were cut to £ 100 . News of UDI was generally received calmly by the local citizenry , apart from some isolated incidents of passing cars being stoned in the black townships outside Bulawayo . A few expected dissenters were arrested , most prominently Leo Baron , Nkomo 's lawyer , whose links with black nationalists and communists were seen by authorities as " subversive " . Baron , the younger brother of the scientist Jacob Bronowski , was arrested nine minutes after UDI was made . 
 Welensky , who had opposed UDI , stated that he felt it was nevertheless " the duty of every responsible Rhodesian to support the revolutionary government " as he believed the only alternative was a descent into anarchy . João de Freitas Cruz , the Portuguese consul @-@ general in Salisbury , reacted to the news with wild excitement ; visiting the Smith residence later in the day , he declared " Only Rhodesians could do this ! " A statement from ZAPU 's Jason Moyo , who was in London at the time , denounced UDI as an act of " treason and rebellion " and asserted that " the lives particularly of four million unarmed Africans are in jeopardy " . Davis M <unk> of the Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) said that " For all those who cherish freedom and a meaningful life , UDI has set a collision course which cannot be altered . [ It has ] marked the turning point of the struggle for freedom ... from a constitutional and political one to primarily a military struggle . " Most major Christian denominational leaders in the country publicly rejected UDI and the assertion that it defended Christianity , with the exception of the local Dutch Reformed Church , which stated that it was apolitical and thereafter refrained from comment . 
 A week after UDI , Smith 's government announced that Dupont , the Deputy Prime Minister , had resigned from the Cabinet to accept the post of Officer Administering the Government created by the 1965 constitution . Smith asked the Queen by letter to appoint a Governor @-@ General to supersede Gibbs , recommending Dupont , but was ignored . Dupont nevertheless effectively replaced the Governor . The Smith administration assigned him the Governor 's official residence at Government House , but no attempt was made to forcibly remove Gibbs and his entourage ; the post @-@ UDI government stated that the Officer Administering the Government would live at Governor 's Lodge instead " until Government House , at present temporarily occupied by Sir Humphrey Gibbs in a private capacity , becomes available " . 
 The Speaker of the Rhodesian parliament , A R W Stumbles , reconvened the Legislative Assembly on 25 November , resolving that if he did not there would be chaos . He feared that Gibbs might dramatically walk into the chamber in an attempt to stop the proceedings , but Gibbs did no such thing . The parliamentary opposition opened the meeting by asking whether the assembly was legal . <unk> Palley , the lone white opposition MP , announced that as he saw it , " certain Honourable Members in collusion have torn up the constitution under which this House meets . The proceedings have no legal validity whatsoever " . Stumbles overruled this objection and two more interruptions from Palley , and suggested that any members with reservations might leave . Palley continued his loud protests until he was forcibly ejected by the Sergeant @-@ at @-@ Arms , shouting " This is an illegal assembly ! God save the Queen ! " Gondo and eight other opposition MPs followed Palley out ; all ten of them rejoined the Legislative Assembly in February 1966 . 
 Gibbs received threatening letters from the Rhodesian public , and on 26 November 1965 Smith 's government cut off the telephones at Government House , and removed the ceremonial guard , the official cars " and even the typewriters " , Wood records . Gibbs nevertheless refused to step down or to leave Government House , issuing a statement that he would remain there " as the lawful Governor of Rhodesia until such time as constitutional government is restored , which I hope will be soon . " He stayed at his post , ignored by the post @-@ UDI government , until the declaration of a republic in 1970 . 
 = = = British and international responses ; sanctions = = = 
 Wilson was astonished by Smith 's actions , and found the timing of the declaration to coincide with the Armistice Day silence deeply insulting . Describing Salisbury as " hell @-@ bent on illegal self @-@ destroying " , the British Prime Minister , supported in the Commons by the Liberals and most Conservatives , called on Rhodesians to ignore the post @-@ UDI government . Within hours of UDI , the UN General Assembly passed a condemnatory resolution , by 107 @-@ to @-@ two — South Africa and Portugal voted against , and France abstained — decrying Rhodesia 's actions and calling on Britain to end " the rebellion by the unlawful authorities in Salisbury " . The UN Security Council the next day adopted Resolution 216 , which denounced the declaration of independence as illegal and racist , and called on all states to refuse recognition and assistance to the Rhodesian government . Security Council Resolution 217 , following on 20 November , condemned UDI as an illegitimate " usurpation of power by a racist settler minority " , and called on nations neither to recognise what it deemed " this illegal authority " nor to entertain diplomatic or economic relations with it . Both of these measures were adopted by ten votes to none with France abstaining . 
 Black nationalists in Rhodesia and their overseas supporters , prominently the OAU , clamoured for Britain to remove Smith 's government with a military invasion , but Britain dismissed this option because of various logistical issues , the risk of provoking a pre @-@ emptive Rhodesian strike on Zambia , and the psychological problems that were likely to accompany any confrontation between British and Rhodesian troops in what Smith said would be a " fratricidal war " . Wilson instead resolved to end the Rhodesian rebellion through economic sanctions ; these principally comprised the expulsion of Rhodesia from the Sterling area , a ban on the import of Rhodesian sugar , tobacco , chrome and other goods , and an oil boycott of Rhodesia . When the Rhodesians continued to receive oil , Wilson attempted to directly cut off their main supply lines , namely the Portuguese Mozambican ports at Beira and Lourenço Marques , by posting a Royal Navy squadron to the Mozambique Channel in March 1966 . This blockade , the Beira Patrol , was endorsed the following month by UN Security Council Resolution 221 . The United Nations proceeded to institute the first mandatory trade sanctions in its history with Security Council Resolutions 232 ( December 1966 ) and 253 ( April 1968 ) , which required member states to cease all trade and economic links with Rhodesia . 
 Wilson predicted in January 1966 that the various boycotts would force Smith to give in " within a matter of weeks rather than months " , but the British and UN sanctions had little effect on Rhodesia , largely because South Africa and Portugal went on trading with the breakaway colony , providing it with oil and other key resources . Clandestine " sanction @-@ busting " trade with other nations also continued , initially at a reduced level , and the diminished presence of foreign competitors helped domestic industries to slowly mature and expand . Rhodesia thus avoided the economic collapse predicted by Wilson and gradually became more self @-@ sufficient . The Rhodesian government set up a string of front holding companies in Switzerland , Luxembourg and Liechtenstein to help keep trade open , with some success ; goods that had previously been imported from Britain were replaced by Japanese , French and West German equivalents . Even many OAU states , while bombarding Rhodesia with vitriol , continued importing Rhodesian food and other products . The United States created a formal exception in its embargo with the Byrd Amendment of 1971 , under which the US replaced its import of chrome from the Soviet Union with Rhodesian chrome ore . This breach of the UN sanctions , passed by the US Congress on the back of anti @-@ communist Cold War considerations , was warmly welcomed by Southern white supremacists ; it aided the Rhodesian economy until 1977 , when the newly elected President Jimmy Carter successfully pushed Congress to repeal it . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 = = = Foreign = = = 
 Official diplomatic recognition by other countries was key for Rhodesia as it was the only way it could regain the international legitimacy it had lost through UDI . Recognition by the UK itself through a bilateral settlement would be the " first prize " , in Smith 's words , as it would end sanctions and constitutional ambiguity and make foreign acceptance , at least in the West , far more likely . Considering their country a potentially important player in the Cold War as a " bastion against communism " in southern Africa , the RF posited that some Western countries might recognise UDI even without a prior Anglo @-@ Rhodesian rapprochement . Specifically , it expected diplomatic recognition from South Africa and Portugal , and thought that France might recognise Rhodesia to annoy Britain and create a precedent for an independent Quebec . But although South Africa and Portugal gave economic , military and limited political support to the post @-@ UDI government ( as did France and other nations , to a lesser extent ) , neither they nor any other country ever recognised Rhodesia as a de jure independent state . Rhodesia 's unsuccessful attempts to win Western support and recognition included offers to the US government in 1966 and 1967 , ignored by Lyndon B Johnson 's administration , to provide Rhodesian troops to fight alongside the Americans and other anti @-@ communist forces in Vietnam . 
 Britain withdrew most of its High Commission staff from Salisbury in the days following UDI , leaving a small skeleton staff to man a " residual mission " intended to help Gibbs keep the British government informed of local happenings . Several countries followed Britain 's lead and closed their consulates in Salisbury , with one prominent exception to this being the United States , which retained its consulate @-@ general in post @-@ UDI Rhodesia , <unk> it a " US Contacts Office " to circumvent the problem of diplomatic recognition . South Africa and Portugal maintained " Accredited Diplomatic Representative " offices in Salisbury , which were embassies in all but name , while Rhodesia kept its pre @-@ UDI overseas missions in Pretoria , Lisbon and Lourenço Marques . Unofficial representative offices of the Rhodesian government also existed in the US , Japan and West Germany , while a citizen of Belgium was employed to represent Rhodesian interests there . The Rhodesian High Commission in London , located at Rhodesia House on the Strand , remained under the control of the post @-@ UDI government and effectively became its representative office in the UK . Like the South African Embassy on Trafalgar Square , Rhodesia House became a regular target for political demonstrations . These continued even after Britain forced the office to close in 1969 . 
 Because UDI claimed to make Rhodesia independent under the Queen as an effective Commonwealth realm , many countries justified their retention of missions in Rhodesia concurrently with their non @-@ recognition of the state by pointing out that the envoys ' accreditation was to the Queen and not to Smith 's government per se . But Rhodesia moved away from its original line of independence as a constitutional monarchy and towards republicanism during the late 1960s , hoping to end ambiguity regarding its claimed constitutional status and elicit official foreign recognition . In March 1970 , after the electorate had voted " yes " in a referendum the previous year both to a new constitution and to the abandoning of symbolic ties to the Queen , Smith 's government declared Rhodesia a republic . Far from prompting recognition , this led all countries apart from Portugal and South Africa to withdraw their consulates and missions , as the justification of royal accreditation could no longer be used . After Portugal 's Carnation Revolution in 1974 , the Rhodesian mission in Lisbon was closed in May 1975 , with its counterpart in Lourenço Marques following a month later on Mozambican independence . Portugal also withdrew its own remaining officials from Rhodesia , leaving South Africa as the only country with links to Salisbury . Rhodesia 's diplomatic activities were thereafter greatly diminished . 
 = = = Judicial = = = 
 The Rhodesian High Court 's nine Appellate and General Division judges initially neither rejected UDI nor openly supported it . The Chief Justice Sir Hugh Beadle , of the Appellate Division , announced simply that the judges would go on carrying out their duties " according to the law " . This originally noncommittal stance evolved over time , largely pivoting around legal cases argued at the High Court in Salisbury between 1966 and 1968 . The first of these , Madzimbamuto v. Lardner @-@ Burke N. O. and Others , concerned Daniel Madzimbamuto , a black nationalist who was detained without trial by the Rhodesian government on 6 November 1965 , the day after the declaration of a state of emergency and five days before UDI , on the grounds that he might pose a danger to the public . Desmond Lardner @-@ Burke , the Rhodesian Minister of Justice and Law and Order , prolonged the state of emergency in February 1966 , prompting Madzimbamuto 's wife to appeal for his release , arguing that since the United Kingdom had declared UDI illegal and outlawed the Rhodesian government with the Southern Rhodesia Act 1965 , the state of emergency ( and , by extension , Madzimbamuto 's imprisonment ) had no legal basis . 
 The General Division of the Rhodesian High Court ruled on 9 September 1966 that legal sovereignty lay with the British government , but that to " avoid chaos and a vacuum in the law " the Rhodesian government should be considered to be in control of law and order to the same extent as before UDI . In February 1968 , ruling on Madzimbamuto 's appeal , Beadle concluded that the Smith administration would be recognised by the local judiciary as the de facto government by virtue of its " effective control over the state 's territory " , but that de jure recognition would be withheld as this was not " firmly established " . Madzimbamuto applied for the right to appeal to the British Privy Council ; the Rhodesian Appellate Division promptly ruled that he had no right to do so , but the Privy Council considered his case anyway . 
 In late February 1968 , considering the fate of James Dhlamini , Victor Mlambo and Duly Shadreck , three black Rhodesians convicted of murder and terrorist offences before UDI , Beadle ruled that Salisbury retained its pre @-@ UDI powers regarding executions and could carry out death sentences . Whitehall announced on 1 March that at the request of the UK government , the Queen had exercised the royal prerogative of mercy and commuted the three death sentences to life imprisonment . Dhlamini and the others applied for a permanent stay of execution on this basis . At the hearing for Dhlamini and Mlambo on 4 March 1968 , Beadle argued that he saw the statement from London as a decision by the UK government and not the Queen herself , and that in any case the 1961 constitution had transferred the prerogative of mercy from Britain to the Rhodesian Executive Council . " The present government is the fully de facto government and as such is the only power that can exercise the prerogative " , he concluded . " It would be strange indeed if the United Kingdom government , exercising no internal power in Rhodesia , were given the right to exercise the prerogative of clemency . " The Judge President Sir Vincent Quenet and Justice Hector Macdonald agreed , and the application was dismissed . Justice John Fieldsend of the High Court 's General Division resigned in protest , writing to Gibbs that he no longer believed the High Court to be defending the rights of Rhodesian citizens . Dhlamini , Mlambo and Shadreck were hanged on 6 March . 
 On 23 July 1968 , the Privy Council in London ruled in Madzimbamuto 's favour , deciding that orders for detention made by the Rhodesian government were invalid regardless of whether the 1961 or 1965 constitution was considered effective . It declared the latter , " revolutionary " constitution illegal , and ruled that the former was overridden by the Southern Rhodesia Act 1965 , which had effectively outlawed the Rhodesian legislative , administrative and legal authorities in British law . Lord Reid , delivering the majority opinion ( Lord Pearce dissented ) , argued that the " usurper " government , though the effective master of Rhodesia , could not be considered lawful as the UK government was still attempting to regain control and it was impossible to say whether or not it would succeed . He ruled that only Whitehall could determine what constituted the maintenance of " law and order " in Rhodesia , and that the Rhodesian emergency measures were unlawful as they had been formalised by the Officer Administering the Government , a post @-@ UDI figure who was , in British eyes , unconstitutional . Reid concluded that Madzimbamuto was illegally detained . Harry Davies , one of the Rhodesian judges , announced on 8 August that the Rhodesian courts would not consider this ruling binding as they no longer accepted the Privy Council as part of the Rhodesian judicial hierarchy . Justice J R Dendy Young resigned in protest at Davies ' ruling on 12 August and four days later was sworn in as Chief Justice of Botswana . 
 The Rhodesian High Court granted full de jure recognition to the post @-@ UDI government on 13 September 1968 , while rejecting the appeals of 32 black nationalists who had been a month earlier convicted of terrorist offences and sentenced to death . Beadle declared that while he believed the Rhodesian judiciary should respect rulings of the Privy Council " so far as possible " , the judgement of 23 July had made it legally impossible for Rhodesian judges to continue under the 1961 constitution . He asserted that the court therefore faced a choice between the 1965 constitution and a legal vacuum , the latter of which he felt he could not endorse . Referring to the Privy Council 's decision that the UK might yet remove the post @-@ UDI government , he said that " on the facts as they exist today , the only prediction which this court can make is that sanctions will not succeed in overthrowing the present government ... and that there are no other factors which might succeed in doing so " . 
 Macdonald , a member of Beadle 's ruling panel , argued that since UDI , the British government had acted unconstitutionally and illegally regarding Rhodesia by involving the United Nations in what should have been legally considered a domestic problem , and had concurrently abdicated its right to the allegiance of the Rhodesian people by waging economic war against the country and encouraging other nations to do the same . To support this argument , Macdonald referred to the assertion by the 17th @-@ century Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius that " the purpose of governing and the purpose of destroying cannot subsist together " . Since Britain was in a state of economic war against Rhodesia , the court concluded , it could not at the same time be regarded as governing it . UDI , the associated 1965 constitution and the government were thereafter considered de jure by the Rhodesian legal system . 
 The British Commonwealth Secretary , George Thomson , promptly accused the Rhodesian judges of breaching " the fundamental laws of the land " , while Gibbs announced that since his position as Governor existed under the 1961 constitution , which allowed appeals to the Privy Council , he could only reject the Rhodesian court ruling . The Rhodesian judges continued regardless . Their recognition of the post @-@ UDI order carried over to the 1969 republican constitution , adopted in 1970 . 
 = = Replacement of national symbols = = 
 Vestiges of British ties were removed piecemeal by the government over the decade following UDI , and replaced with symbols and terminology intended to be more uniquely Rhodesian . A silver " Liberty Bell " , based on the bell of the same name in Philadelphia , was cast during 1966 and rung by the Prime Minister each year on Independence Day ( the anniversary of UDI ) , the number of chimes signifying the number of years since the declaration of independence . The Union Jack and Rhodesia 's Commonwealth @-@ style national flag — a defaced Sky Blue Ensign with the Union Jack in the canton — continued to fly over government buildings , military bases and other official locations until 11 November 1968 , the third anniversary of UDI , when they were superseded by a new national flag : a green @-@ white @-@ green vertical triband , charged centrally with the Rhodesian coat of arms . The Union Jack continued to be ceremonially raised at Cecil Square in Salisbury on 12 September each year as part of the Pioneers ' Day holiday , which marked the anniversary of the establishment of Salisbury ( and , by extension , Rhodesia ) in 1890 . 
 Since Elizabeth II was still the Rhodesian head of state in the eyes of Smith 's administration until 1970 , " God Save the Queen " remained the Rhodesian national anthem , and continued to accompany official occasions such as the opening of the Rhodesian parliament . This was intended to demonstrate Rhodesia 's continued loyalty to the Queen , but the use of the unmistakably British song at Rhodesian state occasions soon seemed " fairly ironic " , as The Times put it . Salisbury started looking for a replacement anthem around the same time as its introduction of the new flag , and in 1974 , after four years without an anthem ( " God Save the Queen " was formally dropped in 1970 ) , republican Rhodesia adopted " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia " , an anthem coupling original lyrics with the tune of Beethoven 's " Ode to Joy " . The country 's head of state under the republican constitution was the President of Rhodesia , the first of whom was Dupont . 
 State press censorship , which had been introduced on UDI , was lifted in early April 1968 . <unk> occurred on 17 February 1970 , two weeks before Rhodesia 's reconstitution as a republic , with the new Rhodesian dollar replacing the pound at a rate of two dollars to each pound . Following the republic 's formal declaration the next month , the Rhodesian military removed nomenclatural and symbolic references to the Crown — the Royal Rhodesian Air Force and Royal Rhodesia Regiment dropped their " Royal " prefixes , new branch and regimental flags were designed , and the St Edward 's Crown surmounting many regimental emblems was expunged in favour of the " lion and tusk " , a motif from the coat of arms of the British South Africa Company that had been used in Rhodesian military symbolism since the 1890s . The air force 's new roundel was a green ring with the lion and tusk on a white centre . Later that year , a system of new Rhodesian honours and decorations was created to replace the old British honours . Rhodesia 's police force , the British South Africa Police , was not renamed . 
 = = Ending UDI = = 
 Wilson told the British House of Commons in January 1966 that he would not enter any kind of dialogue with the post @-@ UDI Rhodesian government ( which he called " the illegal regime " ) until it gave up its claim of independence , but by mid @-@ 1966 British and Rhodesian civil servants were holding " talks about talks " in London and Salisbury . By November that year , Wilson had agreed to negotiate personally with Smith . The two Prime Ministers unsuccessfully attempted to settle aboard HMS Tiger in December 1966 and HMS Fearless in October 1968 . After the Conservatives returned to power in Britain in 1970 , provisional agreement was reached in November 1971 between the Rhodesian government and a British team headed by Douglas @-@ Home ( who was Foreign Secretary under Prime Minister Edward Heath ) , and in early 1972 a Royal Commission chaired by Lord Pearce travelled to Rhodesia to investigate how acceptable the proposals were to majority opinion . After extensive consultation , the commission reported that while whites , coloureds and Asians were largely in favour of the presented terms , most blacks rejected them . The deal was therefore shelved by the British government . 
 The Rhodesian Bush War , a guerrilla conflict pitting the Rhodesian Security Forces against the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) and the Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) , the respective armed wings of ZANU and ZAPU , began in earnest in December 1972 , when ZANLA attacked Altena and Whistlefield Farms in north @-@ eastern Rhodesia . The 1974 Carnation Revolution in Portugal , which over the next year replaced Portuguese support for Smith with an independent , Marxist – Leninist Mozambique on Rhodesia 's eastern frontier , greatly swung the war 's momentum in favour of the nationalists ( particularly ZANU , which was allied with Mozambique 's governing FRELIMO party ) , and caused the sanctions on Rhodesia to finally begin having a noticeable effect . Diplomatic isolation , the sanctions , guerrilla activities and pressure from South Africa to find a settlement led the Rhodesian government to hold talks with the various black nationalist factions . <unk> conferences were held at Victoria Falls ( in 1975 ) and Geneva ( 1976 ) . Despite ideological and tribal rifts , ZANU and ZAPU nominally united as the " Patriotic Front " ( PF ) in late 1976 in a successful attempt to augment overseas support for the black nationalist cause . 
 Smith , who was decisively re @-@ elected three times during the 1970s , announced his acceptance in principle of one man , one vote during Henry Kissinger 's Anglo @-@ American initiative in September 1976 , and in March 1978 concluded the Internal Settlement with non @-@ militant nationalist groups headed by Bishop Abel Muzorewa , the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole and Chief Jeremiah <unk> . This settlement , boycotted by the PF and rejected internationally , led to multiracial elections and Rhodesia 's reconstitution under majority rule as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in June 1979 . Muzorewa , the electoral victor , took office as the country 's first black Prime Minister at the head of a coalition Cabinet comprising 12 blacks and five whites , including Smith as minister without portfolio . Dismissing Muzorewa as a " neocolonial puppet " , ZANLA and ZIPRA continued their armed struggle until December 1979 , when Whitehall , Salisbury and the Patriotic Front settled at Lancaster House . Muzorewa 's government revoked UDI , thereby ending the country 's claim to be independent after 14 years , and dissolved itself . The UK suspended the constitution and vested full executive and legislative powers in a new Governor , Lord Soames , who oversaw a ceasefire and fresh elections during February and March 1980 . These were won by ZANU , whose leader Robert Mugabe became Prime Minister when the UK granted independence to Zimbabwe as a republic within the Commonwealth in April 1980 . 
 = Pilotwings 64 = 
 Pilotwings 64 ( <unk> , <unk> Rokujūyon ) is a video game for the Nintendo 64 , originally released in 1996 along with the debut of the console . The game was co @-@ developed by Nintendo and the American visual technology group Paradigm Simulation . It was one of three launch titles for the Nintendo 64 in Japan as well as Europe and one of two launch titles in North America . Pilotwings 64 is a follow @-@ up to Pilotwings for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) , which was a North American launch game for its respective console in 1991 . Also like that game , Pilotwings 64 received production input from Nintendo producer Shigeru Miyamoto . 
 Pilotwings 64 is a 3D amateur flight simulator that puts the player in control of one of six pilots as they try to earn pilot licenses through various forms of aviation . The events are flying an autogyro , using a jet pack , and hang gliding . Several bonus tasks are offered , such as skydiving and a human cannonball test . The game also puts focus on allowing the player to freely explore its detailed 3D environments , most notably a miniature representation of the United States . 
 The game received positive review scores and praise from gaming publications and news sources alike for its visual presentation and flying controls . Similar to its SNES predecessor , Pilotwings 64 serves to demonstrate the graphical capabilities of its gaming hardware . Although the flight simulator did not enjoy the same commercial success as its fellow launch game Super Mario 64 , Pilotwings 64 nonetheless went on to sell over one million copies worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pilotwings 64 is a 3D flight simulator in which the player must complete a variety of missions involving different airborne vehicles and air sports . Before each mission , the player must choose one of six character pilots , each with their own advantages and disadvantages based on factors such as weight . The tests presented to the player require him or her to complete an objective in order to earn a license for the given event . Depending on the mission , points are awarded or deducted based on time , damage , fuel usage , accuracy , softness of landing , and similar criteria . The player is awarded either a bronze , silver , or gold license based on the number of points attained . More difficult tests become available as the player progresses . 
 There are three main events in Pilotwings 64 required to complete the game , each of which has its own objectives and unique flight controls centered around the Nintendo 64 controller 's single analog stick . The first , hang gliding , usually requires the player to fly through a series of floating marker rings or snap a photograph of a particular piece of scenery before landing in a target area . The player 's movement is affected by wind currents and altitude can be gained by flying through thermal columns . The second event is the " Rocket Belt " , a jet pack that allows the player to move and gain height as well as hover , tilt , and rotate in the air using the belt 's equipped thrusters . Goals entail flying through rings or popping large balloons before landing . The third event , the gyrocopter , challenges the player to take off and land on a runway after completing objectives like navigating a path of rings or destroying targets with missiles . Pilotwings 64 also features several bonus events that are unlocked if the player performs well in the main missions . The player can also earn medals on many of these events . They include skydiving , a human cannonball event , and the " Jumble Hopper " , which grants the player special spring @-@ loaded boots to be used in bouncing across the landscape to an end space . Lastly , Pilotwings 64 features a " Birdman " mode that puts the character in a bird suit and gives players the opportunity to freely explore the game 's detailed , object @-@ dense environments set among its four distinct islands . One of the islands is based on the United States , and has geographical replications of famous landmarks including the Statue of Liberty and Mount Rushmore and major cities such as Los Angeles , Chicago , and New York City . 
 Representations of Nintendo characters and many other interesting quirks can be found in the landscapes of the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Pilotwings 64 was co @-@ developed by the Texas @-@ based graphics company Paradigm Simulation and Nintendo 's Entertainment Analysis and Development ( EAD ) and Integrated Research and Development ( IRD ) divisions . Due to Paradigm 's experience with Silicon Graphics workstations , Nintendo contacted the American company in 1994 concerning it becoming one of the Nintendo 64 's " Dream Team " of first developers . Paradigm worked directly with a team at Silicon Graphics and spent nine months developing a technology base for Pilotwings 64 and Paradigm 's other Nintendo 64 releases . Development on Pilotwings 64 began in earnest during June 1995 , with Nintendo working on the game design and Paradigm working on the technical production . Nintendo 's Genyo Takeda and Makoto Wada acted as Paradigm 's primary technical and design contacts individually . Wada , the game 's director , was also involved in design aspects such as modeling and animation . Shigeru Miyamoto , the producer of Pilotwings for the SNES , reprised his role for Pilotwings 64 and oversaw the project from Japan . Miyamoto 's involvement was more removed than with the SNES game due to his simultaneous work on the platformer Super Mario 64 . 
 According to Miyamoto , Pilotwings 64 was designed to allow gamers to experience free flight in realistic 3D environments on the Nintendo 64 . Prior to the game 's conception , Paradigm had worked on military vehicle and flight simulators , but not video games . Dave Gatchel of Paradigm disclosed that with regard to creating the game , they began with a " physics @-@ based approach " , but deviated from this in order to gain a balance between accuracy and fun for players . He indicated that there was never an issue as to whether Pilotwings 64 should be more of an arcade game or a simulation , as their goal was to " always have a more arcade feel " . The technical team studied the original Pilotwings extensively during development . Pilotwings on the SNES makes use of the power of the 16 @-@ bit console , principally its Mode 7 capability . Similarly , Pilotwings 64 prominently demonstrates the graphical features of its own console . Gatchel suggested that just as design elements present in the game generated its production requirements , these same elements were influenced by the Nintendo 64 's technology during development . The large islands within the game were created using Paradigm 's own 3D development tool Vega <unk> . Navigation of these environments is relatively smooth thanks to Pilotwings 64 taking advantage of several key Nintendo 64 hardware features . Conventional level of detail and mipmapping were used to reduce the computational load of distant landscape objects and terrains when they were rendered . The processes respectively substitute simpler geometrical shapes for more complex ones and less detailed textures for more detailed ones , lowering the polygon count and 3D rendering time for a given frame and thus putting less demand on the geometric engine . Pilotwings 64 also applies z @-@ buffering , which keeps track of an object 's depth and tells the graphics processor which portions of the object to render and which to hide . This , along with texture filtering and anti @-@ aliasing , makes the object appear solid and smooth along its edges rather than pixelated . 
 As Nintendo was in charge of its actual game design , they dictated the aircraft and characters that would be present in the game . The six playable pilots in Pilotwings 64 are all named after various birds . The character Lark is modeled after Nester , a mascot for the North American Nintendo Power magazine . The female character Robin is called " <unk> " in the Japanese version . The soundtrack for Pilotwings 64 was composed and arranged by Dan Hess . The tracks were produced to compliment each level , such as a " soothing " jazz @-@ inspired musical piece played during the exploratory Birdman mode . A now out @-@ of @-@ print CD soundtrack was released by Pony Canyon in Japan on December 16 , 1996 . 
 Pilotwings 64 was one of thirteen Nintendo 64 games shown at Shoshinkai show in Tokyo in November 1995 when the console was first demonstrated to the public as the " Ultra 64 " . The game was later displayed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) in Los Angeles during May 1996 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Pilotwings 64 was released in Japan on June 23 , 1996 as one of three Nintendo 64 launch titles , the other two being Super Mario 64 and Saikyō <unk> <unk> . Pilotwings 64 managed to sell about one unit with about every tenth Nintendo 64 console , with regional sales totaling 136 @,@ 986 copies by the end of the year . The game was one of two original releases for the system during its September 26 , 1996 debut in North America , which was a few days earlier than the date set by Nintendo . While Super Mario 64 initially sold at a one @-@ to @-@ one ratio with each console in the United States , Pilotwings 64 sold an average of one copy with every fourth console . Despite selling out , some store locations for Electronics Boutique and KB Toys reported little or no units of the flight simulator being shipped to retailers . About 90 @,@ 000 copies of Pilotwings 64 were sold in its first few days on sale in the country , putting the game at number four on the NPD Group sales charts for that September . Pilotwings 64 saw a release in European nations on March 1 , 1997 , when it was one of three launch games along with Super Mario 64 and Star Wars : Shadows of the Empire . In the United Kingdom , it was listed by Esquire magazine as the " cheapest game in Nintendo 's frighteningly @-@ priced opening range of titles " . It was confirmed in early 1998 that the game had sold over one million units worldwide . 
 Pilotwings 64 was well received by most reviewers . The game 's combination of 3D graphics , realistic settings , and flight simulation were applauded by many news sources and major gaming publications . In his release review of the Nintendo 64 , The Seattle Times contributor Steven L. Kent found that the flight mechanics and vast areas featured in Pilotwings 64 make it one of the most impressive games ever made . Glenn Rubenstein of the website GameSpot summarized , " The graphics , sound , control , and all around excitement add up to make Pilotwings 64 one hell of a great ride . " Staff reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly , GamePro , and IGN all voiced positive comments on the game 's polygon rendering and frame rates , as well as its sense of control and flying . Alex Constantides of Computer and Video Games enjoyed the game 's large environments , exclaiming , " You 'll not believe just how huge the islands really are and , because certain elements are hidden at first , it 'll take you months to see everything . " IGN 's Levi Buchanan described this low @-@ pressure , " challenge without competition " aspect of the game as a design philosophy adopted by later Nintendo titles such as Nintendogs . Rich Leadbetter of Maximum said that " The sedate nature of the gameplay might not appeal to everyone , but the bottom line is that <unk> 64 is an unparalleled test of skill , dexterity and control . It is a game that you must own and whilst not quite in the same league of ' must @-@ have <unk> as Super Mario 64 , it remains an astounding achievement and another triumph for Nintendo . " 
 Pilotwings 64 has been criticized for lacking innovative gameplay . The New York Times writer Ashley Dunn characterized the game 's E3 demonstration as " brain @-@ dead " in its gameplay and suggested that even young children would rather fly a dragon on the Sony PlayStation . Game Revolution issued Pilotwings 64 a particularly harsh review score , declaring the game to be nothing more than a graphical showcase for those with nothing better to do . This sentiment was echoed by the columnists of Next Generation Magazine , who noted the game as one that would most likely become a footnote in the history of the hardware on which it is played : " While it provides some interesting challenges , it 's less a game than a drop @-@ dead gorgeous example of the kind of rock @-@ solid , smoothly flowing worlds the Nintendo 64 can produce . " The sound effects present in the game were impressive to several reviewers , but the soundtrack has been negatively compared to lounge music and porn groove , although the ' Birdman ' track was highly rated . 
 Pilotwings 64 was ranked number 38 in Nintendo Power 's " 100 Best Nintendo Games of All Time " in its landmark 100th issue in September 1997 . In February 2006 , it was rated the 117th best game made on a Nintendo system in the magazine 's " Top 200 Games " list for its 200th issue . In July 2007 , the United Kingdom video game magazine Edge included Pilotwings 64 at number 69 on its own " Top 100 Games " list . The UK 's Official Nintendo Magazine listed it at number 40 on its " 100 Best Nintendo Games " in February 2009 . 
 Paradigm announced at E3 1997 that they were producing a Nintendo 64 sequel to Pilotwings 64 . However , even though Nintendo expressed interest in Paradigm 's early presentations , the game was cancelled because Nintendo did not have the resources to aid in its development at that time . There were rumors of a sequel on the Nintendo GameCube and later the Wii , development courtesy of Factor 5 , but no game was ever shown . After their briefing time at E3 2010 , Nintendo announced a sequel titled Pilotwings Resort for the Nintendo 3DS , which was released as a launch title for the handheld console . 
 = Luxurious = 
 " Luxurious " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her debut solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . Written by Stefani and Tony Kanal , the track contains a sample of The Isley Brothers ' 1983 song " Between the Sheets " . 
 In addition to the Isley Brothers sample , the song features use of keyboards , synthesizers , and electric guitars . " Luxurious " is an R & B ballad whose lyrics describe the persona 's desire to be rich in love , simultaneously comparing her lover with luxuries . The song also features Stefani 's then @-@ husband Gavin Rossdale who opens the song in French . 
 The song was released as the album 's fifth single in October 2005 along with a remix featuring rapper Slim Thug . A music video was also released which featured Slim Thug , as well as the Harajuku Girls . The track received mixed reviews from critics , who generally found it less impressive than the previous singles . It charted within the top 40 in several countries , but had mediocre success overall and was less popular than the previous singles from Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 Stefani had an emotional breakdown from difficulties collaborating with many other artists and songwriters , so No Doubt bassist Tony Kanal invited her to his house . Kanal had been working on a track , which later became " Crash " , the sixth single from the album . However , the two were unable to write anything following that , because they had differing ideas of how the music should sound . Stefani commented that " it was just frustrating and embarrassing to sit there and think we could write songs . " Six months later , the two returned to work and came up with the beginnings of a song while working in Kanal 's bedroom . The two experimented with combining various melodies and including what Stefani referred to as " this really kinda fast <unk> part " . This was the last song she and Kanal wrote together for the album . 
 After Stefani and Kanal finished writing " Luxurious " , they visited record producer Nellee Hooper , who suggested a sample of The Isley Brothers ' 1983 song " Between the Sheets " . The song had previously been sampled in several songs such as Da Brat 's " <unk> " , Jim Jones ' " Summer wit Miami " , The Notorious B.I.G. ' s " Big Poppa " , and Whitney Houston 's " One of Those Days " . Stefani was reluctant to use the sample because it would mean losing some of the publishing rights to the song . Nevertheless , she decided to use it because " it sounded so amazing and meant to be " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Luxurious " is an R & B ballad , whose instrumentation consists of keyboards and synthesizers . It is written in common time in the key of A minor . The song uses a descending i @-@ vii @-@ VI @-@ V chord progression . The lyrics of the song include descriptions of wealth and riches , what one reviewer called " a world of Egyptian cotton , cashmere , <unk> , and , of course , diamonds " . Stefani stated that " [ the ] song really is more about a love relationship . If you really listen to the lyrics , it has nothing to do with money or luxury . It has to do with love , being rich in love . I just wanted to think of a clever way to express how you have to work really hard for the rewards of that . " The single version of the song contains an additional verse from rapper Slim Thug for release to urban radio and clubs . 
 The song begins with Stefani 's then @-@ husband Gavin Rossdale speaking in French and then leads into the first verse . The lyrics describe Stefani talking about " flying first class " and " <unk> ' like a queen " . She talks about being luxuriously in love and calls her lover Limousine and Treasure Chest . She talks about the increasing passion between her and her partner , and says , " Our passion it just multiplies " and " got in the fifth gear , baby " . In the chorus she tells that love is getting expensive and she and her partner have to work hard night and day to be rich in love , and after working hard , when they lay back together , they get the payback . After the second verse , the song gets slower and Stefani repeats " Cha @-@ ching , cha @-@ ching " four times alternated with lines talking about getting " hooked up with the love " and " hydroponic love " . The song ends with Rossdale speaking more lines in French . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Luxurious " received mixed reviews from music critics . Bill Lamb of About.com commented , " If Madonna is wishing to pass on her ' Material Girl ' title , Gwen Stefani is happy to wear it proudly " , but noted that " [ t ] hings are wearing a little thin , and this song doesn 't have the striking impact of ' Rich Girl ' or ' Hollaback Girl ' . " Sam Shepherd of musicOMH agreed , writing that " ' Luxurious ' is by no means a bad song , but it is pretty ordinary when compared to the songs that have preceded it . " PopMatters ' Jason Damas found the track uninteresting and stated that Rossdale 's appearance " sounds like a <unk> @-@ out Saint Etienne " . Alex Lai from Contactmusic.com called Stefani 's performance " as seductive as ever , and the production extremely polished , but it lacks the infectiousness of her other releases " ; he found Slim Thug 's remix unnecessary and viewed the single 's release as " a money @-@ spinning exercise " . 
 Laura Heaps from <unk> agreed , stating that the single " just doesn 't stand out " and that Stefani " doesn 't do hip hop as well as she does quirky pop " , and Playlouder 's Richard Smirke described the track as a " sickly sweet R & B ballad " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called the lyrics " surprisingly sharp " ; Nick Sylvester of Pitchfork Media disagreed , dubbing the song a " soulless Nellee Hooper 90s R & B vanity affair " and a " <unk> buy @-@ <unk> @-@ clothing mantra " . In August 2013 , Complex magazine placed " Luxurious " at number 19 on its list of " The Best R & B Songs by White Singers in the 2000s " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " Luxurious " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 80 on the issue dated November 5 , 2005 . It failed to reach the top 20 , peaking at number 21 five weeks later , and remained on the chart for 20 weeks . It performed better on the pop @-@ oriented charts , reaching number three on the Pop 100 chart , number 10 on the Mainstream Top 40 chart , and number 37 on the Adult Top 40 chart . The track also had some crossover success , charting at number nine on the Rhythmic Top 40 chart and number 33 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . In Canada , the single was released to radio on October 25 , 2005 , peaking at number 10 on the Canadian Singles Chart in its sixth week on the chart . 
 The song was released on December 5 , 2005 in Europe and Australia . It received very little promotion in the UK and continued the trend of Stefani 's lower @-@ charting singles since " Hollaback Girl " when it debuted at number 44 on the UK Singles Chart , spending three weeks on the chart . The single performed similarly throughout Europe , where it reached the top 40 in Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , and Switzerland , but generally did not reach the top 30 . It did particularly well in Finland , where it charted at number two , becoming the highest @-@ peaking single of Stefani 's solo career in that country , although it spent only two weeks on the chart . Stefani 's previous four singles had been successful in Australia , where all reached the top 10 ; however , " Luxurious " did not reach the top 20 and reached a peak of number 25 . In New Zealand , " Luxurious " was moderately successful , where it reached number 17 but stayed on the chart for only 10 weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Luxurious " was directed by Sophie Muller . In the video , Stefani plays a chola in high school . Then Stefani , accompanied by her Harajuku Girls , receive a manicure at a beauty salon , and styling her hair and applying cosmetics in front of a mirror . She shows off gold jewellery with her name carved on it . During his rap , Slim Thug appears in sequences with either Stefani or two Harajuku Girls . It concludes with Stefani joining her friends in a block party , where they celebrate with breakdancing and a barbecue . The video is intercut with sequences of Stefani breaking open piñatas and lying on a candy @-@ covered floor , styled in a fashion resembling Mexican painter Frida Kahlo . 
 Stefani had generally developed music video concepts while writing the song , but since she had not expected " Luxurious " to become a single , she had not given much thought to a music video for the song . The image she had for her persona was a high school girl named Mercedes , who she described as " very inspiring " : 
 She 's this total like chola girl , white face , and she used to sit in class and put on tons of makeup . And I used to just watch her , mesmerized . And she would just wear this dark liner and this red lipstick and she had this safety pin and she 'd be picking her eyelashes apart . She hadn 't taken that mascara off for months . 
 Stefani called Muller , who had directed several videos for Stefani and No Doubt , to direct the music video . Muller did not understand Stefani 's vision for the video , so Stefani became involved in developing ideas for the video . 
 The video had limited success on music video programs . On MTV 's Total Request Live , the video debuted on October 25 , 2005 at number 10 . It peaked at number seven and left the countdown after only five days . After its October 21 debut on MuchMusic 's Countdown , it peaked nine weeks later at number 11 , remaining on the chart for 13 weeks . The video was featured on an episode of MuchMusic 's Video on Trial , where the reviewers found it a superficial attempt to market to various races . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 European and Canadian CD single 
 " Luxurious " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 24 
 " Luxurious " ( Remix featuring Slim Thug ) [ Radio Edit ] – 4 : 04 
 European CD maxi single and Australian CD single 
 " Luxurious " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 24 
 " Luxurious " ( Remix featuring Slim Thug ) [ Radio Edit ] – 4 : 04 
 " Cool " ( Richard X Remix ) – 6 : 37 
 " Luxurious " ( Video ) – 4 : 06 
 US 12 " single 
 A1 . " Luxurious " ( Remix featuring Slim Thug ) – 4 : 22 
 A2 . " Luxurious " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 24 
 B1 . " Luxurious " ( A Cappella ) – 3 : 42 
 B2 . " Luxurious " ( Instrumental ) – 4 : 24 
 Some vinyl copies accidentally have the Slim Thug remix twice on side A. 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = A 29 @-@ Cent Robbery = 
 A 29 @-@ Cent Robbery is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film features the debut of Marie Eline in the main role as Edna Robinson , a young girl who foils an attempt by a robbery to loot her family 's home . All the thief manages to take is her toy bank , containing 29 cents . Edna ends up taking it upon herself to catch the thief after the police fail in the task . It was reviewed positively by critics and was viewed across the United States . The film was the first split @-@ reel by Thanhouser , containing this short and The Old Shoe Came Back on a single reel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A thief sneaks into the Robinson home with the intention of looting it . He is discovered by a young girl , Edna Robinson , and flees taking only her toy bank containing the paltry sum of 29 cents USD , equivalent to $ 7 in 2015 . She is so upset about the theft of her bank that the parents decide to inform the police . They go to the police station and report the robbery , but the police laugh at them . The parents go home and inform Edna that the police will not do anything , which makes her all the more determined . So Edna goes to the police station by herself and informs the police captain of the robbery and its details . He assigns his officers to work on the case and they arrest several men carrying toy banks . They ask Edna to identify the robber , but she says he is not present . The police set the men free and Edna decides to take the task upon herself . So she gets a police whistle and starts investigating on her own , eventually finding the thief . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as Edna Robinson 
 Grace Eline 
 = = Production = = 
 The director of the film is not known for certain , but two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . The American Film Institute credits Barry O 'Neil as the director . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production , but he does credit Blair Smith as the cameraman . The film was the debut of Marie Eline , soon to be known and famous as the " Thanhouser Kid " . Her older sister , Grace Eline , later recalled being in this Thanhouser production . Grace Eline did not become an official member of the Thanhouser company until 1913 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 750 feet ( 230 m ) , was released on Friday April 15 , 1910 . Another short , The Old Shoe Came Back was also included on the reel , making it a split @-@ reel . It was also the first split reel release from the Thanhouser Company . This release was the first Friday release of the Thanhouser company , switching from its Tuesday weekly release . According to an advertisement in the Moving Picture News , the weekly release dates were changed at the request of exhibitors . 
 The film received favorable reviews by critics . The Morning Telegraph said the story was too far @-@ fetched to be believable , but it was done in an amusing way . The Moving Picture World stated that the acting and camerawork was satisfactory . The film was advertised in numerous states , sometimes as a comedy , by theaters in Indiana , Kansas , New York , and Pennsylvania . 
 = Kirkpatrick Chapel = 
 The Sophia Astley Kirkpatrick Memorial Chapel , known as Kirkpatrick Chapel , is the chapel to Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey and located on the university 's main campus in New Brunswick , New Jersey in the United States . Kirkpatrick Chapel is among the university 's oldest extant buildings , and one of six buildings located on a historic section of the university 's College Avenue Campus in New Brunswick known as the Queens Campus . Built in 1873 when Rutgers was a small , private liberal arts college , the chapel was designed by architect Henry Janeway Hardenbergh at the beginning of his career . Hardenbergh , a native of New Brunswick , was the great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Rutgers ' first president , the Rev. Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh . It was the third of three projects that Hardenbergh designed for the college . 
 Kirkpatrick Chapel was named in honour of Sophia Astley Kirkpatrick . Kirkpatrick was the wife of Littleton Kirkpatrick , a local attorney and politician who was a member of the board of trustees of Rutgers College from 1841 until his death in 1859 . When Sophia Kirkpatrick died in 1871 , Rutgers was named as the residuary legatee of her estate . A bequest of $ 61 @,@ 054 @.@ 57 ( 2013 : US $ 1 @,@ 174 @,@ 079 @.@ 38 ) from her estate funded the construction of the chapel . According to Rutgers , this marked the first time in New Jersey history that an institution became a direct heir to an estate . 
 The chapel was designed in the High Victorian Gothic Revival style that was popular at the middle of the nineteenth century in the United States . Hardenbergh 's design incorporated features common to fourteenth @-@ century German and English Gothic churches . According to the New Jersey Historic Trust , the chapel ’ s stained glass windows feature " some of the first opalescent and multicolored sheet glass manufactured in America . " Four of the chapel 's windows were created by the studios of Louis Comfort Tiffany . Kirkpatrick Chapel was included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places on January 29 , 1973 , and on the National Register of Historic Places on July 2 , 1973 . 
 For its first 30 years , the chapel was used as a college library and for holding daily chapel services . Although Rutgers was founded as a private college affiliated with the Dutch Reformed faith , today , it is a state university and nonsectarian . The chapel is available to students , alumni , and faculty of all faiths , and a variety of services are held throughout the academic term . It is also used for university events including convocation , concerts , alumni and faculty weddings , funerals , and lectures by prominent intellectuals and world leaders . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Kirkpatrick family and Rutgers = = = 
 When Sophia Astley Kirkpatrick ( 1802 – 1871 ) died on March 6 , 1871 at the age of 68 , she named Rutgers College as her estate 's residuary legatee . At that time , Rutgers was a small , private liberal arts college in New Brunswick , New Jersey , affiliated with the Dutch Reformed faith . Founded in 1766 as Queen ’ s College , Rutgers is the eighth @-@ oldest institution of higher education established in the United States . It was one of nine colleges founded in the American colonies before the Revolutionary War . Rutgers ' website states that this bequest from Sophia Kirkpatrick 's will was the first time in New Jersey legal history that an institution became a direct heir to an estate . 
 Sophia was the daughter of wealthy merchant and land investor Thomas Astley of Philadelphia . She married Littleton Kirkpatrick ( 1797 – 1859 ) on October 18 , 1832 . Littleton , an attorney and 1815 graduate of Princeton , was a member of a wealthy , prominent New Brunswick family and pursued a career in politics . They did not have children . During his career , Littleton Kirkpatrick was elected as county surrogate , mayor of New Brunswick , and as a Whig Party member of the United States House of Representatives during the Twenty @-@ Eighth Congress ( 1843 – 1845 ) . He served as a trustee of Rutgers College for 18 years from 1841 until his death in 1859 . Sophia remained in New Brunswick after her husband 's death . A devoted member of the city 's First Presbyterian Church , she was later described as having " adorned her profession by her Christian graces and her many deeds of charity and beneficence to the needy and suffering . " 
 Littleton Kirkpatrick was the son of Jane Bayard and Judge Andrew Kirkpatrick who served as Chief Justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court . He was grandson of Philadelphia merchant and statesman Colonel John Bayard ( 1738 – 1807 ) who served as speaker of the Pennsylvania Assembly , delegate to the Continental Congress , judge , mayor of New Brunswick , and was a Revolutionary War hero . 
 The Kirkpatrick family had a long association with Queen 's College and subsequently with Rutgers . Several members of the family served as trustees or received degrees from the college , including the following : 
 Littleton 's father , Andrew Kirkpatrick ( 1756 – 1831 ) , a 1775 graduate of Princeton , taught at the Queen 's College Grammar School in 1782 , received an honorary Masters ( A.M. ) from Queen 's College in 1783 , and served as a trustee from 1782 to 1809 . 
 Littleton 's brother , John Bayard Kirkpatrick , Esq . ( 1795 – 1864 ) , was an 1815 graduate of Rutgers when it was Queen 's College . 
 Littleton 's nephew , Andrew Kirkpatrick ( 1844 – 1904 ) , studied at Rutgers from 1860 to 1862 before receiving a bachelor 's degree from Union College in 1863 . 
 Another nephew , John Bayard Kirkpatrick , Jr . ( 1844 – 1912 ) , received a bachelor 's degree in 1866 and later served as college trustee ( 1892 – 1912 ) . 
 John Bayard Kirkpatrick III ( 1878 – 1961 ) received his Bachelor of Science degree in 1900 . 
 = = = Hardenbergh 's design and construction = = = 
 In 1870 , the trustees of Rutgers College had decided to build a college chapel when the funds became available to do so . Previously , chapel services had been held inside Old Queen 's , but as the student body expanded in the 1850s and 1860s a larger space was needed to accommodate such events . With the death of Sophia Astley Kirkpatrick in 1871 and Rutgers receiving $ 61 @,@ 054 @.@ 57 ( 2013 : US $ 1 @,@ 174 @,@ 079 @.@ 38 ) from her estate , the trustees directed those funds to the building of a university chapel . 
 A young architect who had recently completed his apprenticeship and started his own firm , Henry Janeway Hardenbergh ( 1847 – 1918 ) , was hired by the trustees in 1870 to design an addition to the Rutgers College Grammar School then housed in Alexander Johnston Hall located across from the Queen 's Campus on College Avenue . He charged the college $ 312 for his work . Born and raised in New Brunswick , Hardenbergh received the contract through family connections . His great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , the Rev. Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh ( 1735 – 1790 ) , was Rutgers ' first president and one of its founders . Further , several members of his family were graduates , trustees , or otherwise associated with the school through the nineteenth century . His grandfather , Rev. Jacob Janeway served as vice president of the college , and turned down the post of president in 1840 . Hardenbergh studied for five years as an apprentice draftsman under German @-@ American architect Detlef Lienau . Lienau was also connected with projects in the city of New Brunswick and later designed the Gardner A. Sage Library ( 1875 ) on the campus of New Brunswick Theological Seminary after Hardenbergh 's earlier design for the seminary 's Suydam Hall , built in 1873 . 
 After completing the addition to Alexander Johnston Hall in 1870 , Hardenbergh was hired to design a Gothic Revival @-@ style Geological Hall that was erected in 1872 on the south side of Old Queen 's ; the hall was built with funds Rutgers had received from the federal government in becoming New Jersey 's land grant college and from the university 's first fundraising campaign . The new chapel , designed by Hardenbergh to complement the Geological Hall , would be built on Old Queen 's north side . Kirkpatrick Chapel was the third of three projects that Hardenbergh designed for Rutgers College . Hardenbergh was at the beginning of his career , and later would design several hotels and skyscrapers in American cities , including designing New York City 's Plaza Hotel and the Dakota Building on Central Park among other Edwardian @-@ period buildings . After his death in 1918 , Architectural Record celebrated Hardenbergh as " one of the most august and inspiring figures that American architecture has produced . " 
 Kirkpatrick Chapel was erected on a hilltop on which Alexander Hamilton , then an artillery captain commanding sixty men of the New York Provincial Company of Artillery , placed his cannons to cover the retreat of George Washington 's forces after the British occupation of New York . After the British victory in taking Fort Washington in November 1776 , Washington 's forces retreated across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania . Hamilton 's battery protected the forces as they crossed the Raritan River and passed through New Brunswick in 1776 . British forces commanded by Lieutenant General Lord Cornwallis under orders from Lieutenant General William Howe , 5th Viscount Howe pursued Washington as far as New Brunswick . A historic marker erected as a gift of the Class of 1899 is located next to the chapel . 
 Kirkpatrick Chapel was completed at a cost of $ 52 @,@ 204 @.@ 57 ( 2013 : US $ 1 @,@ 003 @,@ 893 @.@ 88 ) , and dedicated on December 3 , 1873 . The chapel , seating 350 people , occupied the front section of the present building . The rear of the building had lecture rooms , the office of the college president , a meeting room for the trustees on the first floor , and a library on the second floor . 
 In August 1916 , workmen began to convert Kirkpatrick Chapel into one large assembly room to be used exclusively as the college 's chapel . William P. Hardenbergh , the brother of the architect Henry J. Hardenbergh , donated $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 2013 : US $ 212 @,@ 800 ) for this purpose in honour of his ancestor who served as the college 's first president . Work proceeded quickly and was completed in two months before the college 's planned 150th anniversary celebrations scheduled in October . The inner partitions that separated the chapel from the former library and other rooms were removed . The removal of the partitions expanded the capacity of the chapel from 350 persons to 800 . However , current fire codes limit capacity to 650 . 
 = = = As the college chapel ( 1873 – present ) = = = 
 For its first fifty years , Kirkpatrick Chapel was used for daily worship services by the Rutgers College student body . By 1926 , the increasing size of the student body had forced Rutgers to stop daily mandatory chapel services and hold services for underclassmen on Monday , Wednesday , and Friday ; and for upperclassman on Tuesday and Thursday . Within a few years , continued growth in the student body reduced that schedule to each class meeting in chapel only one day per week . Sunday chapel services were attended by all students who chose to remain on campus for the weekend . Kirkpatrick Chapel is one of two college chapels on Rutgers ' New Brunswick campuses . The other , Voorhees Chapel , was built in 1925 after a donation from Elizabeth Rodman Voorhees to the New Jersey College for Women , later Douglass College , which was later merged into Rutgers . 
 After Rutgers transitioned from a private church @-@ affiliated college to a non @-@ sectarian public university after World War II , the role of the chapel transitioned to less frequent worship services and religious use to providing a venue for the university 's special events — including convocations , lectures , programs , and classes . Despite this transition , the chapel still has a place in the continuing traditions of the university . Since 1876 , graduating classes would have a stone on the exterior of the chapel carved with their class year . Early classes chose the stone while today , new classes engrave stones that located next to the class that graduated 50 years before . Further , the chapel is frequently booked for weddings , baptisms , memorial services and concerts . The university 's 50 @-@ member Kirkpatrick Choir , the all @-@ male Rutgers University Glee Club , and other musical groups at the university 's Mason Gross School of the Arts frequently use the chapel for concerts . 
 = = = As the college library ( 1873 – 1903 ) = = = 
 According to Demarest , after the building was completed , college president William Henry Campbell was charged with raising $ 3 @,@ 000 to acquire reference books for the library . An 1876 survey by the U.S. Bureau of Education reported that Rutgers held 6 @,@ 814 volumes in its college library and 3 @,@ 800 in libraries of its two student literary societies — the Peithessophian Society and <unk> Society . In 1884 , President Merrill Gates appointed a recent alumnus then serving as the college 's registrar , treasurer , and faculty secretary — Irving S. Upson ( A.B. 1881 ) — to take on additional responsibilities as librarian . Upson agreed " to devote at least one hour a day to library work , for which he received a stipend of $ 15 a month , out of which he paid an assistant $ 2 @.@ 50 per week . At this time , the library was open daily from 8 : 00 to 8 : 40 A.M. , noon to 12 : 30 P.M. , and 2 : 00 to 4 : 30 P.M. " Upson increased the holdings by 21 @,@ 000 volumes before informing the president and trustees in 1894 that the library was inadequate to house the collection . The trustees feared that the collection posed a fire hazard or would collapse the floor of the second @-@ floor library . 
 By 1903 the library in Kirkpatrick Chapel housed 45 @,@ 000 books that were " crowded on the shelves , many hid behind others , and piled on the floor " and that the library was fast becoming too small to accommodate . After reading of the college 's effort to build a new library in a Reformed Church publication , Ralph Voorhees and his wife Elizabeth Rodman Voorhees contacted president Austin Scott for the library plans and an estimate of construction costs . Voorhees and his wife , whose wealth came as an inheritance from her family 's shipping and importing business , donated $ 59 @,@ 000 ( 2013 : US $ 1 @,@ 552 @,@ 880 ) to erect a new library . $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 2013 : US $ 131 @,@ 600 ) was added to this total from other donors to furnish the new building . The new library , called Voorhees Hall , was built on land donated by James Nielson behind Kirkpatrick Chapel that began to extend the college campus west . Voorhees Hall was dedicated on November 10 , 1903 — the 140th anniversary of the signing of the college 's charter — and served as the school 's main library until the Archibald S. Alexander Library opened in 1956 . Voorhees , who was fully blind , gave a speech and was awarded an honorary degree at the dedication ceremony . 
 = = = Notable events = = = 
 On May 6 , 1881 , the second intercollegiate forensic debate was held at Kirkpatrick Chapel between the Peithessophian Society of Rutgers and the Philomathean Society of New York University on the topic of whether voting rights and suffrage should be limited or denied by any requirement other than age . The team from Rutgers won the debate . The first intercollegiate debate took place the night before between societies at Illinois College and Knox College . 
 In 1957 , American poet Robert Frost gave a poetry reading at the chapel , after an invitation by Rutgers English professor and poet John Ciardi . 
 In a special ceremony held in the chapel on June 28 , 1981 , Rutgers belatedly presented to Queen Beatrix a 1941 honorary Doctor of Laws ( LL.D. ) degree that the University granted to her grandmother , Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands , for her bravery at the onset of World War II during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Kirkpatrick Chapel was designed to complement the Gothic Revival brownstone exterior masonry of Geology Hall which was constructed the year before of New Jersey brownstone after Hardenbergh 's earlier proposal for brick was found to be prohibitively expensive and overbudget . Brownstone is a durable reddish @-@ brown sandstone used for many houses and buildings in New York City and New Jersey , including Old Queen 's , Geology Hall , and Kirkpatrick Chapel . Brownstone and similar materials , known as freestone , were popular for constructing stone buildings because the properties of the rock allowed it to be worked freely in every direction instead of having to be cut in one direction along a grain . 
 In his design for the Chapel , Hardenbergh attempted a " restrained approach to Gothic architecture " that refrained from the excesses ( " fripperies " ) of typical examples of Victorian Gothic . The facade has a porch with three archways and buttresses described in the Architectural Record of 1918 as being suggestive of German Gothic . It has lancet windows and an appearance described in the application for inclusion on the National Register as " similar to an English country church " . 
 Internally , the chapel has a nave and aisles with the arcade supported on slender iron columns . The roof is of open timber in black walnut and stained pine . Similarly , the former library that is presently part of the expanded chapel ( as of 1916 ) was " finished with open @-@ timbered roof in the native wood . " Both the iron columns and the walls were painted in delicate tints . The chapel was described by alumnus Michael C. Barr and architecture professor Edward Wilkens as having " a particularly graceful interior of wood " with " light , delicate proportions . " 
 Kirkpatrick Chapel was included as part of the Queen 's Campus on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places on January 29 , 1973 , and on the National Register of Historic Places on July 2 , 1973 . 
 = = Fittings and furnishings = = 
 = = = Organ = = = 
 Since 1916 , Kirkpatrick Chapel 's services have been augmented by the force of large pipe organ regarded as one of the " finest classical examples of the instrument anywhere in the state . " In 1916 , the daughter of Rutgers alumnus George <unk> ( A.B. 1832 ) , donated $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 2013 : US $ 212 @,@ 800 ) to the college for a new organ in her father 's memory . Her donation coincided with the observance of Rutgers ' 150th anniversary that year , and the completion of a renovation to remove the partitions dividing the chapel from the former library and classrooms . Previously , an organ purchased by the class of 1866 was located in the gallery above the chapel 's narthex . 
 Built in 1916 as the " Opus 255 " by the Ernest M. Skinner & Company of Boston , the organ featured 33 stops , 24 registers , 27 ranks , and 1606 pipes . According to Rutgers , Skinner ( 1866 – 1960 ) who was considered the nation 's premier organ @-@ builder in the early twentieth century , gave personal attention to the building of this organ . When the purchase of the organ was being considered in 1916 , Rutgers ' director of music , Howard D. McKinney ( RC 1903 ) , sought the advice of English organist T. Tertius Noble who had been installed as the organist and music director at Saint Thomas Church ( Episcopal ) on Fifth Avenue and 53rd Street in New York City . When it was dedicated on April 12 , 1917 , Noble performed an organ recital . During these years , Skinner @-@ built organs were installed in several churches across the United States , including the chapels at Harvard University , Lafayette College , Oberlin College , for Saint Thomas Church and several for the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine in New York City . In 1931 , chimes were added to the Opus 255 organ 's ranks and some of the reeds were repaired . The organ 's components were <unk> in 1957 . 
 From 1958 to 1961 , the organ was updated and rebuilt by the Aeolian @-@ Skinner Organ Company , the successor to Ernest M. Skinner 's company . University organist David A. Drinkwater oversaw the work as the organ — then renamed " Opus 255 @-@ C " — expanded to 59 stops , 52 ranks , and 3 @,@ 059 pipes . 
 As of 2013 , the chapel 's organ has " gone silent " after several years of problems and failures and has been temporarily replaced with a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art electronic organ . Rutgers has not decided whether it will restore the organ or replace it with a new pipe organ as the university considers the possibility of undertaking a larger restoration of the chapel . 
 = = = Stained glass windows = = = 
 Among the stained glass windows at Kirkpatrick Chapel are approximately twenty lancet windows along the chapel 's side aisles that were donated by graduating classes at the turn of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries ( 1890 – 1912 ) . These windows depict their class year and phrases in Ancient Greek and Latin . 
 Four of the chapel 's windows were designed and crafted in the studios of Louis Comfort Tiffany ( 1848 – 1933 ) . Tiffany and Hardenbergh were acquainted through their work with the Architectural League of New York . According to the New Jersey Historic Trust , the windows are " some of the first opalescent and multicolored sheet glass manufactured in America . " <unk> glass , used often in Tiffany glass windows , is glass in which more than one colour is present and caused in the manufacture by fusing through two colors being laminated , or through a superficial application of metallic oxide solutions . 
 The four windows from the Tiffany studios include those donated by the college 's Class of 1899 and Class of 1900 . A window depicting Joan of Arc was donated in memory of Rutgers College sophomore Henry Janeway Weston ( 1877 – 1898 ) who committed suicide in 1898 . According to Rutgers , this window was a gift of the Tiffany studios . Weston , the grandson of Henry Latimer Janeway ( 1824 – 1909 ) — a wealthy wallpaper manufacturer , Rutgers alumnus ( A.B. 1844 , A.M. 1847 ) and long @-@ serving trustee ( 1862 – 1909 ) — killed himself after his family became aware of a romantic relationship with a woman that would have negatively affected his reputation . 
 Designed by Tiffany Studies , the large window in the chancel above the altar , titled " Jesus , the Teacher of the Ages " , was donated by Henry Janeway Hardenbergh after the renovation of the chapel in 1916 and dedicated to his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather and the college 's first president , the Rev. Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh ( 1735 – 1790 ) . A large window over the narthex ( or the entrance of the chapel ) and a choir loft commemorates the signing of charter creating Queen 's College in 1766 by New Jersey 's last royal governor , William Franklin . According to Star @-@ Ledger columnist Mark <unk> , the " Charter Window " was donated by Frelinghuysen family to commemorate the 175th anniversary of the signing , and dedicated to their ancestor the Rev. Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen ( 1692 – 1747 ) — an early advocate for establishing the college — and his sons Rev. Theodorus Jacobus Frelinghuysen II ( 1724 – <unk> ) and Rev. John Frelinghuysen ( 1727 – 1754 ) . Rev. Frelinghuysen , his sons , and Rev. Hardenbergh were instrumental raising funds and political support for establishing the college . 
 The windows of Kirkpatrick chapel underwent an eleven @-@ year restoration beginning in 2004 with the chapel 's clerestory windows under the direction of Michael <unk> and his studio Jersey Art Stained Glass in Frenchtown , New Jersey . 
 = = = Portraits and memorial plaques = = = 
 An alumnus and local attorney , Edward Sullivan Vail ( 1819 – 1889 ) , a graduate from the class of 1839 , is listed in University publications as " Collector of Portraits for Kirkpatrick Chapel " , after spearheading the effort to collecting over sixty paintings portraying Rutgers presidents , prominent trustees , professors and the chapel 's namesake , Sophia Astley Kirkpatrick . Kirkpatrick , whose portrait was painted by an American artist named G. <unk> , is the only woman among the collection . The earliest portraits date to the eighteenth century . 
 The walls inside Kirkpatrick Chapel are adorned with memorial plaques recording the names of Rutgers graduates who died in war . In 1966 , Richard P. McCormick wrote that the names of 234 men and two women associated with Rutgers who died " in the line of duty " are inscribed in the chapel 's Service Book and that a number of " Gold Star scholarships " were established by the Alumni Association as a tribute . This number of alumni killed in action has increased since McCormick 's tabulation was published before the conclusion of the Vietnam War ( 1961 – 1975 ) . Several more Rutgers alumni were killed in Vietnam after McCormick 's 1966 tabulation , and during recent conflicts in the Middle East ( 2001 – present ) . 
 = Sheshi = 
 Maaibre Sheshi ( also <unk> ) was a ruler of areas of Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period . The dynasty , chronological position , duration and extent of his reign are uncertain and subject to ongoing debate . The difficulty of identification is mirrored by problems in determining events from the end of the Middle Kingdom to the arrival of the Hyksos in Egypt . Nonetheless , Sheshi is , in terms of the number of artefacts attributed to him , the best attested king of the period spanning the end of the Middle Kingdom and the Second Intermediate period ; roughly from c . 1800 BC until 1550 BC . Hundreds of <unk> seals bearing his name have been found throughout Canaan , Egypt , Nubia and as far away as Carthage where some were still in use 1500 years after his death . 
 Three competing hypotheses have been put forth for the dynasty to which Sheshi belonged . Egyptologists such as Nicolas Grimal , William C. Hayes and Donald B. Redford believe he should be identified with Salitis , founder of the 15th Dynasty according to historical sources and king of the Hyksos during their invasion of Egypt . Salitis is credited with 19 years of reign and would have lived some time between c . 1720 BC and 1650 BC . The Egyptologist William Ayres Ward and the archaeologist Daphna Ben @-@ Tor propose that Sheshi was a Hyksos king and belongs to the second half of the 15th Dynasty , reigning between Khyan and Apophis . Alternatively , Manfred Bietak has proposed that Sheshi was a vassal of the Hyksos , ruling over some part of Egypt or Canaan . The very existence of such vassals is debated . Finally , Sheshi could be a ruler of the early 14th Dynasty , a line of kings of Canaanite descent ruling over of the Eastern Nile Delta immediately before the arrival of the Hyksos . Proponents of this theory , such as Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker , credit Sheshi with 40 years of reign starting c . 1745 BC . 
 Ryholt proposed that Sheshi allied his kingdom with the Kushites in Nubia via a dynastic marriage with the Nubian princess Tati . Ryholt further posits that the son of Sheshi and Tati was Nehesy , whose name means " The Nubian " , whom he believes succeeded Sheshi to the throne as the pharaoh Nehesy <unk> . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = <unk> and prenomen on seals = = = 
 The nomen of Sheshi is inscribed on over two hundred scarab seals , which constitute the sole attestations of his reign . The number of scarabs attributed to Sheshi is paralleled in number only by those bearing the prenomen Maaibre , meaning " The righteous one is the heart of Ra " . Based on the close stylistic similarities between both groups of scarabs as well as their otherwise unmatched numbers , The consensus among Egyptologists is that Maaibre was the prenomen of Sheshi . 
 Consequently , Maaibre Sheshi is the best attested ruler of the Second Intermediate Period in terms of the number of artefacts attributed to him , with 396 seals and two seal impressions showing his nomen or prenomen . This figure is three times higher than the 123 seals attributed to the next best attested king of the period , Yakbim Sekhaenre . 
 In addition to these seals , Manfred Bietak has suggested that a scarab discovered in Avaris and inscribed with the name of a king " <unk> " should probably be attributed to Sheshi . This conclusion is rejected by Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker , who believe that <unk> was a separate king . 
 = = = Location of the finds = = = 
 Over 80 per cent of the seals attributed to Maaibre Sheshi are of unknown provenance , but the remaining 20 per cent have been found throughout Egypt , Nubia and Canaan , indicating widespread trade and diplomatic contacts during Sheshi 's reign . 
 Important finds include seals from Lachish , Gezer , Jericho , Amman and Tell el @-@ Ajjul in Canaan . In Lower Egypt , three seals have been unearthed in Tell el @-@ <unk> and Tell el @-@ <unk> and a further eight are from the wider Delta region . Four seals originate from Saqqara and a further five from the Middle Egyptian sites of Abusir el @-@ <unk> , Kom Medinet <unk> , Kom el @-@ Ahmar and Deir Rifa . To the south , in Upper Egypt , a total of twenty seals are known from Abydos , Hu , Thebes , Elephantine , Esna and Edfu , In Nubia , seals of Sheshi have been found in the Egyptian fortresses of Uronarti and <unk> and otherwise in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Akasha and Sai . Finally , two seal impressions of Sheshi have been found in Carthage , in a context dated archeologically to the 2nd century BC . 
 The seals of Sheshi are now scattered in many different museums , including the Israel Museum , Petrie Museum , Ashmolean , British Museum , Louvre , Walters Art Museum , Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Egyptian Museum of Cairo . 
 = = = Historical sources = = = 
 No historical attestation of Sheshi is known for certain . Sheshi is absent from the Turin canon , a list of kings written on papyrus during the Ramesside period and which serves as the primary historical source for the second intermediate period . This is because the section of the papyrus covering the 13th to 17th Dynasties is heavily damaged and the problem of <unk> 's chronological position cannot be resolved from the document . 
 It is unclear whether Sheshi is mentioned in the Aegyptiaca , a history of Egypt written in the 3rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II ( 283 – 246 BC ) by the Egyptian priest Manetho . Indeed , the Aegyptiaca only reports Hellenized names for Egyptian pharaohs and the identification of Sheshi with any particular name remains controversial . 
 Finally , Aharon Kempinski and Donald B. Redford have proposed that Sheshi is the historical figure that gave rise to the Biblical <unk> , one of the <unk> living in Hebron at the time of the conquest of Canaan by the Hebrews according to Numbers 13 : 22 . David Rohl goes even further and explicitly equates Sheshi with <unk> . 
 = = Dynasty = = 
 Three competing hypotheses have been proposed regarding the dynasty to which Sheshi belonged . 
 = = = Hyksos ruler = = = 
 William C. Hayes , Nicolas Grimal , Redford and Peter Clayton identify Sheshi with Salitis ( also known as <unk> ) . According to the Aegyptiaca , Salitis was the founder of the Hyksos 15th Dynasty . Alternatively , Bietak and Janine <unk> have proposed that Salitis should be identified with Sakir @-@ Har , a poorly known ruler of the second intermediate period who , in contrast to Sheshi , is known to have borne the title of " Hyksos " . 
 If Sheshi is to be equated with Salitis , then the seals of Sheshi discovered in Nubia suggest that the Hyksos allied themselves with the Nubians against the native Egyptian 13th Dynasty as soon as they arrived in the Nile Delta , an event which Grimal places c . 1720 BC . Grimal envisions Sheshi 's kingdom as comprising the entire Nile Delta and the Nile valley north of Gebelein . According to Manetho as reported by Josephus in Against <unk> , Salitis reigned from Memphis , and fortified the existing town of Avaris , which was to become the Hyksos ' seat of power . 
 Grimal and Hayes further equate Sheshi with <unk> , a king whose sole attestation is found on a stone slab detailing the genealogy of <unk> , a priest who lived at the end of the 21st Dynasty c . 950 BC , some 700 years after Sheshi 's estimated lifetime . 
 William Ayres Ward and the archaeologist Daphna Ben @-@ Tor rely on <unk> of the seals of Sheshi and other kings of the second intermediate period to date Sheshi to the second half of the 15th Dynasty , between the great Hyksos pharaohs Khyan and Apophis . 
 = = = Vassal of the Hyksos = = = 
 Jürgen von Beckerath is less assertive about Sheshi 's identity and assigns him to his combined 15th / 16th Dynasty , where he regroups Hyksos rulers whose chronological position is uncertain together with kings whom he sees as vassals of the Hyksos . Von Beckerath 's analysis relies on the hypothesis that Manetho 's 16th Dynasty comprised minor rulers of the Nile Delta region , called lesser Hyksos , who served the great Hyksos kings of the 15th Dynasty such as Khyan and Apophis . 
 For Manfred Bietak , the large number of attestations of Sheshi suggests that he was an important Hyksos ruler , yet his inclusion in the 15th Dynasty may be doubtful given the total absence of monuments attributable to him . Thus , Bietak concludes that Sheshi should be placed in a group of West Semitic rulers who coexisted with the 15th Dynasty , possibly as vassals or partly independently from it , and some of whom even bore the title of " Hyksos " . 
 The existence of lesser Hyksos kings in Egypt is currently debated . Ryholt has shown that a statement in Eusebius ' epitome of the Aegyptiaca indicating that the Hyksos had vassals contains a corruption of Manetho 's original text . Thus , he rejects the hypothesis that the 16th Dynasty comprised vassals of the Hyksos and maintains instead that it was a native Egyptian dynasty independently reigning over the Theban region between the fall of the 13th Dynasty and the advent of the 17th Dynasty . These conclusions on the 16th Dynasty have been accepted by many scholars , including Ben @-@ Tor , James Peter Allen , Susan Allen , Baker and Redford . Yet , for both Redford and Bietak " without doubt , there were , under the umbrella of the fifteenth dynasty rulers , a series of vassals in southern and coastal Palestine , in Middle Egypt , and in Thebes . ... Such was the political system of the Hyksos , and typical of the Amorite kingdoms in Syria and the city @-@ states in Palestine " . 
 = = = King of the 14th Dynasty = = = 
 Ryholt and Baker reject the <unk> of Sheshi as a 15th Dynasty ruler . Ryholt observes that early Hyksos kings , such as Sakir @-@ Har and Khyan , are known to have adopted the title <unk> <unk> meaning " ruler of the foreign countries " , a title which Sheshi did not bear . In addition , the later of these two kings , Khyan , only adopted an Egyptian prenomen during the second half of his reign – a practice that was followed by subsequent Hyksos kings . In contrast , if Sheshi is to be identified with Maaibre , then Sheshi bore a prenomen . This implies either that he was a Hyksos king reigning after Khyan , in contradiction with Khyan 's known successors Apophis and Khamudi ; or that he belonged to another dynasty . 
 Consequently , Ryholt suggests that Sheshi was actually a 14th Dynasty ruler , the 14th Dynasty being a line of kings of Canaanite descent possibly ruling over the Eastern Nile Delta immediately before the arrival of the Hyksos 15th Dynasty . Many Egyptologists accept the existence of the 14th Dynasty based on archaeological evidence and on the fact that circa 50 kings are recorded in the Turin canon between the 13th Dynasty and the later Hyksos rulers . At the opposite , Redford proposed that these 50 kings constitute the genealogy of the Hyksos rulers and that the 14th Dynasty is chimerical . 
 Based on a <unk> of the scarab seals of the Second Intermediate Period available in 1900 , George Willoughby Fraser was able to date Sheshi 's reign to " a short dynasty before the Hyksos invasion " . More recently , Ryholt obtained a similar result using his own <unk> and places Sheshi before Yaqub @-@ Har and the great Hyksos rulers Khyan and Apophis and after Yakbim Sekhaenre , Ya <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and ' Ammu Ahotepre . Rolf Krauss independently reached the same conclusion . Given that the earliest 14th Dynasty ruler mentioned on the Turin canon is Nehesy , a king who left several attestations of his reign in the Delta region , and that there is only space for one predecessor for Nehesy on the canon , Ryholt concludes that the earlier document from which the canon was copied had a lacuna preceding Nehesy . Such lacunae are noted as <unk> on the canon and could cover any number of kings . Thus , Ryholt sees no obstacle with having Sheshi succeed ' Ammu Ahotepre and immediately precede Nehesy . 
 = = Dating = = 
 = = = Mid 18th century BC = = = 
 Ryholt dates Sheshi 's reign to the mid 18th century BC . His main argument is the presence of seals of Sheshi and of two kings of the mid 13th Dynasty <unk> <unk> and Djedkheperew in the Egyptian fort of Uronarti in Nubia . The fort of Uronarti was abandoned at some point in the 13th Dynasty , an event which Ryholt dates to the reign of Djedkheperew given the lack of seals attributable to subsequent kings . Ryholt thus proposes that Sheshi reigned from c . 1745 BC until 1705 BC and was a contemporary of <unk> and Djedkheperew . 
 Ryholt 's hypothesis regarding Sheshi comes with his dating the start of the 14th Dynasty around 1805 BC , over 90 years earlier than accepted by most Egyptologists . They propose instead that the 14th Dynasty emerged during the two decades of <unk> Ay 's reign , which is dated to between 1700 BC and 1660 BC , depending on the scholar . Ay is the last 13th Dynasty pharaoh to be attested in Lower Egypt , and most scholars therefore contend that he abandoned Itjtawy , the capital of Egypt since the reign of Amenemhat I ( c . 1980 BC ) , in favor of Thebes as he lost control of the Delta region to the 14th Dynasty . 
 = = = Mid to late 17th century BC = = = 
 If Sheshi is to be identified with Salitis , the founder of the 15th Dynasty after Manetho , then he would have lived around 1650 BC , the date agreed upon by most Egyptologists , including Ryholt , for the arrival of the Hyksos in Egypt . If Sheshi lived during the second half of the 15th Dynasty between the reigns of Khyan and Apophis as Ben @-@ Tor and Ward favor then Sheshi would have reigned c . 1600 BC . 
 = = = Reign length = = = 
 The Egyptologists identifying Sheshi with Salitis follow Josephus , Sextus Julius Africanus and Eusebius who report that Manetho credited Salitis with 19 years of reign in his Aegyptiaca . Ryholt relies instead on a statistical method and estimates the duration of Sheshi 's reign to have been between 20 and 53 years . The method consists in tallying the seals of Yakbim Sekhaenre , Ya <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and ' Ammu Ahotepre with those of Sheshi . Then , knowing that the first four of these kings reigned for at least c . 30 years , implies that they have left between 7 @.@ 5 and 20 seals per year on throne . Consequently , Sheshi 's nearly 400 scarabs would correspond to 20 to 53 years , which Ryholt gives as c . 40 years . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ryholt proposes that Sheshi had at least two consorts ; Tati with whom he fathered his successor pharaoh Nehesy , and an unknown queen with whom he fathered a prince Ipqu . Ryholt reached this conclusion on noting that scarabs of queen Tati and Princes Ipqu and Nehesy bear stylistic markers which are found on those of Sheshi and thus that they must have been contemporaries . In addition , " Tati " is attested as a feminine Nubian name in earlier execration texts , which would explain the peculiar name of Nehesy meaning " the Nubian " . For Ryholt , Sheshi 's motivation behind a dynastic marriage with a Kushite princess was to ally his kingdom with the Nubians . Ryholt 's hypothesis concerning Nehesy may be vindicated by a number of scarabs giving Nehesy the titles of " king 's son " and of " eldest king son " , indicating that Nehesy 's father was a king as well . In addition , both Nehesy and Ipqu bore the titles of " king 's son of Ra " , a conflation of the titles " son of Ra " and " king 's son " , which could indicate that were appointed junior <unk> by Sheshi . 
 These conclusions are shared by Baker but rejected by Ben @-@ Tor , who argues not only that Nehesy reigned before Sheshi but also that the Nehesy referred to as " king 's son " was a later Hyksos prince . In 2005 a stele of Nehesy was discovered in the fortress city of Tjaru , the starting point of the Way of Horus , the major road leading out of Egypt into Canaan . The stele shows a " king 's son Nehesy " offering oil to the god <unk> and also bears an inscription mentioning the " king 's sister Tany " . A woman with this name and title is known from other sources around the time of the Hyksos pharaoh Apophis c . 1570 BC . This suggests that the " king 's son Nehesy " of the stela lived c . 1570 BC as well , over 100 years after King Nehesy 's estimated lifetime . This could be confirmed by Ben @-@ Tor 's observation that the scarabs referring to the " king 's son Nehesy " are different in style from those referring to king Nehesy . In this situation , the " king 's son Nehesy " would be a Hyksos prince different from the better known king Nehesy . 
 = Star Fox Adventures = 
 Star Fox Adventures is an action @-@ adventure video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the GameCube as part of the Star Fox series . It was released in North America on 23 September 2002 , Japan on 27 September , Australia on 15 November and Europe on 22 November . Along with being Rare 's only GameCube title , it was Rare 's final game for any Nintendo home console before the company was acquired as a first @-@ party developer for Microsoft 's Xbox division the day after the game 's release in North America . It is the third installment in the series and the direct sequel to Star Fox 64 . 
 The plot centers on Dinosaur Planet ( known as " Sauria " in subsequent games ) of the Lylat System , where Fox McCloud is dispatched by General Pepper to restore the planet after pieces of it have broken off and pose a risk to the System . After arriving , Fox discovers a mystical staff from a blue fox named Krystal and sets off to save the planet . The game began development as an unrelated game named " Dinosaur Planet " , initially intended to be Rare 's last standalone title for the Nintendo 64 system . The game endured a number of dramatic changes during development before Shigeru Miyamoto noticed similarities between the original game and Star Fox and convinced Rare to re @-@ brand it into a Star Fox title for the upcoming GameCube . 
 The game received mostly positive praise from critics upon release . Notable topics of praise included its detailed graphics , new character design for Fox , dynamic environments and The Legend of Zelda @-@ influenced gameplay . However , the game was criticized for its aforementioned gameplay being too much of a departure from previous Star Fox games , while mixed reactions came from critics and fans alike for Rare 's departure from Nintendo . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Star Fox adventures is a 3D action @-@ adventure game with platforming elements . Its gameplay is frequently compared to that of the The Legend of Zelda series , especially The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time . Like Ocarina of Time , Star Fox Adventures has a day @-@ and @-@ night phase , but a more gradual one . The game also has a widescreen mode , designed for widescreen television sets . 
 The game includes thirteen different locations , each of which is unlocked when the player completes parts of the story . Unlike other Star Fox games in which most of the player 's time is spent in air combat , playable protagonist Fox McCloud is on foot for most of the game . He pilots his Arwing aircraft only to reach other parts of the planet , although the game includes a few space battles involving the Arwing . The game 's combat system is melee @-@ orientated , as General Pepper forbids Fox from using any sort of blaster , telling him " This mission is about saving the planet , not blowing it up ! " Fox instead relies on a magical staff belonging to a native named Krystal that he discovered on the planet . The staff can be used to attack and defeat enemies as well as interact with the surrounding environment . While Fox uses the staff primarily for melee combat , he can later gain power @-@ ups for the staff which allow it to fire projectiles , freeze enemies or help him reach high up areas that are normally inaccessible . Fox homes in on his targets automatically when he approaches them , after which combat begins . Fox cannot jump unless he runs off the edge of an object or a cliff , but can roll after landing on the ground . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters and setting = = = 
 Star Fox Adventures features both the established main characters of the Star Fox series — Fox , Falco Lombardi , Slippy Toad , and Peppy Hare , although Falco is absent for the majority of the game — and a host of new characters . Major additions are a quiet , mysterious blue fox named Krystal and the small dinosaur Prince Tricky , Fox 's helper during the game . The entire planet is populated with dinosaurs , like the tyrannical General Scales , and other prehistoric animals such as pterosaurs and mammoths . 
 The entire game takes place on the world of Dinosaur Planet ( known as " Sauria " in subsequent games ) and a number of detached pieces of the planet that are suspended in orbit around it . Dinosaur Planet is ruled by the EarthWalker tribe , which resemble Triceratops , and the rival <unk> tribe , similar to pterosaurs and birds . The <unk> tribe , which are the major antagonists in Adventures , are humanoid theropods . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game takes place eight years after the events of Star Fox 64 , after Andross has been killed by Fox McCloud . Krystal , a mysterious fox looking for answers to the destruction of her home planet , <unk> , and the murder of her parents , lands on Krazoa Palace after receiving a distress call from the planet . She discovers that the planet had been attacked by General Scales and his <unk> army , and is persuaded by a wounded EarthWalker in the Palace to help by collecting all of the Krazoa Spirits and returning them to the palace , which would supposedly tilt the war in the dinosaurs ' favor and stop Scales . However , after releasing the first one , a mysterious being pushes Krystal into the spirit 's path , trapping her in a floating crystal atop the Krazoa Palace until all the spirits can be returned . 
 Meanwhile , General Pepper contacts the Star Fox Team and asks them to investigate a planet on the edge of the Lylat System called Dinosaur Planet , which is falling apart . Since the team is in desperate need of money for maintenance on the Great Fox , their aircraft , Fox McCloud agrees to take a look , arriving unarmed at Pepper 's request to avoid trouble with the locals . On the planet 's surface , Fox comes across Krystal 's magic staff , which Krystal had lost earlier when she was attacked by General Scales at the beginning of the game , and it becomes his sole weapon in the game . 
 Fox learns from the Queen of the EarthWalker Tribe that General Scales has stolen the four Spellstones from the planet 's two Force Point Temples . To prevent the planet from breaking up further and restore it to its original unity , Fox must restore the Spellstones to the temples , with the help of the Queen 's son , Prince Tricky . As Fox retrieves the Spellstones , he discovers that he must also retrieve the other five Krazoa Spirits to repair the planet and save Krystal 's life . 
 When Fox finds the last of the Krazoa Spirits , he discovers that it is guarded by General Scales himself . However , just before Fox and Scales engage in combat , a mysterious voice that Fox seems to recognize orders Scales to surrender the spirit , to which he reluctantly agrees . Fox takes the spirit to the Krazoa Shrine and frees Krystal . The spirits are forced into a Krazoa statue , which reveals itself to be Andross , the mastermind behind the spirit scheme , who flies off to resume his conquest of the Lylat System . Fox pursues him in his Arwing , and , with the help of Falco Lombardi , who arrives during the battle , defeats Andross , restoring the Krazoa spirits to the planet and repairing it . Afterwards , Falco rejoins the Star Fox team . Krystal flies to the Great Fox to thank the team , particularly Fox , in person , subsequently joining the team . 
 = = Development = = 
 What would become Star Fox Adventures was initially developed by Rare as Dinosaur Planet , a Nintendo 64 game unrelated to the Star Fox series . According to lead software engineer Phil Tossell , development of Dinosaur Planet began after the release of Diddy Kong Racing , with two teams to work on the latter title and Jet Force Gemini towards the end of the Nintendo 64 's lifespan . The game was changed many times during early development before Rare settled on the eventual idea of a open world adventure @-@ game based around two interwoven stories . The plot concerned Sabre ( whose role was given to Fox ) and Krystal , along with sidekicks Tricky and Kyte ( who both appear in the finished game ) , and <unk> , a wizard who was Sabre 's father and Krystal 's adoptive father ( who was dropped entirely ) . The game featured elements such as the ' <unk> ' , which would let the player switch between Krystal and Sabre . Dinosaur Planet was intended to be Rare 's last game for the Nintendo 64 and was adorned with gameplay and cinematics introduced by The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time . Dinosaur Planet initially utilised the Nintendo 64 's Expansion Pak and was housed in a 512 @-@ megabit ( 64 megabyte ) cartridge , which would have placed it among the largest Nintendo 64 games by stored data . 
 Shigeru Miyamoto mentioned in a retrospective interview that , after reviewing content of Dinosaur Planet , the similarities of Rare 's anthropomorphic design of Sabre to Nintendo 's Fox McCloud design were striking . The title was later changed to be a Star Fox @-@ brand launch game for the Nintendo GameCube . According to Tossell , the sudden change was not " accepted willingly by all " of the team as the plot had to be entirely re @-@ written in places to accommodate the Star Fox canon . The updated title was originally named Star Fox Adventures : Dinosaur Planet , but " Dinosaur Planet " was later removed . The team later realized the potential of using the Star Fox licence in hopes of boosting awareness , and decided to switch development from the Nintendo 64 to the upcoming GameCube console . Before the change , Rare released downloadable , limited full length MP3s from the unreleased game — many of which did appear in Star Fox Adventures — to video game websites , along with numerous trailers and screenshots of gameplay . 
 With the Star Fox theme established , Rare begun re @-@ working the game for the upcoming GameCube and was subsequently met with little interference from Nintendo . During development , the team was invited to Nintendo 's headquarters in Kyoto to discuss progress and certain changes ; in return Star Fox creator Takaya Imamura came to stay at Rare 's Twycross studio to oversee development . Tossell stated that " without a doubt " , Nintendo strengthened their relationship through trust and respect , despite Nintendo only owning 49 % of the company at the time . 
 The game was Rare 's final console video game released under Nintendo before the Leicestershire @-@ based studio was sold and became a first @-@ party developer for Microsoft . Shortly after the game 's release , Microsoft purchased Rare for £ 375 million , thus ending Rare 's entire association with Nintendo . Many fans and critics do not consider Star Fox Adventures to be an " essential " Rare title , as the negativity was attributed to Microsoft 's takeover , which led to some fans speculating that Microsoft were " buying out competition " . 
 David Wise used Peter <unk> 's Advanced Orchestra library in creating the music for Star Fox Adventures . Wise said the tracks that referenced the music for the previous Star Fox games came very late into development , which was after the developers created Dinosaur Planet into Star Fox Adventures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Star Fox Adventures received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . It sold over 200 @,@ 000 copies in Japan following its release , and was the fastest @-@ selling GameCube game at the time . Star Fox Adventures was eventually designated a Player 's Choice game by Nintendo , signifying over 250 @,@ 000 copies sold , and was thus available at a reduced retail price . 
 The visuals were very well received . Edge wrote that the " visual splendour is immense " , whilst in a similar fashion Matt Casamassina of IGN noted that the game is a " perfect companion " to The Legend of Zelda series , to which Adventures is often compared . Casamassina noted that elements of its graphical rendering were sophisticated for its time , in particular the advanced real @-@ time rendering of the movement of the characters ' fur . NGC Magazine praised the game 's vibrant atmosphere and detailed textures , adding that Adventures had " the best real time graphics on the GameCube so far " . The game 's combat system garnered some accolades , with GameSpot adding that the combat is simplistic , despite being " good looking " and not " frustrating " . Casamassina also praised the combat system , calling it " a beneficial addition " . NGC Magazine similarly praised the use of the combat system , however they noted that the battles did not require any skill and eventually " felt like a dull chore " . The voice acting was viewed negatively , with Casamassina remarking that it is " over the top " in some places . NGC Magazine felt that the accents of most of the characters did not suit that of the Star Fox world , in particular they noted the use of a Scottish accent for the <unk> Master was " awful " . 
 Despite the mostly positive reviews , Star Fox Adventures is often criticized for its setting being too much of a departure from the other Star Fox games . Casamassina said that " Fans expecting a true Star Fox experience akin to the older games are in for a disappointment " . He also added that the Star Fox license has been utilized sparingly to the point where the game felt " out of place within the confines of the Star Fox game universe " . Casamassina asserted that Fox was " clearly only on ' Dinosaur Planet ' at Nintendo 's request , not because he belongs " . NGC Magazine similarly expressed concern on why Fox was added to the game , adding that Adventures was " one game Fox himself would probably want to forget " and further speculating that Nintendo only added the Star Fox license to prevent Dinosaur Planet from appearing on the Xbox . 
 = 1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania = 
 The 1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania was an ultimatum delivered to Lithuania by Poland on March 17 , 1938 . The Lithuanian government had steadfastly refused to have any diplomatic relations with Poland after 1920 , protesting the annexation of the Vilnius Region by Poland . As pre @-@ World War II tensions in Europe intensified , Poland perceived the need to secure its northern borders . Five days earlier , Poland , feeling supported by international recognition of the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany , decided it was imperative to deliver an ultimatum to Lithuania . The ultimatum demanded that the Lithuanian government unconditionally agree to establish diplomatic relations with Warsaw within 48 hours , and that the terms be finalized before March 31 . The establishment of diplomatic relations would mean a de facto renunciation of Lithuanian claims to the region containing its historic capital , Vilnius ( known in Polish as Wilno ) . 
 Lithuania , preferring peace to war , accepted the ultimatum on March 19 . Although diplomatic relations were established as a result of the ultimatum , Lithuania did not agree to recognize the loss of Vilnius de jure . The government of Poland made a similar move against the Czechoslovak government in Prague on September 30 , 1938 , when it took advantage of the Sudeten Crisis to demand a portion of Zaolzie . On both occasions , Poland used the international crises to address long @-@ standing border disputes . 
 = = Vilnius dispute = = 
 Lithuania severed its diplomatic ties with Poland after the Polish general Lucjan Żeligowski staged a mutiny in October 1920 by order of Józef Piłsudski . He invaded Lithuanian @-@ held territory , captured the disputed city of Vilnius ( known to Poles as Wilno ) , and established the short @-@ lived Republic of Central Lithuania . This entity was incorporated into Poland in 1922 . In demographic terms Vilnius was the least Lithuanian of Lithuanian cities , divided almost evenly between the Polish @-@ speaking population and Jews , with Lithuanian @-@ speaking inhabitants constituting about 2 – 3 % of the population , according to Russian ( 1897 ) and German ( 1916 ) censuses . Lithuania demanded that Polish troops withdraw behind the line drawn in the Suwałki Agreement , while Poland falsely maintained that it had not authorized Żeligowski 's actions . The League attempted to mediate the dispute and Paul Hymans presented concrete proposals to form a federation . However , both sides were unwilling to make compromises and negotiations collapsed in January 1922 . In January 1923 , Lithuanian troops crossed over to the Allied @-@ held <unk> and staged the " Klaipėda revolt " . The Lithuanian occupation of Memel ( Klaipėda ) was one of the main factors that led to the decision of the Conference of Ambassadors to award Vilnius to Poland in March 1923 . 
 The result was a state of " no war , no peace " as Lithuania avoided recognizing any Polish claims to the city and the region , as well as refusing to undertake any actions that would recognize Poland 's control of Vilnius even de facto . Lithuania broke off all diplomatic relations with Poland and continuously emphasized that Vilnius remained its permanent capital ( Kaunas was designated as the temporary capital ) . Poland refused to formally recognize the existence of any dispute regarding the region , since that would have lent legitimacy to the Lithuanian claims . Railroad traffic and telegraph lines could not cross the border , and mail service was complicated . For example , a letter from Poland to Lithuania needed to be sent to a neutral country , repackaged in a new envelope to remove any Polish signs , and only then delivered to Lithuania . The conflict over Vilnius remained the most important foreign policy issue in Lithuania , but it became increasingly marginalized in the international arena . There were unsuccessful informal attempts to normalize the situation , most notably by the Lithuanian Prime Minister Augustinas Voldemaras between 1927 and 1928 and by Foreign Minister Stasys Lozoraitis between 1934 and 1936 , who asked Smetona to re @-@ establish the diplomatic relations with Poland . Both sides engaged in emotional and nationalistic rhetoric . 
 = = Rationale = = 
 On March 11 , a day before Austria was annexed into Greater Germany following the Anschluss , <unk> <unk> , a Lithuanian border patrol , shot Stanisław Serafin , a Polish soldier , on the demarcation line in the village of <unk> near Merkinė . The exact circumstances are not clear as the obscure event was variously portrayed as a Lithuanian provocation , a Polish provocation , or as an unfortunate accident . During the 1920s and 1930s , similar incidents had occurred : between 1927 and 1937 seven Lithuanian border guards were killed during the course of 78 events . Usually , such incidents were handled at the local level in an attempt to forestall escalation . On this occasion , however , Polish radio and newspapers picked up the story and fanned anti @-@ Lithuanian sentiment . Protests were held in Warsaw , Vilnius , and four other cities where the crowds shouted for military action against Lithuania . There is evidence that the Camp of National Unity was involved in organizing the protests . 
 On March 13 , the Polish government issued a threatening statement accusing Lithuania of provocation . On the following day , the Senate of the Republic of Poland called for the establishment of diplomatic relations and for the Lithuanian renunciation of claims to Vilnius . Upon receiving news that Poland was considering extreme measures , President Antanas Smetona was verging towards agreeing to discuss diplomatic relations , but changed his mind at almost the last minute . On the night of March 14 , the Lithuanians , acting through France 's envoy to Warsaw , proposed a commission to investigate the shooting incident and to agree on measures to avoid such incidents in the future . This was a partial measure that clearly did not satisfy Poland , which responded by refusing , in the first paragraph of the ultimatum delivered three days later , to establish such a commission . At the same time Lithuanian diplomats approached foreign powers in a bid for international support . 
 = = Initial version = = 
 The first version of the ultimatum , as drafted by Edward Rydz @-@ Śmigły , Prime Minister <unk> <unk> <unk> , and Jan <unk> , contained six demands : 
 Establish normal diplomatic and consular relations with Poland 
 Allow normal railway and road traffic and direct telephone and telegraph lines across the demarcation line 
 Amend the Lithuanian constitution to acknowledge that Vilnius was no longer the capital of Lithuania 
 Conclude the convention protecting the rights of the Polish minority in Lithuania in full 
 Conclude a trade and tariff agreement 
 Fully investigate the incident in <unk> 
 The Polish Foreign Minister Józef Beck , who had just returned from a trip to Sorrento , called for a government meeting on the night of March 16 , . During the meeting he argued that the ultimatum needed to contain only one demand : the establishment of diplomatic relations . In his view , such an ultimatum would not have violated any genuine Lithuanian interests and would offer much @-@ improved prospects for peaceful resolution of the conflict and a speedy relief of tension . It was in accordance with Beck 's vision for Eastern Europe , which was based on a Warsaw @-@ dominated Polish – Baltic – Scandinavian bloc free of Soviet or German influence , a modified version of Józef Piłsudski 's Międzymorze , which required the normalization of relations with Lithuania . The removal of the other demands also reflected political pressure on Poland from the Soviet Union , France , and the United Kingdom to prevent the conflict from escalating into warfare . 
 The Polish government agreed to Beck 's proposal , and the ultimatum was toned down . However , at the same time , Beck ordered military preparations . Poland assembled four divisions along the demarcation line ; about 50 @,@ 000 Polish troops were present , and just over 20 @,@ 000 Lithuanian troops . The Polish troops were reinforced by armored vehicles , by two air force regiments , consisting of about one hundred aircraft , and by the Polish fleet in the waters of the Baltic Sea along the Lithuanian shore . 
 = = The ultimatum = = 
 The final text of the ultimatum , completed by Józef Beck and delivered through a Polish envoy in Tallinn to Bronius <unk> , the Lithuanian envoy in Tallinn , was as follows : 
 1 . " The proposition of the Lithuanian Government of 14 March cannot be accepted for it does not give sufficient guarantees concerning the security of the frontier in view of the negative results of all Polish – Lithuanian negotiations made up to the present time . " 
 2 . " For this reason the Polish Government declares that it considers as the only solution corresponding to the gravity of the situation the immediate establishment of normal diplomatic relations without any previous condition . This is the only way to regulate the neighborly questions for a Government animated by good faith to avoid events dangerous to peace . " 
 3 . " The Polish Government allows the Lithuanian Government 48 hours from the moment the note is presented for the acceptance of this proposition in making it known that diplomatic representations at Kaunas and Warsaw will be accredited not later than March 31 , of this year . Until that date all discussions of a technical or other character between the Polish and Lithuanian Governments shall be continued by the envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary at Tallinn . 
 The exchange of notes attached concerning the establishment of diplomatic relations shall take place , before the expiration of the period of 48 hours mentioned , at Tallinn between the Polish and Lithuanian Ministers at Tallinn . " 
 4 . " The proposition above mentioned will not be the subject of discussion with regard to its content or form — it is an unchangeable proposition . 
 The failure to respond or the presentation of any supplements or reservations shall be considered by the Polish Government as a refusal . In the event of a negative reply the Polish Government will guarantee the just interest of the state by its proper means . " 
 The ultimatum contained an attachment : a draft of what would be deemed an acceptable response to the ultimatum . The proposed response stated only that Lithuania agreed to establish regular diplomatic relations , send a legation to Warsaw , and guarantee normal conditions of operation for a Polish legation in Kaunas . 
 = = International reaction = = 
 After the Soviet – Lithuanian Peace Treaty was ratified in 1920 , the Russian SFSR recognized Lithuanian claims to the Vilnius Region and continued to support them . In its responses to the 1938 ultimatum , the Soviet Union expressed concerns over Lithuania 's independence and threatened to abrogate the Soviet – Polish Non @-@ Aggression Pact of 1932 . It made it clear , though , that it did not wish to be drawn into an armed conflict . This stance has been attributed to the growth of a threat from Japan ; armed assistance to Lithuania would have required the Red Army to invade either Poland or Latvia and could have resulted in a war on two fronts . The Soviets urged France , a major ally of Poland at the time , to de @-@ escalate the conflict and encourage a more moderate version of the ultimatum . France and the United Kingdom , preoccupied with the Anschluss , pressured Lithuania to normalize the relationship with Poland as soon as possible . They feared that the ultimatum had been approved by Nazi Germany . 
 Germany , led by Adolf Hitler , now turned its attention to the Klaipėda Region , then held by Lithuania . In April 1938 , Hitler stated that control of the Port of Klaipėda ( German : Memel ) and its surrounding area was Germany 's second @-@ most important issue , following the status of the Sudeten area . In the event of armed hostilities between Poland and Lithuania , German troops were to defend and occupy the Klaipėda region and significant portions of western Lithuania . The Polish ambassador to Nazi Germany , Józef Lipski , was informed of these plans . The Poles agreed to cooperate with German troops and to respect German interests in Klaipėda if such an armed conflict were to arise . However , in Hitler 's assessment , an immediate bid for Klaipėda was impolitic ; he wished to maintain the status quo until more time had passed after the Anschluss . The German suggestion was that Lithuania concede to the Polish demands . 
 Lithuania , Latvia , and Estonia , the three Baltic states , had formed the Baltic Entente in 1934 . Its principal purposes were coordination of joint foreign policy and mutual international diplomatic support ; it was not a military alliance . In Latvian and Estonian opinion , the Polish – Lithuanian dispute over Vilnius was outside the scope of the Entente , but they wished for a resolution , considering the conflict detrimental to the stability of the region . Latvia attempted to persuade Estonia to exert mutual pressure on Lithuania for a speedy acceptance of the ultimatum . This reaction from an ally was unexpected . 
 = = Acceptance = = 
 President Smetona held a government meeting late on the night of March 18 , to decide whether to accept the ultimatum . Lithuania clearly lacked international support and the demand was rather tame . A refusal would have cast Lithuania in an unfavorable light as an unreasonable <unk> that had irrationally rejected peaceful diplomatic relations for eighteen years . Lithuanian diplomats were divided on the issue , while popular opinion was strongly against accepting the ultimatum . Various campaigns for the Lithuanian liberation of Vilnius had attracted massive participation . " Mourning of Vilnius Day " ( October 9 , when Żeligowski invaded Lithuania and captured Vilnius ) , had become an annual event , and the largest social organization in interwar Lithuania was the League for the Liberation of Vilnius ( Vilniaus <unk> <unk> , or VVS ) , with some 25 @,@ 000 members . Passionate feelings about Vilnius were expressed in a popular slogan " Mes be Vilniaus <unk> " ( we will not rest without Vilnius ) , part of a poem by Petras <unk> . While Paul Hymans ' regional peace plans at the League of Nations were under negotiation , Lithuanian Prime Minister <unk> <unk> barely survived an assassination attempt . A government decision to open over 80 Polish schools in Lithuania was a probable factor in the 1926 Lithuanian coup d 'état . Any government making concessions to Poland at that time risked an ouster . 
 President Smetona received memoranda from nine nationalistic organizations urging the government to reject the ultimatum . However , a decisive comment was made by General Stasys Raštikis , the commander of the Lithuanian army : He testified that a military victory over Poland was impossible and argued for a peaceful resolution . The government 's decision was confirmed by the Fourth Seimas with minimal discussion . On March 19 , <unk> relayed acceptance of the ultimatum to the Poles , who gave a 12 @-@ hour extension to decide on the ultimatum as a show of good faith . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The ultimatum contributed to the general atmosphere of tension and fear in Europe . It relieved some of the pressure on Germany that had arisen in the aftermath of the Anschluss and tested the Soviets ' willingness to defend their interests in Eastern Europe . Fears were expressed , both in Lithuania and abroad , that the establishment of diplomatic relations was not the only goal of Warsaw and that more far @-@ reaching <unk> might follow . Speculations arose that Poland might seek to resurrect the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , using Germany 's annexation of Austria as a precedent . Poland announced that it planned to create a neutral bloc comprising Poland , Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , and Romania to counter both fascism and communism . It stated that it had no wish to incorporate Lithuanian territories and maintained that the bloc would be formed on the basis of bilateral non @-@ aggression and economic treaties . According to The New York Times , the impact of the ultimatum was felt on Wall Street ; on March 17 , the foreign currency and bond markets sagged , in some cases reaching the lowest points seen in several years . These markets recovered on March 19 , after the ultimatum was accepted . 
 The acceptance triggered a government crisis in Lithuania : on March 24 , Prime Minister Juozas <unk> , who held uncompromising positions over Vilnius and at the time of the ultimatum was undergoing medical treatment in Switzerland , stepped down . His successor , Vladas Mironas , who was in favor of normalizing relations with Poland , assembled a new cabinet of ministers . Despite increasing pressure to form a broader coalition , the new cabinet was composed solely of members of the Lithuanian Nationalists Union . The unconditional acceptance hurt Lithuanian pride and damaged the reputation of the party . The suppressed opposition used this damage as an opportunity to renew its activities and formed a group called <unk> ( Axis ) . In Poland the acceptance was greeted with enthusiasm , described as a " great bloodless victory " , and celebrated by a military march in Vilnius . 
 A few days after the ultimatum , both Lithuania and Poland named their ambassadors . Kazys Škirpa was sent to Warsaw , and Franciszek <unk> was sent to Kaunas before March 31 , the deadline indicated in the ultimatum . Negotiations over practical matters began on March 25 , in Augustów , and by June three agreements covering rail transit , mail service , and river navigation had been concluded . The railroad , torn apart for several kilometers at the border , was repaired . A customs post was established in <unk> , and consulates were opened in Klaipėda and Vilnius . Lithuania closed the League for the Liberation of Vilnius and the Vilnius Foundation ; the latter organization had given financial support to Lithuanian activities in the Vilnius Region . Nevertheless , Lithuania continued to claim Vilnius as its de jure capital . In May 1938 a new constitution was adopted , which echoed the previous constitution 's statement that Vilnius was the permanent capital of Lithuania and that Kaunas was merely a temporary capital . Poland continued to suppress Lithuanian organizations in Vilnius . 
 A thaw in Polish – Lithuanian relations began in spring 1939 . After the German – Czech and German – Lithuanian crises , Poland made more active efforts to ensure Lithuania 's assistance , or at least neutrality , in the event of a war with Nazi Germany . Lithuanian General Stasys Raštikis and Polish Foreign Minister Józef Beck made high @-@ profile visits to each other 's countries , and Poland improved the conditions of Lithuanians in the Vilnius Region . However , Lithuania did not believe that Poland and its western allies were strong enough to resist Germany and the Soviet Union . When Germany invaded Poland in September 1939 , Lithuania maintained a policy of strict neutrality , refusing repeated German offers for a joint attack on Poland to capture Vilnius . Instead , Lithuania interned about 15 @,@ 000 Polish soldiers and accepted about 35 @,@ 000 Polish civilian refugees . The Soviet Union returned Vilnius to Lithuania after the Soviet invasion of Eastern Poland in September 1939 . Neither country was aware at the time of the secret protocols of the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , signed in August 1939 , in which Germany and the Soviet Union agreed to divide the region into their spheres of influence . In June 1940 , the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Lithuania in accordance with the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . A year later Russia was attacked by Nazi Germany leading to the Nazi occupation of Lithuania . 
 = Starvin ' Marvin ( South Park ) = 
 " Starvin ' Marvin " is the eighth episode in the first season of the American animated television series South Park . It first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on November 19 , 1997 . In the episode , Cartman , Kenny , Kyle and Stan send money to an African charity hoping to get a sports watch , but are instead sent an Ethiopian child whom they dub " Starvin ' Marvin " . Later , Cartman is accidentally sent to Ethiopia , where he learns activist Sally Struthers is hoarding the charity 's food for herself . In an accompanying subplot , after genetically engineered turkeys attack South Park residents , Chef rallies the residents to fight back , in a parody of the film Braveheart . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . " Starvin ' Marvin " was the first South Park Thanksgiving @-@ themed episode . The episode simultaneously served as a satire on American indifference toward impoverished countries and the humanitarianism industry . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews and several commentators have described it as a classic South Park episode . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was viewed by about 2 @.@ 2 million households during its original broadcast , which at the time was roughly eight times Comedy Central 's average viewership . Parker and Stone said they were unhappy with the turkey subplot , which they wrote only because they felt obligated to include a B story . Sally Struthers was reportedly deeply offended by her portrayal in the episode . In addition to Starvin ' Marvin , who became a popular minor character , the episode introduced regular characters Kyle 's father Gerald Broflovski and Kenny 's family members Stuart , Carol and Kevin McCormick . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After seeing a commercial about starving children in Africa , Cartman , Stan , Kenny and Kyle send money to Sally Struthers ' charity organization , the Christian Children 's Fund . They do not care about the cause , but want the free sports watch that comes with the sponsorship . However , due to a miscommunication , an Ethiopian boy is delivered to the boys instead of the watch . Although initially shocked , the four boys befriend him , and Cartman names the boy Starvin ' Marvin ( " Marvin " being given to him by the apparent pronunciation of the name when he was talking in his native language ) . Meanwhile , mobs of wild turkeys begin attacking and killing South Park residents . Mad scientist Dr. Mephisto tries to warn Mayor McDaniels that genetically engineered turkeys he had been breeding to feed to the poor have gone crazy and are now attacking humans . Mephisto is instead ignored and ridiculed by McDaniels . 
 The boys take Marvin to an all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat buffet , where he is shocked by how much food the townsfolk consume compared to his home country , and by how wasteful Cartman is with his food . Back at school , Mr. Garrison announces the food drive is a failure because students have brought in only a few cans of creamed corn . The boys present Marvin to the class during show and tell , after which Mr. Garrison and Principal Victoria tell the boys they will have to call Red Cross and send Marvin home . Meanwhile , Dr. Mephisto shows Chef that the turkey DNA is growing so rapidly that the turkeys might take over the world if they are not stopped . 
 The FBI arrives to take Marvin back to Ethiopia , but Marvin tricks them into taking Cartman instead . Cartman , who had previously cared little for the impoverished in Africa , is unable to bear the lack of food and poor living conditions there ; furthermore , he attempts to convince the Red Cross there that he 's not one of the Africans , but it fails . While praying to God in Addis Ababa , Cartman says he is sorry he made fun of poor people . He eventually finds a Red Cross shack , where Sally Struthers is hoarding all the food meant for charity . After a brief argument , Cartman exposes all of Miss Struthers 's hoarding of the food supply to the Ethiopians , who then take control of the food supply . 
 Back in South Park , Chef rallies the townspeople ( in a parody of Braveheart ) to fight the genetically engineered turkeys ; humorously , one of the turkeys also rallies the other turkeys to fight the townspeople . A massive battle ensues in which Kenny is killed ( his eye is poked and gouged out ) , but eventually the South Park residents kill all the turkeys and claim victory . The FBI returns Cartman to South Park and takes Marvin home , but not before he brings the bodies of the dead turkeys back to Ethiopia for everyone to eat . Marvin is then hailed as a hero by his people while they pass Struthers being bound and gagged over a fire . 
 In the end , back in South Park , Kenny 's family give their Thanksgiving blessings as they prepare to eat a can of green beans , but realize afterward that they do not have a can opener . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Starvin ' Marvin " was written by Trey Parker , Matt Stone and Pam Brady . Directed by Parker , it was the first official South Park Thanksgiving episode . Parker and Stone said " Starvin ' Marvin " , like other holiday episodes , proved difficult to make because they felt a responsibility to constantly top other previous holiday shows . Stone provided the voice of Marvin . According to the official South Park website , the character was not named after the Starvin ' Marvin 's brand of American gas stations , and that the similarity between the two names is just a coincidence . Jerry Seinfeld , comedian and star of the popular sitcom Seinfeld , contacted Parker and Stone and asked if he could record a guest voice performance because he was a fan of the show . Parker and Stone offered Seinfeld the throwaway background part of one of the turkeys , but Seinfeld 's agent was " a bit put off " by the offer and did not accept . 
 The episode was partially inspired by the commercials for the Christian Children 's Fund , in which Sally Struthers encourages viewers to donate money to provide food for starving children in Africa . Parker said he did not really believe Struthers was hoarding food from the charity , but he came up with the concept because he found it funny that such an obese woman would make a public plea for food for others . Parker said he had always wondered how a starving African child would react if they were taken to a large buffet dinner at an American restaurant , with " people leaving tons of food on their plates " , which served as further inspiration for the episode . Parker and Stone originally planned for Struthers to die at the end of the episode and have the African children eat her and live off her fat ; Comedy Central executives told the duo they could not kill Struthers , although celebrities have been killed off in subsequent episodes without any objections from the network . 
 Parker and Stone were unhappy with the turkey attack subplot , which they felt " never really went anywhere " and ended abruptly without any satisfying conclusion . They nevertheless included it because they felt obligated to include a B story , since every episode in the season so far had included one . Later in the series , they said they realized this was not necessary and made many episodes without a B story . Although the duo liked the " payoff " of the Starvin ' Marvin main plot , they did not know how to end the turkey subplot , so they simply had the characters kill all the turkeys and claim that there were none left ; they decided this sudden ending was the funniest possible option . Stone said of the subplot , " The turkeys were just an excuse to have the Braveheart sequence . " The animators enjoyed creating the turkey battle scene , which was designed to be shown in widescreen aspect ratio while the rest of the episode was animated normally . However , the animation proved to be very difficult and took a long time to do because it involved a larger number of characters and animals in one scene than had ever been featured previously in the show . Some of the characters in the far background were animated as gray and shadowy , which Parker said was not so much a visual effect as it was a " lighting effect meaning we didn 't want to draw all these people " . 
 In addition to Starvin ' Marvin himself , the episode included the first appearances of several regular characters : Kyle 's father Gerald Broflovski , as well as Stuart , Carol and Kevin McCormick , father , mother and brother ( respectively ) of Kenny , who were portrayed as incredibly poor and unhygienic . In a continuity error , the couple killed by the turkeys at Stark 's Pond can be seen alive and unharmed during the turkey battle scene . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Psychologists Gilbert Reyes and Gerard Jacobs have cited " Starvin ' Marvin " as one example of popular culture voicing criticisms of humanitarianism " as an overblown industry <unk> off others ' suffering and harming its purported beneficiaries " . The episode also highlights America 's consumerist society and American indifference toward impoverished countries . The moral of the episode , explained by Stan in the final scene , encourages viewers to see suffering citizens of impoverished countries as real people , rather than images on television screens , which tend to make the viewers feel detached and alienated from them . 
 " Starvin ' Marvin " explores and satirizes gluttony in the US , particularly through its unflattering portrayal of Sally Struthers , who gorges on donated food meant for starving children . The greed and wastefulness shown in the buffet scene , as well as Cartman 's overall greediness and lack of understanding regarding the plight of starving African children , has been said to demonstrate an over @-@ abundance and decadence typically associated with Americans . The destructive rampage of the turkeys provides a commentary on genetic engineering . Scott Calef , a philosophy professor who studies popular culture , said the destruction sown by the turkeys , despite the best of intentions by Dr. Mephisto , are indicative of the unpredictable nature and ethical ambiguity of the use of genetic engineering for the betterment of humankind . 
 = = Cultural references and impact = = 
 Starvin ' Marvin proved to be a popular minor character , even though he would only appear in one more episode , the third season episode " Starvin ' Marvin in Space " . The character was later featured in South Park Rally , a 2000 racing video game from developer Acclaim , in which Marvin races the other characters in a motorized wheat sack . Marvin is also featured in South Park 10 : The Game , a platform mobile game featuring a number of South Park characters . Eric Cartman 's line , " That 's a bad Starvin ' Marvin ! " , became one of the most popular lines from the first season of the show . Starvin ' Marvin is from the African nation Ethiopia , which experienced two famines in the mid @-@ 1980s . The American authorities who address his parents identify his family 's surname as " Click Click Derk " . 
 The scenes in which Chef , and later the lead turkey , don blue and white war paint and speak inspirational words to their armies are a parody of Braveheart , the 1995 Mel Gibson @-@ directed film about Scottish historical hero William Wallace . Parker said it was the first of many times a film was spoofed in a South Park episode , even though both said they enjoyed Braveheart . During class , Mr. Garrison incorrectly tells the children the internationally known English pop singer Engelbert Humperdinck was the first man to walk on the moon . Also in the classroom , when it is suggested some poor people would rather die than go to a poorhouse , Cartman says , " Well then perhaps they should – and decrease the surplus population ! " The line is lifted word @-@ for @-@ word from the Charles Dickens novella A Christmas Carol , prompting Mr. Garrison to respond , " Okay , kids , that 's enough Dickens for one day . " Kyle incorrectly tells Stan that Sally Struthers appeared on Full House , an American sitcom that ran from the late 1980s to early 1990s ; she actually starred in the 1970s series All in the Family . When Dr. Mephisto asks Chef to look into his microscope , Chef says he sees " an extreme close @-@ up of Vanessa Redgrave 's private parts " , a reference to the Academy Award @-@ winning English actress . At the end of the episode , Stan said it is important to remember the images of starving children on television are " just as real as you or I " . Kyle says by that logic , MacGyver is a real person too , a reference to the secret agent protagonist from the 1980s television series of the same name . 
 Tom Vogt , who served as the editor of South Park for several years , was inspired to join the show after watching a bootleg copy of " Starvin ' Marvin " . He had never seen the show before , but was so impressed by the episode he decided to drive to Colorado and seek a job with Parker and Stone . He was hired as the show 's editor after contacting one of the South Park animators who used to work for the same company as he had . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Starvin ' Marvin " first aired in the United States on Comedy Central on November 19 , 1997 . In its original American broadcast , " Starvin ' Marvin " received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 8 , meaning the episode was seen by about 2 @.@ 2 million households in the US . Television journalists described the rating as " astonishing " by Comedy Central standards ; at the time , the network averaged a 0 @.@ 6 rating ( 276 @,@ 000 households ) during prime time , and prior to South Park , the channel 's highest rating was a 2 @.@ 7 ( 1 @.@ 24 million households ) for the second season premiere of Absolutely Fabulous . Several reviewers have described " Starvin ' Marvin " as one of South Park 's " classic episodes " . Parker said the emotional moment when Starvin ' Marvin returned home with all the turkeys made his mother cry , marking the first time he and Stone heard of an emotional reaction to their show . 
 After the episode aired , Parker and Stone received feedback that audiences felt " Starvin ' Marvin " was especially unkind to Struthers . Although they did not speak to her themselves , the duo received word that Struthers was a fan of the show until " Starvin ' Marvin " aired , after which she was very upset and reportedly reacted emotionally over her portrayal . Struthers was particularly saddened by the fact that her character steals food from the same starving children she had been working to help . Parker and Stone were slightly remorseful when they learned of her reaction and have said they did not have anything against Struthers personally . Nevertheless , Struthers was portrayed in an even less flattering way in the third season episode " Starvin ' Marvin in Space " as a Jabba the Hutt @-@ like creature . In a DVD commentary track , Parker said of Struthers , " Dude , you 're really setting yourself up if you 're going to be that fat and go on the air talking about [ starving children ] . ... We don 't think she 's a bad person , she 's probably nice to try to do this , but cut down on the Twinkies a little bit before going on the air . " 
 Tom Carson , television critic for The Village Voice , praised the episode , which he said " featured some amazing sick jokes about American affluence and obliviousness " . Dianne Williamson of the Telegram & Gazette praised " Starvin ' Marvin " for taking a chance with the source material , and said , " Often I 'm in awe at the courage of these [ South Park ] creators . " The Advertiser of Lafayette , Louisiana , called the episode " hysterical " and particularly praised its satire of American consumerism . The St. Paul Pioneer Press described the episode as " hilarious " and said , " We know we shouldn 't laugh , but we can 't help it . " Vicki Englund of The Courier @-@ Mail complimented the " really bizarre storyline " and the moral of the episode , and especially praised the jokes about Struthers : " It might be a good idea not to eat during the hilarious second episode . Enough said . " 
 Vern Perry , a reviewer with The Orange County Register , called " Starvin ' Marvin " his favorite South Park episode . The " Starvin ' Marvin " episode was featured in a 1998 Chicago Tribune list of the top ten reasons for the popularity of South Park . The Chicago Tribune also included " Starvin ' Marvin " in a 2003 list of the top ten funniest episodes . Bill Ward , of the Star Tribune , described " Starvin Marvin " as Cartman 's " finest half @-@ hour " . Not all reviews were positive ; Boston Globe writer Matthew Gilbert , who described South Park as immature and low @-@ brow , called " Starvin ' Marvin " a particularly " <unk> episode " . Brian Boyd of The Irish Times criticized the episode for making jokes at the expense of starving African children . 
 " Starvin ' Marvin " was released , along with eleven other episodes , in a three @-@ DVD set in November 1998 . It was included in the third volume , which also included the episodes " Mecha @-@ Streisand " , " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " and " Tom 's Rhinoplasty " . " Starvin ' Marvin " was also one of six episodes included on a 1998 VHS called " South Park Festival Special " , which included " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " , " Merry Christmas , Charlie Manson ! " , " Mr. Hankey 's Christmas Classics " , " Korn 's Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery " and " Pinkeye " . The episode , along with the other twelve from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD separate from the DVDs . In 2008 , Parker and Stone made " Starvin ' Marvin " and all South Park episodes available to watch for free on the show 's official website , " South Park Studios " . 
 = Gordon Bennett ( general ) = 
 Lieutenant General Henry Gordon Bennett CB , CMG , DSO , VD ( 15 April 1887 – 1 August 1962 ) was a senior Australian Army officer who served in both World War I and World War II . Despite highly decorated achievements during World War I , during which he commanded at both battalion and brigade level and became the youngest general in the Australian Army , Bennett is best remembered for his role in the Battle of Singapore in February 1942 in the Pacific War , as commander of the 8th Australian Division , he escaped while his men became prisoners of the Imperial Japanese Army . After this , Bennett 's military career waned and although he rose to command a corps , he never commanded troops in battle again . In 1945 , his escape caused controversy and resulted in a Royal Commission , which found that he had been unjustified in relinquishing his command . 
 A citizen soldier , before World War I Bennett had worked in the insurance industry and at the conclusion of hostilities pursued his commercial interests while continuing to serve in the military in a part @-@ time capacity , commanding at brigade and divisional level . He retired from the Army after World War II and turned to farming in the Blue Mountains . He remained active in the world of business and as military commentator , before dying at the age of 75 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bennett ( who was always known as Gordon ) was born in Balwyn , Melbourne , on 15 April 1887 , to George Bennett , a South African @-@ born school teacher , and his Australian @-@ born wife , Harriet . He was the sixth of nine children and attended Balwyn State School , where his father taught , and then Hawthorn College as a teenager having been given a three @-@ year scholarship . While at Hawthorn , he did well at mathematics and in 1903 , as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old , after completing a competitive examination he was accepted into the AMP Society to train as an actuary . In May 1908 , just after he turned 21 , Bennett volunteered to serve in the Militia , Australia 's reserve military force , joining the 5th Australian Infantry Regiment as a " recruit officer " . After completing a six @-@ month part @-@ time course , he was appointed as a provisional second lieutenant , and posted to the regiment 's ' B ' Company , in Carlton , Victoria . He continued to work at AMP during this time , but devoted most of his spare time to his military duties and rose in rank quickly , reaching major in 1912 , at the age of 25 , when he became adjutant of his regiment . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Bennett volunteered to serve with the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) and , after securing his release from AMP on full pay , was appointed second @-@ in @-@ command of the 6th Battalion , which was part of the 2nd ( Victorian ) Infantry Brigade , assigned to the 1st Division . After a short period of training , the 1st Division began to embark for Europe . Just prior to his departure overseas , Bennett became engaged to Bess Buchanan , who he had met at a dance in Canterbury . As an engagement gift , Bess bought her betrothed a miniature photo of herself , set in a gold frame . Bennett carried the picture in his jacket pocket while serving overseas and it later saved his life on the Western Front , deflecting a German bullet . 
 = = Gallipoli = = 
 While in transit , as a result of overcrowding in training camps in the United Kingdom , the 1st Division was diverted to Egypt with the intention that it would complete its training there before moving to the Western Front at a later date . The decision by the Allies to force a passage through the Dardanelles interrupted this process , as the 1st Division was allocated to take part in the Gallipoli Campaign . During the landing at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 , Bennett fought on the southern flank of the Anzac beachhead . He led 300 men of his battalion to an advanced position on Pine Ridge , south of Lone Pine . While directing the defence of this position , Bennett was wounded in the shoulder and wrist and forced to retire to the beach for treatment . When the Turkish forces counter @-@ attacked in the evening , the 6th Battalion force on Pine Ridge was isolated and killed to the last man , including Bennett 's younger brother , Godfrey . Instead of accepting evacuation on a hospital ship , after having his wounds treated , Bennett returned to his battalion . 
 In early May , the 2nd Brigade was selected to move to Cape Helles to reinforce the British forces for the Second Battle of Krithia . After being transferred by boat , on 8 May , Bennett advanced with his battalion in impossible conditions . Bennett was the only officer of the 6th , and one of few in the 2nd Brigade , to survive the advance unscathed , although he was lucky do so ; as he led the charge , a Turkish bullet hit the ammunition pouch he wore , exploding the ammunition in it . He was knocked off his feet , but otherwise unharmed . With a handful of men , he achieved the furthest advance of the attack . He became commander of the 6th Battalion the next day . The battalion was then returned to Anzac by a trawler , and shortly afterwards , Bennett 's command of the battalion was confirmed and he was promoted to lieutenant colonel . 
 Throughout June and July , Bennett 's battalion occupied the front line during a period of reduced tempo fighting as a stalemate developed . On 7 August , when the Allies launched their August Offensive to break the stalemate , the 6th Battalion was involved in one of the supporting attacks at the start of the Battle of Sari Bair . While the best known attack was made by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at the Nek , the 6th was required to make a similar attack against a neighbouring Turkish position known as German Officers ' Trench from which machine guns enfiladed the Australian positions as far north as the Nek . Two attempts to capture the trench failed . A third attempt was organised and Bennett resolved to lead it himself but the commander of the 1st Division , Major General Harold Walker , after consulting with the corps commander , Lieutenant General William Birdwood , agreed to abandon the attack . The 6th Battalion 's losses totalled 80 killed and 66 wounded . 
 Following the attack on the German Officers ' Trench , Bennett 's battalion was withdrawn from the front line briefly , before relieving the 1st Brigade , which had successfully captured Lone Pine . The August Offensive failed and a further lull in the fighting occurred . The following month , as reinforcements in the shape of the 2nd Division arrived at Anzac , the original Australian units were relieved on a rotational basis , including the 6th Battalion , which was sent back to Lemnos . While there , Bennett was hospitalised with <unk> and during his stay in hospital , he received word that he had been appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George ( CMG ) . When the 6th Battalion was returned to Gallipoli , Bennett sought to return with them , but was ordered to sail to England aboard the transport Aquitania for further treatment . As well as his CMG , Bennett was also mentioned in despatches twice for his service at Gallipoli . 
 = = Western Front = = 
 Bennett spent Christmas in Southampton , before returning to Egypt early in January 1916 . There , he rejoined his battalion , which was stationed around Gebel <unk> , defending the Suez Canal . He arrived just as the AIF began a period of reorganisation and expansion , which saw the experienced units of the 1st Division being split to provide cadres to the newly formed 5th Division ; as a part of this , the 6th Battalion was split to help form the 58th Battalion in late February . 
 In March 1916 , the 1st Division moved to France as part of the transfer of the AIF 's infantry formations to the Western Front . Bennett subsequently led the 6th Battalion through the Battle of Pozières . After the 1st and 3rd Brigades had captured the town on 24 July 1916 , the 6th and 8th Battalions of the 2nd Brigade moved in to occupy the ruins where they had to endure a prolonged artillery bombardment . Bennett 's battalion headquarters was in a log hut . The hut received six direct hits from shells but survived due to the debris that had accumulated around it . Shortly after Bennett relocated his HQ the hut was finally demolished . On 26 July Bennett protested at the conditions his men had to endure , reporting : " My men are being unmercifully shelled . They cannot hold out if an attack is launched . The firing line and my headquarters are being plastered with heavy guns and the town is being swept by shrapnel . I myself am O.K. but the front line is being buried . " In the capture of Pozières , Bennett 's 6th Battalion suffered 190 casualties , the least by a considerable margin of the 12 battalions in the 1st Division . 
 After this , Bennett continued to serve as the commanding officer of the 6th Battalion , as well as acting as the 3rd Brigade commander . In mid @-@ November , Bennett took a brief leave in London , where he was reunited with his fiancee , Bess , who had sailed from Melbourne with her father to meet him . On 16 November , they were married in Chelsea , and after a short honeymoon in Scotland , Bennett returned to the front . On 3 December 1916 , he was given command of the 3rd Infantry Brigade and promoted to brigadier general , becoming at 29 the youngest general in the Australian Army . He commanded the brigade for the remainder of the war on the Western Front , leading the brigade through several notable actions , including at Bullecourt , Menin Road , and Passchendaele during 1917 , and several actions against the Hindenburg Line in 1918 . While Bennett was serving at the front , his wife remained in England ; he returned to her briefly in November 1917 and again in July 1918 . Just after the war ended , Bess returned to Australia with the couple 's 10 @-@ month @-@ old daughter , while Bennett remained in Europe until June 1919 , briefly touring the Rhine and then viewing the London victory parade , where he escorted Lady Birdwood while her husband , Lord Birdwood , the former commander of the Australian Corps , marched . 
 For his service on the Western Front , Bennett received many awards . He received the Order of Danilo from Montenegro in 1917 , was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1918 , received a Distinguished Service Order in 1919 and mentioned in despatches a further six times . His attitude towards regular officers and temperament , as well as his tendency to act without clearing his actions with superiors , though , resulted in criticism from senior officers . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Upon his return to Australia , Bennett lived at Canterbury with his wife and daughter , while he sought to return to civilian life after his appointment to the AIF was terminated . He was offered his old position at AMP back , having been on full @-@ time leave with pay while serving overseas , but was unhappy with this . He was eventually offered a position in the Commonwealth Bank in Sydney and he moved there with his family . Later , he purchased a textile factory and worked as a clothing manufacturer and public accountant before being appointed chairman of the New South Wales Repatriation Board in 1922 , in which role he was able to help returned soldiers . In 1928 , he was appointed as an administrator of the City of Sydney , along with two other commissioners . He was president of the Chamber of Manufactures of New South Wales between 1931 and 1933 and the Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia between 1933 and 1934 , and was involved in several conservative political groups such as the All for Australia League and the Defence of Australia League . 
 Bennett remained active in the military , continuing to serve as part of the Militia , which was reorganised in 1921 following the conclusion of the demobilisation process . From then until 1926 , he served as commander of the 9th Infantry Brigade , before being appointed to command the 2nd Division . In 1930 , he was promoted to the rank of major general and over the ensuing years became increasingly parochial against the small permanent Staff Corps . He was transferred to the unattached list in 1932 . In 1937 , amidst increasing tensions in Europe , he came into conflict with the Military Board after he wrote a number of newspaper articles expressing his concerns about complacent defence policy and the efficiency of regular officers . 
 = = World War II = = 
 When World War II broke out in 1939 , although only 52 , Bennett was passed over for command of the Second Australian Imperial Force , the position going to General Thomas Blamey . The Chief of the General Staff , General Sir Brudenell White , seems to have been opposed to Bennett being given an active command . A. B. Lodge , Bennett 's biographer in the Australian Dictionary of Biography ( ADB ) comments : " Because of his temperament , he was considered unsuitable for a semi @-@ diplomatic command , and one that involved subordination to British generals . Bennett was as scathing of British officers as he was of Australian regulars . " 
 Bennett was instead given a command in the Volunteer Defence Corps , the Australian version of the British Home Guard . In July 1940 , he took over command of the Eastern Command Training Depot . After White 's death in the Canberra air disaster in August 1940 , Bennett was appointed commander of the newly formed 8th Division , replacing Vernon Sturdee , who was promoted to White 's former role . In February 1941 , the 8th Division 's headquarters , along with one of its brigades – the 22nd – was posted to Malaya in February 1941 , after a request from the British for Australia to contribute troops to bolster the garrison there amid growing concerns of war with the Japanese as part of plans that had been formulated as the pre @-@ war Singapore strategy . The 27th Brigade was also dispatched in August , but the division 's third brigade , the 23rd Brigade remained in Australia . Relations between Bennett and his superiors , and also his subordinate brigade commander , Brigadier Harold Taylor , were not good . Lodge comments : " Bennett 's dealings with British senior officers , especially with the general officer commanding , Malaya , Lieutenant General A.E. Percival , were devoid of harmony . " 
 In December 1941 , the Japanese invasion of Malaya began . Bennett found himself in command of an ad hoc force known as " <unk> " , which included the Australian 27th Brigade – but not the 22nd , which had been transferred to III Indian Corps – and several Indian units . Bennett 's command was not engaged in the early stages of the fighting as the initial Japanese attacks fell on British and Indian units around Kota Bharu and the Thai – Malay border , but as the Japanese pushed the defenders back and advanced into Johore , the Australians fought several actions throughout January . The most significant of these came around <unk> and Muar , where the Australians experienced some local success before being forced to withdraw to Singapore along with the rest of the Allied forces at the end of the month . 
 On Singapore , Bennett 's command once again included the two Australian brigades – the 22nd and 27th – which were allocated the task of defending the north @-@ western sector of the island . On 8 February 1942 , the Japanese launched an assault across the Johore Strait , concentrating upon the sector held by Bennett 's troops . The weight fell on the 22nd Brigade 's area , and as they fought to fend off two Japanese divisions , they were eventually forced to withdraw towards the centre of the island . The 27th Brigade initially managed to hold its sector , but it was subjected to a follow @-@ up assault on 10 February and as the 22nd fell back , it was also forced to withdraw . Heavy fighting followed over the next week , but eventually the Allied troops were pushed across the island to Singapore 's urban areas . On 15 February , Percival began surrender negotiations with the Japanese . That night , Bennett decided that it was his duty to escape from Singapore rather than surrender . He handed over command of the 8th Division to Brigadier Cecil Callaghan . With a few junior officers and some local Europeans , Bennett commandeered a sampan and crossed the Strait of Malacca to the east coast of Sumatra , where they transferred to a launch in which they sailed up the Batang Hari River . They then proceeded by car to Padang , on the west coast of Sumatra . From there Bennett flew to Java and then to Australia , arriving in Melbourne on 2 March 1942 . 
 The fall of Singapore – the largest capitulation in British military history – shocked Australians , resulting in the capture of almost 15 @,@ 000 Australians and many more Indian and British soldiers . Nevertheless , Bennett 's escape was initially regarded as praiseworthy , at least publicly . Prime Minister John Curtin issued a statement that read : 
 I desire to inform the nation that we are proud to pay tribute to the efficiency , gallantry and devotion of our forces throughout the struggle . We have expressed to Major General Bennett our confidence in him . His leadership and conduct were in complete conformity with his duty to the men under his command and to his country . He remained with his men until the end , completed all formalities in connection with the surrender , and then took the opportunity and risk of escaping . 
 Within the military , particularly its senior echelons , Bennett was criticised for leaving his troops . In April 1942 , he was promoted to lieutenant general and given command of III Corps in Perth . At the time , this was an important post , but by 1943 , as the possibility of a Japanese invasion of Australia faded , it became a backwater . Bennett was told by Blamey that he would not be given another active command , and he transferred to the Reserve of Officers in May 1944 . He soon published his account of the Malayan campaign , Why Singapore Fell , which was critical of Percival and other British officers , although his opinions were later challenged by several Australian officers , including Callaghan . Blamey unsuccessfully tried to prevent the book 's publication . Upon retirement from active service , Bennett began writing for a Sydney newspaper and as a correspondent for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation . He remained concerned about his soldiers , though , and met the first group of recently freed 8th Division prisoners of war when they arrived in Sydney on the transport Manunda . For their part , the majority of his former soldiers welcomed him , some even hung a sign over the side of the ship , which read : " We want Bennett " . They later put it in his car as a gesture of their support . 
 = = Postwar inquiries = = 
 The controversy over Bennett 's actions became public in mid @-@ 1945 , when the war ended and Percival and Callaghan were released from Japanese captivity . Percival , who had never got on with Bennett , wrote a letter accusing him of relinquishing his command without permission . Callaghan delivered the letter to Blamey upon his release and Blamey convened a court of enquiry under Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead , and Major Generals Victor <unk> and George Wootten , which found that Bennett was not justified in handing over his command , or in leaving Singapore . Veterans of the 8th Division , who were generally loyal to Bennett , protested against this finding . 
 In November 1945 , Prime Minister Ben Chifley appointed a Royal Commission under Justice George <unk> . The Commission concluded that Bennett had disobeyed Percival 's order to surrender . Lodge wrote : 
 While never questioning Bennett 's personal courage , <unk> concluded that his action had been unjustified . Bennett 's stated reason for leaving Singapore was that he had learned how to defeat the Japanese ( but had been let down by British and Indian troops ) and he was obliged to communicate his knowledge to military authorities . Yet , he had proved no more proficient than other commanders in Malaya and his tactics were outdated . Just as important to him was his wish to lead the Australian army , a consuming aspiration which had been sharpened by not being given an early command . His prejudice against regular officers and his ambition clouded his professional judgement at the most important point in his career . When his most cherished goals were in tatters , he convinced himself that blame for his failure lay with others . 
 In 1948 , Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Fry , a military lawyer , published the opinion : " The Royal Commissioner based his report on an interpretation of international law , and did not discuss General Bennett 's action from the standpoint of Australian military law , which placed him under no inflexible obligation to remain on Singapore Island . " 
 = = Post military and retirement = = 
 Bennett later became an orchardist , purchasing a property and living at <unk> in the Blue Mountains , until 1955 when , due to deteriorating health following a coronary occlusion , he sold his orchard and moved to Sydney . He travelled to Singapore in 1957 with his wife to attend the opening of the Kranji War Memorial and then in 1960 , travelled to Japan to meet with officers who had fought in Malaya . He wrote a number of articles on military topics and served on the board of a number of companies . From 1960 to 1962 , he was Chairman of Directors of MMI Insurance . He died on 1 August 1962 at Dural , survived by <unk> wife and daughter . After a state funeral at St Andrew 's Cathedral , his body was cremated . The diary that Bennett kept while serving in Malaya is held at the State Library of New South Wales . 
 = New Jersey Route 120 = 
 Route 120 is a state highway located in Bergen County , New Jersey , United States . It extends 2 @.@ 65 mi ( 4 @.@ 26 km ) from an interchange with Route 3 in East Rutherford to another interchange with Route 17 in Carlstadt , where it continues to the west as County Route 120 . NJ 120 serves the Meadowlands Sports Complex , which consists of MetLife Stadium , Meadowlands Racetrack , and the Izod Center . It heads north from Route 3 as a six @-@ lane freeway through the sports complex to an interchange with the southern terminus of County Route 503 . From here , Route 120 heads northwest along the northern edge of the sports complex as a four @-@ lane divided at @-@ grade Paterson Plank Road , passing through industrial and commercial areas . 
 In 1927 , Route 3 was legislated along the Paterson Plank Road portion of present @-@ day Route 120 . It was eventually designated along the entire portion of current Route 120 . In 1953 , Route 3 was moved to its current freeway alignment , replacing Route S3 , and a portion of Route 20 was designated to run from current Route 3 north to Paterson Plank Road while Paterson Plank Road was removed from the state highway system . The portion of Paterson Plank Road that lost its state highway status in 1953 gained it back in 1972 , when it became an extension of Route 20 as a result of the construction of the Meadowlands Sports Complex . As this route was not connected to the mainline of Route 20 , it was designated Route 120 by the 1990s . As a result of the construction of American Dream Meadowlands , the interchange between Route 3 and Route 120 was improved . An overpass between eastbound Route 3 and northbound Route 120 was completed in 2009 and a flyover from southbound Route 120 to eastbound Route 3 was completed in 2010 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 120 begins at an interchange with Route 3 in East Rutherford , heading to the north on a six @-@ lane freeway with a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) speed limit . The freeway heads north @-@ northeast into the Meadowlands Sports Complex . Here , MetLife Stadium is on the west side of the road while the Izod Center and the construction site of American Dream Meadowlands are on the east side of the road . Here , the route becomes a 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) freeway that has two interchanges that provide access to the sports complex . The route comes to an interchange with the southern terminus of County Route 503 ( Washington Avenue ) and Paterson Plank Road , where Route 120 becomes a four @-@ lane divided surface road that merges with Paterson Plank Road as it heads northwest along the border of Carlstadt to the northeast and East Rutherford to the southwest . Meanwhile , County Route 503 continues north @-@ northeast to head into the eastern part of Carlstadt . 
 Route 120 passes between the Meadowlands Racetrack and New Jersey Transit 's Meadowlands Rail Line on the East Rutherford side of the road and commercial and industrial areas on the Carlstadt side of the road , intersecting with Gotham Parkway . The route has a southbound exit and entrance to the Meadowlands Sports Complex before it crosses Berrys Creek . Upon crossing the creek , Route 120 continues northwest through industrial and commercial areas , intersecting with Murray Hill Parkway . A short distance past this intersection , the road becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road that crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s Pascack Valley Line before coming to an interchange with Route 17 . Here , Route 120 ends and County Route 120 continues to the west as Paterson Avenue . 
 = = = County Route 120 = = = 
 After crossing the Passaic River into Bergen County , the road is called Paterson Avenue and designated as County Route 120 , in Wallington , in a residential and light @-@ density commercial area . The road becomes the border between Wallington to the north and East Rutherford to the south . At the end of Wallington , Paterson Avenue is the border between Carlstadt and East Rutherford for a short distance but then the road dips into East Rutherford to avoid a hill ( the bypass , which goes over the hill , is called Hoboken Road ) . The road returns to the Carlstadt / East Rutherford border at Route 17 which it crosses over via an overpass , and is then designated as Route 120 and Paterson Plank Road for a distance . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 3 was legislated to run along the Paterson Plank Road portion of today ’ s Route 120 as part of its route between Secaucus and Greenwood Lake . By 1947 , Route 3 had been designated along the entire alignment of current Route 120 . When New Jersey renumbered its state highways in 1953 , Route 3 was moved to a new freeway alignment that was Route S3 . As a result of this realignment , the portion of the route between modern Route 3 and Paterson Plank Road became a portion of Route 20 while the section along Paterson Plank Road was removed from the state highway system . Paterson Plank Road between County Route 503 and Route 17 joined the state highway system again as an extension of this portion of Route 20 in 1972 when the Meadowlands Sports Complex was slated to be built . At this point , Route 20 had consisted of three disconnected segments . Since none of these segments were connected , this portion of road was redesignated Route 120 by the 1990s . 
 With the construction of American Dream Meadowlands , several improvements are taking place to Route 120 . The interchange with Route 3 is being reconstructed with an overpass between eastbound Route 3 and northbound Route 120 that was completed in May 2009 at a cost of $ 38 @.@ 1 million . Also , a flyover from southbound Route 120 to eastbound Route 3 was completed in early 2010 at a cost of $ 13 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Bergen County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Ngo Dinh Diem presidential visit to the United States = 
 Ngô Đình Diệm , the President of South Vietnam , made a state visit to the United States , the main ally of his government , in 1957 . Diệm received a glowing welcome and was heaped with praise as a leader of a " free country " in the midst of the Cold War . The receptions during the visit were in large part organized by the American Friends of Vietnam ( AFV ) , a lobby group dedicated to resolute US support of South Vietnam and which included many politicians from both major parties . The visit was mainly celebratory and ceremonial , rather than being a policy or planning mission . It was part of a year of travelling for Diệm , as he made a visit to Australia in September , as well as to fellow anti @-@ communist countries South Korea and Thailand . 
 Prior to the visit , the US government and the AFV made thorough preparations to make Diệm 's visit pleasant , and the AFV successfully lobbied the media to write favourable reports on the South Vietnamese leader . Diệm was trumpeted as a champion of democracy , and mentions of his autocratic style and election rigging were avoided . Diệm arrived by plane in Washington , D.C. on May 8 , and was personally greeted at the airport by President Dwight D. Eisenhower — an honor Eisenhower accorded to only one other visiting head of state . Diệm 's motorcade was greeted by 50 @,@ 000 <unk> and his address to the US Congress and his policies were heartily endorsed by both sides of politics . During his time in the US capital , Diệm also attended receptions , and had private meetings with both Eisenhower and the US Secretary of State , John Foster Dulles , to discuss American support for South Vietnam , although the meeting with Dulles was ineffectual as Diệm spoke continuously , rendering two @-@ way discussions impossible . 
 Diệm then visited New York City , where he was given a <unk> parade through Manhattan , which was attended by 250 @,@ 000 . He was presented with several honors by the city council and given a civic reception , before attending several functions with business leaders , marketing his country as a favorable location for foreign investment . The South Vietnamese president also made stops at the city 's main Roman Catholic institution , St Patrick 's Cathedral — a Catholic , Diệm had been helped to power by the lobbying of Cardinal Francis Spellman and American Catholic politicians . He also returned to <unk> <unk> where he had stayed while in exile , and to the Catholic Seton Hall University to receive an honorary doctorate . Diệm later received an honorary degree from Michigan State University , where he had stayed in exile earlier in the decade and the day was dedicated in his honor . The South Vietnamese president then traveled westwards across to the pacific coast before returning to Vietnam . 
 The visit was the high point of relations between Diệm and Washington , as in later years , the US government and members of the AFV became increasingly disillusioned with Diệm 's failure to liberalize his government and enact changes to make South Vietnam more democratic . The once @-@ supportive media began to report on South Vietnam without overlooking problems in Diệm 's administration . In 1963 , American support for Diệm collapsed during the Buddhist crisis as Washington concluded that Diệm was incapable of offering a solid alternative to the communists , and he was overthrown in a US @-@ backed military coup and executed after being captured . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1933 , Diệm had been the Interior Minister of Vietnam , serving under Emperor Bảo Đại . However , he resigned after a few months because the French colonial authorities would not give Vietnam any meaningful autonomy , and became a private citizen for the next decade . During World War II , Imperial Japan attacked Indochina and wrested control from France , but when they were defeated by the Allies in 1945 , a power vacuum emerged . The communist @-@ dominated Viet Minh of Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and fought for independence , while the French attempted to regain control of their colony , and created the State of Vietnam under Bảo Đại , which was an associated free state within the French Union . A staunch anti @-@ communist nationalist , Diệm opposed both and attempted to create his own movement , with little success . With both the French and the communists hostile to him , Diệm felt unsafe and went into self @-@ imposed exile in 1950 , leaving Vietnam for the first time in his life . He did so as the communists had sentenced him to death in absentia , while the French refused to give him protection , claiming that they had no resources . Diệm spent most of the next four years in the United States and Europe enlisting support , particularly among fellow Catholic politicians in America and Vatican officials . Diệm 's success with the latter group was helped by the fact that his elder brother Ngô Đình Thục was the leading Catholic cleric in Vietnam and had studied with high @-@ ranking priests in Rome . 
 Diệm had a chance meeting with Wesley Fishel , a political science professor from America during a stopover in Japan . A proponent of the " third force " ideology that opposed communism and colonialism , Fishel quickly befriended Diệm . The American academic organized contacts for Diệm in the US , and he was given an audience with the Acting US Secretary of State James Webb . Diệm made little impression in the first meeting , but continued to meet with lower ranking officials . Thuc introduced his younger brother to Cardinal Francis Spellman , the most politically powerful priest of his time and former classmate of Thuc . Later , Diệm was given a meeting with Pope Pius XII . In early 1951 , Diệm was given an audience with US Secretary of State Dean Acheson . The success of his presentation to Acheson prompted Diệm to stay in the US to campaign , basing himself at Spellman 's seminary in New Jersey . Diệm travelled across the nation , speaking at universities , and he was given a faculty position at Fishel 's institution , the Michigan State University . Diệm then gained the support of US Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas and Senators John McCormack , Mike Mansfield and John F. Kennedy . McCormack later became the Senate Majority Leader , while Mansfield — a Democrat from Montana — had been a professor of Asian history before entering politics ; as a result his opinions about Vietnam were more influential and held in high regard by his fellow senators . 
 In 1954 , the French lost the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the Geneva Conference was held to determine the future of Indochina . The Viet Minh were given control of North Vietnam , while the State of Vietnam controlled the territory south of the 17th parallel . The Geneva agreements , which the State of Vietnam did not sign , called for reunification elections to be held in 1956 . Bảo Đại appointed Diệm as his Prime Minister , hoping Diệm would be able to attract American aid as the French withdrew from Southeast Asia . Diệm returned to Vietnam in June 1954 and took up the post on July 7 , 1954 . After a series of disagreements , Diệm deposed Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum on October 23 , 1955 , and declared himself president of the newly @-@ proclaimed Republic of Vietnam three days later . Diệm received support from the US and other anti @-@ communist countries in the midst of the Cold War . He refused to hold national reunification elections scheduled in 1956 , and asserted that Ho would rig the ballots in the north , although he had done so himself in deposing Bảo Đại . In the meantime , Diệm continued to consolidate his rule and stabilize his new nation . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Diệm 's trip came after two years of American attempts to schedule a state visit . In 1955 , Washington made two attempts to organise a trip while Diệm was still prime minister , but he was too busy quelling opposition groups and his grip on power was tenuous . Diệm took care of this by crushing the Bình Xuyên organised crime syndicate in the Battle for Saigon in May 1955 , and then deposed Bảo Đại and proclaimed the Republic of Vietnam after his brother Ngô Đình Nhu rigged a referendum that made him head of state . Diệm was credited with 98 @.@ 2 % of the votes and 133 % in the capital Saigon . The South Vietnamese leader 's visit was organized after he indicated interest in February 1957 to US Ambassador to South Vietnam Frederick Reinhardt . 
 The Eisenhower administration prepared for Diệm 's arrival in great detail . A memorandum from the Office of Protocol ( OP ) of the State Department gave its personnel detailed information on ceremonial intricacies , such as the correct pronunciation of Diệm 's name . It went further in briefing staff on the toasting procedure . The OP printed and distributed a manual detailing Diệm 's personal traits and idiosyncrasies . It said the South Vietnamese leader was " an introverted , lonely figure ... He is , however , a man with an almost messianic sense of mission " . In 1963 , Diệm held a military parade in honour of his ascension to power in front of empty grandstands , barring the public . The OP warned that Diệm could be " both intransigent and almost brutal in pursuing and applying policies he has decided upon , and ... has a violent temper " . 
 In contrast to public announcements describing the South Vietnamese president was a freedom @-@ loving democrat , the manual also explained Diệm 's authoritarian attitude , as exhibited by his ability to formulate legislation by decree and the police state mechanisms run by Nhu 's Cần Lao Party : In 1955 , Nhu 's agents had beaten those who voted for Bảo Đại instead of Diệm . The manual said that " Vietnam in its present situation and given its own heritage is not yet ready for a democratic government as it is known in the West . The interplay of all shades of opinion in the policy @-@ making process is considered a luxury Vietnam cannot yet afford . " It advised public servants to shun any mention of Diệm 's autocracy and the fact that he regularly killed or jailed dissidents , noting that " He is most sensitive to such charges . " 
 = = = Media campaign = = = 
 In the lead @-@ up to the visit , the American Friends of Vietnam ( AFV ) engaged in a promotional campaign encouraging newspapers to cover Diệm 's visit and imploring them to give the South Vietnamese president favourable coverage . The AFV also drafted many of Diệm 's speeches , making sure that there were analogies made between South Vietnam and various events in American history , so that he would make a good impression on the American public and decision @-@ makers . For this purpose they employed the services of the political consultancy firm Harold Oram . 
 The media prepared for Diệm 's arrival by writing about and praising the South Vietnamese leader in great detail . The Washington Post devoted four pages to its profile of Diệm and titled it " Diệm — Symbol of Free New Asia . " The Washington Evening Star ran the headline " Welcome to a Champion " and described Diệm as " a valiant and effective fighter against communism " . The New York Times praised the visiting president for " advancing the cause of freedom and democracy in Asia " . The Boston Globe dubbed him " Vietnam 's Man of Iron " . Various papers favourably commented on Diệm 's overt opposition to communism , juxtaposing it to non @-@ aligned Asian leaders such as Jawaharlal Nehru of India and Sukarno of Indonesia . Nehru and Sukarno attempted to steer clear of both the US @-@ led anti @-@ communist world and the Soviet bloc , and sought to recruit other countries into their movement . The newspapers compared South Vietnam to a beacon of light in a dark sea of communism . 
 = = Visit = = 
 Diệm arrived at noon on May 8 at the National Airport in Washington , D.C. aboard the plane of U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Columbine III , a silver Constellation . Diệm 's plane landed and he was personally received at the airport by Eisenhower , Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Nathan Twining . It was only the second time in his presidency that Eisenhower had personally gone to the airport to greet a visiting head of state . Diệm was then given a 21 @-@ gun salute and driven by limousine to his residence . A crowd estimated at more than 50 @,@ 000 lined the route taken by the Vietnamese leader 's motorcade . On the day of his arrival , The New York Times editorialized that " President Diệm ... is a substantial partner in a going enterprise on behalf of free men in his country and in ours . We honor him and make him doubly welcome on that account . " Attempting to put a positive spin on the South Vietnamese leader 's lack of emotion towards the crowd , Andrew Tully of The Washington Daily News informed his readers that Diệm 's " air of modest solemnity was far more impressive than any grinning , arm @-@ waving performance could have been " . Diệm 's failure to respond to the greetings of the masses was not new ; when he arrived back in Vietnam from exile to become prime minister in 1954 , he did not bother to wave to well @-@ wishers at Tan Son Nhut Airport . 
 = = = Washington D. C. = = = 
 The next day , Diệm addressed a joint sitting of the US Congress , with both the House of Representatives and the Senate in attendance . He thanked the US for its ongoing support , particularly when his government had been in a perilous state in 1954 and 1955 , and went on to explain his political platform 
 We affirm that the sole legitimate object of the state is to protect the fundamental rights of human beings to existence , to the free development of his [ sic ] intellectual , moral , and spiritual life . ... We affirm that democracy is neither material happiness nor the supremacy of numbers . Democracy is essentially a permanent effort to find the right political means in order to assure to all citizens the right of free development and the maximum initiative , responsibility , and spiritual life . 
 Diệm also thanked the Americans for " the efforts being made to safeguard liberal democracy " as part of Washington 's foreign policy . He compared the million @-@ strong exodus of refugees from communist North Vietnam into the South to that of the pilgrims who had left the British Isles aboard the Mayflower and sailed to Massachusetts to escape religious persecution . This was put in the speech by AFV advisers as the flight of the North Vietnamese refugees had received a great deal of attention in the US due to the statements of Catholic activists . Diệm received a standing ovation and his speech was persistently interrupted by loud applause by legislators . Despite his assertion that the weight of numbers was not the measure of democracy , the American media widely praised his attitude to democracy . Both major parties lavished Diệm with praise . Senator Mansfield said " The chief credit for holding back the communist aggression not only in Vietnam , but , because of that , in Southeast Asia as well , lies in the determination , the courage , the incorruptibility , and the integrity of President Diệm , who has shown such great ability and has accomplished so much against tremendous odds . " Mansfield 's praise was given more weight than that of other senators because of his academic qualifications before entering politics . Senator Jacob Javits , a Republican from New York , dubbed Diệm " one of the real heroes of the free world " . 
 Eisenhower said " President Ngô Đình Diệm stands for the highest qualities of heroism and statesmanship ... The president of Vietnam , by his inspiring leadership , is opening up vast new areas for the peaceful progress of mankind . " In a nationally @-@ televised speech , Secretary of State Dulles said " I am very much impressed by Prime Minister Diệm . He is a true patriot and dedicated to independence , " referring to his defeat of the Bình Xuyên in the 1955 Battle for Saigon . The Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Walter Robertson said " Asia has given us in President Diệm another great figure , and the entire Free World has become the richer for his example of determination and moral fortitude . " 
 At the time the Commercial Import Program ( CIP ) appeared to be working successfully and North Vietnam had not decided to attack the South after Diệm had canceled the planned 1956 reunification elections . The glowing press coverage of the period contrasted to that of the later decades of the 1960s and 1970s , in which the American media engaged in investigative journalism that undermined the official line presented by Washington in relation to Vietnam . This was particularly true during Diệm 's downfall in 1963 . Journalists such as David Halberstam , Malcolm Browne and Neil Sheehan all won Pulitzer Prizes for their work on the Buddhist crisis , in which mass protests erupted after years of discrimination against the Buddhist majority . 
 On his third day in Washington , Diệm was the keynote speaker and guest at a National Press Club lunch . He attacked Asian leaders who advocated neutralism , saying that " Since communism is not neutral , we cannot be neutral " . This impressed the media , who prominently noted Diệm 's unequivocal stance in their reports . The Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning Marguerite Higgins of the New York Herald Tribune said that " it is a refreshing — almost startling — experience to hear this Asian hero assert forthrightly : ' communism isn 't neutral , therefore we cannot be neutral . ' ... He made himself unique among recent Asian visitors ... by the decisiveness with which he publicly chose up sides with the United States and against the communists " . In her critique , Higgins again criticized the stances of Nehru and Sukarno . Such was the impact of Diệm 's soundbite that the AFV thereafter used it as a headline quote in their <unk> and campaigns . 
 Diệm went on to answer a question about his religious convictions by declaring his adherence to Catholicism and saying " I have always found the principles of my religion a great inspiration , and , if I have achieved anything in my political career , I owe it all to those principles " . His comments were widely trumpeted in Catholic newspapers , which cited it as the reason why he was able to stop a communist takeover of South Vietnam . 
 The visit was largely ceremonial and mainly focused on mutual praise rather than specific policy planning and negotiations . Diệm stayed in the capital for four days , meeting with Eisenhower and high @-@ ranking members of the State Department on the last of these days . However , the meeting with Dulles turned into a farce after the Secretary of State and his subordinates decided to visit Diệm at Blair House . Diệm , notorious for monologues that often lasted for up to six hours , talked endlessly and as a result the American diplomats were unable to raise whatever issues they had wanted to discuss . 
 During the meeting with Eisenhower , Diệm asked about the American commitment towards the defense of South Vietnam . At the time , communist guerrillas had begun a low @-@ level campaign against Diệm in an attempt to reunify Vietnam under their rule . In response , Diệm began a widespread campaign to crush the communist remnants . Diệm felt that the cloud cover over Indochina would make it difficult for air bombings against communist guerrillas to be effective . He predicted that the communists would try to enter South Vietnam through Laos , which turned out to be the case when the Ho Chi Minh trail came into full usage . Diệm asked the US for a guarantee of continuing aid ; at the time , two thirds of South Vietnam 's budget came from the CIP , which was mainly abused by the urban elite to buy consumer goods . Diệm knew that the Eisenhower administration and Congress wanted to make budget savings and implored them to refrain from cutting the CIP expenditure , fearing a deterioration in the Vietnamese economy . Eisenhower said that Vietnamese security was ensured by the South East Asian Treaty Organization , but Diệm remained anxious , believing that the other member states were too weak and lacking in resources to stand by their pledges to defend his country . Upon Diệm 's departure from the capital , the White House released a statement praising " the remarkable achievements of the Republic of Viet @-@ Nam under his leadership . " ' 
 = = = New York City = = = 
 After leaving Washington , Diệm traveled to New York City , and disembarked from the Columbine III at LaGuardia Airport . New York had a large Irish Catholic population , and Diệm received an even greater reception than in the capital . Diệm was taken in a seven @-@ car motorcade to St. Patrick 's Cathedral in New York City , where Bishop Joseph <unk> delayed the mass to await the South Vietnamese president . After leading Diệm to a point of honor in the cathedral 's sanctuary , Bishop <unk> said " We are delighted and we are proud to have ... His Excellency Ngô Đình Diệm . The whole world acclaimed him when this God @-@ fearing anti @-@ communist and courageous statesman saved Vietnam ! ... [ Y ] our fellow Catholics join our hearts and souls with you at this altar of God . " 
 Diệm then visited the <unk> Seminary . In the early 1950s , when Diệm 's political fortunes were at a low ebb , he had gone into self @-@ imposed exile and stayed there for a period , engaging in religious practice and building up his political contacts among Catholics , most notably Cardinal Spellman . Diệm was given a strongly supportive reception by the seminarians . He then went to South Orange , New Jersey , where he was conferred with an honorary law degree from the Catholic Seton Hall University , on the grounds that he , " more than anyone else , stopped the communists in their hour of partial conquest of Vietnam " . Diệm had stayed at Seton Hall during his period in exile and claimed partial credit for the creation of an Oriental Studies Department at the university . He said that the new department would " help to salvage what must be salvaged of the values of Asia in the tornado that befell this large portion of the world . " 
 The next day , Diệm was given a <unk> parade from Lower Broadway to City Hall , and given a reception by the Mayor Robert Wagner . Around 250 @,@ 000 people cheered him during the parade . Wagner called Diệm " a man to whom freedom is the very breath of life " , referred to the Republic of Vietnam as a " political miracle " , and said that " the principal credit ... should go to President Ngô Đình Diệm , a man history may yet adjudge as one of the great figures of the twentieth century . " Diệm was bestowed the city 's Medal of Honor and a scroll for " Distinguished and Exceptional Service " . In turn , Diệm praised New York City at a lunch hosted by Wagner in his honor . Diệm praised New York City for successfully integrating large numbers of immigrants of different backgrounds , describing the city as a symbol of " human brotherhood " . Again on the advice of AFV consultants , he compared this to recent events in Vietnam . 
 Diệm then met the Council on Foreign Relations , where he promoted Vietnamese <unk> interests and touted his country as an ideal place for foreign investment . He described Vietnamese people as industrious workers who focused on developing farmland rather than building monuments and palaces . Diệm was given a dinner in his honor at the Ambassador Hotel . It was organized by the AFV and the International Rescue Committee ( IRC ) . The AFV had been formed by Joseph Buttinger , an IRC member who had worked in Saigon in assisting with Operation Passage to Freedom , the mass evacuation of North Vietnamese refugees to the south after the partition of Vietnam in 1954 . 
 Diệm was given an award commemorating Richard Byrd , a polar explorer who previously served as the honorary chairman of the IRC 's board of directors . The master of ceremonies was Henry Luce , the boss of Time magazine , which had been a fervent backer of Diệm . Spellman delivered the speech and the dignitaries included John D. Rockefeller , Senators Mansfield and Kennedy , Eleanor Roosevelt , and William Randolph Hearst , Jr .. Diệm thanked America generally and Luce and his media operations in particular for its support of Vietnam . The dinner was also attended by IRC chairman Leo <unk> , who read a telegram from Eisenhower , extolling Diệm for exhibiting " the highest qualities of heroism and statesmanship . " The day after , Diệm attended mass with Spellman and was the guest of honor at a business lunch hosted by the Far East @-@ America Council of Commerce and Industry at the Waldorf Astoria . Diệm promoted South Vietnam as a business opportunity for American entrepreneurs , saying that the populace was pro @-@ American , unlike other countries , and that they welcomed foreign investment . 
 = = = Closing stages = = = 
 Diệm then left New York City and traveled to Michigan State University , where he had stayed during a self @-@ imposed exile in the early @-@ 1950s . Fishel worked at the university and helped Diệm secure a position there . On May 15 , the South Vietnamese leader gave a speech to 4 @,@ 000 people and received an honorary degree ; Governor Mennen Williams decreed that day to be " Ngô Đình Diệm Day " . Diệm then visited Tennessee before stopping at Los Angeles for a banquet hosted by the Los Angeles World Affairs Council . 
 Diệm left the mainland on May 19 , and his final stop was in Hawaii , where he was a guest of Admiral Felix Stump , the commander of United States Pacific Fleet . The reason for the visit was to discuss Diệm 's concerns over America 's reaction if South Vietnam came under communist attack . Stump reiterated Washington 's opinions that nuclear weapons would be used to defend any anti @-@ communist country that was attacked by communists , in accordance with public statements made by Eisenhower and Dulles . He said the Americans would do so by dropping nuclear weapons on communist China . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The visit to the US was the high point in Diệm 's relations with his primary sponsor . The Americans began to place increasing pressure on Diệm to carry out democratic reforms and liberalize the political system , particularly during ambassadorship of Elbridge Durbrow . Diệm resisted the calls to broaden the base of his government and continued to rig elections . Meanwhile in the US , his support among the AFV also declined , in part due to his ongoing authoritarianism , and also because of his persistent complaints to them about negative media depictions of his regime ; many Vietnamese leaders of various persuasions did not understand that western governments did not control their own media . Pressure also increased on Diệm at home , as the communists intensified their insurgency against him . In November 1960 , discontent in his own army prompted a failed coup attempt by paratroopers . Although Diệm eventually organized for loyalists to put down the coup , he was angered by Durbrow 's calls for him to try to negotiate a settlement , regarding the lack of support for his zero tolerance policy as a betrayal . 
 In 1963 , as mass civil disobedience broke out due to discontent from the Buddhist majority over Diệm 's pro @-@ Catholic discrimination , sparked by the fatal shootings of nine people who were demonstrating against the ban on the Buddhist flag . The US began to lose confidence in Diệm 's ability to run the country effectively and prevent the growth of the communist insurgency , and concluded that he was an obstacle to religious and thus national stability . During this time , the American press corps wrote unvarnished stories about the South Vietnamese government 's policies and actions , in contrast to the supportive pieces of the 1950s , and Diệm 's attempt to physically intimidate correspondents backfired . After Diệm tried to settle the Buddhist crisis by launching synchronized raids on Buddhist temples across the country to round up those monks who were leading protests against him , the Americans began to look for alternative leadership , sending Cable 243 to their embassy in Saigon to authorise the search for someone to replace Diệm . In November 1963 , Diệm was overthrown in a US @-@ backed coup and he and Nhu were captured and executed . 
 = Terra Nova Expedition = 
 The Terra Nova Expedition , officially the British Antarctic Expedition , was an expedition to Antarctica which took place between 1910 and 1913 . It was led by Robert Falcon Scott and had various scientific and geographical objectives . Scott wished to continue the scientific work that he had begun when leading the Discovery Expedition to the Antarctic in 1901 – 04 . He also wanted to be the first to reach the geographic South Pole . He and four companions attained the pole on 17 January 1912 , where they found that the Norwegian team led by Roald Amundsen had preceded them by 34 days . Scott 's entire party died on the return journey from the pole ; some of their bodies , journals , and photographs were found by a search party eight months later . 
 The expedition , named after its supply ship , was a private venture , financed by public contributions augmented by a government grant . It had further backing from the Admiralty , which released experienced seamen to the expedition , and from the Royal Geographical Society . The expedition 's team of scientists carried out a comprehensive scientific programme , while other parties explored Victoria Land and the Western Mountains . An attempted landing and exploration of King Edward VII Land was unsuccessful . A journey to Cape Crozier in June and July 1911 was the first extended sledging journey in the depths of the Antarctic winter . 
 For many years after his death , Scott 's status as tragic hero was unchallenged , and few questions were asked about the causes of the disaster which overcame his polar party . In the final quarter of the 20th century the expedition came under closer scrutiny , and more critical views were expressed about its organization and management . The degree of Scott 's personal culpability , and more recently , the culpability of certain expedition members , remains a matter of controversy among commentators . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After Discovery 's return from the Antarctic in 1904 , Scott eventually resumed his naval career , but continued to nurse ambitions of returning south , with the conquest of the Pole as his specific target . The Discovery Expedition had made a significant contribution to Antarctic scientific and geographical knowledge , but in terms of penetration southward had reached only 82 ° 17 ' and had not traversed the Great Ice Barrier . In 1909 Scott received news that Ernest Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition had narrowly failed to reach the Pole . Starting from a base close to Scott 's Discovery anchorage in McMurdo Sound , Shackleton had crossed the Great Ice Barrier , discovered the Beardmore Glacier route to the Polar Plateau , and had struck out for the Pole . He had been forced to turn for home at 88 ° 23 ' S , less than 100 geographical miles ( 112 statute miles , 180 km ) from his objective . Scott had claimed prescriptive rights to the McMurdo Sound area , describing it as his own " field of work " , and Shackleton 's use of the area as a base was in breach of an undertaking he gave Scott not to do so . This soured relations between the two explorers , and increased Scott 's determination to surpass Shackleton 's achievements . 
 As he made his preparations for a further expedition , Scott was aware of other polar ventures being planned . A Japanese expedition was being planned ; the Australasian Antarctic Expedition under Douglas Mawson was to leave in 1911 , but would be working in a different sector of the continent . Meanwhile , Roald Amundsen , a potential rival , had announced plans for an Arctic voyage . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Sixty @-@ five men ( including replacements ) formed the shore and ship 's parties of the Terra Nova Expedition . They were chosen from 8 @,@ 000 applicants , and included seven Discovery veterans together with five who had been with Shackleton on his 1907 – 09 expedition . Lieutenant Edward Evans , who had been the navigating officer on Morning , the Discovery expedition 's relief ship in 1904 , was appointed Scott 's second @-@ in @-@ command . He abandoned plans to mount his own expedition , and transferred his financial backing to Scott . 
 Among the other serving Royal Navy ( RN ) personnel released by the Admiralty were Lieutenant Harry Pennell , who would serve as navigator and take command of the ship once the shore parties had landed , and two Surgeon @-@ Lieutenants , George Murray Levick and Edward L Atkinson . Ex @-@ RN officer Victor Campbell , known as " The Wicked Mate " , was one of the few who had skills in skiing , and was chosen to lead the party that would explore King Edward VII Land . Two non @-@ Royal Navy officers were appointed : Henry Robertson Bowers , known as " Birdie " , who was a lieutenant in the Royal Indian Marine , and Lawrence Oates ( " Titus " ) , an Army captain from the 6th ( Inniskilling ) Dragoons . Oates , independently wealthy , volunteered his services to the expedition and paid £ 1 @,@ 000 ( 2009 value approximately £ 75 @,@ 000 ) into its funds . 
 The Admiralty also provided a largely naval lower deck , including the Antarctic veterans Edgar Evans , Tom Crean and William Lashly . Other seamen in the shore party included Patrick Keohane and Robert Forde , Thomas Clissold ( cook ) and Frederick Hooper ( domestic steward ) . Two Russians , Dimitri Gerov ( dog driver ) and Anton <unk> ( groom ) , also landed . 
 To head his scientific programme , Scott appointed Edward Wilson as chief scientist . Wilson was Scott 's closest confidant among the party ; on the Discovery expedition he had accompanied Scott on the Farthest South march to 80 ° S. As well as being a qualified medical doctor and a distinguished research zoologist , he was also a talented illustrator . His scientific team – which Scott 's biographer David Crane considered " as impressive a group of scientists as had ever been on a polar expedition " — included some who would enjoy later careers of distinction : George Simpson the meteorologist , Charles Wright , the Canadian physicist , and geologists Frank Debenham and Raymond Priestley . T. Griffith Taylor , the senior of the geologists , biologist Edward W. Nelson and assistant zoologist Apsley Cherry @-@ Garrard completed the team . Cherry @-@ Garrard had no scientific training , but was a protege of Wilson 's . He had , like Oates , contributed £ 1 @,@ 000 to funds . After first being turned down by Scott , he allowed his contribution to stand , which impressed Scott sufficiently for him to reverse his decision . Scott 's biographer David Crane describes Cherry @-@ Garrard as " the future interpreter , historian and conscience of the expedition . " Herbert Ponting was the expedition 's photographer , whose pictures would leave a vivid visual record . On the advice of Fridtjof Nansen , Scott recruited a young Norwegian ski expert , <unk> Gran . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Scott had decided on a mixed transport strategy , relying on contributions from dogs , motor sledges and ponies . He appointed Cecil Meares to take charge of the dog teams , and recruited Shackleton 's former motor specialist , Bernard Day , to run the motor sledges . Oates would be in charge of the ponies , but as he could not join the expedition until May 1910 , Scott instructed Meares , who knew nothing of horses , to buy them — with unfortunate consequences for their quality and performance . 
 A " polarised " motor car had been unsuccessfully tried in the Antarctic by Shackleton , on his 1907 – 09 expedition , while his pioneering use of ponies had transported him as far as the foot of the Beardmore Glacier . Scott believed that ponies had served Shackleton well , and he thought he could resolve the motor traction problem by developing a tracked snow " motor " ( the forerunner of the <unk> and of the tank ) . However , Scott always intended to rely on man @-@ hauling for the polar plateau , believing it impossible to ascend the Beardmore Glacier with motors or with animals . The motors and animals would be used to haul loads only across the Barrier , enabling the men to preserve their strength for the later Glacier and Plateau stages . In practice , the motor sledges proved only briefly useful , and the ponies ' performance was affected by their age and poor condition . As to dogs , while Scott 's experiences on Discovery had made him dubious of their reliability , his writings show that he recognised their effectiveness in the right hands . As the expedition developed , he became increasingly impressed with their capabilities . 
 = = = Finance = = = 
 Unlike the Discovery expedition , where fundraising was handled jointly by the Royal Society and the Royal Geographical Society , the Terra Nova Expedition was organised as a private venture without significant institutional support . Scott estimated the total cost at £ 40 @,@ 000 ( £ 3 million at 2009 values ) , half of which was eventually met by a government grant . The balance was raised by public subscription and loans . The expedition was further assisted by the free supply of a range of provisions and equipment from sympathetic commercial firms . The fund @-@ raising task was largely carried out by Scott , and was a considerable drain on his time and energy , continuing in South Africa , Australia , and New Zealand after Terra Nova had sailed from British waters . 
 By far the largest single cost was the purchase of the ship Terra Nova , for £ 12 @,@ 500 . Terra Nova had been in Antarctica before , as part of the second Discovery relief operation . Scott wanted to sail her as a Naval vessel under the White Ensign ; to enable this , he obtained membership of the Royal Yacht Squadron for the sum of £ 100 . He was thus able to impose Naval discipline on the expedition , and as a registered yacht of the Squadron , Terra Nova became exempt from Board of Trade regulations which might otherwise have deemed her unfit to sail . 
 = = = Objectives = = = 
 Scott defined the objects of the expedition in his initial public appeal : " The main objective of this expedition is to reach the South Pole , and to secure for The British Empire the honour of this achievement . " There were other objectives , both scientific and geographical ; the scientific work was considered by chief scientist Wilson as the main work of the expedition : " No one can say that it will have only been a Pole @-@ hunt ... We want the scientific work to make the bagging of the Pole merely an item in the results . " Wilson hoped to continue investigations , begun during the Discovery expedition , of the penguin colony at Cape Crozier , and to fulfil a programme of geological , magnetic and meteorology studies on an " unprecedented " scale . There were further plans to explore King Edward VII Land , a venture described by Campbell , who was to lead it , as " the thing of the whole expedition " , and Victoria Land . 
 = = First season , 1910 – 11 = = 
 = = = Voyage out = = = 
 Terra Nova sailed from Cardiff , Wales , on 15 June 1910 . Scott , detained by expedition business , sailed later on a faster passenger liner and joined the ship in South Africa . In Melbourne , Australia , he left the ship to continue fund @-@ raising , while Terra Nova proceeded to New Zealand . Waiting for Scott in Melbourne was a telegram from Amundsen , informing Scott that the Norwegian was " proceeding south " ; the telegram was the first indication to Scott that he was in a race . When asked by the press for a reaction , Scott replied that his plans would not change and that he would not sacrifice the expedition 's scientific goals to win the race to the Pole . In his diary he wrote that Amundsen had a fair chance of success , and perhaps deserved his luck if he got through . 
 Scott rejoined the ship in New Zealand , where additional supplies were taken aboard , including 34 dogs , 19 Siberian ponies and three motorised sledges . Terra Nova , heavily overladen , finally left Port Chalmers on 29 November 1910 . During the first days of December the ship was struck by a heavy storm ; at one point , with the ship taking heavy seas and the pumps having failed , the crew had to bail her out with buckets . The storm resulted in the loss of two ponies , a dog , 10 imperial tons ( 10 @,@ 200 kg ) of coal and 65 imperial gallons ( 300 L ) of petrol . On 10 December Terra Nova met the southern pack ice and was halted , remaining for 20 days before breaking clear and continuing southward . The delay , which Scott attributed to " sheer bad luck " , had consumed 61 tons of coal . 
 = = = Cape Evans base = = = 
 Arriving off Ross Island on 4 January 1911 , Terra Nova scouted for possible landing sites around Cape Crozier at the eastern point of the island , before proceeding to McMurdo Sound to its west , where both Discovery and Nimrod had previously landed . After Scott had considered various possible wintering spots , he chose a cape remembered from the Discovery days as the " <unk> " , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of Scott 's 1902 base at Hut Point . Scott hoped that this location , which he renamed Cape Evans after his second @-@ in @-@ command , would be free of ice in the short Antarctic summer , enabling the ship to come and go . As the seas to the south froze over , the expedition would have ready access over the ice to Hut Point and the Barrier . At Cape Evans the shore parties disembarked , with the ponies , dogs , the three motorised sledges ( one of which was lost during unloading ) , and the bulk of the party 's stores . Scott was " astonished at the strength of the ponies " as they transferred stores and materials from ship to shore . A prefabricated accommodation hut , measuring 50 ft x 25 ft ( 15 m x 7 @.@ 7 m ) , was erected and made habitable by 18 January . 
 = = = Amundsen 's camp = = = 
 Scott 's programme included a plan to explore and carry out scientific work in King Edward VII Land , to the east of the Barrier . A party under Campbell was organised for this purpose , with the option of exploring Victoria Land to the north @-@ west if King Edward VII Land proved inaccessible . On 26 January 1911 Campbell 's party left in the ship and headed east . After several failed attempts to land his party on the King Edward VII Land shore , Campbell exercised his option to sail to Victoria Land . On its return westward along the Barrier edge , Terra Nova encountered Amundsen 's expedition camped in the Bay of Whales , an inlet in the Barrier . 
 Amundsen was courteous and hospitable , willing for Campbell to camp nearby and offering him help with his dogs . Campbell politely declined , and returned with his party to Cape Evans to report this development . Scott received the news on 22 February , during the first depot @-@ laying expedition . According to Cherry @-@ Garrard , the first reaction of Scott and his party was an urge to rush over to the Bay of Whales and " have it out " with Amundsen . However , Scott recorded the event calmly in his journal . " One thing only fixes itself in my mind . The proper , as well as the wiser , course is for us to proceed exactly as though this had not happened . To go forward and do our best for the honour of our country without fear or panic . " 
 = = = Depot laying , 1911 = = = 
 The aim of the first season 's depot @-@ laying was to place a series of depots on the Barrier from its edge ( Safety Camp ) down to 80 ° S , for use on the polar journey which would begin the following spring . The final depot would be the largest , and would be known as One Ton Depot . The work was to be carried out by 12 men , the 8 fittest ponies , and two dog teams ; ice conditions prevented the use of the motor sledges . 
 The journey started on 27 January , " in a state of hurry bordering on panic " , according to Cherry @-@ Garrard . Progress was slower than expected , and the ponies ' performance was adversely affected because Oates was opposed to using Norwegian snowshoes and had left them behind at Cape Evans . On 4 February the party established Corner Camp , 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Hut Point , when a blizzard held them up for three days . A few days later , after the march had resumed , Scott sent the three weakest ponies home ( two died en route ) . As the depot @-@ laying party approached 80 ° , Scott became concerned that the remaining ponies would not make it back to base unless the party turned north immediately . Against the advice of Oates , who wanted to go forward , killing the ponies for meat as they collapsed , Scott decided to lay One Ton Depot at 79 ° 29 ' S , more than 30 miles ( 48 km ) short of its intended location . 
 Scott returned to Safety Camp with the dogs , after risking his own life to rescue a dog @-@ team that had fallen into a crevasse . When the slower pony party arrived , one of the animals was in very poor condition and died shortly afterwards . Later , as the surviving ponies were crossing the sea ice near Hut Point , the ice broke up . Despite a determined rescue attempt , three more ponies died . Of the eight ponies that had begun the depot @-@ laying journey , only two returned home . 
 = = = Winter quarters , 1911 = = = 
 On 23 April 1911 the sun set for the duration of the winter months , and the party settled into the Cape Evans hut . Under Scott 's naval regime the hut was divided by a wall made of packing cases , so that officers and men lived largely separate existences , scientists being deemed " officers " for this purpose . Everybody was kept busy ; scientific work continued , observations and measurements were taken , equipment was overhauled and adapted for future journeys . The surviving ponies needed daily exercise , and the dogs required regular attention . Scott spent much time calculating sledging rations and weights for the forthcoming polar march . The routine included regular lectures on a wide range of subjects : Ponting on Japan , Wilson on sketching , Oates on horse management and geologist Frank Debenham on volcanoes . To ensure that physical fitness was maintained there were frequent games of football in the half @-@ light outside the hut ; Scott recorded that " Atkinson is by far the best player , but Hooper , <unk> Evans and Crean are also quite good . " The South Polar Times , which had been produced by Shackleton during the Discovery expedition , was resurrected under Cherry @-@ Garrard 's editorship . On 6 June a feast was arranged , to mark Scott 's 43rd birthday ; a second celebration on 21 June marked Midwinter Day , the day that marks the midpoint of the long polar night . 
 = = Main expedition journeys , 1911 – 12 = = 
 = = = Northern Party = = = 
 After reporting Amundsen 's arrival to Scott at Cape Evans , Campbell 's Eastern party became the " Northern Party " . On 9 February 1911 they sailed northwards , arriving at Robertson Bay , near Cape Adare on 17 February , where they built a hut close to Norwegian explorer Carstens Borchgrevink 's old quarters . 
 The Northern Party spent the 1911 winter in their hut . Their exploration plans for the summer of 1911 – 12 could not be fully carried out , partly because of the condition of the sea ice and also because they were unable to discover a route into the interior . Terra Nova returned from New Zealand on 4 January 1912 , and transferred the party to the vicinity of Evans Cove , a location approximately 250 miles ( 400 km ) south of Cape Adare and 200 miles ( 320 km ) northwest of Cape Evans . They were to be picked up on 18 February after the completion of further geological work , but due to heavy pack ice , the ship was unable to reach them . The group , with meagre rations which they had to supplement by fish and seal meat , were forced to spend the winter months of 1912 in a snow cave which they excavated on <unk> Island . Here they suffered severe privations — frostbite , hunger , and dysentery , with extreme winds and low temperatures , and the discomfort of a blubber stove in confined quarters . 
 On 17 April 1912 a party under Edward Atkinson , in command at Cape Evans during the absence of the polar party , went to relieve Campbell 's party , but were beaten back by the weather . The Northern Party survived the winter in their icy chamber , and set out for the base camp on 30 September 1912 . Despite their physical weakness , the whole party managed to reach Cape Evans on 7 November , after a perilous journey which included a crossing of the difficult Drygalski Ice Tongue . Geological and other specimens collected by the Northern Party were retrieved from Cape Adare and Evans Cove by Terra Nova in January 1913 . 
 = = = Western geological parties = = = 
 = = = = First geological expedition , January – March 1911 = = = = 
 The objective of this journey was geological exploration of the coastal area west of McMurdo Sound , in a region between the McMurdo Dry Valleys and the Koettlitz Glacier . This work was undertaken by a party consisting of Griffith Taylor , Debenham , Wright and Edgar Evans . They landed from Terra Nova on 26 January at Butter Point , opposite Cape Evans on the Victoria Land shore . On 30 January , the party established its main depot in the Ferrar Glacier region , and then conducted explorations and survey work in the Dry Valley and Taylor Glacier areas before moving southwards to the Koettlitz Glacier . After further work there , they started homewards on 2 March , taking a southerly route to Hut Point , where they arrived on 14 March . 
 = = = = Second geological expedition , November 1911 – February 1912 = = = = 
 This was a continuation of the work carried out in the earlier journey , this time centring on the Granite Harbour region approximately 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of Butter Point . Taylor 's companions this time were Debenham , Gran and Forde . The main journey began on 14 November , and involved difficult travel over sea ice to Granite Harbour , which was reached on 26 November . Headquarters were established at a site christened Geology Point , and a stone hut was built . During the following weeks , exploration and surveying work took place on the Mackay Glacier , and a range of features to the north of the glacier were identified and named . The party was due to be picked up by Terra Nova on 15 January 1912 , but the ship could not reach them . The party waited until 5 February before trekking southward , and were rescued from the ice when they were finally spotted from the ship on 18 February . Geological specimens from both Western Mountains expeditions were retrieved by Terra Nova in January 1913 . 
 = = = Winter journey to Cape Crozier = = = 
 This journey was conceived by Wilson . He had suggested the need for it in the Zoology section of the Discovery Expedition 's Scientific Reports , and was anxious to follow up this earlier research . The journey 's scientific purpose was to secure emperor penguin eggs from the rookery near Cape Crozier at an early embryo stage , so that " particular points in the development of the bird could be worked out " . This required a trip in the depths of winter to obtain eggs in an appropriately early stage of incubation . A secondary purpose was to experiment with food rations and equipment in advance of the coming summer 's polar journey . Scott approved , and a party consisting of Wilson , Bowers and Cherry @-@ Garrard set out on 27 June 1911 . 
 Travelling during the Antarctic winter had not been previously tried ; Scott wrote that it was " a bold venture , but the right men have gone to attempt it . " Cherry @-@ Garrard later described the horrors of the 19 days it took to travel the 60 miles ( 97 km ) to Cape Crozier . Gear , clothes , and sleeping bags were constantly iced up ; on 5 July , the temperature fell below − 77 ° F ( − 60 ° C ) – " 109 degrees of frost – as cold as anyone would want to endure in darkness and iced up clothes " , wrote Cherry @-@ Garrard . Often the daily distance travelled was little more than a single mile . 
 After reaching Cape Crozier on 15 July the party built an igloo from snow blocks , stone , and a sheet of wood they had brought for the roof . They were then able to visit the penguin colony and collect several emperor penguin eggs . Subsequently their igloo shelter was almost destroyed in a blizzard with force 11 winds . The storm also carried away the tent upon which their survival would depend during their return journey , but fortunately this was recovered , half a mile away . The group set out on the return journey to Cape Evans , arriving there on 1 August . The three eggs that survived the journey went first to the Natural History Museum in South Kensington , and thereafter were the subject of a report from Dr. <unk> Stewart at the University of Edinburgh . The eggs failed , however , to provide proof of Wilson 's theories . 
 Cherry @-@ Garrard afterwards described this as the " worst journey in the world " , and used this as the title of the book that he wrote in 1922 as a record of the entire Terra Nova Expedition . Scott called the Winter Journey " a very wonderful performance " , and was highly satisfied with the experiments in rations and equipment : " We are as near perfection as experience can direct . " 
 = = = South polar journey = = = 
 On 13 September 1911 , Scott revealed his plans for the South Pole march . Sixteen men would set out , using the two remaining motor sledges , ponies and dogs for the Barrier stage of the journey , which would bring them to the Beardmore Glacier . At this point the dogs would return to base and the ponies would be shot for food . Thereafter , twelve men in three groups would ascend the glacier and begin the crossing of the polar plateau , using man @-@ hauling . Only one of these groups would carry on to the pole ; the supporting groups would be sent back at specified latitudes . The composition of the final polar group would be decided by Scott during the journey . For the return journey , Scott ordered that the dogs teams set off again from the base camp to replenish depots and meet the Polar party between latitude 82 and 82 @.@ 30 on March 1 to assist the party home . 
 The Motor Party ( Lt. Evans , Day , Lashly and Hooper ) started from Cape Evans on 24 October with two motor sledges , their objective being to haul loads to latitude 80 ° 30 ' S and wait there for the others . By 1 November both motor sledges had failed after little more than 50 miles ( 80 km ) of travel , so the party man @-@ hauled 740 pounds ( 336 kg ) of supplies for the remaining 150 miles ( 240 km ) reaching their assigned latitude two weeks later . Scott 's main party , which had left Cape Evans on 1 November with the dogs and ponies , caught up with them on 21 November . 
 Scott 's initial plan was that the dogs would return to base at this stage . However , because of the slower than expected progress Scott decided to take the dogs on further . Day and Hooper were dispatched to Cape Evans with a message to this effect for Simpson , who had been left in charge there . On 4 December the expedition had reached the Gateway , the name given by Shackleton to the route from the Barrier on to the Beardmore Glacier . At this point a blizzard struck , forcing the men to camp until 9 December and to break into rations intended for the Glacier journey . When the blizzard lifted , the remaining ponies were shot as planned , and their meat deposited as food for the return parties . On 11 December , Meares and Dimitri turned back with the dogs , carrying a message back to base that " things were not as rosy as they might be , but we keep our spirits up and say the luck must turn . " 
 The party began the ascent of the Beardmore , and on 20 December reached the beginning of the polar plateau where they laid the Upper Glacier Depot . There was still no hint from Scott as to who would be in the final polar party . On 22 December , at latitude 85 ° 20 ' S , Scott sent back Atkinson , Cherry @-@ Garrard , Wright and Keohane . Scott reminded Atkinson " to take the two dog @-@ teams south in the event of Meares having to return home , as seemed likely " to assist the polar party on its return journey the following March . 
 The remaining eight men continued south , in better conditions which enabled them to make up some of the time lost on the Barrier . By 30 December they had " caught up " with Shackleton 's 1908 – 09 timetable . On 3 January 1912 , at latitude 87 ° 32 ' S , Scott made his decision on the composition of the polar party : five men ( Scott , Wilson , Oates , Bowers and Edgar Evans ) would go forward while Lt. Evans , Lashly and Crean would return to Cape Evans . The decision to take five men forward involved recalculations of weights and rations , since everything had been based on four @-@ men teams . 
 The polar group continued towards the Pole , passing Shackleton 's Furthest South ( 88 ° 23 ' S ) on 9 January . Seven days later , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) from their goal , Amundsen 's black flag was spotted and the party knew that they had been forestalled . They reached the Pole the next day , 17 January 1912 : " The Pole . Yes , but under very different circumstances from those expected ... Great God ! This is an awful place and terrible enough for us to have laboured to it without the reward of priority . Well , it is something to have got here " Scott still hoped to race Amundsen to the telegraph <unk> in Australia : " Now for a desperate struggle to get the news through first . I wonder if we can do it . " However , on 18 January 1912 they discovered Amundsen 's tent , some supplies , a letter to King Haakon VII of Norway ( which Amundsen politely asked Scott to deliver ) and a note stating that Amundsen had arrived there with four companions on 16 December 1911 . 
 After confirming their position and planting their flag , Scott 's party turned homewards . During the next three weeks they made good progress , Scott 's diary recording several " excellent marches " . Nevertheless , Scott began to worry about the physical condition of his party , particularly of Edgar Evans who was suffering from severe frostbite and was , Scott records , " a good deal run down . " The condition of Oates 's feet became an increasing anxiety , as the group approached the summit of the Beardmore Glacier and prepared for the descent to the Barrier . On 7 February , they began their descent and had serious difficulty locating a depot . In a brief spell of good weather , Scott ordered a half @-@ day 's rest , allowing Wilson to " <unk> " ; 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) of fossil @-@ bearing samples were added to the sledges . These plant fossils are now known to prove the theory of continental drift . Edgar Evans 's health was deteriorating ; a hand injury was failing to heal , he was badly frostbitten , and is thought to have injured his head after several falls on the ice . " He is absolutely changed from his normal self @-@ reliant self " , wrote Scott . Near the bottom of the glacier he collapsed , and died on 17 February . 
 On the Barrier stage of the homeward march , Scott reached the 82 @.@ 30 ° S meeting point for the dog teams , three days ahead of schedule , noting in his diary for 27 February 1912 " We are naturally always discussing possibility of meeting dogs , where and when , etc . It is a critical position . We may find ourselves in safety at the next depot , but there is a horrid element of doubt . " The party then met with three , ultimately critical , difficulties : the non @-@ appearance of the dog teams , a large unexpected drop in temperature , and a shortage of fuel in the depots . The low temperatures caused poor surfaces which Scott likened to " pulling over desert sand " ; he described the surface as " coated with a thin layer of woolly crystals , formed by radiation no doubt . These are too firmly fixed to be removed by the wind and cause impossible friction on the [ sledge ] runners . " The low temperatures were accompanied by an absence of wind , something Scott had expected to assist them on their northern journey . 
 The party were further slowed down by the frostbite in Oates ' left foot - daily marches were now down to less than five miles , which was insufficient given the lack of oil . Furthermore , by March 10 it became evident the dog teams were not coming : " The dogs which would have been our salvation have evidently failed . Meares [ the dog @-@ driver ] had a bad trip home I suppose . " In a farewell letter to Sir Edgar Speyer , dated March 16 , Scott wondered whether he had overshot the meeting point and fought the growing suspicion that he had in fact been abandoned by the dog teams : " We very nearly came through , and it 's a pity to have missed it , but lately I have felt that we have overshot our mark . No @-@ one is to blame and I hope no attempt will be made to suggest that we had lacked support . " On the same day , Oates , who " now with hands as well as feet pretty well useless " , voluntarily left the tent and walked to his death . Scott wrote that Oates ' last words were " I am just going outside and may be some time " . 
 Oates ' sacrifice increased the team 's speed but it was too late to save them , especially since Scott 's right toes were now becoming frostbitten . Scott , Wilson and Bowers struggled on to a point 11 miles ( 18 km ) south of One Ton Depot , but were halted on 20 March by a fierce blizzard . Although each day they attempted to advance , they were unable to do so . Scott 's last diary entry , dated 29 March 1912 , the presumed date of their deaths , ends with these words : 
 Every day we have been ready to start for our depot 11 miles away , but outside the door of the tent it remains a scene of whirling drift . I do not think we can hope for any better things now . We shall stick it out to the end , but we are getting weaker , of course , and the end cannot be far . It seems a pity but I do not think I can write more . R. Scott . Last entry . For God 's sake look after our people . 
 = = Attempts to relieve the polar party , 1912 = = 
 = = = Orders concerning dogs = = = 
 Before setting out on the South Pole journey , Scott had made arrangements intended to help the polar party home , with the use of dogs . Meares , who was expected to have returned to Cape Evans by 19 December , had been instructed that in late December or early January he should transport to One Ton Depot " Five XS rations [ XS = " Extra Summit Ration " , food for four men for one week ] , 3 cases of biscuit , 5 gallons of oil and as much dog food as you can conveniently carry " . If this mission could not be carried out by dogs , then " at all hazard " a man @-@ hauling team was to carry the XS rations to the depot . Meares had been further instructed that in about the first week in February , depending on news received from returning units , he should set out , with dogs , with a view to meeting the returning polar party between latitudes 82 ° or 82 ° 30 ' on about 1 March . The objective of these orders was to hasten the party back to Cape Evans before Terra Nova left , so that news of the polar conquest could be carried immediately to New Zealand . Scott placed greater emphasis on the former journey than on the latter : " Whilst the object of your third journey is important , that of the second is vital " . 
 The substance of these orders was reiterated to Atkinson when he left Scott at the top of the Beardmore Glacier on 22 December 1911 . 
 Several events occurred to obscure and ultimately frustrate this order . The fact that Meares had turned back from the polar march much later than originally planned meant that he did not return to Cape Evans until 5 January . Huntford suggests he resigned at this point because he was " disgusted " with Scott 's expedition . Fiennes in contrast quotes from a letter by Cherry Garrard in 1938 that Meares had been ready at Cape Evans to resupply One Ton Depot as ordered , when he had seen the ship arrive in the bay and so stayed at base - the " ship " however turned out to be a mirage , and the real ship did not arrive until the middle of February . According to Fiennes , Meares was preoccupied with his late father 's estate , and was anxious to leave on the ship as soon as he could . Three of the XS rations required for One Ton Depot had been man @-@ hauled there by a party which left Cape Evans on 26 December , but neither Meares nor anyone else transported the missing rations or the dog food to One Ton Depot . 
 = = = Atkinson 's aborted journey to meet Scott = = = 
 When Atkinson arrived back at Cape Evans from the Beardmore Glacier at the end of January , he was the senior officer present and thus in command of the base camp , a role to which he was not accustomed . Terra Nova arrived from her winter mooring in New Zealand on 9 February , and instead of setting off for Scott , Atkinson used the shore party for the arduous task of unloading the ship – a mistake , Cherry @-@ Garrard thought , since these men might be required to sledge again . Belatedly , on 13 February , Atkinson set out with Dimitri Gerov and the dog teams for the scheduled meeting with Scott on the Barrier , arriving and pausing at Hut Point on 19 February . 
 Meanwhile , however , during the final returning party 's journey , Lt Evans had become seriously ill with scurvy . After One Ton Depot he was unable to march , and was carried on the sledge by Crean and Lashly to a point 35 miles ( 56 km ) south of Hut Point . At that point he appeared likely to die . On 18 February , Crean walked on alone to reach Hut Point ( covering 35 miles of difficult terrain in only 18 hours ) , where he found Atkinson and Dimitri with their dogs , pausing in their journey to meet Scott . Atkinson diverted his attention to the rescue of Evans , whom he brought to Hut Point , barely alive , on 22 February . From that point , Atkinson 's priority was to bring Evans to the safety of the ship . 
 = = = Cherry @-@ Garrard 's journey to One Ton Depot = = = 
 With Atkinson thus occupied , an alternative arrangement to pick up Scott was necessary . Disregarding Meares , who was " not available for work " , the most qualified person available to meet Scott 's party was the physicist Wright , an experienced traveller and navigator , but the chief scientist Simpson insisted Wright 's scientific work be given priority . Atkinson therefore chose Cherry @-@ Garrard , who could however not navigate , had never handled a dog before and who was moreover short @-@ sighted . Lt Evans wrote later that he thought Scott would have approved the decision to keep Wright at the base camp , whereas Wright later stated " It always worries me - I should have had that job " . Cherry @-@ Garrard would be accompanied by Dimitri . In his 1922 book The Worst Journey , Cherry @-@ Garrard recalled the controversial verbal orders given by Atkinson . He was to travel to One Ton Depot as fast as possible , where he was to leave food for the returning polar party . If Scott had not arrived before him , Cherry @-@ Garrard should decide " what to do " . Atkinson also emphasised that this was not a rescue party , and added that Scott had given instructions that the dogs were " not to be risked in view of the sledging plans for next season " . In the standard edition of his book , Cherry omitted any mention of Scott 's request to be picked up at 82 ° or 82 ° 30 ' on March 1 . But after Atkinson 's and Lady Scott 's deaths in 1929 and 1947 respectively , in a postscript to his privately published 1948 edition , Cherry acknowledged the existence of Scott 's order and provided reasons why Atkinson , and later he himself , failed to comply : Cherry @-@ Garrard in 1948 stated that Atkinson was too exhausted at the beginning of February to set off to meet Scott , and that the lack of dog food at One Ton Depot made a timely start impractical . Karen May of the Scott Polar Research Institute goes further by suggesting that the instruction about saving the dogs for the following season was Atkinson 's own invention . 
 Cherry @-@ Garrard left Hut Point with Dimitri and two dog teams on 26 February , arriving at One Ton on 4 March and depositing the extra rations . Scott was not there . With supplies for themselves and the dogs for 24 days , they had about eight days ' time before having to return to Hut Point . The alternative to waiting was moving southwards for another four days . Any travel beyond that , in the absence of the dog food depot , would mean killing dogs for dog food as they went along , thus breaching Atkinson 's " not to be risked " order . Cherry @-@ Garrard argued that the weather was too poor for further travel , with daytime temperatures as low as − 37 ° F ( − 38 ° C ) , and that he might miss Scott if leaving the depot , and thus decided to wait for Scott . On 10 March , in worsening weather , with his own supplies dwindling , Cherry @-@ Garrard turned for home . Meanwhile , Scott 's team were fighting for their lives less than 70 miles ( 110 km ) away . Atkinson would later write , " I am satisfied that no other officer of the expedition could have done better " . Cherry @-@ Garrard was troubled for the rest of his life by thoughts that he might have taken other actions that could have saved the polar party . 
 = = = Atkinson 's final relief effort = = = 
 When Cherry @-@ Garrard returned from One Ton Depot without Scott 's party , anxieties rose . Atkinson , now in charge at Cape Evans as the senior naval officer present , decided to make another attempt to reach the polar party when the weather permitted , and on 26 March set out with Keohane , man @-@ hauling a sledge containing 18 days ' provisions . In very low temperatures ( − 40 ° F , − 40 ° C ) they had reached Corner Camp by 30 March , when , in Atkinson 's view , the weather , the cold and the time of year made further progress south impossible . Atkinson recorded , " In my own mind I was morally certain that the [ polar ] party had perished " . 
 = = Search party , October 1912 = = 
 The remaining expedition members still at Cape Evans waited through the winter , continuing their scientific work . In the spring Atkinson had to consider whether efforts should first be directed to the rescue of Campbell 's party , or to establishing if possible the fate of the polar party . A meeting of the whole group decided that they should first search for signs of Scott . The party set out on 29 October , accompanied by a team of mules that had been landed from the Terra Nova during its resupply visit the previous summer . On 12 November the party found the tent containing the frozen bodies of Scott , Wilson and Bowers , 11 miles ( 18 km ) south of One Ton Depot . Atkinson read the relevant portions of Scott 's diaries , and the nature of the disaster was revealed . After diaries , personal effects and records had been collected , the tent was collapsed over the bodies and a cairn of snow erected , topped by a cross fashioned from Gran 's skis . The party searched further south for Oates 's body , but found only his sleeping bag . On 15 November , they raised a cairn near to where they believed he had died . 
 On returning to Hut Point on 25 November the search party found that Campbell 's Northern Party had rescued itself and had returned safely to base . 
 Early in the morning of 10 February 1913 Dr Edward Atkinson and Lieutenant Harry Pennell rowed into the New Zealand port of Oamaru , from where they sent a coded message back to the expedition 's New Zealand agent , Joseph Kinsey , informing him of the fate of Scott and his party . Atkinson and Pennell then boarded a train to meet the Terra Nova in Lyttelton near Christchurch . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As Campbell was now the senior Naval officer of the expedition , he assumed command for its final weeks , until the arrival of Terra Nova on 18 January 1913 . Before the final departure a large wooden cross was erected on the slopes of Observation Hill , overlooking Hut Point , inscribed with the five names of the dead and a quotation from Tennyson 's Ulysses : " To strive , to seek , to find , and not to yield " . 
 The loss of Scott and his party overshadowed all else in the British public 's mind , including Amundsen 's feat in being first at the Pole . For many years the image of Scott as a tragic hero , beyond reproach , remained virtually unchallenged , for although there were rifts among some who were close to the expedition , including relatives of those who died , this disharmony was not public . There was no real change in public perceptions until the 1970s , by which time nearly all those directly concerned with the expedition were dead . 
 Controversy was ignited with the publication of Roland Huntford 's book Scott and Amundsen ( 1979 , re @-@ published and televised in 1985 as The Last Place on Earth ) . Huntford was critical of Scott 's supposedly authoritarian leadership style and of his poor judgment of men , and blamed him for a series of organisational failures that led to the death of everyone in the polar party . Scott 's personal standing suffered from these attacks ; efforts to restore his reputation have included the account by Ranulph Fiennes ( a direct rebuttal of Huntford 's version ) , Susan Solomon 's scientific analysis of the weather conditions that ultimately defeated Scott , David Cranes 's 2005 biography of Scott , and Karen May 's new analysis of Scott 's disobeyed orders specifying that the dog teams transport his returning party swiftly back to the base camp . 
 In comparing the achievements of Scott and Amundsen , most polar historians generally accept that Amundsen 's skills with ski and dogs , his general familiarity with ice conditions , and his clear focus on a non @-@ scientific expedition gave him considerable advantages in the race for the Pole . Scott 's verdict on the disaster that overtook his party , written when he was close to death , lists the initial loss of pony transport , weather conditions , " a shortage of fuel in our depots for which I cannot account " , and the sickening of Evans and Oates , but ultimately Scott concludes that " our wreck is certainly due to this sudden advent of severe weather [ ... ] on the Barrier [ ... ] − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) in the day , − 47 ° F ( − 44 ° C ) at night " . Presumably with regard to the failed rendez @-@ vous with the dog teams requested for 1 March 1912 , Scott furthermore wrote " No @-@ one is to blame and I hope no attempt will be made to suggest that we have lacked support " . Cherry @-@ Garrard , whom Atkinson placed in charge of the dog teams which started late , failed to meet Scott and turned for home , observes that " the whole business simply bristles with ' ifs ' " ; an accumulation of decisions and circumstances that might have fallen differently ultimately led to catastrophe . But " we were as wise as anyone can be before the event . " 
 Thirty @-@ one years later , after suffering irreversible damage while carrying supplies to base stations in Greenland , the SS Terra Nova was set on fire and later sunk by gunfire off the southern coast of Greenland on 13 September 1943 , at 60 ° 15 ′ 15 ″ N , 45 ° 55 ′ 45 ″ W. Its submerged remains were found in 2012 . 
 = James E. Boyd ( scientist ) = 
 James Emory " Jim " Boyd ( July 18 , 1906 – February 18 , 1998 ) was an American physicist , mathematician , and academic administrator . He was director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute from 1957 to 1961 , president of West Georgia College ( now the University of West Georgia ) from 1961 to 1971 , and acting president of the Georgia Institute of Technology from 1971 to 1972 . 
 A graduate of the University of Georgia and Duke University , Boyd began in academia as a professor of physics at West Georgia College . He then became a professor at Georgia Tech and a prominent researcher at the Engineering Experiment Station , now known as the Georgia Tech Research Institute . At the Engineering Experiment Station , Boyd helped spur the organization 's mainstay : federally funded electronics research and development . Along with fellow Georgia Tech researchers Gerald Rosselot and Glen P. Robinson , Boyd was influential in the founding of Scientific Atlanta , where he was a board member for 25 years . As director of the Engineering Experiment Station , Boyd focused on the recruitment of talented engineers and an increase in physical space available to the organization , including the establishment of nuclear research at Georgia Tech with a radioisotopes laboratory and the construction of the Frank H. Neely Research Reactor . 
 While he was the third president of West Georgia College , Boyd increased faculty , degrees , programs , and both undergraduate and graduate enrollment on the campus . Boyd racially integrated the campus in 1963 , unprompted by a court order , and oversaw immense construction projects that dramatically expanded the campus to support the increased ( and future ) enrollment . Hired away to serve as the University System of Georgia 's Vice Chancellor for Academic Development in 1970 , he was almost immediately reassigned to be Georgia Tech 's interim president . During his tenure at Georgia Tech from 1971 to 1972 , Boyd resolved difficult issues in the attempted takeover of the Engineering Experiment Station by previous Georgia Tech president Arthur G. Hansen and the poor performance of ( and corresponding alumni calls to remove ) head football coach Bud Carson . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Boyd was born to Emory Fortson and Rosa Lee ( née Wright ) Boyd on July 18 , 1906 in <unk> , Georgia , a small town near the eastern border of the state of Georgia . He had two brothers , John and Ellis , and a sister , Sophia . In 1927 , he received a Bachelor of Arts in mathematics from the University of Georgia , where he was a member of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society . In 1928 , he received a Master of Arts in mathematics from Duke University . From 1928 to 1930 , Boyd was an instructor of physics at the University of Georgia . He entered graduate school at Yale University in 1930 , and was a graduate assistant there from 1930 – 1931 and a Loomis Fellow from 1931 – 1933 . He received his PhD in physics from Yale in 1933 , with a thesis entitled Scattering of X @-@ Rays by Cold @-@ Worked and by <unk> Beryllium . In his thesis , Boyd described the effects of reflecting radiation through samples of powdered , cold @-@ worked and annealed beryllium with differing particle sizes . The experiment showed that beryllium crystals are " rather imperfect " , that annealing caused " no appreciable change " in beryllium 's lattice structure , and that the mass absorption coefficient of beryllium found in the experiment was reasonably close to the theoretical value calculated using Compton 's empirical formula . 
 Boyd was appointed as head of the Mathematics and Science Department at West Georgia College in 1933 . In 1935 , he joined the faculty at the Georgia Institute of Technology as an assistant professor of physics . Boyd married Elizabeth Reynolds Cobb , daughter of Betty Reynolds Cobb and Hiram Felix Cobb , on June 2 , 1934 . James and Elizabeth went on to have two children : a daughter , Betty Cobb Boyd ( born August 26 , 1939 ) and a son , James Fortson Boyd ( born October 9 , 1942 ) . With World War II under way , Boyd joined the United States Navy in 1942 , serving as a lieutenant and later lieutenant commander in the Bureau of Ordnance , performing research on radar . From 1945 to 1946 , he was a commander in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations where he worked on radar and electronics . 
