 = = = Researcher and entrepreneur = = = 
 In 1946 , Boyd returned to Georgia Tech 's physics department and its Engineering Experiment Station , where he worked as Assistant Project Director under Frank Lawrence ( and , after Lawrence 's departure , as Project Director ) on an Army Air Corps @-@ sponsored project studying microwave propagation . As part of the project , he conducted long @-@ range line @-@ of @-@ sight experiments between Georgia Tech and Mount Oglethorpe in North Georgia . In 1947 , Boyd co @-@ authored a study entitled Propagation Studies of Electromagnetic Waves , which resulted in a series of related research contracts , including a large one obtained from the Navy Bureau of Ordnance on radar @-@ directed fire control . Boyd was promoted to professor of physics in 1948 . Around 1950 , under the authority of his rank of commander in the U.S. Navy Reserve , Boyd created a U.S. Navy Research Reserve Unit at Georgia Tech that included officers from both Georgia Tech and the Atlanta metropolitan area . In the 1950s , Boyd was promoted to captain and ran this unit until his departure from Georgia Tech . 
 In 1950 , Boyd was named the first head of the newly created Physics Division of the Engineering Experiment Station ( now known as the Georgia Tech Research Institute ) . Boyd recruited his former student Glen P. Robinson to the station . In late 1951 , Robinson , station director Gerald Rosselot and Boyd helped start Scientific Associates ( now Scientific Atlanta , part of Cisco ) with $ 700 in seed money to produce and market antenna products that were developed at the station , as the station 's leadership did not think Georgia Tech should be involved in the manufacturing business . Georgia Tech vice president Cherry Emerson believed that EES employees ' affiliation with Scientific Atlanta constituted a conflict of interest and asked Boyd , Rosselot , and Robinson to choose between the two organizations . Boyd resigned from his post at Scientific Atlanta and remained with Georgia Tech , but chose to retain his position on Scientific Atlanta 's Board of Directors . According to Robinson , " Dr. Boyd is really considered the founder of Scientific Atlanta . " 
 = = Administrator = = 
 = = = Experiment Station director = = = 
 Boyd was promoted to Assistant Director of Research at the Engineering Experiment Station in 1954 . He served as director of the station from July 1 , 1957 , until 1961 . While at Georgia Tech , Boyd wrote an influential article about the role of research centers at institutes of technology , which argued that research should be integrated with education ; Boyd applied this by involving undergraduates in his day @-@ to @-@ day research . Boyd was known for his recruitment of faculty capable of both teaching and performing notable research . He was influential enough to be able to override the wishes of Joseph Howey , director of the School of Physics , on occasion : for example , Boyd successfully hired physicist Earl W. McDaniel in 1954 over Howey 's determined opposition . 
 Under Boyd 's purview , the Engineering Experiment Station was awarded many electronics @-@ related contracts , to the extent that an Electronics Division was created in 1959 ; it focused on radar and communications . In 1955 , Georgia Tech president Blake R. Van Leer appointed Boyd to Georgia Tech 's Nuclear Science Committee . The committee recommended the creation of a Radioisotopes Laboratory Facility and the construction of a large research reactor . The former was built and dedicated on January 7 , 1959 , and could receive , store , and process radioactive materials . The Frank H. Neely Research Reactor was completed in 1963 and was operational until 1996 , when the fuel was removed because of safety concerns related to the nearby 1996 Summer Olympics events . In 1961 , Boyd was succeeded in the directorship by Robert E. <unk> , who had previously been the director of Georgia Tech 's School of Civil Engineering . 
 = = = West Georgia College president = = = 
 Boyd became the third President of West Georgia College in 1961 after William H. Row died of a heart attack . Boyd is most known for his peaceful racial integration of the campus ( without waiting for a court order ) in 1963 by inviting a young black woman , Lillian Williams , to attend the college ; she eventually earned two degrees in education and in 1985 received the college 's highest honor , the Founder 's Award . In May 1964 , Boyd invited Robert F. Kennedy to the dedication of the campus chapel as the Kennedy Chapel , which was named after Robert 's brother , U.S. President John F. Kennedy , who had been assassinated in November 1963 . During his visit , Robert Kennedy promoted the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which was then under debate in the United States Senate . 
 Boyd dramatically expanded the college during his tenure , both in terms of headcount and academic diversity . Enrolment grew from 1 @,@ 089 students upon his arrival in 1961 to 5 @,@ 503 students on his departure in 1971 . In 1959 , there were two degrees and five programs available ; in 1969 – 70 there were seven degrees and 45 programs . There were 94 graduate students in 1961 ; the first master 's programs were offered in 1967 , and by 1969 the number of graduate students had risen to 741 . In 1969 alone , 80 new faculty members were hired , a number larger than the total number of faculty members a decade earlier . Several new buildings were constructed , including nine dormitories and five academic buildings . Policy changes occurred as well : in 1966 , the curfew for junior and senior women was abolished , and fraternities and sororities were allowed on campus . In 1970 , Boyd was named the University System of Georgia 's first vice chancellor for academic development , effective once his successor ( Emory graduate Ward B. <unk> ) was appointed in 1971 . 
 = = Georgia Tech president = = 
 In a little under a month after Boyd had assumed the vice chancellorship , then @-@ Georgia Tech president Arthur G. Hansen resigned . Chancellor George L. Simpson appointed Boyd as Acting President of the Georgia Institute of Technology , a post he held from May 1971 to March 1972 . 
 = = = Engineering Experiment Station = = = 
 Simpson 's selection of Boyd as interim president was influenced by Boyd 's previous experience as an academic administrator , his experience as director of the Engineering Experiment Station , and Boyd 's ongoing position on the station 's board of directors . The chancellor hoped this combination would help resolve a brewing controversy over whether the Engineering Experiment Station should be integrated into Georgia Tech 's academic units to improve both entities ' competitiveness for federal money . The station had sizable and growing support from the state of Georgia and its Industrial Development Council , which developed products and methods and provided technical assistance for Georgia industry . However , due in part to efforts made by Boyd and previous station director Gerald Rosselot , the station increasingly relied on electronics research funding from the federal government . In 1971 , funding to both Georgia Tech 's academic units and the Experiment Station began to suffer due to a combination of a sharp decline in state funds and cuts to federal science , research , and education funding after the end of the Space Race funding boom . Similar institutions , such as the Battelle Memorial Institute , Stanford Research Institute , and the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute had weathered this storm by becoming exceedingly good at obtaining research contracts . 
 Boyd 's predecessor Arthur G. Hansen 's " bold and controversial " solution to both entities ' problems was to completely integrate the station into Georgia Tech 's academic units . On paper , this would dramatically increase Georgia Tech 's stated research funding ( as all of it would be performed through the academic units ) , and it would increase options and financial aid for graduate students . Another , less publicized , reason was that Georgia Tech would gain access to the contract organization 's reserve fund , which was said to be over $ 1 million ( equivalent to $ 6 @.@ 1 million in 2015 ) . Thomas E. Stelson , Dean of the College of Engineering at Georgia Tech , was named to " reorganize " the station . Publicly , Stelson 's task was simply to recommend a plan for reorganization , but the administration clearly intended for Georgia Tech and the Engineering Experiment Station to be closely integrated . Maurice W. Long , who was director of the station at the time , viewed the move as a violation of the EES 's charter as legislatively established by the Georgia General Assembly in 1919 , and asserted that Georgia Tech did not have the authority to merge the two institutions . EES employees and business executives involved with the station appealed to the Georgia Board of Regents and to Governor of Georgia ( and future United States President ) Jimmy Carter ( himself a Georgia Tech alumnus ) ; the controversy received coverage in both The Technique and the Atlanta Constitution . 
 This was the climate into which Boyd entered as interim institute president after Hansen had announced , on April 27 , 1971 , that he would be departing Georgia Tech to become president of Purdue University on July 1 of that year . Boyd stopped the plan for absolute absorption of the station , but did allow plans for closer control and more aggressive contract solicitation to proceed . Among these measures were increased resource @-@ sharing , including increased sharing of physical assets and research staff . The latter was evidenced by the increase in joint faculty appointments between the EES and Georgia Tech . The move paid off , and the fiscal year 1970 – 1971 saw EES win new contracts and grants , totaling a record $ 5 @.@ 2 million ( equivalent to $ 30 @.@ 4 million in 2015 ) . 
 = = = Athletic Association = = = 
 Boyd had to deal with intense public pressure to fire the then Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets football coach , Bud Carson . Georgia Tech alumni – accustomed to success under football legends John Heisman ( whose career wins – losses – draws statistics were 185 – 70 – 17 ) , William A. Alexander ( 134 – 95 – 15 ) and Bobby Dodd ( 165 – 64 – 8 ) – made repeated calls for Carson 's dismissal . The complaints were based on a long list of infractions , including " mistreating and humiliating students " and " unsportsmanlike conduct " , but the most important issue was his 27 – 27 record . The last straw was his 6 – 6 season in 1971 , which included both a loss to Georgia Tech 's longtime rival , the Georgia Bulldogs , and to the Mississippi State Bulldogs in the 1971 Peach Bowl . As institute president , Boyd chaired the Board of Directors of the Georgia Tech Athletic Association , which had been suffering both in win percentage and in finances . 
 Traditional sources of Athletic Association income , primarily ticket sales , had declined as a result of both the Yellow Jackets ' poor record and the relatively recent establishment of professional football in Atlanta , namely the Atlanta Falcons . Bobby Dodd , then athletic director , had warned for years that Georgia Tech 's rising academic standards and its limited curriculum would affect the athletic program . At a meeting on January 8 , 1972 , the Athletic Association board , led by Boyd , ignored a 42 @-@ page list of " charges " drafted by an alumnus , but nevertheless voted to not renew Carson 's contract , making him the first Georgia Tech coach to be fired . The board also voted to not accept Bobby Dodd 's resignation , which had been offered at the meeting . Carson went on to have a successful career , particularly with the Pittsburgh Steelers . On January 21 , 1972 , Boyd announced that Bill Fulcher had been selected as the new football head coach . This would not change the Georgia Tech Athletic Association 's fortunes , however ; after Carson 's departure , the on @-@ field and financial problems remained . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 Joseph M. Pettit was selected as the next president of Georgia Tech in March 1972 , after which Boyd returned to his position as vice chancellor for academic development for the University System of Georgia . Boyd retired from professional life in 1974 . Upon retirement , he was named an honorary member of Georgia Tech 's ANAK Society . 
 In 1997 , the Georgia Board of Regents approved the naming and dedication of the math and physics building at the University of West Georgia as the " James E. Boyd Building " . Two scholarships were created in his honor at the University of West Georgia ; one for the top geology student , and one for a graduate of Bremen High School . Boyd died at the age of 91 on February 18 , 1998 , at his home in Carrollton , Georgia . The funeral was on February 20 , 1998 , at St. Margaret 's Episcopal Church in Carrollton , Georgia , and he was interred at Carrollton City Cemetery , Georgia . 
 = U.S. Route 40 Scenic = 
 U.S. Route 40 Scenic ( US 40 Scenic ) is a scenic route of US 40 in the U.S. state of Maryland . US 40 Scenic , which is known for most of its route as National Pike , is the old alignment of US 40 over Town Hill in eastern Allegany County and Sideling Hill in far western Washington County . The highway was originally constructed as part of a turnpike connecting Baltimore with the eastern end of the National Road at Cumberland in the early 19th century . The highway was paved as a modern road in the mid @-@ 1910s and designated US 40 in the late 1920s . US 40 was relocated over Sideling Hill in the early 1950s and over Town Hill in the mid @-@ 1960s . The US 40 Scenic designation was first applied to the old highway over Town Hill in 1965 . Following the completion of Interstate 68 ( I @-@ 68 ) at Sideling Hill , US 40 Scenic was extended east along old US 40 's crossing of the mountain in the late 1980s . US 40 Scenic is the only scenic route in the U.S. Highway System ; formerly , there was a second , US 412 Scenic in Oklahoma , but this has since been redesignated to a more conventional " Alternate " route . 
 The scenic route includes an officially @-@ referenced and fully state @-@ maintained section that runs 9 @.@ 50 miles ( 15 @.@ 29 km ) from Fifteen Mile Creek Road in Green Ridge State Forest near Exit 62 of I @-@ 68 and US 40 to the Washington County line within eastern Allegany County . US 40 Scenic also includes an unofficial but signed section in western Washington County that has a concurrency with I @-@ 68 and has sections maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration and Washington County . The solely signed section runs from the official section at High Germany Road near I @-@ 68 Exit 72 just west of the Allegany – Washington county line east to MD 144 near I @-@ 68 Exit 77 west of Hancock . The signed section between Fifteen Mile Creek Road and MD 144 is 16 @.@ 1 miles ( 25 @.@ 9 km ) eastbound and 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) westbound . The difference in mileage is due to the westbound scenic route following Mountain Road , which is unsigned MD 903 , to its entrance to I @-@ 68 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 40 Scenic begins as Fifteen Mile Creek Road on the edge of Green Ridge State Forest 0 @.@ 05 miles ( 0 @.@ 080 km ) south of the eastbound ramps for Exit 62 of I @-@ 68 and US 40 ( National Freeway ) . Fifteen Mile Creek Road continues south as an unimproved road through Green Ridge State Forest . US 40 Scenic passes over I @-@ 68 and passes by the westbound Exit 62 ramps before intersecting the eastern end of MD 144 ( Old National Pike ) , which heads west as the local complement to the National Freeway . The scenic route continues as National Pike , crosses <unk> Creek , then makes a sharp curve to the east , intersecting another section of Fifteen Mile Creek Road and beginning the short climb to the top of Green Ridge . After a short descent , the highway begins its curvy ascent of Town Hill , which has no climbing lanes . US 40 Scenic , which passes through the Billmeyer Wildlife Management Area , descends the mountain to the community of Piney Grove , where the highway intersects Orleans Road . At Mann Road , the highway turns south to cross over I @-@ 68 . The scenic route turns east again at Turkey Farm Road and parallels the eastbound side of I @-@ 68 until the highway reaches High Germany Road , which is unsigned MD <unk> , in the hamlet of <unk> . 
 The referenced portion of US 40 Scenic continues east to its official terminus at Sideling Hill Creek at the Washington County line . Signed US 40 Scenic turns north onto High Germany Road and joins I @-@ 68 in a concurrency at Exit 72 . The scenic route crosses Sideling Hill Creek into Washington County and begins its ascent of Sideling Hill on I @-@ 68 . US 40 Scenic exits I @-@ 68 at Exit 74 , a partial interchange ( eastbound exit and westbound entrance ) on the western slope of the mountain . Eastbound US 40 Scenic exits the freeway on a sweeping curve ramp that ends at the southern end of Mountain Road . Mountain Road is a two @-@ lane road that heads north as a state highway , signed as US 40 Scenic west and unsigned as 0 @.@ 91 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 46 km ) long MD 903 . MD 903 's northern terminus is at US 40 Scenic 's ramp onto westbound I @-@ 68 . 
 US 40 Scenic continues south as National Pike from the junction of its two directions as a county @-@ maintained , three @-@ lane road , two lanes eastbound and one lane westbound , ascending Sideling Hill . During the climb , the scenic route intersects McFarland Road , the original alignment of US 40 that heads west to the official eastern terminus of US 40 Scenic . As US 40 Scenic approaches the top of Sideling Hill , the eastbound climbing lane ends . The scenic route makes a hairpin turn to the north and begins to descend the mountain , again a three @-@ lane road but with two lanes westbound . US 40 Scenic curves to the east and then to the southeast , paralleling and gradually approaching I @-@ 68 . The westbound climbing lane ends just west of the scenic route 's eastern terminus at MD 144 ( Western Pike ) just south of I @-@ 68 Exit 77 . 
 = = History = = 
 US 40 Scenic is the old alignment of US 40 over Town Hill and Sideling Hill , two of the many north – south ridges of the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians between Cumberland and Hancock that needed to be crossed first by the Baltimore and Cumberland Turnpike , then US 40 , and most recently I @-@ 68 . The portion of US 40 Scenic from its western terminus over Town Hill to Sideling Hill Creek follows the original alignment of the turnpike and US 40 except for deviations at both ends due to construction of the new alignments of US 40 and I @-@ 68 . The Baltimore and Cumberland Turnpike and later US 40 rose abruptly from Sideling Hill Creek to climb the west flank of Sideling Hill , following what is today McFarland Road east , turning south at Hixon Road , and continuing south along the same line , now abandoned , to join the present line at the top of the mountain . On the east flank , the old road began along the current alignment , then turned east a short distance south of the present curve to the east for a steeper descent that followed Western Pike before joining the present alignment a short distance west of MD 144 . 
 The original state road between Cumberland and Hancock was paved from Fifteen Mile Creek to Green Ridge in 1913 , Green Ridge to Sideling Hill Creek in 1915 , and from Sideling Hill Creek to the modern MD 144 junction in 1914 . Early improvements to the state road included a new bridge over Fifteen Mile Creek in 1917 , a new bridge over Sideling Hill Creek in 1925 , and the modification of a nasty curve just east of the new Sideling Creek Bridge at the same time . The road became part of US 40 in 1927 . The highway was widened and curves banked and modified in 1929 and 1930 as part of improvements over 47 miles ( 76 km ) of US 40 between Cumberland and Hagerstown . Passing lanes 800 to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 240 to 300 m ) in length were added on Sideling Hill around 1942 . 
 Despite the improvements , Sideling Hill remained a formidable obstacle to traffic between Cumberland and Hancock until a construction project began in 1949 to build a new highway over the mountain . US 40 was relocated for 6 @.@ 94 miles ( 11 @.@ 17 km ) from just west of Sideling Hill Creek east over the mountain to just west of the modern MD 144 intersection . The relocation involved a box culvert over Little Bear Creek and a high level bridge over Sideling Hill Creek . The new roadway was held to a maximum gradient of 6 percent and had a third climbing lane for 90 percent of the length of the relocation . By the time the project was completed in 1952 , over 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 990 @,@ 000 m3 ) of earth had been excavated . 
 US 40 Scenic was assigned to old US 40 from Fifteen Mile Creek Road over Town Hill to the Mann Road intersection when US 40 was moved to its and I @-@ 68 's present alignment over Town Hill in 1965 . US 40 was expanded to a divided highway and moved to a new alignment from High Germany Road to the sweeping curve that is now Exit 74 in 1983 . The section of old US 40 from the 1949 – 1952 Sideling Hill relocation immediately around Sideling Hill Creek was dismantled . The upgraded US 40 became a part of I @-@ 68 that passes through a cut in Sideling Hill around 1987 . The old alignment over Sideling Hill was transferred to county maintenance and designated US 40 Scenic around 1989 . However , US 40 Scenic temporarily followed the old McFarland Road alignment of US 40 on the west side of Sideling Hill until the completion of Exit 74 in 1991 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire officially referenced portion of US 40 Scenic is in a sparsely @-@ populated area of eastern Allegany County . 
 = Hermes o Logios = 
 Hermes o Logios , also known as Logios Ermis ( Greek : <unk> ὁ <unk> , " Hermes the Scholar " ) was a Greek periodical printed in Vienna , Austria , from 1811 to 1821 . It is regarded as the most significant and longest running periodical of the period prior to the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence , containing contributions by key scholars and intellectuals . Hermes o Logios aimed at creating intellectual contacts between the Greek communities of the Ottoman Empire and the Diaspora in Western Europe , as well as the preparing national awakening of the Greek people . 
 The periodical started its circulation after a proposal by Adamantios Korais , a leading figure of the modern Greek Enlightenment , who had stressed the need of a printed medium , written in vernacular Greek . This initiative was supported by the Philological Society in Bucharest , an organization consisting of Greek intellectuals . Hermes o Logios reflected the style of other European periodicals of early 19th century and reviewed developments in arts and sciences , being an important channel for bringing contemporary intellectual movements to the attention of the Greeks that lived in the Ottoman Empire . It was closed down by the Austrian authorities when the Greek War of Independence broke out . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 18th century the ideals of the Western European Enlightenment and the French Revolution became widely known to the Greek scholars . They soon realized the potential of these new ideals , and especially of popular freedom and sovereignty for their own national struggle against Ottoman rule . Adamantios Korais , a humanist scholar and leading figure of the modern Greek Enlightenment , had stressed the desirability of a printed medium , written in the vernacular language , in order to spread these ideas to the Greek people , that lived in the Ottoman Empire and the Diaspora in Western Europe as well . Korais explained about the necessity of a periodical that would gather material from political and philological newspapers of the enlightened peoples of Europe and contain reports from Ottoman @-@ ruled Greece . He also stressed that this should be edited by a man of learning , and proposed that his friend Anthimos Gazis , scholar and Orthodox priest in Vienna , would be the most suitable person . 
 Vienna became the right place for such an initiative , since it was already the most important publishing centre for the Greek diaspora . In 1783 the Austrian Emperor had authorized the free printing of Greek books in the city , while in 1790 the first Greek newspaper , named <unk> , was published there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment ( 1811 – 1813 ) = = = 
 Hermes o Logios was established with the support of the Philological Society in Bucharest , an organization consisting of Greek intellectuals headed by the local Greek Orthodox Bishop , Ignatios II . The Society ’ s goals , as published in the first issue of the periodical , were " the awakening to the progress of learning " and " the cultivation of the newer Greek language " . Apart from Hermes o Logios , the Society supervised also a Greek @-@ language school , financed translations of schoolbooks into modern Greek and provided scholarships for students to study abroad . Ignatios has already stated the need for a philological newspaper , in which each man of learning could publish his ideas , adding that " This is what the wise man Korais advises us to do and he has wisely chosen a worthy man , archimandrite Anthimos Gazis " . The members of the Society then all agreed to cover part of the printing expenses . 
 The first issue of Hermes o Logios was published on January 1 , 1811 , under the full title <unk> ὁ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Hermes the Scholar , or Philological Reports ) . In the first three years of its existence ( 1811 – 1813 ) , Hermes o Logios appeared twice a month and each issue usually consisted of 16 pages . In April 1813 , Anthimos Gazis left Vienna and the editorship of the periodical was taken over by Theoklitos <unk> , another priest and an even more fanatical supporter of Korais . 
 = = = Crisis and revival ( 1814 – 1820 ) = = = 
 Hermes o Logios faced serious financial problems during this period . When the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1806 – 1812 ended , Ignatios was forced to resign and leave Bucharest and its main sponsor , the Philological Society , ceased to exist . In an announcement published as an appendix to the issues of 1813 ( dated April 1 , 1813 ) , Alexandros <unk> , a supporter of Korais and influential personality within the Greek community of Vienna , states this fact , as well as that the periodical had too few subscribers . He therefore called on all readers to canvass for new subscribers ; moreover he called upon all scholars to send in their contributions . 
 During the period 1814 – 1815 , Hermes o Logios reached an absolute low , with seven issues in 1814 and only one in 1815 , which consisted of 16 pages written by Korais and directed against his ideological adversary , the conservative scholar , <unk> Doukas . On the other hand , Gazis returned . In the following years , however , the periodical was subsidized by the princes of Moldavia , <unk> Callimachi and Michael <unk> . Apart from the difficulties faced , 1816 was a turning point , as two scholars and adherents of Korais , Theoklitos <unk> and Konstantinos Kokkinakis , were placed in charge . Consequently , Hermes o Logios actually became an outlet for Korais and continued to appear without interruption until the Greek War of Independence . 
 = = = Outbreak of the Greek War of Independence ( 1821 ) = = = 
 In 1821 , the year that the War of Independence broke out , nine issues appeared between January and May . There is a special appendix to the issue of April 1 , 1821 , containing a Greek translation of an article dated March 29 , taken from the Wiener Zeitung , which reports on the uprising of Alexandros Ypsilantis and Tudor Vladimirescu in the Danubian Principalities , that marked the beginning of the Greek War of Independence , and also states the official Austrian standpoint . In the issue of May 1 , while Ypsilantis ’ campaign was in full swing , the Austrian authorities required the editors to publish the excommunication issued by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , Gregory V , against the architects of this uprising . This was the last issue of Hermes o Logios which then was closed down by the local authorities and Kokkinakis was arrested as a member of the patriotic organization Filiki Etaireia . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Hermes o Logios is regarded as the most important Greek periodical of the era of modern Greek Enlightenment , also known as Diafotismos . It appeared regularly over a period of ten and a half years and was the longest @-@ running periodical prior to the outbreak of the Revolution . All volumes cover a total of 5131 pages , with texts on various subjects written by 918 contributors . 
 = = = Arts and sciences = = = 
 Its primary goal was to inform the Greek @-@ speaking public within the Ottoman Empire and in the diaspora . Moreover , in favouring the views of Adamantios Korais it reflected the style of other European periodicals of that era . It reviewed developments in arts and sciences and was an important channel for bringing contemporary intellectual movements to the attention of the Ottoman @-@ ruled Greeks . Additionally , it reproduced catalogues of European scientific books , and exhorted Greek scholars to translate and publish them , like those of Louis Jacques Thénard . The journal also published comments on astronomical observations , experiments and various articles on natural philosophy , which alternated with articles on history and philosophy . Greek scholars used as sources German or French educational books on physics , or translated and published texts on natural philosophy with large circulations in Europe , like the works of Antoine Fourcroy , René Just Haüy , and Jérôme Lalande . 
 = = = Possible revolutionary background = = = 
 Although Hermes o Logios was the most important publication for the transmission of progressive ideas to the Greek people , which should ultimately lead to the emancipation and independence , there was hardly any information of signs of an ongoing revolution , at least on the surface . There was the Austrian censure to be reckoned with , as the reactionary minister Klemens von Metternich and his secret police kept a very close eye on the activities of the local Greek community . The lack of items on politics , polity , law and social structures does not indicate an immanent revolution . Several editors were also members of the patriotic organization Filiki Etaireia and staunch supporters of the struggle for independence , but one can hardly maintain that this fervent patriotism is reflected in the subjects treated inside the periodical . Even in the last years , on the eve of the Greek War of Independence , in the fields of philology , sciences , philanthropy , etc . , nothing out of the ordinary was published . On the other hand , there is no doubt that the contributors of Hermes o Logios dreamed of the liberation of the Greek nation and of an independent state . 
 = = = Positions in the Greek language question = = = 
 In respect to the Greek language question , it becomes obvious that from the very beginning Hermes o Logios adhered to Korais ’ views . Korais claimed that the appropriate language for the Greek nation should be a vernacular ( Demotic ) language without foreign words and accepted some views by conservative scholars to retain a <unk> of archaism . On the other hand , some of Korais ' opponents , both conservatives and <unk> , published their own magazines in which they attacked his linguistic views . 
 = Caffo = 
 Caffo was a sixth @-@ century Christian in Anglesey , north Wales , who is venerated as a saint and martyr . The son of a king from northern Britain who took shelter in Anglesey , Caffo was a companion of St Cybi , and is mentioned as carrying a red @-@ hot coal in his clothes to Cybi without his clothes getting burnt . After leaving Cybi , Caffo was killed by shepherds in the south of Anglesey , possibly acting in retaliation for insults Caffo 's brother had paid to the local ruler . The area where he died has a village , Llangaffo , named after him , as well as the parish church of St Caffo , Llangaffo . 
 = = Life and martyrdom = = 
 Little is known for certain about Caffo ; his dates of birth and death are not given in the sources . He is said to have been one of the sons of St Caw , a king in northern Britain who lost his lands and sought safety with his family in Anglesey ; the ruler Maelgwn Gwynedd gave him land in the north @-@ east of the island , in the district known as Twrcelyn . Other relatives of Caffo included his uncles St Iestyn and St <unk> ( brothers of Caw ) , his sister St Cwyllog and various brothers including St Gildas ( although the number of his siblings varies from 10 to 21 in different manuscripts ) . 
 Caffo was a companion and cousin of St Cybi , a Christian from Cornwall who was active in the mid @-@ 6th century . Cybi established himself in Anglesey within a disused Roman fort in what is now called Holyhead : the town 's Welsh name is <unk> , or " Cybi 's fort " ) . Caffo is mentioned in connection with Cybi in a manuscript written in about 1200 , which contains two accounts of Cybi 's life . Caffo is not mentioned in the accounts of Cybi 's life until an incident when he was sent to fetch fire from a blacksmith . He returned to Cybi carrying a red @-@ hot coal in his clothes , which were not burnt . 
 At some point , Cybi and Caffo parted company , possibly because of a disagreement between them , but possibly because his brother Gildas had insulted Maelgwn , who then forced Cybi to dismiss Caffo – both versions appear in the manuscript accounts . Thereafter , Caffo moved towards the south of Anglesey , where he was killed by shepherds from the area now called Newborough , perhaps avenging the insult on their king . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The area of Caffo 's death became known at some point as Llangaffo , and a church was established there : the Welsh word " llan " originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name . It is thought that there may have at one point been a monastery in this location , known as " Merthyr Caffo " ( Merthyr being the Welsh word for " martyr " ) . Caffo is venerated as a saint , although he was never canonized by a pope : as the historian Jane Cartwright notes , " In Wales sanctity was locally conferred and none of the medieval Welsh saints appears to have been canonized by the Roman Catholic Church " . 
 It is uncertain when the name " Llangaffo " was first used or when the first church was established here , but it was before 1254 , when the church and community were recorded in the Norwich Taxation ( a national survey of church names and property ) . There is still a church dedicated to Caffo in the village , used for worship by the Church in Wales . 
 Caffo is reported to have had a bubbling " holy well " in the area , called <unk> Caffo ( " Caffo 's cauldron " ) or Ffynnon Caffo ( " Caffo 's well " ) . Parents would offer fowls to be eaten by the attendant priest , in order to stop their children from <unk> . A nearby farm is still named after the well , although the well itself has been lost . 
 = ECW One Night Stand ( 2005 ) = 
 ECW One Night Stand ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Presented by THQ 's Destroy All Humans ! , it was held on June 12 , 2005 , at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York , New York . 
 The main event was a tag team match between The Dudley Boyz ( Buh Buh Ray and D @-@ Von Dudley ) and the team of Tommy Dreamer and The Sandman . Two of the matches on the undercard were Chris Benoit versus Eddie Guerrero , and Mike Awesome versus Masato Tanaka . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although the build @-@ up for the pay @-@ per @-@ view began in the middle of May , plans were in the works behind the scenes for several months in advance . Tommy Dreamer was in charge of organizing the event and getting ECW Originals to participate . He contacted several people , including The Sandman , Sabu , Justin Credible , and ECW commentator Joey Styles . Reports later stated that Paul Heyman was working with Dreamer to help prepare the event . Other ECW related wrestlers were later added to the pay @-@ per @-@ view . The event was publicly confirmed by WWE through a Dish Network magazine in March 2005 . In an interview with SLAM ! Sports days before One Night Stand , ECW Original Rob Van Dam announced he had asked Vince McMahon about the idea of holding an ECW reunion event . 
 According to reports , many people backstage were very happy with the way One Night Stand went and many former ECW wrestlers that had worked the pay @-@ per @-@ view described it as a " fun " event . 325 @,@ 000 people bought the event on pay @-@ per @-@ view . Many tried to order it through WWE 's official website , but the website was shut down because not enough bandwidth was available . 
 WWE adopted One Night Stand as an annual pay @-@ per @-@ view event . The event returned to the Hammerstein Ballroom for ECW One Night Stand 2006 , and the " One Night Stand " name ( dropping the " ECW " name in 2007 ) was used as a yearly pay @-@ per @-@ view until 2009 when its name was changed to WWE Extreme Rules . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although many of the individual matches on the One Night Stand card were announced weeks before the pay @-@ per @-@ view occurred , none of them got any build @-@ up on any of WWE 's weekly programs , with WWE choosing to focus on an " invasion " angle , with several Raw and SmackDown ! superstars feuding against wrestlers from the original ECW . 
 The invasion angle began on the May 9 episode of Raw , when Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff made a statement regarding the pay @-@ per @-@ view , saying that he would " squash ECW like a bug . " The following week , on the May 16 episode of Raw , Tajiri agreed to an Extreme Rules match with Chris Benoit . In the middle of the contest , however , Bischoff came out to stop it , and announced anything related to ECW was banned from Raw . He also vowed to " destroy " ECW with the help of the Raw superstars chosen to compete at the pay @-@ per @-@ view . Bischoff planned an ECW funeral for the May 23 episode of Raw but was interrupted by WWE Chairman Vince McMahon . McMahon spoke of his support for the ECW reunion and his financial interest in bringing back the promotion . Paul Heyman then came out and reminded McMahon that , while Heyman did not own ECW , he still had control of it . Heyman also said that he welcomed Bischoff 's invasion , claiming , " You may light a fire that you can ’ t put out . " and proceeded to light the funeral wreath ablaze . In a rematch from the previous week 's RAW , Benoit defeated Tajiri in an Extreme Rules match after locking in the Crippler Crossface . The following week , Bischoff set up a Tables match between Edge and Benoit . During the match , Benoit attempted a diving headbutt with Edge on a table , but failed after Lita moved Edge off it . At that point , Bischoff sent several Raw superstars to the ring to assault Benoit , with Gene Snitsky booting Benoit in the face and Edge powerbombing Benoit through the table for the victory . 
 The feud between the RAW superstars and ECW originals also spread over to SmackDown ! . On the May 26 episode of SmackDown ! , Kurt Angle stated that ECW was a low @-@ class promotion , that he would be part of the WWE invasion of One Night Stand , and that he would take SmackDown ! volunteers with him . A week later , Angle asked Tazz to join him in the invasion and on the same episode of SmackDown ! , John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) announced he would be joining Angle in invading the pay @-@ per @-@ view . When Tazz rejected the offer , Angle reacted by assaulting Tazz and leaving him bleeding in the ring . 
 On the June 6 episode of Raw , Benoit defeated Snitsky in an Extreme Rules match by performing a diving headbutt and pinning him . The ECW Originals made their debut on WWE programming , as Tommy Dreamer , Rhyno , Balls Mahoney , Axl Rotten , The Sandman , and other ECW Originals attacked Bischoff 's Raw invaders , with ECW Originals , The Dudley Boyz , hitting a 3D on Raw invader Maven . Benoit was drafted to SmackDown ! on its June 9 , 2005 episode , and faced JBL in the main event with the ECW Originals at ringside cheering him on . JBL 's Cabinet was also at ringside , as well as Carlito , Matt Morgan and Kurt Angle . After Benoit locked in the Crossface on JBL , Angle interfered and broke the submission hold , resulting in a disqualification and a brawl breaking out between the ECW Originals and WWE Invaders , with ECW coming out on top . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , an episode of Extreme Heat aired on Spike TV , showing footage from the build @-@ up to the event . The event started with a speech from ECW commentator Joey Styles , who was greeted with an " ECW " chant . Styles welcomed the fans to One Night Stand before introducing the color commentator for the evening , Mick Foley . 
 The first match of the event was Lance Storm versus Chris Jericho . Storm was accompanied to the ring by Dawn Marie in what would be his last match before retirement . During the match , a " Chris Candido " chant broke out , a reference to the recently deceased wrestler who was a tag team partner of Lance Storm in ECW . Jericho locked in the Walls of Jericho on Storm , but Marie jumped on the ring apron and distracted the referee . Jason and Justin Credible interfered , with Credible hitting Jericho with a kendo stick . Storm got the pinfall on Jericho for the victory . 
 A tribute video played next , highlighting the wrestlers from ECW that had died between the promotion 's end in 2001 and One Night Stand . A three @-@ way dance was next , with Tajiri facing Little Guido Maritato and Super Crazy . Tajiri was accompanied to the ring by The Sinister Minister and Mikey Whipwreck , and Guido was accompanied by his fellow F.B.I. members . One of the highlights of the match occurred when Super Crazy hit a moonsault off the balcony onto all the members of the F.B.I. Guido was the first eliminated when Whipwreck hit a <unk> Snapper while the referee was distracted . Tajiri picked up the three count to eliminate Guido . Super Crazy won the match after hitting a moonsault off the top rope onto Tajiri , getting the three @-@ count in the process . 
 Next came singles Luchador action , as Psychosis faced SmackDown ! superstar and ECW Original Rey Mysterio , Jr . Mysterio won the match at the seven @-@ minute mark after hitting his signature move , the 619 , followed by the West Coast Pop . The two later revealed that they were disappointed with the way their match panned out . After the contest , the SmackDown ! crusaders entered the Hammerstein Ballroom . They consisted of Kurt Angle , JBL and his Cabinet , Carlito and Matt Morgan . The crowd chanted , " You Suck Dick " and " Fuck You SmackDown ! " as they entered the arena . Joel Gertner attempted to interview the invaders , but Angle took the microphone out of his hand and JBL pushed him to the ground . JBL and Angle cut a promo , with the crowd continuing to chant , " You Suck Dick " , to which Angle replied with " Your MOTHER taught me how " . Angle stated , " The last time I was at an ECW event I walked out halfway through because it sucked " . The crowd continued to chant , " Shut the Fuck Up " , while JBL spoke . 
 Rob Van Dam ( RVD ) and Bill Alfonso interrupted the promo , with RVD stating it had nothing to do with SmackDown ! . RVD claimed that WWE deserved no credit , that the interview was a shoot with no scripts , and that missing One Night Stand was worse than missing WrestleMania . The promo was interrupted when Rhino hit Van Dam with a Gore . Van Dam 's former tag team partner Sabu then appeared following the lights turning off , and had a match with Rhino . Sabu won the match with Van Dam 's help as he hit a Van Daminator on Rhino before Sabu hit the Arabian <unk> on Rhino through the table for the victory . 
 The Raw crusaders , which included Eric Bischoff , Jonathan Coachman , Edge , Christian , Tyson Tomko , Snitsky , La Résistance and William Regal , entered the building . Chris Benoit versus Eddie Guerrero followed , with Benoit making Guerrero tap out with the Crippler Crossface . During this match , several anti @-@ Lita chants could be heard , including " Lita 's Got Herpes " and " I Fucked Lita " . After the Benoit versus Guerrero match was over , Gertner again tried to interview the crusaders and begged Bischoff for a job . He was not successful , and Bischoff poured his drink over Gertner , saying , " ECW Sucks " . 
 Mike Awesome versus Masato Tanaka followed , and Joey Styles made comments during the match about Awesome over his controversial departure from ECW . At one point , after Awesome hit a high @-@ flying suicide dive , Styles said , " And it 's a shame he didn 't succeed in taking his own life . " Nearly two years after the match , Awesome committed suicide . Styles has confirmed that this comment , as well as several other comments he made , were actually shoots . He said if the Original ECW was ending he was " going to say whatever the hell I wanted . " Awesome won the match after powerbombing Tanaka through a table on the outside of the ring and followed it with a Suicide Dive , getting the pinfall . 
 ECW booker Paul Heyman then cut a promo in the ring , with the crowd chanting , " Thank You Paul " and rising for a standing ovation . After thanking several people , including Tod Gordon , Heyman turned his attention to the Raw and SmackDown ! invaders . He first spoke to Eric Bischoff , stating that Bischoff was in " our ( ECW 's ) house " . Heyman turned to Edge and said , " Hide your wives , its Edge " . Heyman shouted at Edge , " Matt ' <unk> ' Hardy " , a reference to his legitimate heat with the wrestler who was not contracted with WWE at the time . A huge " We Want Matt " broke out in the Hammerstein Ballroom . He then commented that the only reason JBL was WWE Champion for a year was because Triple H did not want to work Tuesdays ( a reference to the day SmackDown ! is taped ) . 
 The Dudley Boyz then faced Tommy Dreamer and The Sandman in the main event . As the match was about to begin , the bWo , a stable consisting of Hollywood Nova , Stevie Richards and The Blue Meanie entered the ring . Kid Kash interfered , and Balls Mahoney and Axl Rotten then came to the ring with steel chairs and took out the bWo . They attacked all three members of the bWo before hitting Nova with a steel chair twice . Styles made a reference to Simon Dean , the character Nova played with WWE , by stating " That 's more painful than being Simon Dean on national TV . " When the match eventually started , it involved trash cans , cheese graters and street signs . The Impact Players interfered , attacking Dreamer and Sandman . Francine , Dreamer 's former manager , entered the ring and delivered a low blow to Dreamer . Dreamer 's other valet and real life wife , Beulah McGillicutty , returned to wrestling for the first time in over seven years , sparking a catfight with Francine . The Dudley Boyz eventually won with the help of Spike Dudley , who had just turned heel . They sent Dreamer through a flaming table with a Powerbomb to get the victory . The <unk> attempted to attack McGillicutty before Sandman attacked them with a Singapore cane . Sandman shouted for a beer repeatedly . Stone Cold Steve Austin then made his way to the ring , with the ECW Originals coming out moments later . Austin referenced his time in ECW and then asked the crusaders to come to the ring . A huge brawl occurred , with the Originals fighting the Crusaders . The crowd chanted " We Want Taz " , which brought Taz to the ring and he then locked Kurt Angle in the <unk> . During the brawl , JBL legitimately attacked Blue Meanie , causing him to bleed . The Originals came out on top , as The Dudley Boyz hit the Dudley Death Drop on the Crusaders ' leader , Benoit hit Bischoff with a diving headbutt and Mysterio hitting the 619 on the Raw General Manager . Austin asked for Bischoff 's thoughts on the event while on the ground , and Bischoff replied , " Fuck ECW " . Austin then hit the Stone Cold Stunner on Bischoff to end the show . 
 After the show went off the air , the ECW wrestlers left the ring one at a time , but Dreamer stayed in the ring . He bowed to the ECW logo as the crowd chanted , " Thank You Tommy " . The Dudley Boyz came back to the ring and hugged Dreamer , with Bubba Ray saying to Dreamer , " This is all for you " . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Number Ones ( video ) = 
 Number Ones is a video album by American recording artist Michael Jackson . It was released on DVD on November 13 , 2003 under the Epic Records record label , in conjunction with the promotion for Jackson 's greatest hits album , of the same name ( although the album and DVD have different songs ) . The DVD , which is Jackson 's fourth DVD album , contained fifteen music videos , which was directed and produced by various people . It consists of music videos filmed and released by Jackson from 1979 's Off the Wall to 2001 's Invincible . Just like the album , the DVD has four different covers . 
 Notable music videos included on the DVD were " Beat It " , " Billie Jean " and Thriller — which received heavy rotation on MTV in the 1980s , and are credited as having transformed the music video from a promotional tool and into an art form , and " Black or White " and " Scream " which were also prominent on channels like MTV in the 1990s . Number Ones received praise from contemporary music critics and was commercially successful internationally . The DVD peaked at number one on the Australian Top 40 Music DVD in Australia . Number Ones has been certified twenty two times platinum in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association and is the best selling music DVD ever by a male solo artist in Australia . It is also thirteen times platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1972 , while still a member of the band The Jackson 5 , Michael Jackson released his first of what would be ten studio albums , Got to Be There . Four singles were taken from the album , although they were not promoted by music videos , and this pattern continued for his next three studio albums , Ben ( 1972 ) , Music & Me ( 1973 ) and Forever , Michael ( 1975 ) . Unlike in the past , Jackson released his debut music video for the lead single , " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " , from his 1979 album , Off the Wall . Jackson subsequently began releasing music videos for his singles to promote both the song itself and the album . His music videos from the 1980s — particularly the music videos for " Billie Jean " and Thriller — received heavy rotation on channels like Music Television ( MTV ) . The popularity of his music videos that aired on MTV , such as " Beat It " , " Billie Jean " and Thriller — credited for transforming the music video from a promotional tool and into an art form — helped bring the relatively new channel to fame . Music videos such as " Black or White " and " Scream " made Jackson an enduring staple on MTV in the 1990s . Due to length , some of Jackson 's music videos are considered to be short films . Some of them drew criticism for their violent and sexual content , others were lauded by critics and awarded Guinness World Records for their length , success and expense . From 1979 to 2003 , Jackson released thirty @-@ six music videos . 
 = = Content and release = = 
 Number Ones was released in conjunction with Jackson 's greatest number one hits of the same name on November 18 , 2003 . The DVD was released worldwide on November 13 , 2003 . Number Ones is the fourth DVD album to be released by Jackson , the previous three were Dangerous – The Short Films , Video Greatest Hits – HIStory and HIStory on Film , Volume II . The DVD contained ninety one minutes of music video Jackson had already released from as early as 1979 , to as late as 2001 . This compilation was also released in Asia on double Video CD format . 
 Music videos from Jackson 's studio albums , which were Off the Wall ( 1979 ) , Thriller ( 1982 ) , Bad ( 1987 ) , Dangerous ( 1991 ) , HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I ( 1995 ) , Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix ( 1997 ) and Invincible ( 2001 ) , were featured on the DVD . The DVD consisted of fifteen music videos , both long and short form versions . " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " ( 1987 ) , " Break of Dawn " ( 2001 ) , the then newly recorded " One More Chance " ( 2003 ) and a live version of " Ben " ( 1972 ) did not make it onto the DVD , while " Blood on the Dance Floor " ( 1997 ) , which was on the DVD , was not on the American version of the album of the same name , same with " Man in the Mirror " for the international version of the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 Number Ones peaked at number one the ARIA Top 40 Music DVD chart in Australia . It was ranked at number two , charting behind only Funhouse Tour : Live In Australia by Pink , on the Australian Highest Selling Music DVD chart for 2009 . It also peaked at number three on the Swedish DVD Albums Chart . In Czech Republic , Number Ones peaked at number fourteen on the DVD chart . Number Ones peaked at number three on the Hungarian Top 20 DVD chart . In Italy , Number Ones peaked at number nine on the country 's DVD album chart , as of the first week of May 2010 , it has stayed on the chart for forty five weeks . The DVD album was certified thirteen times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for the sales of over 1 @.@ 3 million units in the United States . Number Ones was also certified twenty two times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for the sales of over 330 @,@ 000 units in Australia . Recording Industry Association of Japan certified the DVD gold for the sales of over 100 @,@ 000 units in Japan . For the sales of over 25 @,@ 000 units in Spain , Productores de Música de España gave the album two times platinum certification . Number Ones was also certified six times platinum for the sales of 30 @,@ 000 units in New Zealand , as well as gold by the Polish Society of the Phonographic Industry for the sales of at least 5 @,@ 000 units in Poland . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Number Ones was generally well received by contemporary music critics . William Ruhlmann , a writer for Allmusic , stated that watching the videos in order made him ' experience ' Jackson 's changing appearance over the year ; noting things such as Jackson 's skin becoming lighter ( a result of his Vitiligo ) . Ruhlmann commented that seeing Jackson 's changing appearance , as well as the videos itself helped him understand Jackson 's career more , commenting , " Number Ones was released at what appeared to be the end of Michael Jackson 's long , troubled reign as a pop star , and it contained many clues to both his success and his downfall . " Ruhlmann further noted that " a messianic theme ran through many of the videos " like the relatively modest " Beat It , " which is about stopping violence , to " Earth Song , " in which Jackson restored ravaged rain forests and even brought the dead back to life . Dan <unk> of the Philadelphia Inquirer described Number Ones as being a " reminder " of the " MTV era " . Jeff <unk> of News Pop Music Critic felt that the release of both the Number Ones CD and DVD was a good opportunity to " revisit Jackson 's music " . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ A The short version of the music video is featured on Number Ones . 
 ^ B The ' speed @-@ up ' version of the music video is featured on Number Ones . 
 ^ C " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " , " Smooth Criminal " , and " Blood on the Dance Floor " were excluded on the Chinese version . 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 The DVD album has been released in one version , as a one disc release . 
 Keep case — DVD size packaging 
 The video was also available on double Video CD ( in the Asian market only ) . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits 
 = HMS Romney ( 1762 ) = 
 HMS Romney was a 50 @-@ gun fourth rate of the Royal Navy . She served during the American War of Independence , and the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in a career that spanned forty years . 
 Launched in 1762 , the Romney spent most of her early career in North American waters , serving on the Newfoundland station , often as the flagship of the commander @-@ in @-@ chief . The ship was involved in the tensions leading up to the American Revolution when she was sent to support the Boston commissioners enforcing the Townshend Acts in 1768 . Her actions involved impressing local sailors , confiscating a vessel belonging to John Hancock and providing a refuge for the unpopular commissioners when rioting broke out . She remained in American waters for part of the ensuing war , but towards the end operated in European waters after the French entry to the conflict . 
 The Romney was laid up in ordinary or under repair for most of the subsequent years of peace , but returned to active service on the outbreak of war with Revolutionary France . She was in the Mediterranean supporting Lord Hood 's occupation of Toulon in 1793 , and remained there for several years . During this time she captured the 44 @-@ gun French Sibylle . The Romney briefly returned to North America and then served in the Red Sea . Assigned to blockade the Dutch coast , the Romney ran aground in November 1804 while sailing to join the fleet off Den Helder . She broke up after attempts to float her off failed . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 HMS Romney was built to a unique design by Sir Thomas Slade , which was based on William Bately 's plans for HMS Warwick , but altered to make the ship shorter . She was ordered from Woolwich Dockyard on 20 July 1759 , and laid down there on 1 October 1759 . Built by Master Shipwright Israel Pownoll , she was launched on 8 July 1762 , and completed by Joseph Harris by 4 September 1762 . She was given the name Romney in November 1760 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 HMS Romney was commissioned in August 1762 under her first commander , Captain Robert Walsingham , but was paid off by February the following year . When she recommissioned in June 1763 , it was under the command of Captain James Ferguson . Romney became the flagship of the commander of the North American station , Rear @-@ Admiral Lord Colvill , and served in this capacity for the next three years . After a brief refit at Portsmouth The Romney recommissioned in March 1767 under Captain John Corner , as part of a squadron sent to North America under Samuel Hood . While serving off North America , Romney achieved a degree of notoriety after being sent to Boston Harbour to support the commissioners , who had asked Hood for help in enforcing the Townshend Acts . She arrived on 17 May 1768 , but being short of men , Captain Corner began to impress seamen from the harbour . This was unpopular with the locals , who took to attacking the press gangs . Events escalated when the commissioners in the town ordered the seizure of the merchant vessel the Liberty , which belonged to John Hancock . When sailors and marines from the Romney attempted to seize the vessel , mobs attacked them and then turned on the commissioners . Many of the officials took refuge aboard the Romney , before transferring to Castle William . These incidents heightened tensions that would eventually lead to the Boston Massacre in 1770 . 
 = = = American War of Independence = = = 
 In 1770 Romney was briefly under Captain Hyde Parker , followed by Captain Robert Linzee in October that year . She was paid off in March 1771 and repaired and refitted at Deptford between 1773 and 1775 , recommissioning under Captain George Elphinstone in April and becoming the flagship of the commander of the Newfoundland station , Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Duff . Duff was succeeded by Vice @-@ Admiral John Montagu the following year . Montagu retained the Romney , by now under the command of Captain Elliott Salter , as his flagship . Salter was replaced by Captain George Montagu , the son of Vice @-@ Admiral Montagu , in February 1777 , who remained in command of the ship for the next two years . 
 Captain George Johnstone took over in early 1779 and served in the English Channel . On Johnstone 's advancement to commodore in April that year , Captain Robert Nicholas took over as the Romney 's commander , though she remained part of Johnstone 's squadron and flew his broad pendant . After a refit she returned to sea in 1779 as Sir John Ross 's flagship , with Johnstone back as captain . She was involved in the operations in the Channel during the attempted Franco @-@ Spanish invasion , after which she sailed to Lisbon . On 11 November 1779 she and HMS Tartar captured the 34 @-@ gun Spanish frigate Santa Margarita , which was subsequently taken into the navy as HMS Santa Margarita . With Johnstone 's return to the post of commodore in December 1779 , command passed to Captain Roddam Home , though Johnstone remained aboard . On 1 May 1780 , Romney was involved in an incident with the cartel ship <unk> . The Romney captured two French ships off Cape Finisterre in July , the 38 @-@ gun Artois on 1 July , and the 18 @-@ gun Perle five days later on 6 July . 
 Johnstone sailed to the East Indies with a convoy in March 1781 , and the Romney saw action at the Battle of Porto <unk> on 16 April 1781 . The battle was inconclusive , but on 21 July the ship was part of Johnstone 's squadron which succeeded in capturing several Dutch East Indiamen in Saldanha Bay . 
 HMS Romney returned to Britain in November that year , at which point Captain Robert McDougall took command . By March 1783 she was sailing in the Western Approaches under Captain John <unk> and flying the broad pendant of Captain John Elliot . <unk> was replaced by Captain Thomas Lewes in July 1782 , who went on to capture the 12 @-@ gun privateer Comte de Bois @-@ Goslin off Ushant on 17 October 1782 . The Romney 's next commander was Captain Samuel Osborn , from January to April 1783 , after which she was paid off . After a period spent in ordinary , she underwent a repair and refit at Woolwich , eventually recommissioning in March 1792 under Captain William Domett , as the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Samuel Goodall . She served in the Mediterranean until the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , recommissioning under Captain William Paget in March 1793 , and returning to the Mediterranean to take part in the British occupation of Toulon . 
 = = = French Revolutionary Wars = = = 
 While sailing off Mykonos on 17 June 1794 , Paget spotted a French frigate in the harbour with three merchantmen . Paget approached and demanded that the French surrender . The French captain refused , whereupon Paget approached and the two exchanged broadsides for an hour and ten minutes . The French ship , which was discovered to be the 44 @-@ gun French frigate Sibylle , then struck her colours , having suffered casualties of 46 dead and 112 wounded , nine mortally . The Romney had suffered casualties of eight dead and thirty wounded , two mortally in the Battle of Mykonos . In 1847 this action earned for the survivors the Naval General Service Medal with clasp " Romney 17 June 1794 " . 
 Command then passed to Captain Charles Hamilton . Henry Inman was briefly in command for her return to Britain in March 1795 , whereupon Captain Frank <unk> took over in June when the Romney became the flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral Sir James Wallace and returned to Newfoundland . The vessel spent the next several years sailing to and from Newfoundland , under the command of Captain Percy Fraser from June 1797 , and then Captain John Bligh from July 1797 when Vice @-@ Admiral William Waldegrave took over the station . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Captain John Lawford took command in March 1798 , and in August the following year the Romney was assigned to Vice @-@ Admiral Andrew Mitchell 's squadron in Den Helder during the Vlieter Incident . Captain Sir Home Popham took over in August 1800 and sailed Romney to the Red Sea to support the British forces working to expel the French from Egypt . Because Romney served in the navy 's Egyptian campaign ( 8 March to 2 September 1801 ) , her officers and crew qualified for the clasp " Egypt " to the Naval General Service Medal that the Admiralty issued in 1847 to all surviving claimants . 
 After a refit at Chatham in 1803 Captain William Brown recommissioned her for operations on the African coast and in the West Indies . Captain John Colville replaced Brown in October 1804 . 
 = = Loss = = 
 On 18 November 1804 Romney sailed from Yarmouth to join the force under Rear @-@ Admiral Russell blockading the Texel . She ran aground when her pilots lost their way in thick fog while sailing off the <unk> bank the following day . Attempts to float her off failed . 
 Realising that his ship was doomed , Colvill attempted to save his men and sent out two boats to seek help from nearby merchant vessels . One boat overturned while returning to the Romney , drowning the boat 's crew . The other made for shore , hoping to summon assistance from the Dutch authorities . The following morning , and with the Romney fast breaking up , Colvill supervised the construction and launching of a number of rafts . As the final raft was being launched , seven boats approached from shore . On reaching the Romney , the Dutch commander of the boats called on Colvill to surrender , promising that he would endeavour to save the British sailors . Colvill agreed and the Dutch rescued the remaining members of the crew . The total loss of life in the wreck was between nine and eleven men . 
 The Dutch conveyed the British to shore , where Dutch Admiral <unk> treated them well . <unk> then sent Colvill and eight of his officers back to join Russell . 
 As was standard practice , Colvill was subsequently tried by court martial aboard the Africaine on 31 December for the loss of his ship . The court acquitted him , his officers and his men of all blame . The court found the cause of the accident to be the thick fog and the ignorance of the pilots . The court required the pilots to forfeit their pay , barred them from piloting any of His Majesty 's ships , and imprisoned them for a time in the Marshalsea . 
 = Cloud Strife = 
 Cloud Strife ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is a fictional character and the main protagonist of Square 's ( now Square Enix 's ) role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII and several of its sequels and spin @-@ offs . He was designed by Tetsuya Nomura , a character artist for the Final Fantasy series , whose role expanded during the title 's development to include supervision over Cloud 's personality . Yoshinori Kitase , director of VII , and Kazushige Nojima , one of the game 's event planners , developed the story and wanted to create a mysterious character who acted atypically for a hero . After VII , Nomura assumed greater responsibility over Cloud 's development , and his design was revised to better conform with the series ' shift to a more realistic style . Cloud 's appearance is marked by spiky blond hair , striking blue eyes , dark clothing and his Buster Sword ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) ; the sword previously belonged to his friend , Zack Fair . 
 In Final Fantasy VII , Cloud is a mercenary claiming to be formerly of SOLDIER , a group of elite supersoldiers employed by the Shinra Electric Power Company , a megacorporation responsible for draining the life from the planet . Fighting against Shinra in the resistance group AVALANCHE , and driven by a feud with the primary antagonist , Sephiroth , Cloud learns to accept his troubled past and adapts to his role as a leader . Cloud reappears as the protagonist in the computer @-@ animated film , Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , which serves as a sequel to the original game . He acts in a supporting role in other Compilation of Final Fantasy VII titles , and is featured in several other games outside the Final Fantasy VII continuity , such as Ehrgeiz , Final Fantasy Tactics , Itadaki Street Special , Dissidia Final Fantasy , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , and the Kingdom Hearts series . 
 Cloud has garnered a primarily positive reception from critics . Described as " iconic " , Cloud has been cited favorably as an example of complex character writing in video games and as one of its first unreliable narrators . He has ranked highly in various character lists compiled by video game publications , and remains popular among fans , continuing to place highly in popularity polls conducted by Famitsu , Guinness , and other organizations . He has also become the basis for a variety of merchandise , such as action figures and jewelry . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Cloud is introduced as a mercenary employed by AVALANCHE , an eco @-@ terrorist group opposed to the Shinra Company . Beginning the game with the placeholder name " Ex @-@ SOLDIER " ( <unk> , Moto <unk> ) , Cloud assists AVALANCHE 's leader , Barret Wallace , in bombing a Mako reactor , power plants which drain the planet 's " Lifestream " . Cloud claims to be formerly of SOLDIER 1st Class , an elite Shinra fighting unit . Cloud takes pride in his past and boasts of the abilities of its members . However , his background produces misgivings as to his allegiances and trustworthiness , and Cloud 's blasé attitude towards the goals of AVALANCHE creates further tension . Despite appearing detached , Cloud demonstrates moments of camaraderie , and players can choose to interact in a friendlier manner with AVALANCHE 's members . When approached by his childhood friend and AVALANCHE member , Tifa Lockhart , about accepting another job , Cloud at first refuses . However , when confronted with his boyhood promise to protect her were he to become a famous hero , Cloud agrees to continue helping AVALANCHE , despite neither having become famous nor a hero . 
 While working for AVALANCHE , Cloud encounters Aerith Gainsborough , a resident of Midgar 's slums . Agreeing to serve as her bodyguard in exchange for a date , Cloud helps Aerith evade Shinra , who pursue her because she is the sole survivor of a race known as the Cetra . Aerith notes that Cloud reminds her of an old boyfriend of hers , who is implied to be Zack Fair . During the course of their travels , a love triangle develops between Cloud , Tifa and Aerith , often exploited to humorous effect . Dialogue choices impact the strength of Cloud 's relationship with Tifa and Aerith , as well as with Barret and Yuffie Kisaragi . These interactions determine who accompanies Cloud through the Gold Saucer , an amusement park . If Aerith joins Cloud , she reflects on how strongly Cloud 's physical appearance and mannerisms resemble Zack 's , and struggles to put into words how she is still " searching for [ Cloud ] " . Irrespective of who accompanies Cloud at the Gold Saucer , how the player interacts with Tifa may also result in a more sexually suggestive scene playing out during the night she spends with Cloud before the game 's conclusion . Tifa worries instead that the party saw , rather than overheard , the two the morning after . 
 Following the player 's departure from Midgar , Cloud is appointed group leader by the other members of the party , upsetting Barret . Shortly thereafter , Cloud narrates his history with Sephiroth , a legendary member of SOLDIER and the game 's primary antagonist , and the events that led to Sephiroth 's disappearance five years prior . According to Cloud , the two were " war buddies " . Joining SOLDIER to emulate Sephiroth , Cloud explains that he would sign up for a " big mission " whenever they became available , as the conclusion of Shinra 's war with the people of Wutai ended his chances for military fame . Cloud explains that Sephiroth started questioning his humanity after accompanying him on a job to Cloud 's hometown of Nibelheim , which suffered from a malfunctioning Mako reactor responsible for producing monsters . Discovering documents concerning Jenova , an extraterrestrial lifeform and Sephiroth 's " mother " , Sephiroth mistakes himself for a Cetra and blames their downfall on humans . Razing Nibelheim , Sephiroth leaves for the Mt . Nibel Mako reactor , and Cloud gives chase . There , Cloud finds Tifa gravely wounded by Sephiroth outside the chamber where Jenova is stored . Cloud says that he then confronted Sephiroth , but that he is unable to remember or explain how he survived the encounter given Sephiroth 's strength . 
 However , numerous clues suggest the unreliability of Cloud 's memory . Various visual and audio cues , such as the screen flashing white or red and the sound of static , play when Cloud attempts to recall details about his identity . Cloud will spontaneously remember words or scenes from his past , sometimes collapsing to the ground while cradling his head . An unidentified voice questions Cloud in his sleep about why he and Tifa never met alone during his mission to Nibelheim despite their history . Additionally , Tifa makes various remarks suggesting that Cloud 's version of events troubles her , and she feigns ignorance of who Zack is . Cloud 's behavior grows increasingly erratic after searching the Temple of the Ancients for the Black Materia , an item capable of casting the destructive magic Meteor . After its retrieval , Cloud loses control of himself , handing over the Black Materia to Sephiroth and attacking Aerith . Alarmed that Sephiroth can manipulate him , Cloud realizes that he is " afraid to find out the truth " and becomes fearful of himself . Later , Sephiroth takes advantage of Cloud 's insecurities , telling him that his past is merely a fiction and that Shinra created Cloud in an attempt to clone Sephiroth . Although Cloud is initially dismissive , when Tifa is unable to corroborate Cloud 's account of the Nibelheim incident , Cloud realizes he cannot remember things like how or when he joined SOLDIER . Cloud , resigning himself as a " failed experiment " , goes missing after Sephiroth summons Meteor . The party later discovers a comatose Cloud suffering from Mako poisoning , and Tifa helps Cloud reconstruct his past after the two fall into the Lifestream . 
 It is revealed that Cloud never qualified for SOLDIER , and instead enlisted as an infantryman in Shinra 's army . During the mission to Nibelheim , Cloud served under Sephiroth and Zack , a SOLDIER 1st Class , hiding his identity from the townspeople out of embarrassment . Following Sephiroth 's defeat of Zack at the Mt . Nibel Mako reactor , Cloud took up Zack 's sword , catching Sephiroth off guard and stabbing him . Zack urges Cloud to kill Sephiroth after Sephiroth emerges alive , but when Cloud pursues him , he is run through by Sephiroth 's sword . Cloud , to Sephiroth 's shock , summons the strength to grab hold of the blade and lift Sephiroth off the ground , tossing him into a Mako vat below . Cloud and Zack are then imprisoned by Shinra 's lead scientist , Hojo , for experimentation . Zack later escapes with Cloud , bringing him to the outskirts of Midgar before Shinra soldiers gun Zack down . Due to exposure to Mako radiation and the injection of Jenova 's cells , in addition to the shame stemming from his personal failures , Cloud 's mind fabricated a story blending together his own memories with accounts of Zack 's heroics , creating a false personality . After piecing back together his identity , Cloud resumes his role as leader . At the game 's conclusion , Sephiroth reappears in Cloud 's mind a final time , but he is defeated in a one @-@ on @-@ one fight . 
 = = = In Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Cloud appears in a minor role in the cellphone game Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , a prequel set six years before Final Fantasy VII . The player , a member of the Shinra covert operatives group , the Turks , encounters Cloud during his time as a Shinra infantryman working to join SOLDIER . The game portrays Cloud 's natural talent for swordsmanship , and recounts his role during Nibelheim 's destruction . 
 In the computer @-@ animated film Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , set two years following the conclusion of Final Fantasy VII , Cloud lives with Tifa in the city of Edge , along with Marlene , Barret 's adopted daughter , and Denzel , an orphan afflicted with a rampant and deadly disease called Geostigma . Having given up his life as a mercenary , Cloud works as a courier for the " Strife Delivery Service " that Tifa set up in her new bar . Confronted by Tifa following the disappearance of Denzel and Marlene , it is revealed that he also suffers from the effects of Geostigma , and he responds that he is unfit to protect his friends and new family . However , when urged by Tifa to let go of the past , Cloud sets out for the Forgotten City in search of the children . There , Cloud confronts Kadaj , Loz and Yazoo , genetic remnants of Sephiroth left behind before he diffused into the Lifestream completely . Cloud 's battle with Kadaj later takes them back to Aerith 's church , where Cloud recovers from his Geostigma with Aerith 's help . Kadaj , merging with the remains of Jenova , resurrects Sephiroth . Cloud , having overcome his doubts , defeats Sephiroth once more , leaving a dying Kadaj in his place . At the film 's conclusion , Cloud , seeing Aerith and Zack , assures the two that he will be fine and reunites with his friends . 
 Cloud appears in On the Way to a Smile , a series of short stories set between Final Fantasy VII and Advent Children . " Case of Tifa " serves as an epilogue to VII , and portrays Cloud 's life alongside Tifa , Marlene , and Denzel . " Case of Denzel " relates how Cloud first met Denzel , and was later adapted as a short original video animation for the release of Advent Children Complete , On the Way to a Smile - Episode : Denzel . 
 Cloud acts in a supporting role in the PlayStation 2 game Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII . A year after the events of Advent Children , Cloud , working alongside Barret and Tifa , lends his support to the ground forces of the World Regenesis Organization and Vincent Valentine in their siege of Midgar and counterattack against the rogue Shinra military unit , Deepground . 
 In the PlayStation Portable game Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , Cloud is presented as a young Shinra infantryman who befriends Zack . During the game 's conclusion , a dying Zack gives Cloud his Buster Sword , telling him that he is his legacy . The game ends with Cloud heading to Midgar , reprising the start of Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 The OVA Last Order : Final Fantasy VII serves as an alternate retelling of Nibelheim 's destruction and Zack and Cloud 's escape from Shinra imprisonment . Animated and produced by Madhouse , based on a script by Kazuhiko <unk> , several scenes diverge from Final Fantasy VII 's depiction of events , such as reinterpreting Cloud 's rescue of Tifa by having her view his face . Although it is associated with and makes references to the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , Last Order is considered an outside work . 
 Cloud 's character has also appeared in various games outside of the Final Fantasy VII continuity . He is a playable character in the PlayStation version of Ehrgeiz , but like the other Final Fantasy VII characters present in the game , he has no storyline . Cloud and Tifa are the only Final Fantasy VII characters with a third costume or a story mode title : Cloud 's third alternate appearance depicts him in his Shinra infantryman attire , and his title is " Guardian " . In Chocobo Racing , Cloud is a hidden character that rides a motorcycle . Cloud is one of several playable Final Fantasy VII characters in Itadaki Street Special for the PlayStation 2 and Itadaki Street Portable for the PlayStation Portable . LittleBigPlanet 2 features Cloud as a downloadable character model . Cloud is a playable character representing Final Fantasy VII in the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy . Players in Final Fantasy Explorers can briefly transform into Cloud , enabling use of his <unk> Limit Break from Final Fantasy VII . Cloud is the protagonist of Final Fantasy VII G @-@ Bike , a mobile game for which Nomura designed a new costume for him . 
 Cloud appears as a playable guest character in the 2014 Nintendo crossover fighting games Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , sporting his character designs from both Final Fantasy VII and Advent Children . He was revealed in the November 2015 Nintendo Direct broadcast and was made available as in @-@ game downloadable content alongside a stage based on Midgar and a Mii Fighter hat based on a Chocobo on December 15 , 2015 . 
 In the PlayStation game Final Fantasy Tactics and its PlayStation Portable update , Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions , Cloud is accidentally pulled into the world of Ivalice by an ancient machine called " the Celestial Globe " , which was activated by Ramza Beoulve . Cloud is disoriented after arriving in Ramza 's world , and after a short exchange with Ramza and the others , he leaves . He wanders into <unk> Trade City , where he encounters a flower girl named Aerith . As Cloud is leaving the area , Aerith is accosted by a man demanding payment . Cloud returns to help Aerith escape , and Ramza and his party catch up to him . After the battle , he joins Ramza 's party as a playable character , although he cannot perform any of his signature attacks until the player tracks down his sword . Cloud also appears as an enemy unit in the " Brave Story " series of battles as part of Rendezvous , the unlockable cooperative multiplayer mode in The War of the Lions . 
 In Kingdom Hearts , Cloud appears in the Olympus Coliseum world . Hired by Hades to kill Hercules , Cloud must fight Sora as a prerequisite . After the fight , Hades sends Cerberus to attack Cloud and Sora , who are then saved by Hercules . Cloud meets with Sora afterward and explains that he is searching for someone . In Kingdom Hearts : Final Mix there is an additional scene where he battles Sephiroth . During the credit roll at the end of the game , Cloud is shown reuniting residents of Hollow Bastion . A memory @-@ based version of Cloud appears in the Game Boy Advance sequel Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories as a boss in the Olympus Coliseum and later as a summon card for Sora . Cloud features again in Kingdom Hearts II , depicted in his Advent Children attire . He is searching for Sephiroth , and is himself being sought out by Tifa . Cloud fights alongside Leon 's team during the Heartless invasion of Hollow Bastion . Should the player choose to engage Sephiroth and win the battle , Cloud returns and fights Sephiroth , which ends with both of them disappearing in a flash of light after Tifa gives Cloud her support . Sora concludes that Cloud is still fighting with Sephiroth , and will not stop until he is defeated . A digital replica of Cloud also appears in Kingdom Hearts coded in the Olympus Coliseum , helping Sora and Hercules to battle Hades . 
 Cloud serves as the representative Final Fantasy VII character in Dissidia Final Fantasy , a fighting game featuring characters from the Final Fantasy series . He is depicted in his Final Fantasy VII outfit , while his Advent Children appearance is also available . His fight against Sephiroth in this game is based on their battles from Final Fantasy VII and Advent Children . Along with the entire cast , Cloud reappears in the prequel Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy as a Warrior of Chaos . Concerned for Tifa , who is on the opposing side , Cloud tries to defeat Chaos alone but is nearly killed . He is later saved by the goddess Cosmos and becomes one of her warriors . Cloud 's main outfit is based on Yoshitaka Amano 's original artwork concept , while his Kingdom Hearts outfit is offered as downloadable content . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Conceptualized as one of only three playable characters in early planning stages for the game , Cloud was one of the first two characters designed for Final Fantasy VII by Tetsuya Nomura . Nomura worked to strike an orthodox balance of varied designs for the game . Because he only started receiving character profiles prior to composing their appearances during later game productions , Nomura thought of the characters ' stories first before tackling their designs . Nomura 's first draft of Cloud featured slicked @-@ back , black hair . The depiction served both as a contrast to the long silver hair of the game 's chief antagonist , Sephiroth , and to minimize the model 's polygon count . However , to make Cloud stand out more and emphasize his role as the game 's lead protagonist , Nomura altered Cloud 's design to give him spiky , bright blond hair . Miyamoto Musashi and Sasaki <unk> served as bases for Cloud and Sephiroth 's appearances , respectively , and in particular influenced the look of their swords . Early renditions of Cloud 's weapon , the Buster Sword , depicted a smaller blade . Its size grew over the course of several revisions , and Nomura called it " the Giant Kitchen Knife " , envisioning it as unrefined steel . The sword at one point featured a small chain connected to the pommel , while magnets would secure the blade to Cloud 's back . More deeply involved with Cloud 's creation than with other characters ' from previous Final Fantasy projects , Nomura also provided supervision over Cloud 's personality traits . 
 Yoshinori Kitase and Kazushige Nojima developed Cloud 's backstory and his relationship to Sephiroth . The idea for Cloud 's false persona arose after Nojima saw event planner Motomu Toriyama 's standing animation depicting " Cloud showing off " , which impressed him and inspired the basis for the scenario . Nojima created the character of Zack so as to expand upon the mysteries in Cloud 's backstory . Kitase remained unaware of the addition 's significance until playtesting , as Nojima left the unfolding of events concerning Cloud 's identity unwritten . In emphasizing Cloud 's individuality , the staff made repeated use of elements that they believed made the character interesting , such as Cloud 's phrase " not interested " and Toriyama 's standing animation . Kitase felt Cloud 's character was fresh in reviewing Nojima 's scenario , observing that he possessed an atypical personality for a hero by being neither single @-@ minded nor righteous . The love triangle between Cloud , Tifa and Aerith was also viewed as novel for the series , and Nojima likened Cloud 's relationship to Tifa as one of childhood friends since nursery school , whereas Aerith was akin to a transfer student arriving mid @-@ term . 
 In early drafts , Cloud would act as an alter ego for Sephiroth , influenced to believe he was a creation of Sephiroth 's will . As in the finished game , Cloud would later realize that he is the real Cloud , and that the reason Sephiroth could control his mind and body was because of his weakened will and Shinra 's experiments . Additionally , Cloud would have scarred Tifa prior to the game 's events , although the reasons for as to why were unknown . Early materials listed Cloud 's job as magic swordsman ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and berserker ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Masato Kato , one of the event planners , proposed a scene involving Cloud walking out of the Highwind 's Chocobo stable followed by Tifa the morning before the final battle . Kitase rejected it as too extreme , but maintained a scene written by Kato depicting the night before , in which a risqué line is spoken by Tifa followed by a fade to black . In an interview , Nojima stated that none of the staff thought it would become an important issue at the time . 
 Nojima has explained that the relationship between the player and the main character in a Final Fantasy title is a dynamic he has always been concerned about . With VII , Cloud 's subdued nature led him to write scenes with the character in such a way that the players would be placed in the position of deciding for themselves what the character was thinking . Cloud 's foggy memories served both to help players " become " the character , and to introduce them to a world which other inhabitants would otherwise share common knowledge of . Nomura believes that the reason Cloud has become so popular with audiences is due to the impact his personality made in Nojima 's scenario . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 Nomura redesigned Cloud for his appearance in Kingdom Hearts . He is depicted with a claw and a crimson cape , and the blade of his sword is wrapped in bandages . Stating that Cloud 's left arm was inspired by Vincent Valentine , Nomura explained that he wanted to give the character a more demon @-@ like appearance due to his ties to the dark side in the game . Nomura stated that he wanted to leave the question of whether Cloud was searching for Aerith open to the player 's interpretation . Teruaki Sugawara , the game 's voice director , recommended Takahiro Sakurai , Cloud 's Japanese voice actor , to Nomura for the role . Nomura had originally asked Sakurai to play the protagonist of The Bouncer , Sion <unk> , but found that his voice best suited Cloud after hearing him speak . Sakurai received the script without any accompanying visuals , and first arrived for recording under the impression that he would be voicing a different character than the one featured in Final Fantasy VII . 
 For Advent Children , Nomura agreed to direct the project largely because of his attachment to the character of Cloud . Although Nomura stated that Cloud was a more positive character in Final Fantasy VII than in Advent Children , he did not believe that such an " ' upbeat ' image of him is what stuck in the minds of the fans " , and the script was written to explain why Cloud returned to a state of mind " consistent with the fans ' view of him . " Nomura describes Cloud 's life as peaceful but , hurt by the losses he experienced during the original game , one which he grew scared of losing . Blaming himself for things outside of his control , Cloud , Nomura elaborated , needed to overcome himself . In contrast to other heroes , who , in Nomura 's view , typically possess character defects amounting only to quirks , Nomura believed Cloud 's weakness to be humanizing . Nojima viewed the theme of the story as one of forgiveness , which he believed required hardship . Cloud , by taking up his sword and fighting , struggles to achieve it . Nojima sought to establish Cloud 's withdrawn personality by depicting him with a cell phone , but never answering any calls . He originally intended for Aerith 's name to be the last of those displayed while the backlog of ignored messages appears as Cloud 's cell phone sinks into the water , but Nojima altered the scene because it " sounded too creepy " . The wolf which Cloud imagines " represents the deepest part of Cloud 's psyche " and " appears in response to some burden that Cloud is carrying deep in his heart " , vanishing at the film 's end . Nomura cites one of the film 's final scenes , in which Cloud smiles , as his favorite , highlighting the lack of dialogue and Cloud 's embarrassment . The scene influenced composer Nobuo Uematsu 's score , who grew excited after coming across it in his review of the script , commenting on the difficulty players who had finished Final Fantasy VII would have had imagining Cloud 's smile . 
 Nomura sought to make Cloud 's design " distinctly different from the other characters . " About thirty different designs were made for Cloud 's face , and his hair was altered both to give it a more realistic look and to illustrate that two years had passed since the game 's conclusion . The staff attempted rendering Cloud based on the game 's original illustrations , but concluded that doing so left his eyes unrealistically big , which " looked gross . " Further revisions were made to Cloud 's face after completion of the pilot film , which featured a more realistic style . In contrast to his hair , Cloud 's clothes were difficult to make in the film . Deciding to give Cloud a simple costume consistent with the concept of " clothes designed for action " , the staff began with the idea of a black robe , eventually <unk> it down to a " long apron " shifted to one side . Cloud 's weaponry was based on the joking observation that because his sword in the original game was already enormously tall , in the sequel , he should use sheer numbers . Referred to as " the fusion swords " during the film 's development , early storyboard concepts included Cloud carrying six swords on his back , although the idea was later modified to six interlocking swords . While the idea wasn 't " logically thought out " and the staff didn 't think that they could " make it work physically " , it was believed to provide " an interesting accent to the story . " Cloud 's new motorcycle , Fenrir ( <unk> ) , was designed by Takayuki <unk> , who was asked by the staff to design an upgraded version of Cloud 's " Hardy @-@ Daytona " motorcycle from Final Fantasy VII . As development continued , the bike got bigger , with <unk> feeling its heaviness provided an impact that worked well within the film . 
 For Advent Children , Nomura wanted to contrast Cloud and Vincent 's voices given their similar personalities . As a sequel to the highly popular Final Fantasy VII , Sakurai felt greater pressure performing the role than he did when he voiced Cloud for Kingdom Hearts . Sakurai received comments from colleagues revealing their love of the game , some of them jokingly threatening that they would not forgive Sakurai if he did not meet their expectations . During recording , Sakurai was told that " [ n ] o matter what kind of odds are stacked against him , Cloud won 't be shaken . " Sakurai says that while he recorded most of his work individually , he performed alongside Ayumi Ito , who voiced Tifa , for a few scenes . These recordings left him feeling " deflated " , as the " exchanges he has with Tifa can be pretty painful " , Sakurai commenting that Cloud — whom he empathized with as his voice actor — has a hard time dealing with straight talk . Sakurai says that there were scenes that took over a year to complete , with very precise directions being given requiring multiple takes . According to Sakurai , Cloud 's silence conveys more about the character than when he speaks . While possessing heroic characteristics , Sakurai describes Cloud 's outlook as negative , and says that he is delicate in some respects . A fan of VII , Sakurai had believed Cloud to be a colder character based on his original impression of him , but later came to view him as more sentimental . After the final product was released , Sakurai was anxious to hear the fans ' response , whether positive or negative , and says that most of the feedback he received praised him . While recording Crisis Core , Sakurai felt that Cloud , though still introverted , acted more like a normal teenager , and modified his approach accordingly . Cloud 's scream over Zack 's death left a major impression on Sakurai , who says that he worked hard to convey the emotional tone of the ending . Sakurai has come to regard Cloud as an important role , commenting that Cloud reminds him of his own past , and that , as a Final Fantasy VII fan himself , he is happy to contribute . 
 In English adaptations , Cloud is voiced by Steve Burton . Burton 's work as Cloud in Advent Children served as his first feature length role , an experience he enjoyed . Calling the character a rare opportunity for him as an actor , Burton describes Cloud as having a " heaviness about him " . Burton says he is surprised when fans recognize him for his work as Cloud , whom he has referred to as " [ one of the ] coolest characters there is , " and he too considers himself lucky for having voiced him . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Cloud has been merchandised extensively , in many different forms , including figurines and jewelry . In commemoration of the franchise 's 20th anniversary , Square released figurines of him alongside other Final Fantasy protagonists . Square Enix 's manager of merchandise , Kanji Tashiro , said at the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International that Cloud 's likeness has produced some of the company 's best @-@ selling items , and that fans could look forward to further adaptations of the character in the future . Popular models at the time included Cloud 's Advent Children figurine and Final Fantasy VII Hardy @-@ Daytona bike set , both of which sold particularly well in European and North American markets . Square has also released two promotional books primarily focusing on Cloud 's character : Cloud vol.1 , which was released in 2007 , and Cloud message , in 2008 . In 2013 , a replica of the Buster Sword was created by blacksmith Tony <unk> for the webseries Man at Arms . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Cloud has been mostly well received by critics . In 2005 , Electronic Gaming Monthly placed Cloud seventh in their list of top video game characters . He was named best character of all time in Dengeki PlayStation 's 2007 " Den @-@ Play Awards " . IGN in 2008 ranked him third in both their lists of top Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy series characters . GameSpot published a video titled " Greatest Game Hero : Cloud Strife " for his inclusion in their 2009 " All Time Greatest Game Hero " poll , showcasing scenes of Cloud as he appears in Advent Children . UGO placed him first in their 2010 list of top Japanese RPG characters , stating " Cloud is the cloth from whom the great majority of JRPG characters were cut . " That same year , GamesRadar listed Cloud as the second best Final Fantasy hero of all the time , describing him as " one of the most well @-@ rounded and thought @-@ out characters in the series . " He was also ranked as the second best Final Fantasy character in a 2010 list by VideoGamer.com , who called him a " poster boy for the entire JRPG genre " . In 2011 , Empire ranked Cloud as the 13th greatest video game character , stating : " He is , and always will be , the definitive FF poster child - an enduring axiom of character <unk> [ sic ] . " GameZone ranked Cloud second in their 2012 list of top Final Fantasy characters , attributing the success of Final Fantasy VII largely to his character . In 2013 , Complex named him the greatest Final Fantasy character of all time , citing his " killer backstory , iconic weaponry , and a great game to the boot . " 
 In his review of the 1998 PC release of Final Fantasy VII , Ron Dulin of GameSpot commented that " a simple understatement will have to suffice : Cloud is easily the most interesting and complex character ever presented in a game . " RPGamer 's Abadi <unk> called Cloud " one of the most complex characters Square has created , " as well as " the first truly complicated main character . " Unicorn Lynx of MobyGames described him as " one of the most complex characters ever seen in a game , " citing the struggle Cloud faces in assuming responsibility as a leader while confronting " his own deep psychological problems " and " the truth about his very existence . " Kurt Kalata of Gamasutra stated that he is " neither hero nor anti @-@ hero " , but rather " somewhat of a weakling " suffering from grandiose delusions and other psychological issues . He also called Cloud one of the first unreliable narrators in a role @-@ playing video game . Chi Kong Lui , writing for GameCritics , stated that while Final Fantasy VII features " some of the most complex characters ever created , by video game standards , " their personalities are " paper @-@ thin " . He criticized Cloud 's " childish motivations " , stating that Final Fantasy VII could not " match the depth of screenplay in Orson Welles ' Citizen Kane or the complexities of characters exhibited in Martin Scorsese 's Taxi Driver . " 
 IGN stated that Cloud set a trend for role @-@ playing video game heroes , describing his " spiky blond hair " and " gigantic Buster Sword " as " instantly identifiable icons , recognized by gamers around the world . " Edge described Cloud as an example of " excellent design and characterization " . Famitsu in 2010 published a seven @-@ page tribute to Cloud , showcasing his many appearances throughout the years . 
 Cloud has appeared in various other lists . These include IGN 's " Worst Videogame <unk> " ( 2006 ) and " Top Videogame Sword Masters " ( 2008 ) , and ScrewAttack 's " Top Ten Coolest Characters " ( 2007 ) . 1UP.com featured Cloud in their list of top Final Fantasy character types , citing him as an example of " The Sullen Asshole " alongside Squall Leonhart from Final Fantasy VIII and Cecil from Final Fantasy IV . GameDaily ranked him fifth on their list of top " gaming hunks " , praising his design and weapon . GamesRadar included his name among the 50 " most gloriously stupid " in video game history , and featured him in its " RPG Emo @-@ Off " , listing Cloud as the second " most emo character of all JRPGs " behind Genesis Rhapsodos from Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . GamesRadar also listed Cloud 's Buster Sword as one " the most ludicrously impractical RPG weapons " and included his cross @-@ dressing scene in its list of " [ g ] <unk> 's most piss poor disguises " , commenting that " it makes Cloud look so damn feminine , the escort @-@ loving baddie chooses him over ... <unk> [ sic ] and Tifa " . Cloud and Aerith 's relationship ranked third in GamesRadar 's 2008 list of top Square Enix couples , who called it " a classic love story " , while IGN ranked it ninth in their 2006 list of best video game couples overall . In 2013 , Complex ranked Cloud as the eighth greatest soldier in video games . 
 In an Oricon poll conducted in 2008 , Cloud placed second overall for most popular video game character , ranking second among men and third with women . In a 2010 ASCII Media Works poll asking fans which video game or manga character they would like to name their children after , Cloud 's name ranked third for male characters . That same year , Famitsu readers voted Cloud as the third best video game character of all time . In one of IGN 's 2007 " Hero <unk> " , Cloud was pitted against Link and lost . The character placed similarly in contests by GameFAQs , winning the " Character Battle II " ( 2003 ) and finishing second in the " Character Battle III " ( 2004 ) and the " Battle Royale " ( 2006 ) . In the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition of 2011 , Cloud was voted as the fifth best video game character . 
 PSXextreme praised Cloud 's redesign in Kingdom Hearts as one of the best in the game , describing it is a " hybrid " of his and Vincent Valentine 's designs . According to AnimeFringe , Cloud 's appearance in Kingdom Hearts was one of the things that excited Final Fantasy VII fans the most . His development in Advent Children was praised by DVD Talk as one of the best parts from the film . James Mielke of 1UP.com commented that Cloud 's guilt over Aerith 's death was effective enough to move viewers , but regarded such scenes as " manipulative " . Michael Beckett , writing for RPGamer , referred to Cloud overcoming Aerith 's death as central to the film , and called his fight sequences " the most creative and impressive scenes " . Mielke also described the characters as " beautiful ; perfect almost " , commenting that Cloud possessed " <unk> perfect hair " . Briana <unk> of Mania Entertainment , however , listed Cloud second in her article " 10 Male Headaches of Anime " , criticizing his feeling of guilt about Aerith 's death . Joystiq 's Andrew Yoon opined that the director 's cut version of the film provides more depth to Cloud 's development , taking advantage of its longer runtime by better " humanizing [ him ] " . A 2010 GamesRadar article showcasing classic game character redesigns contrasted Cloud 's appearances in Advent Children and Final Fantasy VII , stating that the move away from low polygon models necessitated the change , and commenting that Square Enix alters the design with each title he features in . 
 Tasked with creating a " female version of Cloud " for Final Fantasy XIII , Nomura designed Lightning with Cloud 's success in mind , stating that he " desired for her to be ... loved for a long time , like Cloud . " After Lightning was voted as the most popular female character in the series by Japanese fans , Mollie Patterson of <unk> commented : " Some have also brought up that Lightning is kind of the female equivalent to Cloud , which might be why she gets so much love . " 
 = FIFA World Cup Trophy = 
 The World Cup is a gold trophy that is awarded to the winners of the FIFA World Cup association football tournament . Since the advent of the World Cup in 1930 , two trophies have been used : the Jules Rimet Trophy from 1930 to 1970 , and the FIFA World Cup Trophy from 1974 to the present @-@ day . 
 The first trophy , originally named Victory , but later renamed in honour of former FIFA president Jules Rimet , was made of gold plated sterling silver and lapis lazuli and depicted Nike , the Greek goddess of victory . Brazil won the trophy outright in 1970 , prompting the commissioning of a replacement . The Jules Rimet Trophy was stolen in 1983 and never recovered . 
 The subsequent trophy , called the " FIFA World Cup Trophy " , was introduced in 1974 . Made of 18 karat gold with a malachite base , it stands 36 @.@ 8 centimeters high and weighs 6 @.@ 1 kilograms . The trophy was made by Stabilimento <unk> Bertoni company in Italy . It depicts two human figures holding up the Earth . The current holder of the trophy is Germany , winner of the 2014 World Cup . 
 = = Jules Rimet Trophy = = 
 The Jules Rimet Trophy was the original prize for winning the Football World Cup . Originally called " Victory " , but generally known simply as the World Cup or Coupe du Monde , it was officially renamed in 1946 to honour the FIFA President Jules Rimet who in 1929 passed a vote to initiate the competition . It was designed by Abel Lafleur and made of gold @-@ plated sterling silver on a white / yellow marble base . In 1954 this base was replaced with a high base made of lapis lazuli . It stood 35 centimetres ( 14 in ) high and weighed 3 @.@ 8 kilograms ( 8 @.@ 4 lb ) . It comprised a decagonal cup , supported by a winged figure representing Nike , the ancient Greek goddess of victory . The Jules Rimet Trophy was taken to Uruguay for the first FIFA World Cup aboard the Conte Verde , which set sail from Villefranche @-@ sur @-@ Mer , just southeast of Nice , on 21 June 1930 . This was the same ship that carried Jules Rimet and the footballers representing France , Romania and Belgium who were participating in the tournament that year . The first team to be awarded the trophy was Uruguay , the winners of the 1930 World Cup . 
 During World War II , the trophy was held by 1938 winners Italy . Ottorino Barassi , the Italian vice @-@ president of FIFA and president of FIGC , secretly transported the trophy from a bank in Rome and hid it in a shoe @-@ box under his bed to prevent Adolf Hitler and the Nazis from taking it . The 1958 FIFA World Cup in Sweden marked the beginning of a tradition regarding the trophy . As Brazilian captain <unk> Bellini heard photographer requests for a better view of the Jules Rimet Trophy , he lifted it up in the air . Every Cup @-@ winning captain ever since has repeated the gesture . 
 On 20 March 1966 , four months before the 1966 FIFA World Cup in England , the trophy was stolen during a public exhibition at Westminster Central Hall . The trophy was found just seven days later wrapped in newspaper at the bottom of a suburban garden hedge in Upper Norwood , South London , by a dog named Pickles . 
 As a security measure , The Football Association secretly manufactured a replica of the trophy for use in exhibitions rather than the original . This replica was used on subsequent occasions up until 1970 when the original trophy had to be handed back to FIFA . Since FIFA had explicitly denied the FA permission to create a replica , the replica also had to disappear from public view and was for many years kept under its creator 's bed . This replica was eventually sold at an auction in 1997 for £ 254 @,@ 500 , when it was purchased by FIFA . The high auction price , ten times the reserve price of £ 20 @,@ 000 – £ 30 @,@ 000 , was led by speculation that the auctioned trophy was not the replica trophy but the original itself . Subsequent testing by FIFA , however , confirmed the auctioned trophy was indeed a replica and FIFA soon afterwards arranged for the replica to be lent for display at the English National Football Museum , which was then based in Preston but is now in Manchester . 
 The Brazilian team won the tournament for the third time in 1970 , allowing them to keep the real trophy in perpetuity , as had been stipulated by Jules Rimet in 1930 . It was put on display at the Brazilian Football Confederation headquarters in Rio de Janeiro in a cabinet with a front of bullet @-@ proof glass . 
 On 19 December 1983 , the wooden rear of the cabinet was pried open with a crowbar and the cup was stolen again . Four men were tried and convicted in absentia for the crime . The trophy has never been recovered , and it is widely believed to have been melted down and sold . Only one piece of the Jules Rimet Trophy has been found , the original base which FIFA had kept in a basement of the federation 's Zurich headquarters prior to 2015 . 
 The Confederation commissioned a replica of their own , made by Eastman Kodak , using 1 @.@ 8 kg ( 3 @.@ 97 lb ) of gold . This replica was presented to Brazilian military president João Figueiredo in 1984 . 
 The trophy was the subject of a 2014 documentary " Mysteries of the Rimet Trophy " shown as part of ESPN 's 30 for 30 : Soccer Stories films series during the 2014 World Cup . 
 = = New Trophy = = 
 A replacement trophy was commissioned by FIFA for the 1974 World Cup . Fifty @-@ three submissions were received from sculptors in seven countries . Italian artist Silvio Gazzaniga was awarded the commission . The trophy stands 36 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 14 @.@ 4 inches ) tall and is made of 5 kg ( 11 lb ) of 18 carat ( 75 % ) gold with a base ( 13 centimetres [ 5 @.@ 1 inches ] in diameter ) containing two layers of malachite . It has been asserted by Sir Martyn Poliakoff that the trophy is hollow ; if , as is claimed , it were solid , the trophy would weigh 70 – 80 kg and would be too heavy to lift . Produced by Bertoni , Milano in <unk> <unk> , it weighs 6 @.@ 175 kg ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) in total and depicts two human figures holding up the Earth . Gazzaniga described the trophy thus , " The lines spring out from the base , rising in spirals , stretching out to receive the world . From the remarkable dynamic tensions of the compact body of the sculpture rise the figures of two athletes at the stirring moment of victory . " 
 The trophy has the engraving " FIFA World Cup " on its base . After the 1994 FIFA World Cup a plate was added to the bottom side of the trophy on which the names of winning countries are engraved , and are therefore not visible when the trophy is standing upright . The inscriptions state the year in figures and the name of the winning nation in its national language ; for example , " 1974 Deutschland " or " 1994 Brasil " . In 2010 , however , the name of the winning nation was engraved as " 2010 Spain " , in English , not in Spanish . As of 2014 , ten winners have been engraved on the base . The plate is replaced and rearranged the winners of the trophy into a spiral to accommodate future winners , with Spain this time written in Spanish ( España ) . FIFA 's regulations now state that the trophy , unlike its predecessor , cannot be won outright : the winners of the tournament receive a Bronze replica which is gold plated rather than solid gold . Germany was the first nation to win the new trophy for the third time in 2014 . 
 = = Winners = = 
 Jules Rimet Trophy 
 Brazil – 1958 , 1962 , 1970 
 Uruguay – 1930 , 1950 
 Italy – 1934 , 1938 
 Germany – 1954 
 England – 1966 
 FIFA World Cup Trophy 
 Germany – 1974 , 1990 , 2014 
 Argentina – 1978 , 1986 
 Italy – 1982 , 2006 
 Brazil – 1994 , 2002 
 France – 1998 
 Spain – 2010 
 = Tropical Storm Emily ( 2011 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Emily was a weak Atlantic tropical cyclone that brought torrential rains to much of the northern Caribbean in 2011 . The fifth named storm of the annual hurricane season , Emily developed from a strong but poorly organized tropical wave that tracked the open Atlantic for several days in late July . On August 1 , it approached the Lesser Antilles and became better defined , producing inclement weather over much of the area . Two days later , the disturbance developed a closed wind circulation center , marking the formation of Tropical Storm Emily . The storm remained fairly disorganized as it proceeded into the Caribbean , though it generated strong thunderstorms and gusty winds along its path . On August 4 , Emily was declassified as a tropical cyclone , after the mountainous areas of Hispaniola disrupted its weak circulation . Upon exiting the northeastern Caribbean on August 6 , its remnants regenerated into a tropical storm , ultimately dissipating the next day . 
 Despite its poor organization , Emily wrought havoc across many Caribbean nations . Gusty winds felled trees and heavy rains triggered widespread flooding throughout the Lesser Antilles ; any significant damage in those islands was confined to Martinique , however , where one fatality occurred . In Puerto Rico , similar floods affected residences and roads , with infrastructural losses in the territory estimated at $ 5 million . Even after dissipating , the remnants of Emily continued to produce prolonged rainfall over much of Hispaniola . Extensive floods and mudslides in the Dominican Republic displaced over 7 @,@ 000 residents , and three people drowned in the capital of Santo Domingo . In neighboring Haiti , hundreds of homes were flooded in the department of Artibonite , prompting evacuations . Only minor wind damage occurred throughout the country 's southern peninsula , but one death was reported in the region . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The cyclogenesis of Tropical Storm Emily was complicated , extending over several days from late July into early August . An easterly tropical wave — an equatorward trough of low pressure — exited the west African coast in the fourth week of July , at which point it became largely embedded within the monsoon trough . Located to the south of a ride of high pressure , the wave moved west @-@ northwestward across the open Atlantic ; it retained a broad circulation with little to no precipitation for a day or two . Over time , clusters of convection increased around the broad system , and it developed two distinct centers of circulation on July 30 . During the morning of July 31 , the large low markedly gained in organization , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted it was close to becoming a tropical depression . Later that day , however , the main circulation became increasingly elongated ; its westernmost component soon detached to form a separate tropical wave . This new disturbance featured widely scattered convection and rainbands , which briefly affected the Lesser Antilles . The next day , a new area of deep convection with a dominant center formed as the circulation became better defined . It passed through the Leeward Islands with some improvement in its structure , and the surface winds rose to near tropical storm force . A reconnaissance flight into the system revealed the circulation center had become well defined near the deep convection . The system was upgraded to tropical storm status and given the name Emily at 0000 UTC on August 2 , when it was located to the south of Dominica . During the initial stages of its existence , the storm accelerated toward the west @-@ northwest in response to the strong high pressure to its north . 
 With a relatively dry environment along its projected path , Emily was expected to strengthen only gradually until its predicted passage through the Greater Antilles . For several hours into August 2 , the cyclone fluctuated little in intensity and organization as it developed banding features . Emily 's appearance later improved on satellite images , and it developed a ragged central dense overcast ; the NHC estimated that the storm had reached its peak sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) by 0000 UTC on August 3 . Nevertheless , reconnaissance revealed that its circulation remained poorly organized , and at the time , several forecast models even supported dissipation prior to landfall in Hispaniola . An increase in upper wind shear removed the deepest convection from the circulation center , and it would remain so for the rest of the storm 's duration . On August 4 , the cloud pattern and convective banding became better organized near the center as the upper outflow over the cyclone expanded . Emily proceeded to track just south of the Dominican Republic , where its weak circulation became increasingly disrupted due to the adjacent high terrain and increasing vertical wind shear . The cyclone accelerated over Hispaniola and degenerated into an open trough around 2100 UTC that day . 
 The remnant trough proceeded northwestward into the Bahamas , where the NHC assessed a high chance of redevelopment based on relenting upper wind shear . Over the next couple of days , it moved over the Bahamas and proceeded east of southern Florida . Late on August 6 , the trough developed a new center of circulation and regenerated into a weak tropical depression by 1800 UTC near Grand Bahama . Emily briefly reattained tropical storm strength six hours later , although it once again dissipated to a remnant low the next day owing to increasing wind shear . The low took on an accelerated east @-@ northeastward motion , bypassing Bermuda before heading eastward over the open Atlantic . It briefly retained a broad area of gale @-@ force winds with deep convection , which prompted the NHC to <unk> the system . The combination of strong wind shear and its rapid forward speed inhibited significant development , and the remnant dissipated around 1200 UTC on August 11 , about 980 mi ( 1 @,@ 565 km ) west of the Azores . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Because of the high potential for tropical cyclone development , Météo @-@ France declared yellow cyclone alerts for Guadeloupe and Martinique , warning of imminent squally weather . Due to the presence of Emily , a state of emergency was declared for all of Puerto Rico . Officials ordered the preparation of over 400 storm shelters and ensured adequate water supply . The morning before the storm , government workers were dismissed , and national courtrooms remained closed . The United States Coast Guard issued a statement urging residents of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands to avoid recreational boating and swimming until Emily had passed . JetBlue Airways waived fees for flights into the Dominican Republic because of the inclement weather conditions . Four cruise ships , Oasis of the Seas , Freedom of the Seas , Carnival Dream and Carnival Liberty altered their courses through the Caribbean to avoid the storm . 
 In Haiti , about 630 @,@ 000 people were still living in tents across areas devastated by the January 2010 earthquake prior to Emily 's arrival . Due to the lack of sturdy structure to ride out a storm , fears arose over how they would fare with a tropical cyclone passing through the country . Emergency officials in the country set aside 22 large buses to evacuate thousands of people at the risk of flooding . Additionally , residents were urged to conserve food and safeguard their belongings . The United Nations placed 11 @,@ 500 troops in the country on standby to assist in recovery efforts should they be necessitated . The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies also put emergency teams on standby to deliver food support in addition to the 125 @,@ 000 people already assisted . In advance of the storm , authorities closed all airports and landing sites in country . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 Intense rainbands produced gusty winds and heavy precipitation totaling to 5 @.@ 90 in ( 150 mm ) in Martinique , causing street flooding and inundating homes . Roughly 5 @,@ 000 residences lost power at the height of the storm , though the outages were brief and confined to the southeast of the island . A large landslide occurred in the capital of Fort @-@ de @-@ France due to excessive soil saturation , prompting some 40 families to evacuate the area . Across the city , deep flood waters affected 29 houses ; a man was electrocuted and killed by an exposed wire in his flooded home . 
 In Guadeloupe , damage from the storm was limited ; potent gusts uprooted numerous trees and blew debris onto streets throughout Basse @-@ Terre . One road was blocked off to traffic during its passage as a precautionary measure , but was reopened soon thereafter . Gale @-@ force winds downed some electricity lines in Saint Kitts and Nevis , causing two island @-@ wide outages . The storm enhanced moisture to produce intermittent torrents over the Virgin Islands , with localized totals of no more than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) . Winds in the area were also limited ; the highest gust was experienced on Buck Island , measuring 52 mph ( 83 km / h ) . 
 = = = Puerto Rico = = = 
 While moving little near Puerto Rico , Emily brought prolonged tropical storm conditions to many parts of the island . The heaviest rainfall occurred in southern regions ; Caguas recorded a total of 8 @.@ 22 in ( 209 mm ) of rain during the storm . High winds damaged an electrical grid , cutting off power to about 18 @,@ 500 customers ; roughly 6 @,@ 000 people were left without drinking water during the storm . Dozens of residents evacuated to shelters , in particular those living near risk zones . Torrential rains of up to 10 inches ( 250 mm ) overflowed three rivers , which resulted in the flooding and subsequent closure of the PR @-@ 31 highway and PRI @-@ 3 intersection . Throughout the island , multiple other roads were made impassable by landslides and fallen objects ; infrastructural damage surmounted $ 5 million , according to preliminary estimates . The two @-@ day suspension of about 280 @,@ 000 employees — about 30 percent of the territory 's workforce — affected the local economy significantly , with capital losses estimated at $ 55 million . 
 In San Lorenzo , 25 families became isolated when a bridge threatened to collapse . Flooded homes and cluttered streets were reported in Ceiba , with one residential gate collapsing in the municipality . The agricultural sector also sustained losses from the storm ; in Yabucoa , heavy rains washed out 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 490 ha ) of banana seedlings . 
 = = = Hispaniola = = = 
 Albeit disorganized , Emily and its remnants dropped extensive precipitation across the Dominican Republic , with maximum totals of up to 21 inches ( 528 mm ) recorded in <unk> . Among other consequences , severe flooding and isolated mudslides left 56 communities isolated from surrounding areas . The storm displaced up to 7 @,@ 534 people throughout the country , of which 1 @,@ 549 sought refuge in storm shelters . Consecutive hours of rainfall resulted in the overflow of some rivers , although no significant damage was reported to adjacent areas . Offshore , squalls generated rough waves that briefly affected boating operations and oceanside homes . To the east of Santo Domingo , two men drowned after getting caught in a swollen river . A third drowning fatality occurred elsewhere in the capital due to flooding . 
 Owing to the timing of its dissipation , Emily spared neighboring Haiti from the devastation initially anticipated . At least 235 people in Jacmel and <unk> , as well as 65 prisoners from Gonaïves and Miragoâne , required evacuation at the height of the storm . In Artibonite , civil protection teams evacuated roughly 300 residents . Rainfall triggered floods that damaged over 300 homes throughout the country , while several cholera treatment centers were destroyed . At the risk of new outbreaks , special <unk> were distributed to sanitize possibly contaminated waters . A body was recovered from a ravine near Les Cayes , but the exact cause of death was disputed ; another person in the area sustained injuries after being hit by a fallen tree . High winds caused some property damage in Léogâne and Jacmel . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The successor trough to Emily produced torrential rains over eastern Cuba , causing some rivers to overflow . Damaging flood waters spread across roads in Santiago de Cuba , where 37 homes were affected by mud . While regenerating into a tropical depression , Emily dropped prolonged rainfall in the Bahamas ; a severe thunderstorm warning was accordingly issued for Grand Bahama and adjacent waters . Precipitation totals of up to 7 @.@ 9 in ( 200 mm ) were recorded during the time . 
 = Fantastic Four in film = 
 The fictional superhero team Fantastic Four featured in Marvel Comics publication has appeared in four live @-@ action films since its inception . The plots deal with four main characters , known formally as Reed Richards , Susan Storm , Ben Grimm and Johnny Storm , and how they adapt to the superpowers they attain . 
 Constantin Film bought the film rights for the characters in 1986 . A low @-@ budget film was produced in 1992 by New Horizon Studios owned by Roger Corman . In 2004 , with a distribution deal from 20th Century Fox , a second Fantastic Four film entered production . Fantastic Four was released in 2005 and the sequel Fantastic Four : Rise of the Silver Surfer was released in 2007 . Both films received negative reviews from critics , yet earned a combined US $ 619 million worldwide at the box office . Due to 20th Century Fox 's disappointment with the box @-@ office return of Fantastic Four : Rise of the Silver Surfer , a potential third Fantastic Four film and a Silver Surfer spin @-@ off film were canceled . 
 In 2009 , the development for a reboot was announced . Directed by Josh Trank , Fantastic Four was released on August 7 , 2015 and received negative reviews from both critics and public , and Trank himself . A sequel to the reboot was scheduled to be released on June 9 , 2017 , but it was removed from Fox 's upcoming slate . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = The Fantastic Four ( 1994 ) = = = 
 The story of the film focused on four astronauts that were bombarded with cosmic rays from a comet while on an experimental space craft . In the process , they acquired extraordinary abilities . 
 In 1986 , Bernd Eichinger of Constantin Film acquired the film rights of the Fantastic Four from Marvel Comics . In 1992 , Eichinger hired Roger Corman to produce a low @-@ budget film in order to keep the rights . In 1994 , the adaptation , titled The Fantastic Four , had its trailer released to theaters , and its cast and director went on a promotional tour , however the film was not officially released . The film was accused of being an <unk> copy , meaning it was only made to keep the license . Stan Lee and Eichinger stated that the actors had no idea of the situation , instead believing they were creating a proper release . Marvel Comics paid in exchange for the film 's negative , so 20th Century Fox could go ahead with the big @-@ budget adaptation . While the film was never released to theaters and home @-@ video , it was released by bootleg video distributors . 
 = = = Original film series = = = 
 = = = = Fantastic Four ( 2005 ) = = = = 
 The story features Reed Richards , Ben Grimm , Susan Storm , Johnny Storm and Victor von Doom getting hit by a space storm after boarding into a space station . As a result , by the radiation from the storm , they get new abilities and powers that they have deal with in their own ways . 
 Chris Columbus was hired by 20th Century Fox to write and direct the film in 1995 . In 1997 , Peter Segal was attached to a script which had been written by Columbus and Michael France . Segal later left the project in the same year . Phillip Morton worked on the script , and Sam Hamm did rewrites in 1998 . The following year , Raja Gosnell signed on as director . The film was announced in August 2000 as being aimed for a July 4 , 2001 release date . Gosnell decided to leave the project to film Scooby @-@ Doo . Peyton Reed served as replacement in April 2001 . Reed contemplated making the film as a period piece set in the early 1960s during the space race . He later dropped out from the film . In April 2004 , Tim Story was hired to direct and principal photography began in August in Vancouver , Canada with re @-@ shoots carried on until May 2005 . Starring Ioan Gruffudd , Jessica Alba , Chris Evans , Michael Chiklis and Julian McMahon , the film was released on July 8 , 2005 . 
 = = = = Fantastic Four : Rise of the Silver Surfer ( 2007 ) = = = = 
 The story , both inspired by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby 's Fantastic Four comic @-@ book storyline " The Galactus Trilogy " and Warren Ellis 's comic @-@ book Ultimate Extinction , features the Silver Surfer , whose cosmic energy has been affecting the planet Earth and leaving craters around the planet . Set against an impending wedding between Reed and Susan , the U.S. Army recruits the Fantastic Four to help stop the Silver Surfer , and separately gain help from Doom . 
 With Fantastic Four grossing $ 330 @.@ 5 million worldwide , 20th Century Fox hired director Tim Story and screenwriter Mark Frost in December 2005 to return to work for the sequel . Don Payne was also hired to write the screenplay . Principal photography began on August 28 , 2006 in Vancouver , Canada . The film was released on June 15 , 2007 . 
 Due to 20th Century Fox 's disappointment in the box @-@ office performance of the film , a potential third Fantastic Four film and a Silver Surfer spin @-@ off film were canceled . 
 = = = Reboot = = = 
 = = = = Fantastic Four ( 2015 ) = = = = 
 The story , loosely based on the Ultimate Fantastic Four comic @-@ books , features four people teleporting to an alternate universe , which alters their physical form and grants them new abilities . They must learn to harness their abilities and work together as a team to save the Earth from a familiar enemy . 
 In August 2009 , the development for the reboot of the Fantastic Four film franchise was announced by 20th Century Fox . In July 2012 , Josh Trank was hired to direct . Michael Green , Jeremy Slater , Seth Grahame @-@ Smith and Simon Kinberg were hired to write the screenplay with Slater and Kinberg receiving credit . Casting began in January 2014 with the announcement of the cast occurred in the following months . Principal photography began in May 2014 in Baton Rouge , Louisiana and ended in August the same year . Starring Miles Teller , Kate Mara , Michael B. Jordan , Jamie Bell and Toby Kebbell , the film was released on August 7 , 2015 . A sequel was originally planned for 2017 , but was removed from the studio 's schedule in November 2015 . 
 = = Recurring cast and characters = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 This table only includes characters which have appeared in more than one film . 
 A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film , or that the character 's presence in the film has not yet been announced . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = Home media release = = 
 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released Fantastic Four and Fantastic Four : Rise of the Silver Surfer on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and digital download . The films were also released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray box sets : 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 The Fantastic Four film series is the fourth highest @-@ grossing film series based on Marvel Comics characters after the Marvel Cinematic Universe , the Spider @-@ Man films and the X @-@ Men film series respectively grossing over $ 342 million in North America and over $ 787 million worldwide . 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 None of the Fantastic Four films to date have been positively received by critics . Scott Weinberg of <unk> called the 1994 film " [ a ] painfully silly film , one with more heroic intentions than actual assets . " 
 Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald gave negative reviews to the Fantastic Four films directed by Tim Story . Regarding Rise of the Silver Surfer , he stated , " Story does the same sort of efficient , impersonal job he did on the first film , keeping things at such a basic , almost childish level that it seems the movie is aimed squarely , if not exclusively , at the 12 @-@ and @-@ under set . " However , Roger Moore of Orlando Sentinel gave Story 's Fantastic Four films good reviews . He called the first film as a " popcorn popper " and a " cinematic sugar buzz " and the second film an " entertaining film that doesn 't overstay its welcome . " 
 The 2015 Fantastic Four film was the weakest reviewed of the series ; it was criticised for its dark , humorless tone , its character arcs , designs ( especially that of Dr. Doom ) , bland acting , and poorly written story . Josh Trank , who directed the film , was himself not satisfied , posting a message on Twitter stating he had a better version of the film , but was ruined by Fox ; he later deleted the message . 
 = The Checkers ( restaurant ) = 
 The Checkers , is a restaurant with rooms in Montgomery , Powys , Wales . Historically , the building was used as a coaching inn dating from the 17th century . Until the 2000s , it was used as a pub / hotel . It was converted into a French restaurant in 2012 and under chef Stephane Borie , it was awarded a Michelin star later that year . There are two main rooms in the restaurant , and three hotel rooms . It has received a mixed reception from critics , who have praised particular dishes but criticised the atmosphere . It serves both modern and classic French dishes , and in 2016 , switched to only using set menus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The restaurant is located on Broad Street in the town of Montgomery , Powys , a short distance from Montgomery Castle . There is a separate dining room and bar / lounge area in the restaurant . The dining room has low @-@ slung beams , and an open brick fireplace , around which are placed Laura Ashley sofas . The chestnut wood flooring of the restaurant was created from a fallen tree on the Francis family farm . There is room to serve up to 40 diners , with 12 members of staff working there . There are three en @-@ suite rooms available to hire on a hotel basis . 
 = = = Menu = = = 
 The menu uses locally grown produce from Powys and Shropshire , and is a combination of classic and modern French cuisine with seasonal changes . Dishes include a pork belly main from the nearby Neuadd Fach <unk> , which is served with an apple <unk> , pear and au jus . A monkfish main course comes served with a langoustine consommé and a <unk> sprout purée . Other French courses include a French onion soup and a cheese soufflé . Desserts served include a nougat tube filled with white chocolate and passion fruit mousse , and a trio of lemon pots . 
 In early 2016 , the a la carte menu was stopped and the restaurant moved to serving only set menus . This was attributed to a desire to reduce the food waste produced by the restaurant , which staff hoped that could drop by half as a result of the change . The children 's menu consists of smaller portions of the main menu . 
 = = History = = 
 The building dates from the 17th century , and was originally used as a coaching inn . References to the Checkers Inn in Montgomery within the British Newspaper Archives appear as far back as 1855 , when Rebecca Davies ' annual ball was due to take place in the large room there . In 1870 , the inn was run by Charles Williams . During the early 2000s , the building was operated as a hotel and pub , . with Eric Whittingham as landlord . 
 Head chef Stephane Borie trained with Michel Roux at the three Michelin star restaurant The Waterside Inn in Bray , Berkshire for seven years , where he met pastry chef Sarah Francis . Borie and Francis went on to run the Herbert Arms near Montgomery in 2008 with Sarah 's sister Kathryn running the front of house service . The trio took over The Checkers in March 2011 , refurbishing the former pub as a restaurant . They praised the customer base following them from the Herbert Arms to the new venture . 
 The restaurant was awarded a Michelin star for 2012 . The list was announced in October 2011 , only seven months after the restaurant opened . Borie said " I am very surprised , but it is teamwork obviously , we didn 't really expect anything because we have been in business for such a small amount of time . " Following the star , Borie increased the number of kitchen staff from three to six . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Neil Thomas visited the restaurant shortly after it was awarded a Michelin star . He gave it a rating of five out of five in his review for the Shropshire Star . He praised the <unk> cheese soufflé and the pheasant <unk> starters , as well as three of the mains ; a roast duck dish , the pork belly dish , and a venison dish . Around the same time , Sally Williams reviewed the restaurant for the Western Mail , who also praised the soufflé . She called the atmosphere " comfortable " and stated that it had a home @-@ like quality to it . In 2013 , the restaurant was ranked as the second best in Wales , behind The Walnut Tree in Abergavenny , in the Sunday Times list of the 100 best restaurants in the UK . 
 Matthew Norman gave the restaurant three and a half stars out of five , following a visit in early 2014 for The Daily Telegraph . He praised the soufflé and the French onion soup , but called the monkfish " bland " . The pork belly dish was described by his colleague as " superb , just the right side of too intimately piggy " . Norman concluded that the restaurant was a " slick operation " , but the " character , vibrancy and fun had been slaughtered on the altar of satisfying the inspectorate " . 
 = Wuffa of East Anglia = 
 Wuffa ( or Uffa , Old English : <unk> ) is recorded in the Anglo @-@ Saxon genealogies as an early king of East Anglia . If historical , he would have flourished in the 6th century . 
 By tradition Wuffa was named as the son of Wehha and the father of Tytila , but it is not known with any certainty that Wuffa was an actual historical figure . The name Wuffa was the eponym for the Wuffingas dynasty , the ruling royal family of the East Angles until 749 . 
 Bede regarded Wuffa as the first king of the East Angles , but the author of the Historia Brittonum , writing a century later , named Wehha as the first ruler . 
 = = Background = = 
 The kingdom of the East Angles was an independent and long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom that was established after migrants arrived in southeast Suffolk from the area now known as Jutland . Rainbird Clarke identified Wehha as one of the leaders of the new arrivals : the East Angles are tentatively identified with the Geats of the Old English poem Beowulf . Historians have used sources such as the Anglian collection too as an aid in calculating a date for the establishment of the kingdom . Collingwood and Myers note the use of literacy sources and archaeological finds as evidence in how the region was settled during and after the 5th century , when various disparate groups arrived in Norfolk and Suffolk from different parts of the coast and the rivers of the Fens . 
 The kingdom of the East Angles was bordered to the north and east by the North Sea , to the south by mainly impenetrable forests and by the Fens marshes on its western border . The main land route from East Anglia would at that time have been a corridor , along which ran the prehistoric Icknield Way . The Devil 's Dyke ( near modern Newmarket ) may have at one time formed part of the kingdom 's western boundary , but its construction cannot be dated accurately enough to establish it as of Anglo @-@ Saxon origin . 
 = = Pedigree and reign = = 
 According to the East Anglian dynastic tally in the Anglian collection , Wuffa was the son of Wehha and the father of Tytila . His name , which is a diminutive form of the Old English word for wolf , is the eponym for his dynasty , the Wuffingas , ( which taken literally , means ' the kin of Wuffa ' ) . It has been suggested that Wuffa and his dynasty may possibly have originated from a Germanic tribe known as the <unk> : Wuffa has been identified with the ' King of the Angli ' , as depicted by the Byzantine scholar Procopius . According to Procopius , a 6th @-@ century <unk> prince called <unk> was <unk> to the sister of the ' King of the Angli ' . The historian Michael Wood has suggested that before the arrival of Wuffa 's dynasty in Britain , it had been founded by " some powerful and important warrior " that was of an ancient royal line . 
 According to the 13th century chronicler Roger of Wendover , Wuffa ruled from 571 to 578 , but the origin of this information is unknown . According to Michael Wood , current evidence suggests that Wuffa ruled the East Angles in around 575 . 
 Bede named Wuffa as the grandfather of Rædwald , " from whom the East Anglian kings are called Wuffingas " , but Bede 's view that Wuffa was the first King of the East Angles is contradicted by the 9th century Historia Brittonum , which instead apparently names a person called Guillem Guercha . In the Historia Brittonum , Guillem Guercha is listed as part of a long pedigree : 
 Woden begat Casser , who begat Titinon , who begat Trigil , who begat Rodmunt , who begat Rippa , who begat Guillem Guercha , who was the first king of the East Angles . Guercha begat Uffa , who begat <unk> , who begat Eni , who begat Edric , who begat <unk> , who begat Elric . 
 The 19th @-@ century historian Sir Francis Palgrave confused matters when he stated that , " Guercha is a distortion of the name Uffa , or Wuffa , arising in the first instance from the pronunciation of the British writer , and in the next place from the error of the transcriber " . D. P. Kirby has however concluded that Nennius intended to mean that it was Wehha , and not Wuffa , who was the earliest Wuffingas king . 
 A lack of documentary evidence prevents scholars from knowing if Wuffa is anything more than a legendary figure and the true identity of the first East Anglian king cannot be known with certainty . The historian Martin Carver has argued that Wuffa is " best regarded as an emblematic figure personified from royal origin @-@ myth " 
 Later East Anglian kings claimed their right to rule by being descended from Wuffa , in the same way that the Kentish kings claimed descent from Oisc . 
 The descendants of Wehha 
 See Wuffingas for a more complete family tree . 
 = Indianapolis in the American Civil War = 
 During the American Civil War , Indianapolis , the state capital of Indiana , was a major base of support for the Union . Governor Oliver P. Morton , a major supporter of President Abraham Lincoln , quickly made Indianapolis a gathering place to organize and train troops for the Union army . The city became a major railroad hub for troop transport to Confederate lands , and therefore had military importance . Twenty @-@ four military camps were established in the vicinity of Indianapolis . Camp Morton , the initial mustering ground to organize and train the state 's Union volunteers in 1861 , was designated as a major prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp for captured Confederate soldiers in 1862 . In addition to military camps , a state @-@ owned arsenal was established in the city in 1861 , and a federal arsenal in 1862 . A Soldiers ' Home and a Ladies ' Home were established in Indianapolis to house and feed Union soldiers and their families as they passed through the city . Indianapolis residents also supported the Union cause by providing soldiers with food , clothing , equipment , and supplies , despite rising prices and wartime hardships , such as food and clothing shortages . Local doctors aided the sick , some area women provided nursing care , and Indianapolis City Hospital tended to wounded soldiers . Indianapolis sent an estimated 4 @,@ 000 men into military service ; an estimated 700 died during the war . Indianapolis 's Crown Hill National Cemetery was established as one of two national military cemeteries established in Indiana in 1866 . 
 During the war , the city 's population increased with the arrival of new businesses and industries that offered additional employment opportunities , spurred real estate development , and ushered in the beginning of the city 's urban , industrial development . In addition , street crime was prevalent , causing the city government to increase its police force and local merchants to hire private security . The era was also a time of bitter political disputes between Indiana 's Democrats and Republicans . In May 1863 , in an incident sarcastically called the Battle of Pogue 's Run , Union soldiers stopped and searched two departing trainloads of delegates to a statewide Democratic convention , many of whom tossed their personal weapons into a nearby creek . In July 1863 Indianapolis residents feared an attack from Confederate forces during Morgan 's Raid into southern Indiana , but the Confederates turned east toward Ohio and never came to the city . 
 After the war , increased wartime manufacturing and industrial growth ushered in a new era of economic prosperity , and Indianapolis 's population increased from 8 @,@ 000 in 1850 to 45 @,@ 000 at the end of 1864 . A real @-@ estate boom led to the establishment of new residential suburbs , but the city retained its slums . Indianapolis also experienced improvements to its public services , such as health care , utilities , street railways , and public schools . By 1880 Indianapolis was Indiana 's commercial and industrial center . Construction for the Soldiers ' and Sailors ' Monument began in 1888 , in the center of downtown Indianapolis , after decades of discussion . The city 's iconic monument was dedicated on May 15 , 1902 . 
 = = War years = = 
 During the American Civil War , Indianapolis served as a gathering place for organizing troops . As Indianapolis 's citizens rallied in support of the Union , its population increased with the arrival of new businesses and industries that offered additional employment opportunities and spurred real estate development . City residents experienced rising prices and wartime hardships , such as food and clothing shortages . It was also a time of bitter political disputes between Indiana 's Democrats and Republicans . The Civil War era ushered in the beginning of the city 's urban , industrial development , its connections to an expanding railroad network , and the growth of local charitable organizations . 
 = = = 1861 = = = 
 During the winter of 1860 – 1861 , there was talk throughout the region of a possible of war with the South , but Indianapolis had only four militia groups ready to fight : the National Guards , the City Greys , the Indianapolis Independent Zouaves , and the Zouave Guards . On January 7 , 1861 , the Indianapolis Zouaves volunteered for service if Indiana 's governor , Oliver P. Morton , requested it , but they were not needed until spring . On February 11 , 1861 , president @-@ elect Abraham Lincoln arrived in Indianapolis , one of several train stops he made en route to Washington , D.C. , for his presidential inauguration . The pre @-@ inauguration stop made Lincoln the first president @-@ elect to visit Indianapolis . Two months later , the United States was on the brink of war . 
 On April 12 , news arrived in Indianapolis via telegraph that Confederate forces had opened fire on Fort Sumter , a federal fort in the harbor at Charleston , South Carolina . On April 13 , two mass meetings were held in Indianapolis , where resolutions were approved to support the Union . Indianapolis citizens proclaimed , " We unite as one man to repel all treasonable assaults upon the Government , its people , and citizens in every department of the Union – – peaceably , if we can , forcibly if we must . " 
 On April 15 , 1861 , President Lincoln responded to the surrender of the federal fort after the Battle of Fort Sumter by calling for 75 @,@ 000 volunteers to join the Union army and restore order . Governor Morton telegraphed Lincoln offering 10 @,@ 000 Hoosier men to defend the country , but the state 's initial quota was set at six regiments ( a total of 4 @,@ 683 men ) for three months of service . Orders were issued on April 16 to form Indiana 's first regiments and establish Indianapolis a gathering point for volunteers to enlist . On the first day , 500 men were encamped in the city . Within a week , more than 12 @,@ 000 recruits had signed up to fight for the Union , nearly three times as many needed to meet the state 's initial quota . 
 Governor Morton and Lew Wallace , Indiana 's adjutant general , quickly established Camp Morton on the former grounds of the Indiana State Fair ( along Alabama Street , north of the city ) as the initial mustering ground to organize and train the state 's Union volunteers . The camp 's first soldiers arrived on April 17 . During the war a total of 24 military camps were established in the vicinity of Indianapolis , including Camp Sullivan , Camp Morton , Camp Burnside , Camp Freemont , and Camp Carrington , which was the state 's largest . 
 On April 20 Indianapolis 's city council appropriated $ 10 @,@ 000 for wartime use . Four days later , the Indiana General Assembly convened in Indianapolis to give the governor wartime powers and appropriate funds to support the war effort ( $ 1 @.@ 6 million for military purposes and a $ 2 million bond issue for state and national defense ) . To provide ammunition , Governor Morton established a state @-@ owned arsenal at Indianapolis . Congress passed legislation to establish a permanent federal arsenal at Indianapolis in 1862 . 
 By April 27 , 1861 , Indiana 's first six regiments , all of which were organized at Indianapolis , were fully organized as the First Brigade , Indiana Volunteers , under the command of Brigadier General Thomas A. Morris . These included the 6th Indiana , the 7th Indiana , the 8th Indiana , the 9th Indiana , the 10th Indiana , and the 11th Indiana infantry regiments . 
 Slightly more than sixty percent ( 104 ) of Indiana 's total regiments mustered into service and trained at Indianapolis . Men from Indianapolis and surrounding Marion County , Indiana , served in 39 regiments . In total , Indianapolis sent an estimated 4 @,@ 000 men into the service . The first resident of Indianapolis to die in the war was Private John C. <unk> , of Company B , 11th Indiana . He died near Romney , Virginia on June 27 , 1861 . An estimated 700 Indianapolis residents died during the war . 
 The 11th Indiana Volunteer Infantry Regiment , also known as the Indiana Zouaves , was the first regiment organized in Indiana during the war and the first one to leave Indianapolis , on May 8 , 1861 . All four of Indianapolis 's militia units ( National Guards , the City Greys , the Indianapolis Independent Zouaves , and the Zouave Guards ) , and an additional company of men from Indianapolis , became part of the regiment . Wallace , who resigned as Indiana 's adjutant general to take command of the 11th Indiana , went on to become a major general in the Union army . First Lieutenant Frederick <unk> , another Indianapolis resident , was an officer from Company H , 11th Indiana , who eventually rose to the rank of brevet brigadier general and became the highest @-@ ranking Jewish military officer in the Union . Francis A. Shoup , also from Indianapolis , briefly led the Independent Zouaves before the war , but he decided to go south and ultimately became a brigadier general in the Confederate States Army . 
 Most of Indiana 's regimental units were organized within towns or counties , but ethnic units also formed . The 32nd Indiana , the state 's first German @-@ American infantry regiment , and the 35th Indiana , the state 's first Irish @-@ American regiment , organized at Indianapolis in 1861 . Other regiments established in 1861 that included residents of Indianapolis and Marion County , Indiana , included the 19th Indiana , the 27th Indiana , and the 33rd Indiana , among others . 
 There was little doubt that the majority of Indianapolis residents supported the Union . The city became a hub for Union troop organization and training . Pro @-@ Union mobs would sometimes force individuals suspected of Confederate sympathies to take an oath of loyalty at the mayor 's office . The most notable of these was J. J. Bingham , the editor of the Indianapolis Sentinel . A mob forced Bingham to take a loyalty oath after articles critical of his political views appeared in the Indianapolis Journal . 
 = = = 1862 = = = 
 Union troops continued to organize and train at military camps in the city , as battles in Kentucky and Tennessee caused major changes to Indianapolis . After the battles of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson , the Union began to collect a large number of Confederate prisoners of war for transport to the North . Governor Morton volunteered to hold some of the prisoners at Indianapolis . Designated as one of four northern prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps , Camp Morton was converted into one of the Union 's largest prisons for captured Confederate soldiers . 
 Camp Morton 's first Confederate prisoners arrived on February 22 – 23 , 1862 . Many of the 2 @,@ 398 Confederates in the first group were sick , ill fed , and without sufficient clothing for the cold , northern winters . The citizens of Indianapolis rallied to provide humanitarian aid for the prisoners , which included additional food , clothing , and supplies . Local doctors aided the sick and local women provided nursing care . The Athenaeum , at the corner of East Michigan Street and Massachusetts Avenue , and another local building were converted into hospitals to treat the Confederate prisoners . For the remainder of the war , Camp Morton typically housed between 3 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 As regiments organized and reorganized , Union soldiers continued to gather at Indianapolis , sometimes as many as 12 @,@ 000 at a time . Indianapolis regiments formed in 1862 included the 70th Indiana , under the command of Benjamin Harrison , and the 79th Indiana , under the command of Frederick <unk> . Popular gathering spots for the soldiers included Monument Circle and University Park . A Soldiers ' Home and a Ladies ' Home were established in Indianapolis in 1862 and in 1863 , respectively , to house and feed Indiana 's soldiers and their families as they passed through Indianapolis . City residents continued to aid Union soldiers by providing food , clothing , equipment , and supplies . Soldiers ' aid societies and the Indiana Sanitary Commission , established in 1862 with its headquarters in Indianapolis , raised funds and gathered supplies for troops in the field . The women of Indianapolis also organized groups , usually local Ladies ' Aid Societies , to provide soldiers with blankets and clothing , and helped raise funds for additional troop supplies . 
 Street crime was prevalent in Indianapolis during the war . The city government increased its police force , local merchants hired private security , and guards were posted at Union Station to deal with law @-@ enforcement issues . Fights , robberies , gambling , prostitution , and <unk> became significant problems . Prohibition of alcohol sales had to be established in the city . Because there was so much street violence , city police never bothered to discover who murdered an officer from Pennsylvania . The bodies of many deceased soldiers killed in the war were held at Indianapolis 's Union Station , awaiting transport to their eventual burial spots . 
 Several Indiana facilities cared for wounded soldiers , including Indianapolis City Hospital . Governor Morton and the Indiana Sanitary Commission began recruiting women to work as nurses at military hospitals and ships in January 1863 . 
 The city was also the wartime home of Richard Jordan Gatling , a physician and entrepreneur , who invented the Gatling gun . Tested in Indianapolis and patented in November 1862 , the hand @-@ cranked , rapid @-@ fire gun was a predecessor to the modern machine gun . The U.S. Navy adopted the Gatling gun during the war , where it was used on federal gunboats , but the U.S. Army did not formally adopt it for use until 1866 . 
 = = = 1863 = = = 
 The first military execution in the war 's western theater occurred on March 27 , 1863 , at Camp Burnside ( Burnside Barracks ) . Robert Gay , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old schoolteacher from Clay County , Indiana , was executed by a 20 @-@ man firing squad . After his capture by Confederates at Richmond , Kentucky , Gay declared allegiance to the Confederate States of America to escape further army service . After his return to Indiana , Gay was convicted of treason and executed , but not before he apologized for what he had done . Other executions took place in 1864 , when three bounty jumpers were executed at Burnside Barracks . 
 Major political differences between Democrats and Republicans and wartime propaganda caused many Hoosiers to become suspicious of dissenters and fearful of potential insurrections , especially from secret societies sympathetic to the South . During the Indianapolis city election In May , the Democrats , who decided a fair election could not be held , withdrew their ticket . Only 14 votes were cast for Democratic candidates in the nine Indianapolis wards . 
 Prior to a state Democratic convention in May , rumors had spread that members of a secret society , who were planning to attend the convention in Indianapolis , were plotting to attack Camp Morton and the state arsenal . In response to the perceived threat , soldiers were posted to guard the city and protect government property . On May 20 Union soldiers attempted to the convention , forcing the proceedings to be adjourned . Elsewhere in the city , men were arrested for carrying concealed weapons or taken into custody for further questioning . After the convention adjourned , Union soldiers stopped and searched two departing trainloads of convention delegates , demanding that the passengers surrender their personal weapons . The soldiers seized " several hundred " weapons , while the passengers tossed others into Pogue 's Run , a nearby creek . The incident , later called the Battle of Pogue 's Run , caused no serious trouble , but it did illustrate the intensity of the state 's ongoing political feuds . The Republicans used the seized weapons as evidence that the Democrats were disloyal to the Union and guilty of treasonable plots . 
 Rumors of plots to overthrow Morton and Indiana 's government continued during the summer . On July 8 , 1863 , when Confederate general John Hunt Morgan crossed the Ohio River with 2 @,@ 400 troopers , Indiana went into a state of emergency . Only the day before , the citizens of Indianapolis were rejoicing over the Union victories at Vicksburg , Mississippi , and Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . The city 's mood turned to panic when Morgan 's troops appeared to be headed toward Indianapolis . Many Hoosiers feared Morgan would attack the city and attempt to free the Confederate prisoners at Camp Morton . The panic was increased as Morgan 's telegrapher , " Lightning " Ellsworth , posing as various Union <unk> , claimed Morgan had far more men than he actually did . Ellsworth also sent false information suggesting Morgan would attack Indianapolis , among other locations . Within forty @-@ eight hours an estimated 65 @,@ 000 Indiana volunteers had assembled to fight the Confederate raiders . Five regiments encamped on the grounds of the Indiana Statehouse were prepared to defend the state capital . Tension in the city ended on July 14 , when it was confirmed that Morgan had left Indiana and entered Ohio . Morgan was captured on July 26 . Volunteers who served in the temporary regiments at Indianapolis mustered out of service on July 17 , once the threat from Morgan 's troops was gone . An accident caused by the explosion of ammunition in a caisson killed a boy , three soldiers , and two horses as some of the soldiers were departing town . 
 = = = 1864 = = = 
 New regiments continued to muster into service at Indianapolis . The 28th Regiment U.S. Colored Troops , organized between December 24 , 1863 , and March 31 , 1864 , was the only black regiment formed in Indiana during the war . The regiment trained at Camp Fremont , near Fountain Square . It included 518 enlisted men who signed on for a term of three years , but the war was effectively over within a year , cutting short its term of service . The regiment lost 212 men before it mustered out of service on November 8 , 1865 . 
 Indianapolis 's " City Regiment " mustered into service as the 132nd Indiana Infantry Regiment in May 1864 as one of several regiments of Hundred Days Men . The regiment guarded railroads in Tennessee and Alabama , which were firmly in the control of Union forces , to relieve the regular U.S. army troops for active duty on the front lines . The 132nd Indiana , which was formed mostly of young boys and older men , was a favorite among Indianapolis citizens . Twelve of its members of disease before the regiment returned home . 
 Beginning in September 1864 , Indianapolis was the site of the trials by a military commission of several men accused and convicted of treason . In a landmark civil liberty case that became known as Ex parte Milligan , the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the convictions , On April 3 , 1866 , the Court ruled that the military trial was illegal because the civilian courts were open and functioning during the war . Following the Court 's ruling , the men were released . 
 = = = 1865 = = = 
 News of Confederate General Robert E. Lee 's surrender at Appomattox Courthouse , Virginia , reached Indianapolis at 11 p.m. on April 9 , 1865 , causing wild , public celebrations that the Indianapolis Journal characterized as " demented . " The celebrations soon turned to sadness when news of the assassination of President Lincoln arrived on April 15 . Lincoln 's funeral train passed through the city on April 30 , en route to Springfield , Illinois . An estimated 100 @,@ 000 people waited in long lines to pass Lincoln 's bier at the Indiana Statehouse , where the president 's remains lay in state . 
 Indianapolis residents saw much activity in the drawdown of military forces at the end of the war . The last military troops organized in Indianapolis was the 156th Indiana , which mustered into service on April 12 for a year of service . In June formal receptions honored soldiers who returned home . On June 12 the last Confederate prisoner was <unk> at Camp Morton . On July 25 a military wagon train , 28 miles ( 45 km ) in length , passed through the city . By the autumn of 1865 the city 's Soldiers ' Home and Ladies ' Home had closed , as did most of the city 's military camps after the soldiers left Indianapolis . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Indiana 's economic situation improved after the war , particularly in Indianapolis ; its population increased from 8 @,@ 000 in 1850 to 45 @,@ 000 people at the end of 1864 . The city 's population exceeded 75 @,@ 000 by 1880 . As a result of the war , the city experienced a real @-@ estate boom . Real @-@ estate transactions increased from more than $ 1 million in 1860 to more than $ 5 million by 1870 . New residential suburbs , such as Irvington and Woodruff Place , were established , but Indianapolis still retained its slum areas . As the city grew , it also experienced a need for more public services , such as utilities and street railways , as well as an improved public school system . A street railway came to the city in the 1860s , the city established its first sewage system in 1869 , most of the city 's downtown streets were illuminated with gaslights by 1870 , and the first water supplied from a central waterworks was delivered to city residents in 1871 . Health care in the city also improved . Indianapolis City Hospital was equipped and staffed to begin treatment of civilian patients in 1866 . 
 Increased wartime manufacturing and industrial growth ushered in a new era of economic prosperity and the rise of labor unions in the city . By 1880 Indianapolis was Indiana 's commercial and industrial center . New industries in Indianapolis included pork @-@ packing plants and foundries , as well as numerous manufacturers , small businesses , retail shops , and banks . In 1876 Colonel Eli Lilly opened a new pharmaceutical laboratory on Indianapolis 's Pearl Street , founding what later became Eli Lilly and Company . The Union Railroad Transfer and Stock Yards Company , another major employer , opened in 1877 . After the war , Indianapolis continued to develop into a transportation hub . Existing railroad lines expanded and new ones were established , linking Indianapolis to other cities across the nation . 
 Indianapolis residents continued to assist those in need . Veterans programs were initiated to help wounded soldiers with housing , food , and other basic necessities . New orphanages and asylums joined the Indianapolis Orphans ' Home , chartered in 1850 , to aid women and children . The German Protestant Orphans ' Association was organized in 1867 . The Indianapolis Asylum for Friendless Colored Children , the state 's only orphanage for African American children , was established in 1870 . Other major charitable groups included the Indianapolis Benevolent Society and the Indianapolis Flower Mission , both organized in 1876 . 
 When the South returned to firm Democratic control at the end of the 1870s , Indiana became a key swing state , one of a few that often decided the outcome of national elections . Five Indiana politicians were vice @-@ presidential nominees on the major party tickets in elections held between 1868 and 1916 . Benjamin Harrison , an Indianapolis lawyer and former officer in the Union army , was elected the 23rd president of the United States in 1888 . 
 = = Memorials and tributes = = 
 In 1866 Indianapolis 's Crown Hill National Cemetery was established within the grounds of Crown Hill Cemetery , a privately owned cemetery northwest of downtown . It is one of two national military cemeteries established in Indiana as a result of the war . That same year , the first Union soldiers ' bodies that had been buried elsewhere in the city during the war were reinterred at Crown Hill . 
 In November 1866 the city continued to honor the service of Civil War veterans as the host of the first national Grand Army of the Republic encampment . 
 The Soldiers ' and Sailors ' Monument in downtown Indianapolis was erected to honor Indiana veterans of the Civil War . Construction began in 1888 after two decades of discussion . The monument was completed in <unk> dedicated on May 15 , 1902 . 
 = Léal Souvenir = 
 Léal Souvenir ( or Timotheus or Portrait of a Man ) is a small 1432 oil @-@ on @-@ oak panel portrait by the Early Netherlandish painter Jan van Eyck . The sitter has not been identified , but his individualistic features suggest a historical person rather than the hypothetical ideal usual in contemporary northern Renaissance portraiture ; there is a contradiction between his unassuming appearance and deceptively sophisticated expression . The portrait is set within an imitation parapet which contains three layers of painted inscriptions , each rendered look as if chiseled onto stone . Van Eyck did not have full command of either classical Greek or Latin , and made errors , so readings by modern scholars are divided . The first inscription is in a form of Greek and seems to spell " TYΜ.ωΘΕΟC " , which has not been satisfactorily interpreted but has inspired some to title the work Timotheus . The middle lettering is in French , reads " Leal Souvenir " ( Loyal Memory ) and indicates that the portrait is commemorative , completed after the man 's death . The third records van Eyck 's signature and the date of execution in somewhat legalese wording , prompting some to think the man was involved in that profession . 
 The sitter 's features have been described as " plain and rustic " , yet he is presented as thoughtful and inward @-@ looking . A number of art historians have detected <unk> in his expression , perhaps as art historian Erwin Panofsky suggests , he suffers from " loneliness " . The panel was acquired in 1857 by the National Gallery , London , where it is on permanent display . He was apparently significant enough a member of the Burgundian prince Philip the Good 's circle that his court painter would have portrayed him and aligned him with a figure from antiquity . The 19th @-@ century art historian Hippolyte <unk> Gevaert identified the lettering " TYΜ.ωΘΕΟC " with the Greek musician Timotheus of Miletus . Panofsky drew the same conclusion , eliminating other Greeks bearing the name Timothy ; they were of religious or military background , professions that do not match the dress of the sitter . Panofsky believed the man was probably a highly placed musician in Philip 's court . More recent research focuses on the apparent legalese of the inscriptions , and favours the idea that the man was a legal adviser to the crown , perhaps even reporting to van Eyck himself . 
 = = Description = = 
 Léal Souvenir is one of the earliest surviving examples of secular portraiture in medieval European art and one of the earliest extant <unk> representations . This is apparent in its realism and acute observation of the details of the man 's everyday appearance . Van Eyck worked in the early Renaissance tradition , and pioneered the manipulation of oil paint . Oil allows smooth translucent surfaces , and could be applied across a range of thicknesses . It could be manipulated while wet , allowing far more subtle detail than available to previous generations of painters . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The parapet simulates marked or scarred stone . The decay allows van Eyck to display his skill at mimicking stone chiseling . The construct evidences the influence of classical Roman funerary art , particularly stone memorials . The parapet serves a number of functions ; mostly it provides a sense of gravitas ; the illusion of chips and cracks conveying a sense of the venerable , or according to art historian Elisabeth Dhanens , a sense of the " fragility of life or of memory itself " . 
 The man 's torso is undersized compared to his head , and that the parapet dominates the portrait , and given that the work is only the second of van Eyck 's known portraits , speculate if this is due to inexperience and poor design . Meiss wonders if he didn 't " lose control of [ the ] design as a whole by indulging his astounding virtuosity . " The panel 's ground is made from chalk . Infrared photography shows traces of short vertical hatching , and underdrawings of the face , arms and hands , which were repositioned in the final painting – originally the fingers were shorter , his right thumb was raised and the parapet was lower . Analysis of the pigment shows that the flesh of his face is painted with whites and vermilion , and traced with greys , blacks , blues and some ultramarine over a red @-@ lake glaze . 
 = = = Portrait = = = 
 The man is positioned within an undefined narrow space and set against a flat black background . Typically for van Eyck , the head is large in relation to the torso . He is dressed in typically Burgundian fashion , with a red robe and a green wool chaperon with a <unk> and cornette hanging forward . The headdress is trimmed with fur , fastened with two buttons , and extends to the parapet . His right hand might be holding the end of the cornette . Neither the shape of his head nor his facial features correspond to contemporary standard types , let alone canons of ideal beauty . The sitter appears to be bald , although there are some faint traces of fair hair , leading Erwin Panofsky to conclude that his " countenance is as ' Nordic ' as his dress is Burgundian . " He has neither eyebrows nor stubble , while it is believed the eyelashes were added by a 19th @-@ century restorer . Van Eyck 's cool observation of the man 's narrow shoulders , pursed lips and thin eyebrows extends to detailing the moisture on his blue eyes . He holds a scroll that might be a legal document , letter or pamphlet . In his early portraits , van Eyck 's sitters are often shown holding objects indicative of their profession . The scroll contains six lines of illegible writing . The abbreviations are more prominent and seem to be in Latin , but may be vernacular . 
 Light falls from the left , leaving traces of shadow on the side of his face , a device commonly found in van Eyck 's early portraits . The man is youthful , his face has a soft fleshiness achieved through shallow curves and flowing harmonious brushstrokes giving the appearance of a relaxed , warm and open personality , which Meiss describes as evoking an almost " <unk> warmth and sympathy . " The man is not handsome ; he has a flattish face , stubby yet pointed nose and cheekbones that might , according to Panofsky , belong to a " Flemish peasant . " Dhanens describes him as having a " snub " nose , " prominent " cheek bones , and an honest expression . 
 A number of art historians have noted the apparent contradictions in the man 's plain looks and enigmatic expression . Meiss describes him as " plain and rustic " , and finds resemblance between his rather generic face and a number of figures in the lower portions of the " Adoration of the Lamb " panel in the Ghent Altarpiece . He concedes to Panofsky 's view , observing a " thoughtfulness on the high , wrinkled forehead , visionary force in the dreamy yet steady eyes , [ and ] a formidable strength of passion in the wide , firm mouth . " According to Panofsky , the man 's face is not that of an intellectual , yet he detects a pensive and lonely nature , " the face of one who feels and produces rather than observes and dissects . " Unlike Rogier van der Weyden , who pays especially close attention to detail in the rendering of his model 's fingers , to van Eyck hands were often something of an afterthought . They are generically rendered , do not contain much detail and may have been a later addition by his workshop . Yet they are very similar to those of the sitter in his c . 1435 Portrait of Baudouin de Lannoy . Given the clutched scroll , it is accepted that he was a legal professional for the Dukes of Burgundy , and given van Eyck 's high position , may worked as agent for the artist . In either case , although he is not grandly dressed and is probably a member of the middle class , he must have been highly regarded in Philip 's court , given that such portraits rarely depicted non @-@ nobles . 
 = = = Inscriptions and identity of sitter = = = 
 The parapet has three horizontal layers of inscription , with smaller lettering on the top and lower levels that is often not visible in reproductions . In places the Greek characters are unclear , and have been widely speculated on by art historians , not least due to van Eyck 's sometimes erratic spelling and unusual spacings . Panofsky notes that many of the errors in the work appear in Byzantine script , most likely was his source , while in instances there are no definitive formations of characters for some of the constructs he appears to be use . 
 The top lettering is in chalk white and in Greek script reads " TYΜ.ωΘΕΟC " . However the last character is deliberately concealed by a chip in the imitation stone , a touch described by Panofsky as a " terminal flourish " . This makes the meaning of the inscription overall difficult to discern . A general consensus has formed that the final character is a square C or sigma sign . Campbell cautions that the inscriptions are in Greek indicates their meaning was probably intended " to be obscure " , and that there may be a significant reason why the final character is partially <unk> in such a deliberate way . He cautions that it is " rash to attempt to supply the missing verb " . 
 " TYΜ.ωΘΕΟC " was interpreted in 1857 by Charles Eastlake as " <unk> " , a proper name . However , if this was the intended meaning , more correct lettering would have read " <unk> " , which suggests van Eyck introduced spelling errors . One proposal is the inscription meant to read " Honour God " , or " Be Honored , O God " , written in the passive imperative . Panofsky considers the hypothesis that the final letter is a " N " , and that the lettering forms two words rather than one . In this interpretation , the letters spell <unk> <unk> , meaning " Honour God " . While he admires the convenience of the interpretation , and the fact that it would make explanation more straightforward than if we accept " Timotheus " , he rejects the possibility . He writes that " the presence of a shorter horizontal line connecting with the slightly tapering top of the vertical stroke and completing it into a Γ form ... evidently precludes a " N " . Dhanens suggests the inscription can be read as " Time Deum " ( " Fear God " ) , a known motto of the Vilain family . 
 Eastlake 's translation as " <unk> " is generally accepted , although the possibility of it being a variant of " Timothy " has been discounted , as that word was not used in Northern Europe before the Reformation . There is no Germanic name which might , given the lettering in which it inscribed , imply a humanistic imitation of a Greek word . As such , art historians have sought to identify the man from Greek history or legend . Although some have advanced Athenian and Syrian generals , these have been discounted as the sitter is not wearing military clothing . Saint Timothy , first Bishop of Ephesus and associate of Saint Paul , has been suggested but eliminated as he is not dressed as a high cleric . 
 The larger middle inscription is in French , using a 12th @-@ century script . It reads " <unk> <unk> " ( Loyal Remembrance , or Faithful Souvenir ) , and painted to give the impression that it was carved into the parapet . In 1927 , Hippolyte <unk> Gevaert put forward Timotheus of Miletus , a Greek musician and <unk> poet born c . 446 . Gevaert held that the portrait was a commemoration of a court artist who had recently died , and that the classical reference was intended to flatter his memory . Panofsky largely went with this position in 1949 . He speculated that the sitter was the celebrated musician Gilles <unk> , by 1430 a canon at St. <unk> 's Cathedral , Bruges . Campbell is skeptical , disclaiming that the sitter " is not dressed as a cleric " . Other theories include that the man was a Greek or Lucchese merchant , Henry the Navigator , Jean de Croÿ , or , less likely , that it is a self @-@ portrait . Though much disagreement exists , it is probable that he was a native French speaker , and a notary , poet or member of the Compagnie du Chapel Vert ( " Society of the Green Hat " ) at Tournai . Elisabeth Dhanens <unk> the theory that the man was a musician on the basis that van Eyck would have made this explicit , portraying him holding a device or emblem clearly symbolizing music . She concludes that he is an accountant or lawyer holding a legal or financial document . 
 From the first two inscriptions the panel is generally accepted as a posthumous portrait . Roman tombstones often showed a representation of the deceased behind a parapet with a carved inscription , and van Eyck may have known of these from travels to France . The lower inscription reads " <unk> [ m ] an [ n ] o d [ <unk> ] <unk> <unk> [ <unk> ] de Eyck " ( These are done in the year of our Lord 1432 on the 10th day of October by Jan van Eyck ) . Campbell observes that the phrasing of this extended signature is surprisingly reminiscent of legalese , and that van Eyck seems to be reinforcing that the man was a legal professional . Jacques <unk> notes that it is written in the Gothic cursive script <unk> , then favoured by the legal trade . 
 = = Condition = = 
 The panel consists of a single 8mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) vertically cut oak board , cut down close to the painted surface . It has a small unpainted area at the upper left . The support 's encasing was probably changed in the 19th century ; today four of the eight supports are fixed to the edges of the interior borders , forming inner mouldings . The other four act as inner pins . The varnish is severely degraded , with key areas of paint and ground either removed or overpainted . Infrared photography of the reverse reveals underdrawings , but they do not give any hint as to the identity of the sitter . Its ground is mostly chalk based , the pigments are predominantly blacks , red lake and blues . The final portrait differs in many ways from the underdrawing — the fingers are shorter , his right arm once extended over a larger area . In the final portrait the ear is elevated , and the scroll occupies a larger pictorial space . 
 It is not particularly well preserved . There are yellowish layers of glaze over the face , probably later additions . The varnishes have degraded and lost their original colors . The panel has undergone a number of detrimental <unk> . In instances these have altered the sitter 's appearance , most especially the removal of strands of fair hair below the chaperon . It has sustained structural damage , especially to the marble on the reverse . The National Gallery repaired some " slight injuries " when it came into their possession in 1857 . Campbell notes a number of efforts by later restorers were imperfect and " rather disfiguring " , including <unk> to the man 's nostrils , eyelashes and tip of his nose . There is a yellowish glaze over the eyes that seems to be either damage or overpaint . The panel is discoloured overall and suffers from aged and degenerated varnishes which make the original pigments hard to discern . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The painting was widely copied and imitated during the 15th century . Near exact copper reproductions were recorded in Bergamo and Turin . Petrus Christus borrowed the illusionistic carving on the parapet for his 1446 Portrait of a Carthusian . A c . 1449 – 50 portrait of Marco Barbarigo attributed to a follower of van Eyck is heavily indebted , in that it is also unusually tall and narrow , with a large space above the sitter 's head . 
 The painting is first recorded in the National Gallery 's collector and later director Charles Eastlake 's notes from its acquisition that year . He mentions that it had been in the possession of the Scottish landscape painter Karl Ross ( 1816 – 58 ) " before 1854 " . Like many of van Eyck 's works and those of the Early Netherlandish painters in general , the painting 's provenance is murky before the 19th century . Two near @-@ contemporary copies in copper were recorded that year in Bergamo and Turin when the National Gallery was verifying attribution . The first was found by Eastlake in the collection of the <unk> family of Bergamo in Italy . A second copy was located in Turin , belonging to a Count Castellane Harrach , also on copper and described as smaller than the original , and " very weak " . Both are now lost . 
 Ink markings on the marble reverse show a small cross which may record a merchant 's mark or emblem . Although it is incomplete and no identification has been made , W. H. J. Weale detected the mark of " an early Italian , probably Venetian owner " . An early provenance in Italy would not imply that the man came from that country ; van Eyck 's works were often purchased by collectors from that region . 
 = Vito Cascioferro = 
 Vito Cascioferro or Vito Cascio Ferro ( January 22 , 1862 – September 20 , 1943 ) , also known as Don Vito , was a prominent member of the Sicilian Mafia . He also operated for several years in the United States . He is often depicted as the " boss of bosses " , although such a position does not exist in the loose structure of Cosa Nostra in Sicily . 
 Cascioferro 's life is full of myth and mystery . He became a legend even when he was alive , and that legend is partially responsible for creating the image of the gallant gentleman <unk> ( Mafia boss ) . He is widely considered to have been responsible for the 1909 murder of Joseph Petrosino , head of the New York City police department 's Italian Squad . However , he was never convicted of the crime . 
 With the rise of Fascism in Italy , his untouchable position declined . He was arrested and sentenced to death in 1930 and would remain in jail until his death . There is some confusion about the exact year of his death , but according to La Stampa , Cascioferro died on September 20 , 1943 , in the prison on the island of Procida . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Although many sources have identified him as a native of the rural town of Bisacquino , where he was raised , he was actually born in the city of Palermo . His parents , <unk> Cascioferro and Santa Ippolito , were poor and illiterate . The family moved to Bisacquino when his father became a <unk> ( an armed guard ) with the local landlord , Baron Antonino <unk> , a notorious usurper of state @-@ owned land . The position of <unk> often involved Mafiosi . According to other sources , at an early age , the family moved to <unk> <unk> , where he lived for approximately 24 years before relocating to Bisacquino , his recognized power base in the Mafia . 
 Cascioferro never went to any school . When still young , Cascioferro married a teacher from Bisacquino , <unk> Giaccone , who instructed him how to read and write . He was inducted into the Mafia in the 1880s . He worked as a revenue collector as a young adult , using the position as a cover to carry out his protection racket . His criminal record began with an assault in 1884 and progressed through extortion , arson , and menacing , and eventually to the kidnapping of the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Baroness Clorinda <unk> di <unk> in June 1898 , for which he received a three @-@ year sentence . 
 = = Revolutionary mafioso = = 
 While incarcerated for attempted extortion , Cascioferro was recruited into the Fasci Siciliani ( Sicilian Leagues ) , a popular movement of democratic and socialist inspiration , by Bernardino Verro , the president of the League in Corleone . The Leagues needed muscle in their social struggle of 1893 – 94 . Cascioferro became the president of the Fascio of Bisacquino . 
 In January 1894 , the Fasci were outlawed and brutally repressed on the orders of Prime Minister Francesco Crispi . Many leaders were put in jail ; Cascioferro fled to Tunis for a year . After serving his sentence for his role in the peasant unrest , Cascioferro returned to a position of social power and pressured authorities in Palermo to put him in charge of granting emigration permits in the district of Corleone . According to Mafia historian Salvatore Lupo , Cascioferro was involved in clandestine emigration networks . 
 = = In the United States = = 
 Sentenced for the kidnapping of the Baroness of <unk> in 1898 , Cascioferro was released in 1900 . To escape special police surveillance in Sicily , he sailed to the United States and arrived in New York City at the end of September 1901 . He lived for about 21 ⁄ 2 years in New York , acting as an importer of fruits and foods . He also spent six months in New Orleans . 
 On May 21 , 1902 , Cascioferro was arrested in connection with a large counterfeiting operation in Hackensack , New Jersey . He was arrested at the barbershop of Giuseppe Romano on First Avenue that had been distributing the counterfeit money . Cascioferro managed to escape conviction — his alibi was that he worked at a paper mill — while the other gang members were tried and sentenced . 
 In New York , he became associated with the Morello gang in Harlem , headed by Giuseppe Morello and Ignazio Lupo . In September 1904 , he returned to Sicily shortly after police sergeant Joseph Petrosino of the New York City Police Department ordered his arrest for involvement with the Barrel Murder ; his application for American citizenship was consequently blocked . Petrosino traced him to New Orleans , where Cascioferro had gone to escape detection , but he had already slipped away . 
 Some observers consider Cascioferro as the one who brought the extortion practice of " continuing protection " in exchange for protection money ( <unk> ) from Sicily to the United States . " You have to skim the cream off the milk without breaking the bottle , " he summarized the system . " Don 't throw people into bankruptcy with ridiculous demands for money . Offer them protection instead , help them to make their business prosperous , and not only will they be happy to pay but they 'll kiss your hands out of gratitude . " 
 = = Back in Sicily = = 
 Back in Sicily , Cascioferro rose to the position of a local notable . He was the capo <unk> ( ward <unk> ) of Domenico De Michele Ferrantelli , the mayor of Burgio and member of Parliament for the district of Bivona , as well as on good terms with the Baron <unk> . He exercised influence over several Mafia <unk> ( clans ) in the towns of Bisacquino , Burgio , <unk> , <unk> Sclafani , Contessa <unk> , Corleone , and Villafranca <unk> , as well as some districts in the city of Palermo . 
 A semi @-@ factual and romantic portrait by journalist Luigi Barzini contributed much to form the legend of Don Vito : 
 Don Vito brought the organization to its highest perfection without undue recourse to violence . The Mafia leader who scatters corpses all over the island in order to achieve his goal is considered as inept as the statesman who has to wage aggressive wars . Don Vito ruled and inspired fear mainly by the use of his great qualities and natural ascendancy . His awe @-@ inspiring appearance helped him . … His manners were princely , his demeanour humble but majestic . He was loved by all . Being very generous by nature , he never refused a request for aid and dispensed millions in loans , gifts and general philanthropy . He would personally go out of his way to redress a wrong . When he started a journey , every major , dressed in his best clothes , awaited him at the entrance of his village , kissed his hands , and paid homage , as if he were a king . And he was a king of sorts : under his reign peace and order were observed , the Mafia peace , of course , which was not what the official law of the Kingdom of Italy would have imposed , but people did not stop to draw too fine a distinction . 
 Police reports described Cascioferro as notoriously associated with the " high " Mafia , leading a life of luxury , going to the theater , cafés , gambling high sums at the <unk> dei <unk> – a club for gentlemen , reserved for those with pretensions to education and elite status . 
 = = The Petrosino murder = = 
 Cascioferro is considered to be the mastermind behind the murder of New York policeman and head of the Italian Squad , Joseph Petrosino , on March 12 , 1909 . He was shot and killed in Piazza Marina in Palermo ; two men were seen running from the crime scene . Petrosino had gone to Sicily to gather information from local police files to help deport Italian gangsters from New York as illegal immigrants . The two men were very much aware of the danger to each other 's survival ; Petrosino carried a note describing Cascioferro as “ a terrible criminal ” , while Cascioferro had a photograph of the police officer . 
 Many accounts claim that Cascioferro personally killed Petrosino . Legend has it that Cascioferro excused himself from a dinner party among the high society at the home of his political patron De Michele Ferrantelli , took a carriage ( that of his host according to some ) , and drove to Piazza Marina in Palermo 's city centre . He and Petrosino engaged in a brief conversation , then Cascioferro killed Petrosino and returned to join the dinner again . Historical reconstructions have dismissed this version and cannot locate Cascioferro at the scene of the crime . 
 News of the murder spread fast in U.S. newspapers and a swell of anti @-@ Italian sentiment spread across New York . Cascioferro pleaded his innocence and provided an alibi for the entire period when Petrosino was assassinated . He stayed in the house of De Michele Ferrantelli in Burgio . However , the alibi provided by De Michele Ferrantelli was suspicious , taking into account the relation between the two . Moreover , while in jail after his arrest and life sentence in 1930 , Cascioferro apparently claimed that he had killed Petrosino . According to writer Arrigo Petacco in his 1972 book on Joe Petrosino , Cascioferro said : " In my whole life I have killed only one person , and I did that <unk> … Petrosino was a brave adversary , and deserved better than a shameful death at the hands of some hired cut @-@ throat . " 
 A report by Baldassare <unk> , the police commissioner of Palermo , concluded that the crime had probably been carried out by Mafiosi Carlo Costantino and Antonino Passananti under Cascioferro 's direction . Evidence was thin , however , and the case was effectively closed when in July 1911 the Palermo Court of Appeals discharged Cascioferro , as well as Costantino and Passananti , due to insufficient evidence to send them to trial . Petrosino 's murder was never solved . Nevertheless , Costantino and Passananti were identified as the most likely assassins . Costantino died in the late 1930s and Passananti , in March 1969 . In 2014 , more than a century after the assassination , the Italian police overheard a tapped phone conversation in which a sibling claimed that Paolo <unk> had been the killer on the orders of Cascioferro . <unk> had been arrested after the shooting , but had been released for lack of evidence . 
 = = Downfall = = 
 In 1923 , the sub @-@ prefect of Corleone warned the Ministry of Interior that Cascioferro was " one of the worst offenders , quite capable of committing any crime . " In May 1925 , he was arrested as the instigator of a murder . He was able to be released on bail , as usual . However , with the rise of Fascism , his reputation and immunity was declining . 
 In May 1926 , Prefect Cesare Mori , under orders from Fascist leader Benito Mussolini to destroy the Mafia , arrested Cascioferro in a big round @-@ up in the area that included Corleone and Bisacquino . More than 150 people were arrested . Cascioferro 's godson asked the local landlord to intervene , but he refused : " Times have changed " , was the reply . He was indicted for participation in 20 murders , eight attempted murders , five robberies with violence , 37 acts of extortion , and 53 other offences including physical violence and threats . 
 He was sentenced to life on June 27 , 1930 , on the old murder charge . He remained silent during the trial . Cascioferro had been arrested some 69 times before and always had been acquitted , but this time it was different . After hearing the sentence the president of the court asked Cascioferro if he had something to say in his defense . Cascioferro stood up and said : " Gentlemen , as you have been unable to obtain proof of any of the numerous crimes I have committed , you have been reduced to condemning me for the only one I never committed . " The " iron prefect " , as Mori was known , wanted to give maximum publicity to the event . He had posters printed with pictures of Cascioferro and the text of the court sentence . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 There is uncertainty about the exact date of his death . The most common account is that he died of natural causes in 1945 while serving his sentence at <unk> prison in Palermo . Italian author Petacco found evidence for his 1972 book on Joe Petrosino that Cascioferro may have died of dehydration in the summer of 1943 . According to Petacco , Cascioferro was left behind in his cell by prison guards while other inmates were evacuated in advance of the Allied invasion of Sicily . However , according to historian Giuseppe Carlo Marino , Cascioferro was transferred to another prison in Pozzuoli in 1940 , and the octogenarian was left to die during an Allied bombardment of that prison in 1943 ( other sources mention 1942 ) . According to La Stampa , Cascioferro died on September 20 , 1943 , in the prison on the island of Procida . 
 For years , a sentence believed to be carved by Cascioferro was legible on the wall of his <unk> cell : " Prison , sickness , and necessity , reveal the real heart of a man . " Inmates considered occupying Don Vito 's former cell a great honour . Historians consider this account a legend rather than fact . 
 = Washington State Route 902 = 
 State Route 902 ( SR 902 ) is a 12 @.@ 36 @-@ mile ( 19 @.@ 89 km ) long state highway located entirely in Spokane County , Washington , United States . The highway serves to connect Lakeland Village and Medical Lake to the county seat of Spokane . The highway has existed since at least 1931 , and before the 1964 state highway renumbering , it was numbered Secondary State Highway 11D . Between 1 @,@ 600 and 9 @,@ 200 vehicles used the highway on an average day in 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 902 begins at exit 264 , a diamond interchange , on the concurrent Interstate 90 ( I @-@ 90 ) / U.S. Route 395 ( US 395 ) in western Spokane County . The road travels northwesterly through sparsely populated light woodlands , passing west of a small lake , before turning north . The highway then passes Lakeland Village , an educational facility for the mentally disabled , before reaching the city of Medical Lake . The highway passes through western Medical Lake and Medical Lake High School before turning east at Brooks Road . The highway passes over a rail line belonging to the Eastern Washington Gateway railroad , before leaving Medical Lake city limits . The road continues northeast , clipping the southern border of Fairchild Air Force Base before intersecting the concurrent I @-@ 90 / US 395 at exit 272 . 
 Every year , Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 1 @,@ 600 vehicles used the highway at the western terminus , and as many as 9 @,@ 200 vehicles at the eastern terminus . 
 = = History = = 
 The first roadway linking now I @-@ 90 / US 395 and Medical Lake first appeared on maps in 1931 . By the 1933 map , the remainder of the highway was present , linking back to I @-@ 90 / US 395 . Before the 1964 state highway renumbering , SR 902 was numbered Secondary State Highway 11D , a branch of Primary State Highway 11 , the predecessor to US 395 through the region . No changes have been made to the alignment of the roadway , however the legal definition of the highway was changed during the 1991 legislative session . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Spokane County . 
 = <unk> 'i hookbill = 
 The Lānaʻi hookbill ( Dysmorodrepanis munroi ) is an extinct species of Hawaiian honeycreeper . It was endemic to the island of Lānaʻi in Hawaiʻi , and was last seen in the southwestern part of the island . George C. Munro collected the only known specimen of this species in 1913 , which is housed in the Bernice P. Bishop Museum in Honolulu , and saw the species only twice more , once in 1916 and for a final time in 1918 . No other sightings have been reported . They inhabited montane dry forests dominated by ʻakoko ( Euphorbia species ) and ōpuhe ( <unk> glabra ) . The Lānaʻi hookbill was monotypic within the genus Dysmorodrepanis and had no known subspecies . Its closest relative is believed to be the ʻōʻū , and some early authors suggested that the Lānaʻi hookbill was merely a deformed ʻōʻū . The Lānaʻi hookbill was a plump , medium @-@ sized bird with greenish olive upperparts and pale whitish yellow underparts . It also had a yellow or white superciliary line and a white chin and throat . The wings also had a distinctive and conspicuous white wing patch . The hookbill 's distinguishing characteristic was its heavy , <unk> bill , which had the mandibles hooking sharply towards each other , leaving a gap between them when the beak was closed . 
 As the bird became extinct before significant field observations could be made , not much is known about its behavior . The Lānaʻi hookbill is only known to have eaten the fruit of the ōpuhe ; however , it is unlikely that its unique bill would have developed to eat fruit , and it may have been a snail specialist . The hookbill has not been seen since 1918 , and by 1940 nearly all of Lānaʻi 's forests were converted into pineapple fields , destroying the bird ’ s habitat . The combination of habitat destruction and the introduction of feral cats and rats are thought to have led to the Lānaʻi hookbill ’ s extinction . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Lānaʻi hookbill was first collected by George C. Munro from Lānaʻi 's <unk> Valley on February 22 , 1913 . In 1919 Robert Cyril Layton Perkins described the species as Dysmorodrepanis munroi based upon this specimen , placing the hookbill in a new , monotypic genus . The genus name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " ill @-@ fated , " and <unk> to identify the species as a Hawaiian honeycreeper . <unk> comes from the Ancient Greek word <unk> " sickle , " in reference to most Hawaiian honeycreeper 's bills . The specific name munroi recognizes the collector of the specimen , George C. Munro . The common name came from the species ' limited range and distinctive bill shape . 
 However , other taxonomists challenged the validity of the species as early as 1939 , noting that the Lānaʻi hookbill was only known from one specimen and arguing that it was merely an aberrant and partially albino female ʻōʻū . The hookbill 's validity was not confirmed until 1989 when the specimen 's skull was removed and examined . The bird 's cranial osteology , <unk> , plumage , and bill morphology confirmed the distinctness of the species . 
 The hookbill was a member of the Hawaiian honeycreeper subfamily <unk> and the tribe <unk> , which it shared with seven historically recorded species and about ten species known only from fossils . It is believed that the Lānaʻi hookbill was most closely related to the ʻōʻū . No fossil specimens of the Lānaʻi hookbill have been found . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Lānaʻi hookbill was a plump , medium @-@ sized bird . It had greenish olive upperparts and pale whitish yellow underparts , as well as a yellow or white superciliary line . The chin and throat were white . The wings ' secondaries had a distinctive and conspicuous white wing patch . Due to the subdued colors of the sole specimen , it is believed that it was a female , suggesting that the male would have had a brighter plumage , especially in the superciliary line . The eyes , which were large for a bird of the hookbill 's size , were dark brown and the muscular legs were gray with yellow toepads . The bird was about 6 inches ( 15 cm ) in length , and the weight is unknown . 
 The hookbill 's distinguishing characteristic was a heavy , <unk> bill . The upper mandible hooked sharply downwards , while the heavy lower mandible hooked sharply upwards towards the middle of the upper mandible . This structure left a gap between the two mandibles when the bird held its beak closed . It is believed that the bill was pale pink in coloration . The jaw muscles were particularly well developed around the bill . The hookbill 's tongue was primitive and <unk> . 
 Like other Hawaiian honeycreepers , the hookbill possessed a distinctive musty odor . The bird 's only known vocalization was an inconspicuous chirp ; however , all other Hawaiian honeycreepers are excellent vocalists that demonstrate an array of sounds , and therefore the hookbill likely had a broader , unrecorded repertoire . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Lānaʻi hookbill was endemic to the island of Lānaʻi in Hawaii . All recorded sightings of the species were made from the southwestern end of Lānaʻi 's forests , which included the <unk> Valley and <unk> . These sightings were between 2 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 600 feet ( 610 and 790 m ) in elevation . However , the species ' habitat once covered thousands of acres on Lānaʻi , and it is possible that the species once had a broader range on the island . The species was non @-@ migratory . 
 It is believed that the Lānaʻi hookbill inhabited montane dry forests on Lānaʻi dominated by ʻakoko ( Euphorbia species ) and ōpuhe ( <unk> glabra ) . The unique shape of the hookbill 's bill , particularly when compared with the ʻōʻū 's bill , and its apparent rarity suggested that the species was an extreme specialist and was therefore restricted to this habitat . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The Lānaʻi hookbill is only known to have eaten the fruit of the ōpuhe . The type specimen was caught while feeding on the plant , and its berries were subsequently discovered in its stomach . It is considered likely that the hookbill additionally ate ʻakoko fruits due to their similarity in size and shape to those of the ōpuhe . However , the hookbill 's unique bill is considered unlikely to have evolved if the species was purely frugivorous , and it has been suggested that the hookbill specialized in eating snails . The species was very active while searching for food , constantly flying from tree to tree . While perched it shifted restlessly . 
 Based upon the structure of the bill , it has been suggested that this unique bill was used as a pincer , with the tips of both mandibles touching . The hookbill could have used this movement to pluck fruits or flowers for consumption , or it may have been used to extract snails from their shells . It is also possible that the bird could have crushed a snail shell between its mandibles and then used its tongue to ingest the meat and expel the shell out of the open sides of the beak . 
 There is no recorded information on the Lānaʻi hookbill 's breeding behavior . However , the other Hawaiian honeycreepers are remarkably uniform in their breeding behavior , and it is therefore likely that the <unk> also bred from early winter through the end of summer in August , with pair bonding being completed by January or February . The males likely defended a territory that moved along with his bonded female and became a centered around the nest after the female constructed it . It is hypothesized that the hookbill laid two to three eggs and that its young were altricial . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Historically , the hookbill was only recorded three times . All three sightings were made by George C. Munro ; the first was when he collected a single bird on February 22 , 1913 , and the other two sightings came on March 16 , 1916 and August 12 , 1918 . The only existing specimen is in the Bernice P. Bishop Museum in Honolulu . The species was not recorded by the native Hawaiians . 
 The fact that Munro , an excellent observer who spent years on Lānaʻi , only saw the bird three times implies that it was already very rare by the 1910s . From 1900 to 1940 nearly all of Lānaʻi 's forests were converted into pineapple fields . This conversion reduced the area of the hookbill 's potential habitat , and is believed to be the biggest contributor to the species ' extinction . It has also been suggested that avian malaria , which began affecting Lānaʻi 's birds in the 1920s , may have contributed to the species ' decline . Likewise , the introduction of feral cats and rats to Lānaʻi may have led to a decline in the hookbill 's population . The extinction of local snails through human intervention could also have led to the Lānaʻi hookbill 's extinction . 
 = Ellis Wackett = 
 Air Vice Marshal Ellis Charles Wackett , CB , CBE ( 13 April 1901 – 3 August 1984 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Its chief engineer from 1935 to 1959 , he served on the RAAF 's controlling body , the Air Board , for a record 17 years , and has been credited with infusing operations with new standards of airworthiness . Commencing his service career as a Royal Australian Navy cadet during World War I , Wackett transferred to the Air Force in 1923 while on an engineering course in Britain . He qualified as a pilot before completing his studies and returning to Australia , where he inaugurated parachute instruction within the RAAF and made the country 's first freefall descent from a military aircraft in 1926 . The following year , he led a three @-@ month survey flight to Papua New Guinea . 
 Wackett became the RAAF 's senior engineer with his appointment as Director of Technical Services in 1935 . A wing commander at the outbreak of World War II , he rose to air commodore by 1942 and assumed the role of Air Member for Engineering and Maintenance . He established the Technical Branch as a separate department of the RAAF in 1948 , and was promoted to air vice marshal the same year . Wackett served as Air Member for Technical Services until leaving the military in 1959 , having been appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire and Companion of the Order of the Bath . From 1960 to 1968 , he was a member of the Australian National Airlines Commission , parent of Trans Australia Airlines . Generally known as " Wack " , or " EC " ( to distinguish him from his elder brother , aircraft designer Lawrence James Wackett or " LJ " ) , his prominent chin and nose also earned him the nickname " Punch " . He died in 1984 at the age of 83 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Townsville , Queensland , Ellis Wackett was the third and youngest child of James , an English @-@ born storekeeper , and Alice Wackett ( née Lawrence ) . Following initial schooling in Townsville , he entered the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay , New South Wales in 1914 , aged 13 . Graduating in 1918 , he served as a midshipman aboard the Royal Navy battleship HMS Monarch and battlecruiser HMS Renown , and later the RAN light cruiser HMAS Brisbane and battlecruiser HMAS Australia . He was commissioned a sub @-@ lieutenant in January 1921 , and posted to England for study in July . Wackett was at the Royal Naval Engineering College , Keyham , when he applied to join the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in 1922 . Accepted by the Air Force the following year , he finished at Keyham in August and trained as a pilot on Salisbury Plain . He then took a one @-@ year post @-@ graduate course in aeronautics at the Imperial College of Science and Technology , London , before returning to Australia to take up his service as a flying officer with the RAAF . 
 Wackett 's first role was to establish parachute instruction within the Air Force . His trip home from England had been postponed at the last minute to enable him to be trained ; he began instructing volunteers in 1926 at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and made Australia 's first freefall descent from a military aircraft — an Airco DH.9 — on 26 May . The Chief of the Air Staff , Group Captain Richard Williams , himself made a successful jump on 5 August , to set " a good example " prior to making the wearing of parachutes compulsory for all aircrew . On 21 August , Wackett piloted the DH.9 from which Flying Officer Frederick Scherger made the first public display of parachuting in Australia , at Essendon , Victoria . 
 By August 1927 , Wackett had been promoted flight lieutenant and given command of the Papuan Survey Flight formed at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria . Consisting of two Supermarine Seagull III single @-@ engined amphibious biplanes and six aircrew , the flight was to examine and photograph the Papuan and New Guinean coasts as far north as Aitape and , if possible , Bougainville . Stripped of all equipment considered non @-@ essential — including radio sets — to increase range , the aircraft departed on 27 September and journeyed some 17 @,@ 700 kilometres ( 11 @,@ 000 mi ) , covering almost 130 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 50 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of country and taking 350 photos . Wackett 's machine ( serial A9 @-@ 5 ) returned to Melbourne on 26 December and the other ( A9 – 6 ) on 19 January 1928 . Inclement weather prevented the expedition from reaching Bougainville , and thick jungle cover limited the usefulness of its photographic record . Nevertheless , the Air Force learned valuable lessons concerning the Seagull 's capabilities in a potential wartime role , as it was found to be unsuited to operations in the tropics . 
 On 14 August 1928 , Wackett married Doreen Dove ; the couple would have two sons and a daughter . In 1933 , Wackett was posted to England to attend RAF Staff College , Andover . Returning to Australia , he was promoted squadron leader and became Director of Technical Services , an organisation within the RAAF 's Supply Branch , in May 1935 ; the appointment made Wackett the Air Force 's senior engineer . The same year , he took charge of the Resources Committee for Electrical Equipment , Scientific and Optical Instruments , one of several subcommittees on the federal government 's Defence Resources Board set up to investigate and report on the readiness of Australian industry to provide munitions for defence in the event of international conflict . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Ranked wing commander at the outbreak of World War II , Wackett immediately faced major supply challenges in his role as Director of Technical Services . Spare parts for the RAAF 's mainly British @-@ built equipment were now in short supply , a fact complicated by the infancy of the local aircraft industry and a US arms embargo . His directorate made whatever use it could of civilian repair facilities , setting up central recovery depots to salvage spares from damaged aircraft and other equipment . He also drew on the advice and support of his brother Lawrence , who had established the RAAF 's technical services organisation in the 1920s and now , having retired from the Air Force , headed the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation ( CAC ) . By late 1940 , Wackett had been promoted temporary group captain , and joined the Flying Personnel Research Committee . Its members , drawn from the aviation , medical , scientific and technical disciplines , were to study and report upon such factors as aircrew safety , comfort , fatigue , survival , motion sickness , decompression and hypoxia . 
 Wackett was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1941 New Year Honours . In June , he became the RAAF 's representative on the federal Aircraft Advisory Committee , set up to assist the Director @-@ General of Aircraft Production . As well as members from governmental and scientific bodies , the committee included delegates from aircraft manufacturers such as de Havilland Australia and CAC , with Lawrence Wackett acting as Chief Technical Advisor . Later that year , the two brothers joined various academics on the newly formed Australian Council for Aeronautics , established by Prime Minister John Curtin to advise government , educational and scientific organisations on technical developments in the aircraft industry . 
 Raised to air commodore , Wackett was appointed Air Member for Engineering and Maintenance ( AME ) on 4 June 1942 . As AME , he sat on the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body , which consisted of its most senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . His new position had been created to replace that of the Director @-@ General of Supply and Production , a civilian post . Wackett would serve on the Air Board for the next seventeen years , a record tenure for the RAAF , his experience and intellect making him , in the words of Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " singularly adept at bringing a committee around to his point of view " . During the war , the Air Board oversaw expansion from a complement in 1939 of 246 obsolescent machines such as CAC Wirraways , Avro Ansons and Lockheed Hudsons , to a strength in 1945 of 5 @,@ 620 sophisticated aircraft including Supermarine Spitfires , P @-@ 51 Mustangs , de Havilland Mosquitoes and B @-@ 24 Liberators ; to support this force , the RAAF had provided all @-@ through training for 18 @,@ 000 technical staff , and further education for 35 @,@ 000 more schooled initially outside the service . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Following the end of the war , Wackett contributed to " Plan D " , the blueprint for restructuring the RAAF sponsored by the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones . A major facet of Plan D , adopted in June 1947 , was its encouragement of local industry to design and build military trainers and produce more sophisticated combat aircraft under licence from overseas manufacturers . This policy would eventually lead to the CAC Winjeel basic trainer and Australian co @-@ partnership in production of the CAC Sabre jet fighter and GAF Canberra jet bomber . Wackett also supported Air Vice Marshal Joe Hewitt , the Air Member for Personnel , in fostering apprenticeships as part of the " education revolution " that took place in the RAAF during the late 1940s and early 1950s . The Apprentice Training Scheme , designed to raise the standard of technical roles in the Air Force , opened early in 1948 at the Ground Training School in RAAF Station Wagga , New South Wales to provide education and technical training for youths aged 15 to 17 . By 1952 , it had been renamed the RAAF School of Technical Training . 
 Wackett played a key role in establishing technical services as a distinct department within the RAAF , rather than forming part of the Supply Branch as in previous years . Mindful of the increasing responsibility that was being placed on scientific and technical resources in the modern Air Force , he had raised the question of a specialist engineering branch immediately after the war , and in March 1946 gained broad approval for its establishment . After eighteen months of work defining its scope and responsibilities , the Technical Branch was formed under Wackett 's leadership on 23 September 1948 , his goals being " to support the operational power of the RAAF by providing the most efficient technical organisation possible " and " to increase the effectiveness of air power through technical development " . This in turn led to a separate " list " of engineering personnel , as opposed to the earlier Technical List subgroup under the General Duties Branch . 
 For flexibility , and to ensure that the flying and engineering branches had a better appreciation of their respective operations , Wackett supported the practice of some general duties officers continuing to perform engineering work , and as many technical officers as possible receiving secondary training as aircrew . He was disappointed , however , by the limits imposed by the Air Board on career advancement for his personnel . While the General Duties Branch in the late 1940s was permitted to maintain thirty @-@ seven officer positions of group captain and above , the Technical Branch was only allowed fourteen such slots , though both departments had an almost identical overall strength of just under 400 staff . This anomaly led Wackett to submit a dissenting report on the subject to the Air Board , one of the few occasions a board member exercised his right to such a protest . His new organisation caused some other tensions in the RAAF : new airworthiness considerations frustrated pilots who found their flying time restricted by the introduction of more rigorous maintenance procedures ; supply officers feared being " outshone " by the new status accorded to engineers ; and so @-@ called " black handers " — old @-@ school technical officers who had risen through the ranks — regarded with disdain the prospect of an influx of " silly young blokes with degrees " . 
 Wackett had been promoted temporary air vice marshal on 1 January 1947 ; this rank was made substantive following the formation of the Technical Branch . On 31 October 1949 , his title was changed from Air Member for Equipment and Maintenance to Air Member for Technical Services ( AMTS ) , in which capacity he would serve until his retirement from the RAAF in 1959 . Appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1951 King 's Birthday Honours , Wackett again worked closely with Air Vice Marshal Hewitt , now the Air Member for Supply and Equipment , to introduce the concept of acquiring spare parts based on " life @-@ of @-@ type " , whereby the forecast number and type of spares necessary for an aircraft 's projected service life would be ordered when it was first deployed , to reduce costs and delivery time . 
 In 1953 , Wackett established advanced diploma training for twenty @-@ five airmen annually at Melbourne Technical College , the graduates receiving commissions as pilot officers . He also began recruiting university @-@ qualified engineers to the Technical Branch , and put in place formal relationships with such bodies as CSIRO , the Council of Aeronautics ( of which he was a member ) , Aeronautical Research Laboratories , and local aircraft manufacturers de Havilland Australia , Government Aircraft Factories , and CAC . He further initiated RAAF sponsorship of a chair of aeronautics at the University of Sydney . Wackett was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1957 New Years Honours . Two years later , his wife Doreen was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire for her service as Vice President and , from 1948 , President of the RAAF Women 's Association . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 When Wackett left the Air Force on 31 December 1959 , he was its longest @-@ serving officer . The next year he joined the Australian National Airlines Commission ( ANAC ) , the controlling body of the federal government 's domestic carrier , Trans Australia Airlines ( TAA ) . He rose to the Vice Chairmanship of ANAC before retiring in 1968 . During his term on the commission , Wackett witnessed the arrival of the Jet Age to domestic air routes , with TAA taking delivery of its first Boeing 727 in 1964 , and its first Douglas DC @-@ 9 in 1967 . He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society . Like his brother Lawrence , who wrote two books on the subject , Ellis Wackett 's chief hobby was angling . He died in Warracknabeal , Victoria , on 3 August 1984 ; his wife predeceased him in 1975 . 
 For his commitment to the concept of airworthiness , as an attitude to quality and professionalism that went beyond simply whether aircraft were fit to fly or not , Wackett has been described as one of the " outstanding officers of the post @-@ war era " . The establishment of a dedicated Technical Branch , which he founded in 1948 , was a key factor in the Air Force developing the ability to successfully manage the maintenance and upgrade of such highly sophisticated aircraft as the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 . Wackett 's 17 @-@ year tenure on the Air Board , which was dissolved in 1976 , remained the longest of any officer in the RAAF . He was followed by a series of leaders of the Technical Branch ( renamed Engineering Branch in 1966 ) who shared his vision , including Air Vice Marshals Ernie Hey ( 1960 – 1972 ) and James Rowland ( 1972 – 75 ) . Wackett was among those considered as possible successors to Air Marshal George Jones as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) when the latter was retired in 1952 , but Prime Minister Robert Menzies ' federal government chose an RAF officer for the role , Air Marshal Sir Donald Hardman . In any case , Air Force regulations at that time stipulated that appointees had to belong to the RAAF 's General Duties ( Aircrew ) Branch . In 1975 , Air Marshal Rowland was appointed as CAS , though he had to transfer from Engineering to General Duties before this could be formalised . The following year , the requirement for CAS to be a member of the General Duties Branch was removed . 
 = Celilo Falls = 
 Celilo Falls ( <unk> , meaning " echo of falling water " or " sound of water upon the rocks , " in several native languages ) was a tribal fishing area on the Columbia River , just east of the Cascade Mountains , on what is today the border between the U.S. states of Oregon and Washington . The name refers to a series of cascades and waterfalls on the river , as well as to the native settlements and trading villages that existed there in various configurations for 15 @,@ 000 years . Celilo was the oldest continuously inhabited community on the North American continent until 1957 , when the falls and nearby settlements were submerged by the construction of The Dalles Dam . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Main waterfall = = = 
 The main waterfall , known variously as Celilo Falls , The Chutes , Great Falls , or Columbia Falls , consisted of three sections : a cataract , called Horseshoe Falls or Tumwater Falls ; a deep eddy , the Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac ; and the main channel . These features were formed by the Columbia River 's relentless push through basalt narrows on the final leg of its journey to the Pacific Ocean . Frequently more than a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in width , the river was squeezed here into a width of only 140 feet ( 43 m ) . The seasonal flow of the Columbia changed the height of the falls over the course of a year . At low water the drop was about 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . In 1839 , Modeste Demers investigated the area in some detail and described not just one fall but a great many , in different channels and with different qualities . He wrote , " The number and variety [ of the channels and falls ] are surprising . They are not all equally deep . The falls are from 3 to 12 and 15 feet high . " During the spring freshet in June and July , the falls could be completely submerged . The falls were the sixth @-@ largest by volume in the world and were among the largest in North America . Average annual flow was about 190 @,@ 000 ft ³ / sec ( <unk> m ³ / s ) , and during periods of high water or flood , as much as 1 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 ft ³ / sec ( 35 @,@ 113 m ³ / s ) passed over the falls . 
 = = = The Narrows and The Dalles = = = 
 Celilo Falls itself was the first in a series of cascades and rapids known collectively as The Narrows or The Dalles , stretching for about 12 miles ( 19 km ) downstream . Over that length , the river dropped 82 feet ( 25 m ) at high water and 63 feet ( 19 m ) at low water . 
 Three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) below Celilo Falls was a stretch of rapids known variously as the Short Narrows , Ten Mile Rapids , the Little ( or Upper ) Dalles , or Les Petites Dalles . These rapids were about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long and 250 feet ( 76 m ) wide . Ten miles ( 16 km ) below Celilo Falls was another stretch of rapids , this one known as the Long Narrows , Five Mile Rapids , the Big ( or Lower ) Dalles , Les Grandes Dalles , or Grand Dalles . This stretch of rapids was about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long , and the river channel narrowed to 75 feet ( 23 m ) . Immediately downstream were the Dalles Rapids ( or Wascopam to the local natives ) , about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . Here the river dropped 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in a tumult much commented on by early explorers . 
 The Long Narrows and the Dalles Rapids are sometimes grouped together under names such as Grand Dalles , Les Dalles , Big Dalles , or The Dalles . One early observer , Ross Cox , noted a three @-@ mile " succession of boiling whirlpools . " Explorer Charles Wilkes described it as " one of the most remarkable places upon the Columbia . " He calculated that the river dropped about 50 feet ( 15 m ) over 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) here . During the spring freshet , the river rose as much as 62 feet ( 19 m ) , radically altering the nature of the rapids . Fur trader Alexander Ross wrote , " [ The water ] rushes with great impetuosity ; the foaming surges dash through the rocks with terrific violence ; no craft , either large or small , can venture there safely . During floods , this obstruction , or ledge of rocks , is covered with water , yet the passage of the narrows is not thereby improved . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Fishing and trading = = = 
 For 15 @,@ 000 years , native peoples gathered at <unk> to fish and exchange goods . They built wooden platforms out over the water and caught salmon with <unk> and long spears on poles as the fish swam up through the rapids and jumped over the falls . Historically , an estimated fifteen to twenty million salmon passed through the falls every year , making it one of the greatest fishing sites in North America . 
 Celilo Falls and The Dalles were strategically located at the border between Chinookan and <unk> speaking peoples and served as the center of an extensive trading network across the Pacific Plateau . Artifacts from the original village site at Celilo suggest that trade goods came from as far away as the Great Plains , Southwestern United States , and Alaska . There are also numerous rock art drawings at the head of the falls . This demonstrates the site to not just be important for trading purposes . It acted as a melting pot for the cultures which fished and traded there . When the Lewis and Clark expedition passed through the area in 1805 , the explorers found a " great emporium … where all the neighboring nations assemble , " and a population density unlike anything they had seen on their journey . Accordingly , historians have likened the Celilo area to the “ Wall Street of the West . " The Wishram people lived on the north bank , while the Wasco lived on the south bank , with the most intense bargaining occurring at the Wishram village of Nix @-@ <unk> . Charles Wilkes reported finding three major native fishing sites on the lower Columbia — Celilo Falls , the Big Dalles , and Cascades Rapids , with the Big Dalles being the largest . Alexander Ross described it as the " great rendezvous " of native traders , as " the great emporium or mart of the Columbia . " Pinnipeds such as sea lions and seals followed salmon up the Columbia as far as Celilo Falls . In 1841 George Simpson wrote " these animals ascend the Columbia in great numbers in quest of the salmon . 
 = = = Navigation = = = 
 The seasonal changes in the Columbia 's flow , high in summer and low in winter , affected Celilo Falls dramatically . Lewis and Clark reached Celilo Falls in the late autumn when the water was relatively low , turning the falls into a major barrier . In contrast , when David Thompson passed Celilo Falls in July 1811 , the high water obscured the falls and made his passage through the Columbia Gorge relatively easy . Modeste Demers wrote about the seasonal change in 1839 : " One may be astonished to learn that these chutes , so terrible at low water , are smooth and still at very high water , which does not happen every year . Then it is that , instead of fearing them , the voyageurs hasten to approach them , to light their pipes and rest . " More difficult was the Long Narrows , or Big Dalles , ten miles below Celilo Falls . This section of the river was impassable during high water . During the autumn low water they were passable but with unloaded boats only , and even then the passage was very dangerous . " They are never passed without dread , " wrote François Blanchet in 1839 . Narcissa Whitman asserted in 1836 that over one hundred " white lives " had been lost at the Dalles . 
 In the 1840s and 1850s , American pioneers began arriving in the area , traveling down the Columbia on wooden barges loaded with wagons . Many lost their lives in the violent currents near Celilo . In the 1870s , the Army Corps of Engineers embarked on a plan to improve navigation on the river . In 1915 , they completed the 14 @-@ mile ( 23 km ) Celilo Canal , a portage allowing steamboats to circumvent the turbulent falls . Though the canal 's opening was greeted with great enthusiasm and anticipation , the canal was scarcely used and was completely idle by 1919 . 
 = = Flooded by the dam = = 
 As more settlers arrived in the Pacific Northwest in the 1930s and 1940s , civic leaders advocated a system of hydroelectric dams on the Columbia River . They argued that the dams would improve navigation for barge traffic from interior regions to the ocean ; provide a reliable source of irrigation for agricultural production ; provide electricity for the World War II defense industry ; and alleviate the flooding of downriver cities , as occurred in the 1948 destruction of Vanport City , Oregon . 
 Aluminum production , shipbuilding , and nuclear production at the Hanford site contributed to a rapid increase in regional demand for electricity . By 1943 , fully 96 percent of Columbia River electricity was being used for war manufacturing . The volume of water at Celilo Falls made The Dalles an attractive site for a new dam in the eyes of the Corps of Engineers . 
 Throughout this period , native people continued to fish at Celilo , under the provisions of the 1855 Treaties signed with the Yakama Nation , the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs , and the Walla Walla , Umatilla , and Cayuse , which guaranteed the tribes ' ancient " right of taking fish at all usual and accustomed stations . " In 1947 , the federal government convened Congressional hearings and concluded that the proposed dam at The Dalles would not violate tribal fishing rights under the treaties . Subsequently , the government reached a monetary settlement with the affected tribes , paying $ 26 @.@ 8 million for the loss of Celilo and other fishing sites on the Columbia . 
 The Army Corps of Engineers commenced work on The Dalles Dam in 1952 and completed it five years later . On March 10 , 1957 , hundreds of observers looked on as a rising Lake Celilo rapidly silenced the falls , submerged fishing platforms , and consumed the village of Celilo , ending an age @-@ old existence for those who lived there . A small Native American community exists today at nearby Celilo Village , on a bluff overlooking the former location of the falls . 
 In 2008 the Army Corps of Engineers completed a survey of the Celilo Falls site using sonar technology , in response to the 50th anniversary of the flooding of the falls . The survey revealed that the falls remain intact below the artificial lake , and that " rocky outcrops , carved basins and channels that match aerial photographs from the 1940s . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Celilo Falls retains great cultural significance for native peoples . Ted Strong of the Intertribal Fish Commission told one historian , " If you are an Indian person and you think , you can still see all the characteristics of that waterfall . If you listen , you can still hear its roar . If you inhale , the fragrances of mist and fish and water come back again . " In 2007 , three thousand people gathered at Celilo Village to commemorate the 50 @-@ year anniversary of the inundation of the falls . 
 Artist and architect Maya Lin is working on interpretive artwork at Celilo for the Confluence Project , scheduled for completion in 2016 . 
 = Hawksbill sea turtle = 
 The hawksbill sea turtle ( Eretmochelys imbricata ) is a critically endangered sea turtle belonging to the family Cheloniidae . It is the only extant species in the genus Eretmochelys . The species has a worldwide distribution , with Atlantic and Indo @-@ Pacific subspecies — E. i. imbricata and E. i. bissa , respectively . 
 The hawksbill 's appearance is similar to that of other marine turtles . In general , it has a flattened body shape , a protective carapace , and flipper @-@ like limbs , adapted for swimming in the open ocean . E. imbricata is easily distinguished from other sea turtles by its sharp , curving beak with prominent <unk> , and the saw @-@ like appearance of its shell margins . Hawksbill shells slightly change colors , depending on water temperature . While this turtle lives part of its life in the open ocean , it spends more time in shallow lagoons and coral reefs . Human fishing practices threaten E. imbricata populations with extinction . The World Conservation Union classifies the hawksbill as critically endangered . Hawksbill shells were the primary source of tortoiseshell material used for decorative purposes . The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species outlaws the capture and trade of hawksbill sea turtles and products derived from them . 
 = = Anatomy and morphology = = 
 E. imbricata has the typical appearance of a marine turtle . Like the other members of its family , it has a depressed body form and flipper @-@ like limbs adapted for swimming . 
 Adult hawksbill sea turtles have been known to grow up to 1 m ( 3 ft ) in length , weighing around 80 kg ( 180 lb ) on average . The heaviest hawksbill ever captured was measured to be 127 kg ( 280 lb ) . The turtle 's shell , or carapace , has an amber background patterned with an irregular combination of light and dark streaks , with predominantly black and mottled @-@ brown colors radiating to the sides . 
 Several characteristics of the hawksbill sea turtle distinguish it from other sea turtle species . Its elongated , tapered head ends in a beak @-@ like mouth ( from which its common name is derived ) , and its beak is more sharply pronounced and hooked than others . The hawksbill 's fore limbs have two visible claws on each flipper . 
 One of the hawksbill 's more easily distinguished characteristics is the pattern of thick scutes that make up its carapace . While its carapace has five central scutes and four pairs of lateral scutes like several members of its family , E. imbricata 's posterior scutes overlap in such a way as to give the rear margin of its carapace a serrated look , similar to the edge of a saw or a steak knife . The turtle 's carapace has been known to reach almost 1 m ( 3 ft ) in length . The hawksbill appears to frequently employ its sturdy shell to insert its body into tight spaces in reefs . 
 Hawksbill sea turtles ' sand tracks are asymmetrical , because they crawl on land with an alternating gait . By contrast , the green sea turtle and the leatherback turtle crawl rather symmetrically . 
 Due to its consumption of venomous cnidarians , hawksbill sea turtle flesh can become toxic . 
 The hawksbill sea turtle has been shown to be <unk> and is the first reptile recorded with this characteristic . It is unknown if this is derived from the turtle 's diet , which includes <unk> organisms like the hard coral <unk> <unk> . Males have more intense pigmentation than females , and a behavioural role of these differences is speculated . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Hawksbill sea turtles have a wide range , found predominantly in tropical reefs of the Indian , Pacific , and Atlantic Oceans . Of all the sea turtle species , E. imbricata is the one most associated with warm tropical waters . Two major subpopulations are known , in the Atlantic and Indo @-@ Pacific . 
 = = = Atlantic subpopulation = = = 
 In the Atlantic , hawksbill populations range as far west as the Gulf of Mexico and as far southeast as the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa . They live off the Brazilian coast ( specifically Bahia , Fernando de Noronha ) through southern Florida and the waters off Virginia . 
 In the Caribbean , the main nesting beaches are in the Lesser Antilles , Barbados , Guadeloupe , Tortuguero in Costa Rica , and in the Yucatan . They feed in the waters off Cuba and around Mona Island near Puerto Rico among other places . 
 = = = Indo @-@ Pacific subpopulation = = = 
 In the Indian Ocean , hawksbills are a common sight along the east coast of Africa , including the seas surrounding Madagascar and nearby island groups , and all along the southern Asian coast , including the Persian Gulf , the Red Sea , and the coasts of the Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asia . They are present across the Malay Archipelago and northern Australia . Their Pacific range is limited to the ocean 's tropical and subtropical regions . In the west , it extends from the southwestern tips of the Korean Peninsula and the Japanese Archipelago south to northern New Zealand . 
 The Philippines hosts several nesting sites , including the island of Boracay and Punta <unk> in Davao City . A small group of islands in the southwest of the archipelago has been named the " Turtle Islands " because two species of sea turtles nest there : the hawksbill and the green sea turtle . In January 2016 , a juvenile was seen in Gulf of Thailand . In Hawaii , hawksbills mostly nest on the " main " islands of Oahu , Maui , Molokai , and Hawaii . In Australia , hawksbills are known to nest on Milman Island in the Great Barrier Reef . Hawksbill sea turtles nest as far west as Cousine Island in the Seychelles , where the species has been legally protected since 1994 , and the population is showing some recovery . The Seychelles ' inner islands and islets , such as Aldabra , are popular feeding grounds for immature hawksbills . 
 = = = Eastern Pacific subpopulation = = = 
 In the eastern Pacific , hawksbills are known to occur from the Baja Peninsula in Mexico south along the coast to southern Peru . Nonetheless , as recently as 2007 , the species had been considered largely extirpated in the region . Important remnant nesting and foraging sites have since been discovered in Mexico , El Salvador , Nicaragua , and Ecuador , providing new opportunities for research and conservation . In contrast to their traditional roles in other parts of the world , where hawksbills primarily inhabit coral reefs and rocky substrate areas , in the eastern Pacific , hawksbills tend to forage and nest principally in mangrove estuaries , such as those present in the Bahia de <unk> ( El Salvador ) , Gulf of Fonseca ( Nicaragua , El Salvador , and Honduras ) , Estero Padre Ramos ( Nicaragua ) , and the Gulf of Guayaquil ( Ecuador ) . Multi @-@ national initiatives , such as the Eastern Pacific Hawksbill Initiative , are currently pushing efforts to research and conserve the population , which remains poorly understood . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Adult hawksbill sea turtles are primarily found in tropical coral reefs . They are usually seen resting in caves and ledges in and around these reefs throughout the day . As a highly migratory species , they inhabit a wide range of habitats , from the open ocean to lagoons and even mangrove swamps in estuaries . Little is known about the habitat preferences of early life @-@ stage E. imbricata ; like other young sea turtles , they are assumed to be completely pelagic , remaining at sea until they mature . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 While the hawksbill sea turtles mainly feed on sponges found on coral reefs , they also feed on crustaceans , algae , and fish . They are prey to large fish , sharks , and humans . The hawksbill sea turtles are unfortunately endangered mainly due to human impact . These sea turtles mainly stay close to shorelines as this is where sponge @-@ bearing coral reefs can be found , as well as beaches that provide nesting sites . 
 While they are omnivorous , sea sponges are their principal food ; they constitute 70 – 95 % of the turtles ' diets in the Caribbean . However , like many <unk> , they feed only on select species , ignoring many others . Caribbean populations feed primarily on the orders <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in the class Demospongiae . Aside from sponges , hawksbills feed on algae , cnidarians , comb jellies and other jellyfish , and sea anemones . They also feed on the dangerous jellyfish @-@ like hydrozoan , the Portuguese man o ' war ( <unk> <unk> ) . Hawksbills close their unprotected eyes when they feed on these cnidarians . The man o ' war 's stinging cells cannot penetrate the turtles ' armored heads . 
 Hawksbills are highly resilient and resistant to their prey . Some of the sponges they eat , such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , are highly ( often lethally ) toxic to other organisms . In addition , hawksbills choose sponge species with significant numbers of siliceous spicules , such as <unk> , <unk> ( G. <unk> ) , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Life history = = 
 Not much is known about the life history of hawksbills . Their life history can be divided into three phases , namely the pelagic phase , from hatching to about 20 cm , the benthic phase , when the immature turtles recruit to foraging areas , and the reproductive phase , when they reach sexual maturity . The pelagic phase possibly lasts until the turtles reach around 20 cm in length in 1 – 3 years , reaching sexual maturity at around 40 cm ( 2 – 4 years ) . Hawksbills show a degree of fidelity after recruiting to the benthic phase , however movement to other similar habitats is possible . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Hawksbills mate biannually in secluded lagoons off their nesting beaches in remote islands throughout their range . Mating season for Atlantic hawksbills usually spans April to November . Indian Ocean populations , such as the Seychelles hawksbill population , mate from September to February . After mating , females drag their heavy bodies high onto the beach during the night . They clear an area of debris and dig a nesting hole using their rear flippers , then lay clutches of eggs and cover them with sand . Caribbean and Florida nests of E. imbricata normally contain around 140 eggs . After the hours @-@ long process , the female returns to the sea . 
 The baby turtles , usually weighing less than 24 g ( 0 @.@ 85 oz ) hatch at night after around two months . These newly emergent hatchlings are dark @-@ colored , with heart @-@ shaped carapaces measuring around 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long . They instinctively crawl into the sea , attracted by the reflection of the moon on the water ( possibly disrupted by light sources such as street lamps and lights ) . While they emerge under the cover of darkness , baby turtles that do not reach the water by daybreak are preyed upon by shorebirds , shore crabs , and other predators . 
 = = = Maturity = = = 
 Hawksbills evidently reach maturity after 20 years . Their lifespan is unknown . Like other sea turtles , hawksbills are solitary for most of their lives ; they meet only to mate . They are highly migratory . Because of their tough carapaces , adults ' only predators are sharks , estuarine crocodiles , octopuses , and some species of pelagic fish . 
 A series of biotic and abiotic cues , such as individual genetics , foraging quantity and quality , or population density , may trigger the maturation of the reproductive organs and the production of gametes and thus determine sexual maturity . Like many reptiles , all marine turtles of a same aggregation are highly unlikely to reach sexual maturity at the same size and thus age . Age at maturity has been estimated to occur between 10 and 25 years of age for Caribbean hawksbills . Turtles nesting in the Indo @-@ Pacific region may reach maturity at a minimum of 30 to 35 years . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Within the sea turtles , E. imbricata has several unique anatomical and ecological traits . It is the only primarily <unk> reptile . Because of this , its evolutionary position is somewhat unclear . Molecular analyses support placement of Eretmochelys within the taxonomic tribe <unk> , which includes the carnivorous loggerhead and ridley sea turtles , rather than in the tribe <unk> , which includes the herbivorous green turtle . The hawksbill probably evolved from carnivorous ancestors . 
 = = Etymology and taxonomic history = = 
 Linnaeus originally described the hawksbill sea turtle as Testudo imbricata in 1766 , in the 12th edition of his Systema Naturae . In 1843 , Austrian zoologist Leopold Fitzinger moved it into genus Eretmochelys . In 1857 , the species was temporarily <unk> as Eretmochelys imbricata squamata . 
 Two subspecies are accepted in E. imbricata 's taxon . E. i. bissa ( Rüppell , 1835 ) refers to populations that reside in the Pacific Ocean . The Atlantic population is a separate subspecies , E. i. imbricata ( Linnaeus , 1766 ) . The nominate subspecies is the Atlantic taxon , because Linnaeus ' type specimen was from the Atlantic . 
 Fitzinger derived the genus ' name , Eretmochelys , from the Greek roots <unk> and <unk> , corresponding to " oar " and " turtle " , respectively . The name refers to the turtles ' oar @-@ like front flippers . The species ' name imbricata is Latin , corresponding to the English term imbricate . This appropriately describes the turtles ' overlapping posterior scutes . The Pacific hawksbill 's subspecies name , bissa , is Latin for " double " . The subspecies was originally described as Caretta bissa ; the term referred to the then @-@ species being the second species in the genus . Caretta is the genus of the hawksbill 's much larger relative , the loggerhead turtle . 
 = = Exploitation by humans = = 
 Throughout the world , hawksbill sea turtles are taken by humans , though it is illegal to hunt them in many countries . In some parts of the world , hawksbill sea turtles are eaten as a delicacy . As far back as the fifth century BC , sea turtles , including the hawksbill , were eaten as delicacies in China . 
 Many cultures also use turtles ' shells for decoration . These turtles have been harvested for their beautiful shell since Egyptian times , and the material known as tortoiseshell is normally from the hawksbill . In China , where it was known as tai mei , the hawksbill is called the " tortoise @-@ shell turtle " , named primarily for its shell , which was used for making and decorating a variety of small items , as it was in the West . In Japan , the turtles are also harvested for their shell scutes , which are called <unk> in Japanese . It is used in various personal implements , such as <unk> frames and the shamisen ( Japanese traditional three @-@ stringed instrument ) picks . In 1994 , Japan stopped importing hawksbill shells from other nations . Prior to this , the Japanese hawksbill shell trade was around 30 @,@ 000 kg ( 66 @,@ 000 lb ) of raw shells per year . In the West , hawksbill sea turtle shells were harvested by the ancient Greeks and ancient Romans for jewelry , such as combs , brushes , and rings . The bulk of the world 's hawksbill shell trade originates in the Caribbean . In 2006 , processed shells were regularly available , often in large amounts , in countries including the Dominican Republic and Colombia . 
 The hawksbill sea turtle appears on the reverse side of the Venezuelan 20 @-@ <unk> and the Brazilian 2 @-@ reais banknotes . A much @-@ beloved fountain sculpture of a boy riding a hawksbill , affectionately known as Turtle Boy , stands in Worcester , Massachusetts . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Consensus has determined sea turtles , including E. imbricata to be , at the very least , threatened species because of their slow growth and maturity , and slow reproductive rates . Many adult turtles have been killed by humans , both accidentally and deliberately , for instance , due to loss of nesting , pollution and coastal development . In addition , human and animal encroachment threatens nesting sites , and small mammals dig up eggs . In the US Virgin Islands , mongooses raid hawksbill nests ( along with those of other sea turtles , such as Dermochelys coriacea ) right after they are laid . 
 In 1982 , the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species first listed E. imbricata as endangered . This endangered status continued through several reassessments in 1986 , 1988 , 1990 , and 1994 until it was upgraded in status to critically endangered in 1996 . Two petitions challenged its status as an endangered species prior to this , claiming the turtle ( along with three other species ) had several significant stable populations worldwide . These petitions were rejected based on their analysis of data submitted by the Marine Turtle Specialist Group ( <unk> ) . The data given by the <unk> showed the worldwide hawksbill sea turtle population had declined by 80 % in the three most recent generations , and no significant population increase occurred as of 1996 . CR A2 status was denied , however , because the IUCN did not find sufficient data to show the population likely to decrease by a further 80 % in the future . 
 The species ( along with the entire family Cheloniidae ) has been listed on Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species . It is illegal to import or export turtle products , or to kill , capture , or harass hawksbill sea turtles . 
 Local involvement in conservation efforts has also increased in the past few years . 
 The United States Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service have classified hawksbills as endangered under the Endangered Species Act since 1970 . The US government established several recovery plans for protecting E. imbricata . 
 = SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis = 
 SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis is a 2007 made @-@ for @-@ television musical comedy special directed by Andrew Overtoom . It stars Tom Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , Rodger Bumpass , Clancy Brown , Carolyn Lawrence , and Mr. Lawrence . SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 12 , 2007 , following a 12 @-@ hour @-@ marathon of SpongeBob SquarePants episodes . The series follows the adventures of the title character in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In the film , SpongeBob ( voiced by Kenny ) and Patrick ( voiced by Fagerbakke ) discover a half of an ancient medallion that helps them & their friends get to the lost city of Atlantis . 
 It was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Steven Banks , and Dani Michaeli . British musician and actor David Bowie guest starred as the voice of Lord Royal Highness . Upon release , it attracted an estimated 8 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 SpongeBob and Patrick find a piece of a medallion to the lost city of Atlantis , but have no idea what it is . They take it to the Bikini Bottom Museum to see if the staff there know what it is . SpongeBob and Patrick run into Squidward , who thinks they stole the missing half of the medallion . He soon matches it to the displayed other half of the medallion and tells them it was the key to Atlantis . After hearing the story of Atlantis , the only thing SpongeBob and Patrick want to see is the " World 's Oldest Bubble . " Squidward then proceeds to reconnect the two halves of the medallion , opening the " path to Atlantis " , which is a bus that runs on " song fuel " . When the characters run out of " song fuel " , the bus then crash @-@ lands into the city of Atlantis . 
 At Atlantis , they meet the Atlantean Emperor , Lord Royal Highness who shows them a grand tour of the fortress . During the tour , Mr. Krabs , Sandy , and Squidward each get distracted by places in Atlantis ; Mr. Krabs unsurprisingly by the treasury room , Sandy by the science laboratory , and Squidward by the art gallery . 
 Meanwhile , Plankton checks out the weaponry room , intent on using the city 's lost weapons for his own ends . He then chooses his weapon , a tank . Finally , SpongeBob and Patrick get to see the world 's oldest living bubble . Patrick takes a picture of it , which causes the bubble to pop . They are afraid to speak , saying they have to go back to Bikini Bottom . Then , Patrick shouts out the " truth . " 
 Lord Royal Highness is not enraged at SpongeBob and Patrick for popping the bubble , telling him that the one they popped was just a prop for the tourists . He then shows them the real oldest living bubble , which Patrick then takes a picture of , causing it to pop . Angered , Lord Royal Highness summons the Atlantean Royal Guards to attack , but the gang manage to escape . Just when they escape outside , Plankton comes in and tries to destroy them with the tank he found , but much to his dismay , it showers the group with ice cream . Lord Royal Highness captures Plankton , and says that " a talking speck " would be a better replacement for the bubble . SpongeBob and friends go home , but Patrick , Sandy , Mr. Krabs , and Squidward are all sad because they want to stay in Atlantis , even though SpongeBob does not . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Tom Kenny as SpongeBob SquarePants , Gary the Snail and Patchy the Pirate 
 Bill Fagerbakke as Patrick Star 
 Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs 
 Rodger Bumpass as Squidward Tentacles 
 Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks 
 Mr. Lawrence as Plankton 
 David Bowie as Lord Royal Highness 
 Paul Tibbitt as Potty the Parrot 
 Deric <unk> as <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 Atlantis SquarePantis was written by longtime SpongeBob SquarePants writers , Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Steven Banks , and Dani Michaeli , and was directed by Andrew Overtoom . Although it was promoted by Nickelodeon as the first made @-@ for @-@ television film of the series , Atlantis SquarePantis is an extended episode , running 45 minutes . " [ Atlantis SquarePantis is ] an adventurous quest kind of a story , " said Tom Kenny , the voice of SpongeBob , " about SpongeBob and his friends journeying and discovering the lost continent of Atlantis , which is ruled by a character voiced by David Bowie . " 
 The film stars the series main cast members including Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , Rodger Bumpass , Clancy Brown , Carolyn Lawrence , and Mr. Lawrence . In addition to the regular series voice cast , English musician and artist David Bowie guest starred as the voice of the Atlantean King , Lord Royal Highness . Writing on his blog , David Bowie said : 
 It 's happened . At last . I 've hit the Holy Grail of animation gigs . Yesterday I got to be a character on ... tan @-@ tara ... SpongeBob SquarePants . Oh Yeah ! ! We , the family , are thrilled . Nothing else need happen this year , well , this week anyway . My character in this special longform ( I think a half hour special ) show is called ' Lord Royal Highness ' . <unk> ! ! 
 Tom Kenny said " the people who [ watch ] are often surprising to me and unexpected . You don 't picture David Bowie , the Thin White Duke , sitting on the couch in his pajamas eating Cheerios watching SpongeBob cartoons . [ With ] our little basic @-@ cable budget we could never afford to pay a legend like David Bowie what he 's worth , but the fact he wants to be in something his kid likes is what gets the ball rolling . " Tom Kenny described Bowie 's performance as " wonderfully convincing [ ... ] It almost sounded real . " 
 The film includes 33 minutes of animation . Its animators at the Nickelodeon Animation Studios at Burbank , California sketched the outlines of the story in a year . Paul Tibbitt , the show 's supervising producer who also serves as the showrunner , explained " We 're one of the last shows that does it the old @-@ fashioned way , like they used to do it back in the Warner Brothers days . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Atlantis SquarePantis originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 12 , 2007 , preceding a 12 @-@ hour SpongeBob marathon . After the premiere , the Behind the <unk> special aired featuring the production of the film from story pitch and animation to voice @-@ recording sessions . It was proclaimed " the most special special that 's ever been called a special . " 
 On November 13 , 2007 , the episode was released on the DVD compilation of the same name in the United States and Canada , and on October 27 , 2008 in region 2 . The episode was also released in the series ' season five DVD , alongside 21 other episodes . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film begun production in May 2006 , and was delivered to Nickelodeon roughly a year later , allowing time for the network 's marketers to promote it . A SpongeBob marathon is a key part of the channel 's effort to stave off increasing competition from Disney Channel , Cartoon Network and other rivals . Cyma Zarghami , the president of the Nickelodeon networks , said " We do know that kids like events as much as adults do [ ... ] There 's a certain amount of water @-@ cooler talk that goes on among kids . " 
 The video game of the same name that was based on the film was released for PlayStation 2 , Wii , Game Boy Advance , and Nintendo DS . It was released on November 12 , 2007 for Wii , and on October 27 for the PS2 , Game Boy Advance , and Nintendo DS . The game was developed by Blitz Games and <unk> , and was published by THQ . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Atlantis SquarePantis was broadcast on November 12 , 2007 on Nickelodeon , and was preceded by an " Z @-@ A " countdown of SpongeBob SquarePants episodes picked by viewers . It attracted 8 @.@ 8 million viewers , the largest audience of a series broadcast at 8 : 00 p.m. show on November 12 , 2007 , with the exception of Dancing with the Stars , and currently the highest audience in the series ' history . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Ian Jane of DVD Talk said " [ the season five DVD ] is a fun selection of solid episodes and [ the film ] is excellent [ ... ] Paramount has done a nice job on this release and SpongeBob SquarePants : Atlantis SquarePantis comes recommended . " 
 In her review for About.com , Nancy Basile 's review was mixed and gave it a score of 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 . She wrote " Kids will enjoy this , but adults , who love the crazy antics , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor and naive <unk> of early SpongeBob will be disappointed . " Jerry <unk> of <unk> gave the episode a score of 7 / 10 and wrote " Atlantis SquarePants [ sic ] is not a masterpiece , but neither does it deserve the awful reputation it seems to have . " 
 Tom Shales , a television critic of The Washington Post , lambasted the film in a November 11 , 2007 review . In his review , Shales wrote that " the funniest thing about the film is its title " and " a typical episode has about as many laughs as this inflated version does . " Shales also criticized the musical numbers in Atlantis SquarePantis , calling them " numbing . " He concluded the review saying that the special was " flat " and " unimpressive " . 
 = Liz Sanbourne = 
 Liz Sanbourne is a fictional <unk> <unk> the American soap opera Passions , a long @-@ running serial drama which aired on NBC ( 1999 – 2007 ) and later on DirecTV ( 2007 – 08 ) . It followed the romantic and supernatural adventures in the fictional , coastal New England town of Harmony . Created by the soap 's founder and head writer James E. Reilly , the role was portrayed by Amelia Marshall from October 3 , 2001 to February 17 , 2006 . In 2003 , Arreale Davis and Taquel Graves played the character in flashbacks . 
 Liz is a member of the Russell family . Introduced as a romantic interest for Antonio Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , originally using the pseudonym " Brian O 'Leary " , played by Christopher Douglas , and as interference in the love triangle between Sheridan Crane , Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , and Antonio , Liz receives more prominence on the show as the antagonist and foil to her adoptive sister Eve Russell . Initially portrayed as a good @-@ hearted woman , she is later defined by her desire to ruin her sister 's life at any cost . Liz 's exit in February 2006 was described as " abrupt " by media outlets and the cast . 
 The character is notable to the show for exposing Eve 's past with Julian Crane , inadvertently leading them to reunite as a couple , and proving Chad Harris @-@ Crane and Whitney Russell were not committing incest by her identification as Chad 's mother . Marshall characterized Liz as expanding the representation of African @-@ Americans on television and the roles possible for African @-@ American actors . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 In the 2001 novel Hidden Passions : Secrets from the Diaries of Tabitha Lenox , Eve Russell is the only child of " too @-@ busy Harvard history Professor Warren Johnson and journalist Tanya Lincoln Johnson " . The series changed Eve 's family by identifying her parents as Warren Johnson and Ruby Lincoln , a poor couple from the American South , introducing the character of Liz as her adoptive sister , and Mr. Sanbourne as her stepfather . Despite the book being billed as the show 's canon at the time of its release , it contradicts much of the novel 's material . 
 Creator and head writer James E. Reilly approached Amelia Marshall about the role because they had worked together on Guiding Light ; in an interview with Soap Talk , Marshall commented : " I just love the fact that he saw me and realized that I could be such a witch . " Marshall described her opinion of Passions prior to being approached with the role : " ... there were always these strange things happening on the show . It really pulls you in . " She has commented that her decision to take on the role of Liz came from wanting to play characters that were different from her past appearances as Belinda <unk> in All My Children , and Gilly Grant <unk> in Guiding Light . By accepting the role of Liz on the NBC soap opera , Marshall became one of the few soap actresses to appear on each of the big three television networks . Marshall identified the show 's racial diversity as one of the primary reasons behind her attraction to the role : 
 " It 's an awful lot of fun to be going to all these dark and extreme places . I finally realized that there are seven African @-@ Americans on this show and I don 't have to be the flag @-@ bearer for African @-@ Americans . I can just be an actress given a crazy bitch to play and play it to the best of my ability . I don 't have to say , ' I don 't want to represent my people like that . ' We 'll let the Eve character be upstanding , even though she 's got shades . It 's so much fun to just deal with acting the part and not deal with the politics of it . " 
 Sheraton Kalouria , senior vice president of NBC 's daytime programming , explained that the show 's racially diverse ensemble , as represented by " the African American Russells and the Hispanic Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds " , reflects " its truly color @-@ blind storytelling . " Rodney Van Johnson , who played Russell family patriarch T. C. Russell , expressed appreciation for the show 's representation of " a full African @-@ American family " on daytime television that has serious storylines rather than being " just a flash in the pan . " Johnson said the Russell family has promted a large response from African @-@ American viewers . An article in Jet described each member of the Russells , including Liz , as being an " integral part of the show " instead of being token characters . In an interview with Soap Opera Digest , Marshall said Kalouria has led the effort : " to making sure the African @-@ American community knows they are telling tales with African @-@ American actors . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Marshall stated that her portrayal of Liz was influenced by her background as a dancer which gives her the " discipline and direction " when preparing for her character . She described the show as being " so on the edge all the time " and attributed her discipline as " ground [ ing ] [ her ] and the freedom from the dance world ... giv [ ing ] [ her ] the freedom to just soar with it . " 
 She characterized Liz , during her early storylines on the show , as " milquetoast " without any edges . Candace Havens of The Free Lance @-@ Star said that " Liz 's well @-@ rounded views and good sense of humor have made her a favorite in Harmony " because of her attempts to reunite the then supercouple Sheridan Crane and Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald . Soap Opera Digest listed the reveal of " the hard @-@ working , kind @-@ hearted hotel owner " Liz as Eve 's sister through " a slap @-@ filled reunion " as one of Passions ' biggest twists . 
 Marshall described Liz 's character later in the show as " a very strong , centered woman who has had some hard knocks and challenge " who " is wise beyond her years " and " doesn 't like being alone . " She said that the role was " so much fun for me to play because I 've been the ' good girl next door ' all of my career " and found that Liz 's " unhealed pain and anger " , and inability to reconcile with her sister , presented interesting acting challenges . Marshall found the lack of concrete information on her character 's past at the outset " allow [ ed ] [ me ] the freedom to go for what I see as Liz 's level of anger and betrayal . " 
 Marshall referred to Liz 's character development in 2005 portrayed her as " operat [ ing ] even crazier than she normally does " and found acting her to be fun as " [ s ] he 's out there ! " She viewed Liz as irredeemable after all her past deeds against Eve and Julian . Tracey Ross stated Liz " needs some serious electroshock therapy . " She said Marshall has " one of , if not the hardest jobs on the soap opera , " commending her ability to make " Liz want [ ing ] to have sex in the middle of the tsunami " believable . Ross described watching Marshall " to see what she is doing , take notes and copy it " during the filming of the show . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Liz Sanbourne is the adopted daughter of Mr. Sanbourne and Ruby Lincoln and the adoptive sister of Eve Russell , who is Ruby 's daughter from a previous marriage . She is unaware of her adoption and identifies herself as Eve 's half @-@ sister . After Eve left home to be a nightclub singer , and a prostitute , and started a relationship with businessman Julian Crane , Mr. Sanbourne began to molest Liz who blames Eve for abandoning her to her father 's sexual abuse . Liz 's resentment toward Eve for choosing a life of singing , drugs , and alcohol with Julian , over her family , is the start of her desire for revenge against her sister . When she was fourteen , Liz went to Boston in search of Eve . She tracked down Julian at a jazz club to talk to him about her sister and their relationship . Later that night , Alistair Crane raped Liz in Julian 's apartment ; Julian was passed out in a drunken stupor in the same room and was unaware of what happened . Residents of Harmony feel that Liz 's hardened personality is the result of the repeated sexual assaults ; witch Tabitha Lenox describes Liz 's past as making her as " mean as a rattlesnake " and Julian attributes Alistair 's actions as " destroying a young woman 's life and in the process creating someone who is as vengeful and nearly as cruel as [ him ] self " . The rape resulted in Liz 's pregnancy with Chad Harris @-@ Crane , who was originally believed to be Eve and Julian 's son ; Liz gave up her baby for adoption at birth . 
 In 2001 , Liz is introduced as the owner of the unnamed resort on the fictional island of St. Lisa 's located near Bermuda and the Bermuda Triangle . She is still in love with her former boyfriend Brian O 'Leary . She is first seen helping to take care of Sheridan Crane who Brian rescued from the ocean following the explosion of her boat . Liz 's connection to Eve and the Russell family is kept from the audience during this time . Along with Brian , and their friend Doc , Liz becomes close with the amnesiac Sheridan while trying to help her to remember her past . Sheridan believes her name is Diana due to confusing memories of her friendship with Diana , Princess of Wales with her own ; she begins a romantic relationship with Brian . Liz grows increasingly jealous of the attention Brian pays to Diana and suspicious of Brian 's true identity . When Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald comes to the island to pick up a boat for his then girlfriend Beth Wallace , Liz forms a friendship with him and listens to his story about his past life with Sheridan on the RMS Titanic . She thinks Luis is Diana 's fiancée , but fails to reunite them , despite several attempts , before he returns . Liz joins Diana and Brian to sail the ship back to Harmony . Upon returning to Harmony on Christmas Eve , Brian reveals his identity as Antonio Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , the long lost brother of Luis , and Liz and Diana convince him to reunite with his family . Liz again attempts to reunite Diana with Luis , but fails to do so before they return to St. Lisa 's Island . 
 In 2002 , Liz returns to Harmony in response to a telephone call from Diana ; she tells Liz about her true identity as Sheridan , her engagement to Luis , and Antonio 's terminal illness . While visiting Antonio in the hospital , she is startled and angry to find Eve in Harmony . Originally , Liz was revealed to be Eve 's half @-@ sister as neither were aware that she is in fact adopted . In order to keep her past a secret , Eve previously told her family , and everyone else in Harmony , that she did not have any living relatives . Liz plots to reveal Eve 's past to her husband T. C. Russell and her children Whitney and Simone Russell . She makes plans to replace Eve as the head of her family by becoming close with her daughters and seducing her husband . Deciding to remain in Harmony , she sells the hotel on St. Lisa 's Island to Doc . During Antonio and Sheridan 's wedding , Liz decides to let go of her romantic feelings for him to completely devote herself to enacting her vengeance on Eve . 
 The build @-@ up of the storyline ran from 2002 until 2004 as Liz makes bolder moves to expose Eve as lying about her past , and coerce T. C. to have sex with her . In 2003 , Liz buys the Blue Note , a jazz club where Eve used to sing and where she first met Julian , as a cover to stay in Harmony longer without raising suspicion . The storyline culminates in July 2004 when Liz brings Eve 's aunt Irma Johnson to tell T. C. the truth about Eve 's past relationship with Julian and their child . Everyone in Harmony incorrectly assumes that Eve 's child with Julian is Chad ; Whitney 's relationship with Chad is believed to be incestuous as they would be half @-@ siblings . Ashamed of committing incest by having sex with Chad , Whitney turns against her mother for not telling her the truth about her past earlier . The characters also find out that Eve , not Julian , was responsible for the car accident ending T. C. ' s tennis career . In retaliation , Eve tells everyone in Harmony about Liz 's true identity . T. C. later divorces Eve after finding himself unable to forgive her for lying about her past with Julian and her pregnancy . Following the signing of the divorce papers , T. C. openly begins a romantic relationship with Liz . 
 Liz continues to plot revenge against Eve even after she has successfully broken up her family and turned their trust against her . At Christmas dinner at the Crane family 's mansion , Liz accidentally drinks poisoned punch , which Rebecca Hotchkiss had intended for Eve , and passes out . Eve performs an emergency tracheotomy to save Liz . After recovering from the poison , Liz accuses Eve of giving her the glass of punch , leading to her arrest for attempted murder . T. C. proposes to Liz , but she becomes increasingly paranoid over his romantic feelings for Eve . Liz tries to ruin Eve 's budding relationship with Julian by attempting to seduce him during the earthquake and tsunami in the show 's 2005 summertime extravaganza . In the middle of the tsunami , Liz says to Julian : " You are going to make love to me , or I 'll kill you " and then stabs him in the back when he does not comply . At this time , Liz lies to Julian , claiming that he raped her during their meeting years earlier , in order to cause him further pain Julian manages to escape from Liz and the stab wound turns out to be superficial . Following the natural disasters , T. C. breaks off his engagement with Liz after reconciling with his ex @-@ wife 's past and rebukes all of her efforts to seduce her way back into his life . The poisoning storyline comes back into focus during Eve 's trial , in episodes aired in August and September 2005 . On the eve of her trial , Liz offers Eve a deal : she will rescind her accusation and not testify if Eve promises to leave Harmony forever . Eve considers the deal before ultimately refusing it . Near the end of Eve 's trial , Julian agrees to give Rebecca anything she wants in exchange for her testimony that she saw Liz with the vial of poison . Tabitha 's daughter <unk> magically casts the jury into a fake flashback , matching Rebecca 's testimony , and the judge declares a mistrial . 
 Liz 's desperation to destroy Eve , Julian , and Alistair drives her to act more violent and erratic , such as threatening to kill Julian with a letter opener . At the New Year 's Eve party appropriately titled " A Murder is Announced " , Liz stabs Alistair in the neck which puts him in a coma . Before attempting to disconnect Alistair 's life support , Liz confesses to Julian that she shot him in 2002 . She tells Julian that he did not rape her several years ago , that it was actually Alistair who did . Julian stops Liz from killing Alistair by encouraging her to let go of her hatred in order to find love in the future . She agrees to abandon her plans of revenge against Eve and Alistair in order to find a new direction for her life , and leaves Harmony . In his comatose state , Alistair swears revenge against Liz , but this is never seen or referenced again . Chad later finds out Liz is his mother through his birth certificate provided by tabloid editor JT Cornell . JT 's proof also reveals Liz was not Eve 's half @-@ sister like everyone originally believed that she was actually adopted by Eve 's mother , making Chad and Whitney unrelated . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Liz was nominated for Soap Opera Digest Award for Outstanding <unk> in a Drama Series – Daytime in the 2005 Soap Opera Digest Awards , but lost to General Hospital 's Tracy Quartermaine played by Jane Elliot . 
 TV Guide 's soap opera columnist , Daniel R. Coleridge , criticized Liz 's exit as an obvious result of " the significant budget cuts required to renew Passions " that prevented fans from " enjoy [ ing ] the pleasure of watching Liz to digest all of that explosive info and act upon it . " Metacritic noted that " she was let go due to budget cuts . " Media outlets ' questions about the nature of Liz 's exit arose from the slashing of the soap opera 's budget by " a reported $ 4 @-@ to- $ 5 million " to secure its renewal . While Passions representatives clarified the budget cuts will limited to a reduction in the production team , sets , and extras , but media outlets connected the departures of certain actors to the show 's financial restraints . When discussing Marshall 's final appearances with Soap Opera Digest , Tracey Ross said , " When you 're an actress of her caliber and kind to everyone and plan Christmas parties and celebrate everyone 's birthday and know your lines and are the most darling girl that ever breathed , of course you 're going to be fired ! " Rodney Van Johnson expressed disappointment when the show began " taking out the people of color " like Amelia Marshall , and commented that it was an obvious sign that " this thing is going down . " 
 = King of the Ring ( 1993 ) = 
 King of the Ring ( 1993 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . This was the first of ten King of the Ring events that was produced as a pay @-@ per @-@ view . The event resulted from the WWF 's decision to make its annual King of the Ring tournament into a televised event . It took place on June 13 , 1993 , at the Nutter Center in Dayton , Ohio . The card featured ten matches , which resulted from scripted storylines and had results predetermined by the WWF . 
 The central focus of this PPV event was the tournament itself . Wrestlers gained entry into the tournament by participating in qualifying matches on WWF television programs , and the second , third and fourth rounds of the tournament were televised on the King of the Ring PPV broadcast . Bret Hart won the tournament by defeating Razor Ramon , Mr. Perfect , and Bam Bam Bigelow . He was attacked by Jerry Lawler during a coronation ceremony , which led to a feud that lasted more than two years . In addition to the tournament , the event featured Yokozuna defeating Hulk Hogan for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship as well as Shawn Michaels retaining his belt in a match against Crush for the WWF Intercontinental Championship . 
 Reviews of the event have been mainly positive . Several reviewers have called Bret Hart 's matches the highlight of the PPV . The match for the Intercontinental Championship has received positive reviews , but the ending to the WWF World Heavyweight Championship match , which featured Hulk Hogan in his final PPV appearance in the WWF until 2002 , has been criticized . The event was attended by 6 @,@ 500 fans — the lowest attendance of any King of the Ring event . The PPV buyrate , however , was the highest of any King of the Ring event until 1999 . The event has been released on VHS in North America and on VHS and DVD in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 The WWF had held several " King of the Ring " tournaments in previous years , but it did not become a PPV event until 1993 . The 1993 event featured the King of the Ring tournament as well as three other matches . In these matches , wrestlers were portrayed as villains or fan favorites and wrestled in matches that built upon pre @-@ existing feuds and storylines . 
 Seven of the eight entrants in the quarter @-@ final matches wrestled in a qualifying round prior to the PPV broadcast , while Bret Hart was entered without needing to qualify . Lex Luger was the first wrestler to qualify , as he defeated Bob Backlund in a match televised on the May 2 episode of Wrestling Challenge . Six days later , Razor Ramon was added to the tournament after he defeated Tito Santana on WWF Superstars . On May 9 , " Hacksaw " Jim Duggan pinned Papa Shango on Wrestling Challenge to become the fourth entrant . The following night , Bam Bam Bigelow qualified by defeating Typhoon on a live episode of Monday Night Raw . On the May 15 episode of WWF Superstars , Tatanka faced Giant Gonzalez in a qualifying match . Gonzalez choked his opponent and was disqualified by referee Bill Alfonso - whom Gonzalez attacked after the match ; as a result , Tatanka advanced to the next round of the tournament . Mr. Perfect and Doink the Clown wrestled three qualifying matches against each other , before a decisive winner could be found to advance in the tournament . They first faced each other on the May 1 episode of WWF Superstars , but the match was declared a draw when the time limit expired . Their next match took place on the May 16 episode of Wrestling Challenge and again resulted in time @-@ limit draw . On the May 24 episode of Monday Night Raw , a third match between the two was ordered , this time with no time limit , and Perfect pinned Doink to advance to the seventh spot in the quarter @-@ finals . In the final qualifying match , Mr. Hughes defeated Kamala on the May 30 episode of Wrestling Challenge . 
 At WrestleMania IX , Bret Hart dropped the WWF World Heavyweight Championship to Yokozuna . At the conclusion of the match , Mr. Fuji , Yokozuna 's manager , threw salt in Hart 's eyes , enabling Yokozuna to win the match . After the match , Hulk Hogan came to the ring to help Hart . Fuji challenged Hogan to a match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship , which took place immediately . Fuji attempted to throw salt in Hogan 's eyes , but Hogan moved and the salt hit Yokozuna instead . Hogan quickly defeated him to become the new WWF World Heavyweight Champion . Due to a real @-@ life arrangement with WWF owner Vince McMahon , Hogan was supposed to lose the title to Bret Hart , but he changed his mind and refused to lose to Hart . He formed a compromise that allowed him to face Yokozuna in a rematch at King of the Ring 1993 . He did not want to be pinned cleanly , so he insisted on a storyline in which he would lose the belt due to outside interference . As a result of Hart 's controversial loss , Jack Tunney , who played the on @-@ screen role of WWF President , granted Hart entry into the King of the Ring tournament without requiring him to win a qualifying match . 
 Crush faced WWF Intercontinental Champion Shawn Michaels several times in early 1993 but was unable to win the title belt . The pair also faced each other in a qualifying match for the King of the Ring tournament on the May 23 episode of WWF Superstars . The match ended in a double countout , however , and both wrestlers were eliminated from the tournament . It was later announced that they would wrestle each other at King of the Ring 1993 , with Michaels 's championship on the line . 
 The event also featured an eight @-@ man tag team match that pitted the fan favorite team of The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott Steiner ) and The Smoking Gunns ( Billy and Bart Gunn ) against the villain team of Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) and The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) . The Steiners and The Headshrinkers had faced each other at WrestleMania in a match won by the Steiners . The Steiners then moved on to feud with Money Inc . , the WWF Tag Team Champions . The Gunns made their WWF debut in the spring of 1993 and faced The Headshrinkers in a series of matches . The match was not a standard tag team match so the championship was not on the line . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the live PPV broadcast began , a dark match took place between Owen Hart and Papa Shango . Papa Shango pinned Hart to retain the USWA Heavyweight Championship , which was being defended in the WWF as part of a talent exchange program between the WWF and the United States Wrestling Association ( USWA ) . 
 = = = Tournament matches = = = 
 In the first televised match of the event , Bret Hart fought Razor Ramon . Hart got the early advantage , but Ramon used his size advantage to control much of the match . He performed a fallaway slam and a running powerslam but was unable to pin Hart . Hart performed several of his signature moves , including a Russian legsweep and an elbow drop from the second rope . Ramon regained control of the match and attempted to execute a suplex from the top rope . Hart landed on top of Ramon , however , and pinned him to win the match . 
 Mr. Hughes used his strength advantage to control the early stages of the following match against Mr. Perfect . After he missed a leg drop , Perfect used the opportunity to perform a neckbreaker on Hughes . Hughes picked up the urn that he had stolen from The Undertaker and hit Perfect with it . As a result , Hughes was disqualified and Mr. Perfect advanced to the next round . 
 In the next match , " Hacksaw " Jim Duggan faced Bam Bam Bigelow . Neither wrestler was able to gain an advantage until Duggan was thrown into the corner of the ring . He suffered a storyline injury , which allowed Bigelow to place Duggan in a bear hug . Duggan bit Bigelow to escape from the hold . He executed a powerslam and attempted to perform his signature move , a charging clothesline . Bigelow moved out of the way , however , and performed a diving headbutt on Duggan to get the pinfall victory . 
 Tatanka gained the early advantage over Lex Luger in the next match . He performed a crossbody to knock Luger down to the mat . Luger elbowed Tatanka to escape from a hold and then executed a chinlock on Tatanka . Tatanka came back by performing a knife @-@ edge chop on Luger . He attempted the same move from the top rope , but Luger blocked him . Luger performed a clothesline on Tatanka to knock him down , but he was unable to pin him . The time limit expired , and both wrestlers were eliminated from the tournament . As a result , Bigelow received a bye into the final round . 
 The semi @-@ final round of the tournament took place immediately after the first round , and Mr. Perfect gained the early advantage over Bret Hart . Hart reversed the momentum of the match by applying a series of <unk> on Perfect . Perfect then performed a dropkick on Hart and followed it up by pushing him off the edge of the ring into the steel barricade on the arena floor . Perfect then performed another dropkick , but Hart recovered and executed a superplex on Perfect . Hart wore down Perfect 's leg with a figure four leglock and attempted to perform the Sharpshooter , his finishing maneuver . Perfect blocked the move and attempted to perform the <unk> , his finishing move , on Hart . Hart reversed this move , however , and both men were thrown out of the ring . When they returned to the ring , Perfect tried to pin Hart with a small package . Hart reversed the move to get the pinfall victory and advance to the tournament final . 
 = = = Other matches = = = 
 The WWF World Heavyweight Championship match came next , as Hulk Hogan defended his title against Yokozuna . Yokozuna controlled the beginning of the match until he ran at Hogan in the corner but missed an avalanche splash . Hogan tried twice to body slam Yokozuna but could not pick him up . Yokozuna performed a bear hug on Hogan and tried to pin him after executing a belly to belly suplex . Hogan kicked Yokozuna in the face three times and knocked him down to the mat . He performed a leg drop , his signature move , on Yokozuna but was unable to pin him . As Hogan prepared to attempt to body slam Yokozuna , manager Harvey Wippleman , disguised as a planted photographer , jumped up onto the edge of the ring . His camera exploded in Hogan 's face , which allowed Yokozuna to knock Hogan down and perform a leg drop . Yokozuna pinned Hogan to regain the WWF World Heavyweight Championship and performed a Banzai drop on Hogan after the match . 
 In the next match , the team of the Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott Steiner ) and The Smoking Gunns ( Billy and Bart Gunn ) faced the team of Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) and The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) . The match began with the Steiners in control as they took turns attacking DiBiase . Fatu and Bart Gunn entered the match , and Fatu and his teammates wore Bart down while preventing him from tagging in a partner . Billy Gunn fought DiBiase and controlled the match until DiBiase performed the Million Dollar Dream on Billy . DiBiase released the hold and gloated about his performance . This enabled Billy Gunn to surprise DiBiase with a small package pinfall to win the match . After the match , the teams continued to fight until the Steiners and Gunns cleared their opponents from the ring . 
 The following match featured Shawn Michaels defending his WWF Intercontinental Championship against Crush . Crush controlled the early portion of the match by performing several dropkicks on Michaels , which he followed with a military press slam and a tilt @-@ a @-@ whirl backbreaker . Michaels left the ring to recover and returned to attack Crush 's head . Michaels was unable to pin Crush , however , and Crush threw Michaels out of the ring . Two wrestlers dressed as Doink the Clown , with whom Crush had been feuding , came to the ring to distract Crush . Michaels performed a superkick , his signature move , and pinned Crush to retain the championship . 
 = = = Tournament final = = = 
 The final match of the evening was between Bret Hart and Bam Bam Bigelow to determine the winner of the tournament . Bigelow used his strength advantage to control the beginning of the match . He threw Hart out of the ring and focused on injuring Hart 's back . Hart escaped from a bear hug and pushed Bigelow into the steel rail at ringside . Bigelow responded by pushing Hart 's back into the ring post . Luna Vachon , Bigelow 's valet , hit Hart with a chair , which enabled Bigelow to pin Hart and be declared the winner . Referee Earl Hebner came to the ring , however , and explained to Joey Marella , the referee for the match , what had happened . The match was ordered to continue , and Bigelow continued to attack Hart 's back . While Bigelow was outside of the ring , Hart performed a flying crossbody by jumping over the top rope and landing on Bigelow . He attempted to perform the Sharpshooter but was unable . As Bigelow ran at Hart in the corner of the ring , Hart moved out of the way . He climbed onto Bigelow 's shoulders and flipped Bigelow forward to pin him with a victory roll . 
