 Washington served as a Border Ruffian in a company under the command of Captain Henry Clay Pate . On June 2 , 1856 , Washington and his company were attacked at their encampment near Baldwin City , Kansas by anti @-@ slavery Free @-@ Stater forces under the leadership of abolitionist John Brown . Upon seeing that the Free @-@ Staters ' reinforcements were nearby , Captain Pate instructed Washington to send for reinforcements of their own . Washington departed during the early stages of the engagement to send for reinforcements , and sustained slight wounds . Pate surrendered to Brown and his men , and Brown took 25 of the Border Ruffians as prisoners . The attack came to be known as the Battle of Black Jack or the Black Jack Point Affray . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Washington died by drowning after falling overboard from a steamboat on the Missouri River near Rocheport in Boone County , Missouri , on the night of September 21 , 1856 . Washington family descendants claim that Washington was murdered by Kansas <unk> because of his pro @-@ slavery Southern sympathies and possibly in retaliation for his participation in the Bleeding Kansas conflicts as a Border Ruffian . In remarking of Washington 's death , the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch stated that the incident " gave Kansas the name of ' Bloody ' " . 
 Washington was a lifelong bachelor , and he died without issue . His younger brother , John Thornton Augustine Washington , memorialized Washington by naming his fifth child Lawrence Berry Washington ; he was born in San Antonio , Texas , on July 12 , 1869 . 
 = = Theoretical American royal succession = = 
 According to a May 1908 article in The Scrap Book entitled " If Washington Had Been Crowned " and later in a February 1951 article in Life entitled " If Washington Had Become King : A Carpenter or an Engineer Might Now Rule the U.S. , " Lawrence Berry Washington would have succeeded his father , John Thornton Augustine Washington , as " king " of the United States had his great @-@ granduncle , George Washington , accepted the position of monarch rather than that of president . Throughout the course of 1908 and 1909 , the theoretical Washington family royal succession was further publicized in the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch , The Washington Post , The Cincinnati Enquirer , Pittsburgh Daily Post , The Oregon Daily Journal , and The Wichita Daily Eagle . 
 Following the laws of male preference primogeniture succession recognized by the Kingdom of Great Britain at the time of American independence , Lawrence Berry Washington would have been the lawful heir apparent to his father , who was the eldest son of Thornton Augustine Washington , who in turn was the eldest son of Samuel Washington , George Washington 's eldest full brother . A theoretical " King Lawrence I of the United States " would have had a reign spanning from his father 's death in 1841 until his own death in 1856 . Following his death , the American crown would have passed to his next eldest brother , Daniel Bedinger Washington . 
 = Josh Weinstein = 
 Josh Weinstein ( born May 5 , 1966 ) is an American television writer and producer , known for his work on the animated comedy series The Simpsons . Weinstein and Bill Oakley became best friends and writing partners at St. Albans High School ; Weinstein then attended Stanford University and was editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Stanford Chaparral . He worked on several short @-@ term media projects , including writing for the variety show Sunday Best , but was then unemployed for a long period . 
 Weinstein and Oakley eventually penned a spec script for Seinfeld , after which they wrote " Marge Gets a Job " , an episode of The Simpsons . Subsequently , the two were hired to write for the show on a permanent basis in 1992 . After they wrote episodes such as " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , " Bart vs. Australia " and " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , the two were appointed executive producers and showrunners for the seventh and eighth seasons of the show . They attempted to include several emotional episodes focusing on the Simpson family , as well as several high @-@ concept episodes such as " Homer 's Enemy " , " Two Bad Neighbors " and " The Principal and the Pauper " , winning three Primetime Emmy Awards for their work . 
 After they left The Simpsons , Oakley and Weinstein created Mission Hill . The show was plagued by promotional issues and was swiftly canceled . They worked as consulting producers on Futurama , then created The Mullets in 2003 . The two wrote several unsuccessful TV pilots , and were due to serve as showrunners on Sit Down , Shut Up in 2009 . Oakley left the project over a contract dispute , but Weinstein remained until it was canceled . He co @-@ produced and wrote for Futurama again during its Comedy Central revival , winning an Emmy in 2011 . Since 2013 , Weinstein has served as showrunner for the CBBC series Strange Hill High . He has also served as a writer for Season Two of Gravity Falls , co @-@ writing nine of the season 's episodes . Weinstein is married to journalist Lisa Simmons . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Weinstein was born and raised in Washington , D.C. to Rosa and Harris Weinstein . His mother is the director of the <unk> Mobile University which provides education for the elderly , while his father is a lawyer for Covington & Burling . He has a brother , Jacob , and a sister , Teme . Weinstein attended St. Albans High School in Washington , D.C. , where he met and became best friends with Bill Oakley in the eighth grade . The two created the school humor magazine The Alban Antic in 1983 . He later attended Stanford University , where he served as editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Stanford Chaparral . Weinstein is an honorary member of the Harvard Lampoon as he worked on some of Lampoon 's parody publications with Oakley over the summers between course years . 
 = = Career = = 
 Weinstein did not land a job on a major comedy series , as previous Harvard graduates who wrote for the Lampoon had done , despite writing numerous spec scripts for shows such as Saturday Night Live and Late Night with David Letterman ; he moved back home to Washington , D.C. There , he worked as a copywriter for an advertising agency , writing print adverts for such clients as IKEA . In their free time , Oakley and Weinstein wrote for local comedy groups , such as Gross National Product . In 1989 , they moved to New York City after being hired to write for a game show on Ha ! , before writing for a variety show on the network featuring Denis Leary . The two also wrote for the National Lampoon and Spy . An editor of Spy was hired by NBC to run the variety show Sunday Best , and took Oakley and Weinstein to Los Angeles with him in 1991 . When the show was canceled after three episodes , they were unemployed for a lengthy period . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 = = = = As a writer = = = = 
 After changing their agent , they wrote a spec script for Seinfeld , which was well received . Amongst those who liked it were Al Jean and Mike Reiss , showrunners of The Simpsons . There were no openings on the staff at the time , but Oakley and Weinstein were hired to write the episode " Marge Gets a Job " , based on an idea by Conan O 'Brien . The episode aired as part of season four . Their Seinfeld script and The Simpsons episode caught the attention of Diane English , and they were offered a job on a sitcom . Before they accepted this job , they were told that Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky were leaving The Simpsons , and then joined the writing staff on a permanent basis in 1992 , in the third season of that show . They began as story editors . They were initially quiet and felt " intimidated " , being in the same room as " 10 of the greatest minds in comedy " , but eventually started pitching jokes with confidence . They wrote their scripts together , working side @-@ by @-@ side at a computer . Their first episode as staff writers was " Marge in Chains " , an existing idea that they were assigned . The first draft of the script was based on research about women in prison conducted by Oakley and Weinstein , making it " slightly more realistic " than the final version of the episode , in which many realistic elements were replaced . 
 After season four , most of the original staff left the show . Before David Mirkin arrived to take over as showrunner for season five , Oakley , Weinstein , O 'Brien and Dan McGrath were the only writers working on the show and spent a month mapping out most of the season 's episodes . Oakley and Weinstein wrote several episodes for season five , penning the " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " segment of " Treehouse of Horror IV " , " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " , the show 's 100th episode " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " and " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " . For season six they wrote " Sideshow Bob Roberts " , basing much of the episode on the Watergate scandal , in which they had a great interest , as well as " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " and " Bart vs. Australia " . For " Bart vs. Australia " , the writing staff wanted to produce an episode in which the Simpsons family traveled to a foreign country ; they selected Australia because they thought that everyone in Australia had a good sense of humor and " would get the jokes " , with the episode being intentionally inaccurate . The episode proved somewhat controversial ; some Australian fans said the episode was a mockery of their country . Shortly after it had aired , the Simpsons staff received over a hundred letters from Australians who were insulted by the episode . The pair wrote the two @-@ part episode " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , which was initially proposed by series creator Matt Groening . While deciding who the culprit was , Oakley and Weinstein pitched Barney Gumble because he was a character that could go to jail and it could change the dynamic of the show . Mirkin suggested Maggie because he felt it was funnier and wanted the culprit to be a family member . Oakley and Weinstein were initially unsure about having Maggie as the culprit , and it was decided that the episode would end with Maggie shifting her eyes and making it look like it was not a complete accident . 
 = = = = As showrunner = = = = 
 Oakley and Weinstein were appointed executive producers and showrunners of the seventh and eighth seasons . They were chosen partly because they had been with the show since the third season and understood many of its dynamics . The showrunner is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the show 's production . Each episode takes ten months to produce , so the showrunner must " oversee many different episodes in different stages of production all at the same time " , with roles including head writer , making notes on the storyboards and working with the voice actors , animators , editors and composers . Oakley and Weinstein often set two script @-@ rewriting rooms in motion at the same time , delegating leadership in the rooms to writers such as Steve Tompkins and David Cohen . Mirkin , who had suggested that the two take over , remained on the show in an advisory capacity , helping Oakley and Weinstein with technical aspects of the show such as editing and sound mixing . When they took over the series , they wanted many of the episodes to be realistic ones that focused more on the five members of the Simpson family and explored their feelings and emotions towards each other . They wanted to produce Treehouse of Horror episodes , episodes about Sideshow Bob , Itchy & Scratchy and several " format @-@ bending " episodes such as " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , for which Weinstein wrote the scene featuring Comic Book Guy and Milhouse Van Houten . They aimed for " at least two episodes per season that ' pushed the envelope ' , [ and ] expanded the definition of what an episode could be . " This was a style they employed for both seasons they produced . Season eight featured several episodes in which focus was given to secondary characters and in which new issues were explored , such as divorce . Their preferred choice of guest stars were those with unique and interesting voices , and several of their guest stars were " old grizzled men with distinctive voices " such as R. Lee Ermey , Donald Sutherland , Kirk Douglas and Lawrence Tierney . Oakley considered season three to be the single greatest comedic season of television ever produced and so attempted to recreate the feel of that season for the two he ran , focusing on stories with real emotions and situations , as well as some off @-@ the @-@ wall episodes . Season three was their basis for Homer : " We liked Homer the way he was in the second and third seasons . That was what we consciously used as our model . Dimwitted , loving , hyper @-@ enthusiastic , creatively goofy , parody of the American father – drawn with real emotions , though admittedly amplified . This was exemplified in " Mother Simpson " , " Lisa the Iconoclast " , " Diddly @-@ Dum @-@ <unk> " , and a couple others . In some of the less reality @-@ based episodes , i.e. the Beer Baron one – usually Swartzwelder 's , we 'd treat this stricture with a certain amount of latitude . " 
 One of their most notable episodes was " Homer 's Enemy " , an episode designed to " push the envelope conceptually . " The idea for " Homer 's Enemy " was first conceived by Oakley who thought that Homer should have an enemy . This evolved into the concept of a " real world " co @-@ worker who would either love or hate Homer . The writers chose the latter as they thought it would have funnier results . The result was the character of Frank Grimes , a man who has had to work hard all his life with nothing to show for it and is dismayed and embittered by Homer 's success and comfort in spite of his inherent laziness and ignorance . " Homer 's Enemy " explores the comic possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic placed alongside Homer in a work environment . In the episode , Homer is portrayed as an everyman and the embodiment of the American spirit ; however , in some scenes his negative characteristics and silliness are prominently highlighted . By the close of the episode , Grimes , a hard working and persevering " real American hero , " is relegated to the role of antagonist ; the viewer is intended to be pleased that Homer has emerged victorious . Oakley says the episode was " hyper @-@ meta " and focused on " parodying to some degree the Homer we don 't like . That 's one of the things that episode is supposed to illustrate — " Homer gone wrong " . Although , I would argue that in " Homer 's Enemy " he 's not even really even all that excessively stupid or immature , actually . " Weinstein said : " We wanted to do an episode where the thinking was " What if a real life , normal person had to enter Homer 's universe and deal with him ? " I know this episode is controversial and divisive , but I just love it . It really feels like what would happen if a real , somewhat humorless human had to deal with Homer . There was some talk [ on NoHomers.net ] about the ending — we just did that because ( a ) it ’ s really funny and shocking , ( 2 ) we like the lesson of " sometimes , you just can 't win " — the whole Frank Grimes episode is a study in frustration and hence Homer has the last laugh and ( 3 ) we wanted to show that in real life , being Homer Simpson could be really dangerous and life @-@ threatening , as Frank Grimes sadly learned . " When the episode was first broadcast , many fans felt it was too dark , unfunny and that Homer was portrayed as overly bad @-@ mannered . On the DVD commentary , Weinstein considers this episode one of the most controversial of the seasons he ran , as it involves sharp observational humor which many fans " didn 't get . " Weinstein also talks about a " generation gap " — the episode was originally panned by viewers , but has since become a favorite among fans who grew up with the show . 
 Other episodes included " Two Bad Neighbors " , which sees Homer meet former President George H. W. Bush , a reference to the show 's feud with the Bushes in the early 1990s . Weinstein said that the episode is often misunderstood . Many audiences expected a political satire , while the writers made special effort to keep the parody apolitical . Oakley stresses that " it 's not a political attack , it 's a personal attack ! " , and instead of criticizing Bush for his policies , the episode instead pokes fun at his " crotchetiness " . Oakley described the episode as a companion piece to " Homer 's Enemy " , in that a character is juxtaposed alongside Homer and does not get along with him . 
 They considered working on the show to be similar to working in a bubble due to the lack of interference from the Fox network 's executives , as is commonplace on other shows . This allowed them to produce any episodes they wanted , as Weinstein commented : " The great thing about The Simpsons is that we pretty much were able to get away with everything , so there weren 't any episodes we really wanted to do that we couldn 't do . Even the crazy high @-@ concept ones like " Two Bad Neighbors " and " Homer 's Enemy " we managed to put on the air because honestly there were no network execs there to stop us . " Such was the network 's limited input , when an executive suggested the staff introduce a new character to live with the Simpsons so as to " liven up the show " , the staff rejected the idea and instead created the episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " , inserting the one @-@ time character Roy , with no explanation as to who he was , or why he was living with the family , as a reference to the executive 's proposal . The episode , which marked the point at which The Simpsons surpassed The Flintstones for the number of episodes produced for an animated series , was named by the BBC as one of the ten most memorable episodes of the show . They noted " the writers used the opportunity to pay tribute to the art of animation and rail against network interference in their show . " The intrusion of the network censors was limited : the normal procedure is for an episode 's script to be sent to the censor and then faxed back with a list of lines and words that should be substituted , causing limited problems as often the offending lines are removed or changed for comedic purposes after animation . The episode " Homer 's Phobia " drew the censor 's objections . Its script came back with two pages of notes about almost every single line . The censors stated that they did not like the use of the word " gay " , or the discussion of homosexuality at all , and closed with a paragraph which stated that " the topic and substance of this episode are unacceptable for broadcast " . The censor problems ultimately came to nothing when the episode came back from animation in South Korea , the then @-@ Fox president had just been fired and replaced , with the censors being replaced as well . The new censors sent back merely one line : " acceptable for broadcast " . 
 = = = = Leaving the show = = = = 
 Oakley and Weinstein stood down as showrunners after season eight because they " didn 't want to break [ the show ] . " Oakley said : " We always said we 'd never do a joke that we 'd done before . " They felt the showrunner should not stay for more than two seasons . Due to the pressures of having to work on two seasons at once ( writing season eight , whilst doing post @-@ production of season seven ) , Oakley said that at least two episodes from season eight would ideally have been rewritten , had there been sufficient time , and that towards the end , they were " treading water " . As they were working on post @-@ production of season eight , they were credited as consulting producers for season nine , which was in its initial writing stages . Oakley stated that they contributed " somewhere between 0 and .0001 % " of the season , only attending the table readings of the scripts . They produced three episodes held over from season eight , which aired as part of season nine : " The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson " , " The Principal and the Pauper " and " Lisa the Simpson " . " The Principal and the Pauper " was negatively received due the sudden revelation that long @-@ time character Seymour Skinner was actually an imposter . For example , in his book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner describes " The Principal and the Pauper " as the " broadcast that marked [ the ] abrupt plunge " from The Simpsons ' " Golden Age " , which he says began in the middle of the show 's third season . He calls the episode " [ one of ] the weakest episodes in Simpsons history " . As such , they consider it the most controversial episode from their tenure as executive producers . He and Oakley advise viewers to treat " The Principal and the Pauper " as an " experiment " . They surmise that the negative reception was partly due to the fact that it was not immediately apparent to viewers that this was such an episode ( as opposed to , for example , " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " ) . They describe the ending of the episode as an attempt to reset the continuity and allow fans to consider the episode on its own . " Lisa the Simpson " was their final involvement with the show . The duo wanted to end on a good note — Weinstein stated that the episode " was meant to embody the humor , depth , and emotions of The Simpsons , " — and they were pleased with the result . 
 = = = = Awards and critical reaction = = = = 
 Weinstein won three Emmys for his work on The Simpsons , and shared them with the other producers . When Weinstein was the showrunner and executive producer , " Homer 's Phobia " won the Emmy for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or Less ) in 1997 . The previous year , " Treehouse of Horror VI " was submitted for the award . The staff felt the 3D animation sequence " Homer ³ " would have given it the edge . The episode eventually lost to Pinky and the Brain . Oakley later expressed regret about not submitting an episode with a more emotionally driven plot , such as " Mother Simpson " . In 1996 , during season seven , the show received a Peabody Award . Weinstein shared the awards for " Lisa 's Wedding " and " Trash of the Titans " in 1995 and 1998 respectively . Oakley and Weinstein themselves were nominated , along with the show 's composer Alf Clausen , for the Emmy for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and Lyrics for writing " Señor Burns " from " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? ( Part Two ) " . 
 Many of the episodes by Oakley and Weinstein are considered amongst the show 's best . For example , in 2003 , Entertainment Weekly included six episodes they produced ( " Homer 's Phobia " , " A Fish Called Selma " , " The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson " , " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " and " The Itchy and Scratchy and Poochie Show " ) and one episode they wrote ( " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " ) as part of their list of the show 's 25 best episodes . Robert Canning of IGN said the episode " You Only Move Twice " from season eight " may well be the greatest Simpsons episode of all time . In my book , it 's at least tied , " with " Marge vs. the Monorail " . A. O. Scott described their era as " reach [ ing ] a pinnacle of zany self @-@ reference with " 22 Short Films About Springfield " and " Simpsons Spin @-@ off Showcase " . " Weinstein considers the line " Too crazy for Boy 's Town , too much of a boy for Crazy Town " , from the episode " Treehouse of Horror VII " to be his favorite joke contribution to the show . The two are popular amongst the show 's fans , and in the early days of the Internet , Oakley read and participated in fan discussion of the show on newsgroups such as alt.tv.simpsons. In 2005 and 2006 , they participated in two question @-@ and @-@ answer sessions on the fan message board <unk> 
 = = = Mission Hill and other work = = = 
 After Oakley and Weinstein left The Simpsons , they created Mission Hill in 1997 , a show about a hip , lazy , 24 @-@ year @-@ old cartoonist named Andy French , and sold it to The WB for a fall 1999 debut . They pitched the show in 1998 " as an animated series for young adults with a sophisticated , ' Simpsons ' -style sensibility . " They aimed to make the show about realistic issues affecting young adults , which were too mature for The Simpsons . The network was impressed and initially ordered 13 episodes ; they ordered five more once the first was completed . Oakley explained : " The audience we 're going for is one that 's sophisticated , that likes high and low humor , that 's very savvy in animation . [ But ] this show is definitely a case where a lot of people don 't get it . It 's not setup , setup , setup , punch line . It 's observational humor . It 's jokes told in a weird way , in the background or with a bizarre sound effect . " The show was plagued by " public relations " difficulties , which meant it was " tarnished " from the start . A badly edited two @-@ minute promotional video for the show , sent to advertisers in April 1999 for the annual upfronts , was poorly received . Oakley and Weinstein had been informed that the upfronts did not matter . Similarly , because no episodes were finished in time , journalists were not able to see anything of the show at the network 's schedule presentation in July . Subsequently , as Weinstein commented to the Washington Post , " for seven months , the only impression people had of the show was based on a two @-@ minute tape that looked terrible . Six major publications panned it before they even saw it . " The pilot garnered largely negative reviews from publications such as The Deseret News ; and earned a positive write @-@ up in Variety . Furthermore , the show was forced to change from its originally planned title of The <unk> due to its closeness to an MTV show . All of these factors combined to ensure the show received little attention , and the WB ran only a few commercials for it . Weinstein stated : " I don 't know exactly why America doesn 't know about this show . It 's like Teen People came out with its fall preview , and we 're not even in it . " Mission Hill came at a time when the TV schedules were already saturated with animated shows ; some of the response could be chalked up to its genre . 
 The show was put out on a Friday , a night on which the WB had never broadcast before , at 8 : 00 pm , a time Oakley felt was inappropriate , and aired in front of The Wayans Bros. , The Jamie Foxx Show and The Steve Harvey Show , all shows with which Oakley felt it was " incompatible " . The show 's poor reviews and ratings of an average of 1 @.@ 8 million led to its swift cancellation . Oakley concluded that the pair had been " very naive " with regard to producing the show , and that it " would 've been better on cable anyway because it would never have appealed to a broad enough audience due to the subject matter . " The 13 completed episodes were later aired on Cartoon Network 's adult swim block and the show garnered a worldwide cult following . After lobbying from Oakley and Weinstein , the WB eventually released the series on DVD . 
 From 2001 to 2002 , the two served as consulting producers on Futurama . They worked for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half days a week , contributing jokes and helping with stories . They worked most substantially on the episodes " That 's Lobstertainment ! " and " Roswell That Ends Well " . They produced The Mullets for UPN in 2003 . Oakley and Weinstein have written and produced several television pilots . These include a CBS dramedy entitled 22 Birthdays , Business Class , a comedy for NBC about two traveling salesmen , The Funkhousers , an off @-@ the @-@ wall comedy for ABC about a close @-@ knit family which was directed by Frank Oz and The Ruling Class for Fox , about a high school class who all got along , regardless of their social group . They have written two feature film screenplays : The Optimist for New Line Cinema , in which Seann William Scott was slated to star as a man born with no unhappiness gene , and Ruprecht , a Santa Claus @-@ related comedy for Disney . 
 Weinstein was due to serve with Oakley as an executive producer on the Fox animated television series Sit Down , Shut Up in 2009 , which was created by Mitchell Hurwitz . The show , which was based on an Australian program , featured cartoon characters on live @-@ action backgrounds . However , Oakley ended his involvement with the show due to a contract dispute between the staff and Sony Pictures . Sony refused to offer a contract which operated under the complete terms of the Writers Guild of America . Weinstein continued working on the show , before it was canceled after 13 episodes . Weinstein returned to Futurama , following its revival on Comedy Central in 2010 , and served as a writer and co @-@ executive producer on its sixth and seventh seasons . He wrote the episodes " That Darn Katz ! " , " Law and Oracle " , " All the Presidents ' Heads " , " A Farewell to Arms " and " Viva Mars Vegas " . Weinstein shared another Emmy for Outstanding Animated Program for the Futurama episode " The Late Philip J. Fry " in 2011 , being nominated again the following year for " The Tip of the <unk> " . Individually , he received an Annie Award nomination for Writing in a Television Production for the episode " All the Presidents ' Heads " in 2011 , and a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for Outstanding Animation for writing " A Farewell to Arms " in 2013 . 
 In 2013 , Weinstein co @-@ created , produced and wrote the animated comedy @-@ mystery series Strange Hill High for British children 's channel CBBC . For the series , Weinstein imported the role of the showrunner and the writer 's room , used routinely on American television shows like The Simpsons , but uncommon on British television . The show uses the animation technique <unk> , a mix of puppetry and CGI . Weinstein will also team up with Oakley again to co @-@ write and co @-@ executive produce 22 Birthdays , the failed pilot they originally produced for CBS , as a pilot for Bravo . Doug Liman and Dave <unk> will also be co @-@ executive producers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Weinstein married Lisa Simmons , a West Coast editor of Cosmopolitan , in 1995 . They have two children , Molly and Simon . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Sunday Best ( 1991 ) – writer 
 The Simpsons ( 1992 – 1998 ) – writer , producer , story editor , supervising producer , consulting producer , executive producer , showrunner ( all episodes with Bill Oakley ) 
 " Marge Gets a Job " 
 " Marge in Chains " 
 " Treehouse of Horror IV " ( " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " segment ) 
 " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " 
 " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " 
 " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " 
 " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " 
 " Sideshow Bob Roberts " 
 " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " 
 " Bart vs. Australia " 
 " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " ( parts 1 & 2 ) 
 " 22 Short Films About Springfield " ( Milhouse and Comic Book Guy scenes ) 
 Mission Hill ( 1999 – 2002 ) – creator , writer , executive producer , voice of Toby <unk> 
 " Pilot " ( with Oakley ) 
 Futurama ( 2001 – 2002 , <unk> ) – consulting producer , executive producer , writer 
 " That Darn Katz ! " 
 " Law and Oracle " 
 " All the Presidents ' Heads " 
 " A Farewell to Arms " 
 " Viva Mars Vegas " 
 " T. : The Terrestrial " 
 The Funkhousers ( 2001 ) – writer 
 Ruling Class ( 2002 ) – writer 
 The Mullets ( 2003 ) – creator , executive producer 
 22 Birthdays ( 2005 ) – writer 
 Business Class ( 2007 ) – creator , writer 
 Sit Down , Shut Up ( 2009 ) – executive producer , writer 
 " High School Musical Musical " 
 Strange Hill High ( 2013 ) – creator , showrunner , writer 
 The <unk> ( 2013 ) – writer 
 Gravity Falls ( 2014 ) - writer 
 Danger Mouse ( 2016 ) - writer 
 = Tacks Neuer = 
 John Stein " Tacks " Neuer ( June 8 , 1877 – January 14 , 1966 ) was a Major League Baseball pitcher who played for the New York Highlanders in 1907 . In seven career games , he had a 4 – 2 record , with a 2 @.@ 17 earned run average ( ERA ) and 22 strikeouts . 
 A veteran of the Spanish – American War , Neuer worked as a brakeman before taking up baseball professionally . He played for various minor league teams in 1905 and 1907 before making his debut for the New York Highlanders . With New York , he threw three shutouts in seven games , and was praised by manager Clark Griffith for his pitching ability during that stretch . However , his control deteriorated after that season , and over the next three years he played for various minor league teams . He retired after 1910 and became an umpire . He then worked at Bendix Aviation until his retirement in 1942 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Neuer was born in Fremont , Ohio , and was one of eight children born to Henry Neuer and Jennie <unk> . He and his family moved to Sunbury , Pennsylvania , when he was a child . In 1898 , Neuer enlisted in the Spanish – American War as a private , and was discharged the following year . After his discharge , he worked as a brakeman for a local railroad for the next few years . In late 1904 , the Detroit Tigers intended to sign Neuer to a contract . However , nothing came of it and he never played a game with the organization . 
 Six months after the rumored signing , Neuer was signed by the Wilkes @-@ Barre Barons of the New York State League . He made his professional debut on July 27 , 1905 , and threw a one @-@ hit shutout against the Syracuse Stars . He pitched for Wilkes @-@ Barre the rest of the season . In his final game for them , he pitched both games of a doubleheader , winning one and losing the other . In 1906 , Wilkes @-@ Barre planned to re @-@ sign Neuer , praising his hitting ability to the point that they were considering trying him out as an outfielder or first baseman . They were unable to agree on a contract , and as a result he sat out the 1906 season . 
 In December 1906 , the Philadelphia Phillies signed Neuer to a contract . He played with the Phillies through the spring , but was cut before the season started and sent to the Providence Grays of the Eastern League . He debuted for them in May , and after being on the team for five days was sent back to Philadelphia . The Phillies stated that they released him outright to Providence ; the issue led to a dispute on which club should pay him for that month , which was settled the following year . After the dispute , Neuer was assigned to the Savannah Indians of the South Atlantic League . He played with the team for three months , and threw multiple shutouts for the team . As a result , New York Highlanders manager Clark Griffith purchased Neuer on August 23 " for immediate delivery . " 
 = = New York Highlanders = = 
 Neuer made his debut for New York on August 28 , 1907 , against the Boston Americans . He pitched a shutout and earned a 1 – 0 victory in which he showed " excellent speed and control . " A week later , he again faced the Americans , and while his pitching was not as " unsolvable " as in his debut , the Highlanders again won , 10 – 5 . His next appearance was against the Washington Senators on September 9 . In that game , he allowed two hits and threw his second shutout of the season . A rematch against Washington five days later resulted in a 10 – 2 loss that " came as a great shock " due to his victory earlier in the month . 
 On September 21 , Neuer made an appearance as a relief pitcher in a game against the Detroit Tigers , taking over for Bill Hogg due to the latter 's ineffectiveness . His next appearance as a starter was against the St. Louis Browns . He was unable to control the baseball due to rain ; the 5 – 2 game was called after six innings as a result , giving Neuer his second loss . His final appearance of the season was on October 3 against the Chicago White Sox . In that game , he allowed three hits in an 8 – 0 victory for his third and final shutout of the season . Neuer spent the offseason working as a hotel clerk , and after signing a contract for the 1908 season , he joined the team for spring training . 
 Griffith continued to have faith in Neuer during the exhibition season , and said he could potentially be " one of the greatest ever in the twirling line . " Instead of working on his control during that time , which was considered the main thing he needed to work on , he practiced throwing the knuckleball and spitball . Griffith encouraged him to do so , believing that developing these trick pitches would allow him to become a great pitcher , and as a result , he practiced these pitches until , according to one sportswriter , " he was so wild he couldn ’ t hit the grand stand . " In one exhibition game against Atlanta , he appeared in relief of Jack Chesbro , and allowed four runs in less than an inning due to his lack of control . His pitching continued to get worse , and by the end of spring training he was sent to the Newark Indians of the Eastern League . He never returned to the major leagues , becoming the only person to throw a shutout in both his major league debut and his final game . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In Neuer 's debut for Newark , he allowed nine walks , eight runs , and made two errors ; his pitching was noted as the direct cause of the 8 – 5 loss . By the beginning of June , Newark returned him to New York ; in his short time in the Eastern League , Neuer set the record for most strikeouts in a game and most walks in a game , with 13 each . Griffith sent him back to Newark almost immediately , and they in turn sent him to the Toronto Maple Leafs , who in turn released him . He then signed with the Little Rock Travelers of the Southern Association , and pitched for them before being released on August 1 . 
 The Chicago Cubs decided to give Neuer a tryout , hoping to add some pitching depth to help them , as they were in a pennant race . He did not make the roster , and was sent to the Johnstown Johnnies of the Tri @-@ State League , where he finished the 1908 season . In 1909 , he was increasingly referred to with the nickname of " Tacks " , a nickname reserved for " restless , uneasy , erratic athletes " , due to both his lack of control and his general inconsistency on the mound . That season , he played with many teams , both professional and semi @-@ pro , and was frequently released to his inability to control the ball . The following year , he attempted one more comeback with the Binghamton <unk> of the New York State League . Manager Jack Warner found his control to be so bad that he refused to use him in a regular season game , and Neuer 's release from Binghamton marked the end of his professional career . 
 After retiring from baseball , Neuer became an umpire for local semi @-@ pro and amateur baseball games , and worked for Bendix Aviation Corporation in Greene , New York until retiring in 1942 . As an umpire , he was known for his entertaining style , adding extra emphasis on his calls to amuse game attendees . Neuer was married twice and had one son , Eugene , from his first marriage . He moved to Northumberland , Pennsylvania in the 1940s , where he lived until his death in 1966 . 
 = Ducie Island = 
 Ducie Island / <unk> / is an uninhabited atoll in the Pitcairn Islands . It lies 535 kilometres ( 332 mi ) east of Pitcairn Island , and 354 kilometres ( 220 mi ) east of Henderson Island , and has a total area of 1 @.@ 5 square miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km2 ) , which includes the lagoon . It is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long , measured northeast to southwest , and about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide . The island is composed of four islets : Acadia , Pandora , Westward and Edwards . 
 Despite its sparse vegetation , the atoll is known as the breeding ground of a number of bird species . More than 90 % of the world population of Murphy 's petrel nests on Ducie , while pairs of red @-@ tailed tropicbirds and fairy terns make around 1 % of the world population for each species . 
 Ducie was first discovered in 1606 by Pedro Fernandes de Queirós , who named it Luna Puesta , and rediscovered by Edward Edwards , captain of HMS Pandora , who was sent in 1790 to capture the mutineers of HMS Bounty . He named the island Ducie in honour of Francis Reynolds @-@ Moreton , 3rd Baron Ducie . In 1867 it was claimed by the United States under the Guano Islands Act , but the United Kingdom annexed it on 19 December 1902 as part of the Pitcairn Islands . Due to its inaccessibility and the distance from Pitcairn Island , Ducie is rarely visited today . 
 = = History = = 
 The island was discovered by a Spanish expedition led by Portuguese sailor Pedro Fernandes de Queirós on 26 January 1606 , during an expedition that began in Callao , Peru . Supported by Pope Clement VIII and Philip III of Spain , Queirós was given the command of the San Pedro , San Pablo and <unk> . The fleet was nicknamed Los Tres Reyes <unk> ( " The Three Wise Men " ) . The objective of the expedition was to take soldiers , friars and provisions to establish a colony in the Santa Cruz Islands . 
 Ducie Island was the first of eighteen discoveries on the trip . Queirós named the island Luna Puesta ( roughly , " moon that has set " ) . On the same day , he also sighted two more islands , one that he named San Juan Bautista ( " St John the Baptist " ) , and the other La Encarnación ( " the Incarnation " ) . It is unclear which one was Henderson island and which one Pitcairn . The confusion was later compounded when a chart produced by Admiral José de Espinosa marked Ducie as La Encarnación , rather than as Luna Puesta . 
 The island was rediscovered and named Ducie Island on 16 March 1791 by Captain Edward Edwards , of HMS Pandora , who had been despatched from Britain in 1790 to arrest the Bounty mutineers . Edwards named it in honour of Francis Reynolds @-@ Moreton , 3rd Baron Ducie , under whom he had served earlier in his career . HMS Pandora turned northwards from Ducie and , because of this change of course , Edwards did not sight the other islands of the group . If HMS Pandora had maintained its course , it would eventually have reached Pitcairn Island and found the Bounty mutineers . 
 The crew of the whaleship Essex , which a whale had attacked and sunk in November 1820 , mistakenly believed that they had reached Ducie after a month at sea in two whaleboats . In fact they had reached Henderson Island . Captain Thomas Raine of Surrey , who was searching for the survivors of Essex , in 1820 made the first recorded landing on Ducie . Frederick William Beechey , who arrived in HMS Blossom during November 1825 , wrote the first comprehensive description of the island . Beechey 's expedition did not land in the atoll , but members of the crew sailed around it in small boats . Based on Beechey 's survey , the first Admiralty chart of the island was published in 1826 . For nearly a hundred years it was the only available map of the island . 
 On 5 June 1881 the mail ship Acadia ran aground on the island while returning from San Francisco , Peru after unloading its cargo . On the way to Queenstown or Falmouth for new orders , Master Stephen George calculated a route passing 15 to 20 miles ( 24 to 32 km ) to the east of Ducie . George left the first mate in command at 6 am . Half an hour later , the first mate saw a white line , which he disregarded on the assumption that it was phosphorescence in the water . Later , realising that it was land , he manoeuvred to avoid running aground , but failed . The look @-@ out excused himself by saying that he thought that the white land was a cloud . The crew made several unsuccessful attempts to re @-@ float the ship , after which the master sailed one of the ship 's boats to Pitcairn Island . He was assisted there by the local inhabitants and returned aboard the Edward O 'Brien , an American boat , to rescue the rest of the crew . The incident was later investigated in a court in Liverpool , where the ultimate cause of the wreck was left undetermined , though possible causes included a calculation error by the master or an unknown current that carried the ship to the island . The court declared the master not guilty of any wrongdoing . A stone marker with a memorial inscription is located at the landing point on Acadia Islet . It was unveiled to commemorate the recovery of the anchor in 1990 . The wreck lies offshore from the memorial stone in about 10 metres of water . 
 In 1969 the atoll was proposed as an " Island for Science " , and was later recommended as a Ramsar Site . Major expeditions that came to the island to record its biota include the Whitney South Seas Expedition in 1922 , the National Geographic Society @-@ Oceanic Institute Expedition to Southeast Oceania of 1970 – 71 and the Smithsonian expedition of 1975 . More recent expeditions include a new expedition by the Smithsonian in 1987 , one by Raleigh International in the same year , the Sir Peter Scott Commemorative Expedition of 1990 – 91 and the Pitcairn Scientific Expedition of 1991 – 92 . In 2012 , National Geographic Explorer @-@ in @-@ Residence Enric Sala produced Sharks Of Lost Island including Ducie and all the Pitcairn Islands . Because of its inaccessibility , Ducie is rarely approached , but cruise ships make one or two landings per year . In addition , unrecorded visits are known to be made by freighters and tankers that dump residues on the island or in the nearby waters . 
 = = = Sovereignty = = = 
 Although Captain Edward Edwards discovered the atoll in 1791 , Ducie was not considered a British possession . In 1867 Ducie was claimed by the United States under the Guano Islands Act , which established that an uninhabited territory with guano deposits could be claimed as a US possession , so long as it was unclaimed by any other country . Despite claims on several other territories , based on various documents such as the Guano Islands Act , neither the United States nor the United Kingdom recognised the sovereignty claimed by each other . Neither of the two considered that the mere discovery of an island was sufficient to claim sovereignty over it , and often a formal act of possession was considered the proper procedure to claim rights over a territory . Ultimately , the United States did not assert its sovereignty over most of its claimed territories . 
 Under the 1893 Pacific Order in Council , Pitcairn Island was governed by the High Commissioner of the British Western Pacific Territories in Fiji . On 19 December 1902 , commissioned by R. T. Simmons , the British Consul in Tahiti , Captain G. F. Jones and a group of <unk> visited the nearby islands and annexed them to the United Kingdom . In 1903 Ducie was annexed by the same procedure and placed under the authority of the Western Pacific High Commissioner . R. T. Simmons stated in a dispatch to the Foreign Office that James Russell McCoy had assured him that the islands had always been considered as dependencies of Pitcairn , and that he and other <unk> had frequently visited them in the past . This claim is contested by Donald McLoughlin on grounds of the distance between Pitcairn Island and Ducie Island and the lack of a suitable boat to navigate the distance between the two , casting doubt on whether they had ever visited Ducie . 
 On 4 August 1937 Captain J. W. Rivers @-@ Carnac , commander of HMS Leander , reaffirmed British sovereignty over Ducie by hoisting the Union Flag and placing boards proclaiming the island to be the property of King George VI . Ducie was one of several islands thought valuable for potential seaplane bases , though they did not materialise . In 1953 the Pacific Order in Council ceased to have effect and the British Governor of Fiji was appointed Governor of the Pitcairn Islands , which became a separate British colony . A new constitution for the Pitcairn Islands was enacted on 10 February 2010 , establishing that Ducie and the rest of the islands are ruled by a governor designated by the British monarch , presently ( As of 23 July 2016 ) Elizabeth II . The governor has a duty to enforce the provisions of the constitution . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Ducie lies 290 miles ( 470 km ) east of Pitcairn Island and is claimed by some to be the southernmost atoll in the world at 24 degrees south latitude . However , Middleton Reef is at 29 degrees south latitude , so the assertion on behalf of Ducie Island is doubtful . Ducie Island 's land area is 170 acres ( 1 km2 ) and its maximum elevation , occurring on the Westward islet , is 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . 
 Ducie is located 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) west of the edge of the Easter Plate . It was formed approximately 8 million years ago , after Oeno Island was formed by a hotspot that later caused a magma leak generated in the Oeno <unk> . The leak spread over fracture zone <unk> , which was formed by the third movement of the Pacific Plate . The atoll is part of the Oeno @-@ Henderson @-@ Ducie @-@ Crough seamount , speculated to be part of the southern Tuamotus . 
 The atoll consists of four islets : Acadia , Pandora , Westward and Edwards . The last three of these can be accessed on foot from Acadia at low tide . The islets were named by Harald Rehder and John Randall , who visited the atoll during an expedition by the Smithsonian Institution in 1975 . 
 Acadia Islet , along the atoll 's north and east rim , is larger than the other three islets combined , measuring 140 acres ( 57 ha ) . Very long and thin , the islet is largely forested and is composed of ridges of coral rubble . It is named after the Acadia , a ship that was wrecked on Ducie in 1881 . 
 Pandora Islet , in the south , is the second largest . It is composed of sand and coral rubble that borders the lagoon . It is named after HMS Pandora . 
 Edwards Islet lies immediately to the east of Pandora Islet and has the same characteristics . It is named after Edward Edwards , captain of HMS Pandora . 
 Westward Islet , west of Pandora Islet , is the smallest . It appears sandy from a distance , but the soil is composed of coral rubble and dead shells . Its highest point rises 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) above average sea level . It is named after the Westward , the ship that carried the members of the National Geographic Society and the Oceanic Institute during their 1970 – 71 expedition . 
 The atoll has a central lagoon , accessible by boat only by way of a channel 100 yards ( 91 m ) wide located in the southwest , between Pandora and Westward Islets . It has a maximum depth of 52 feet ( 16 m ) and its bottom consists of sand and coral . <unk> in the lagoon are common , caused by tunnels that drain the water from the lagoon into the ocean . 
 = = Flora = = 
 The vegetation in the atoll is sparse , because of the lack of fresh water . Only two species of vascular plant are currently known to grow there – one of the smallest such floras on any island . Acadia , Pandora and Edwards Islets are forested with Heliotropium foertherianum , but Westward Islet is not . <unk> <unk> has also been recorded on Ducie ; specimens were found during an expedition in 1991 . 
 During the expedition of Hugh Cuming in 1827 and the 1922 Whitney South Sea Expedition , <unk> grass was found on Acadia Islet . However , it disappeared when storm waves deforested the island some time before the Smithsonian expedition of 1975 . Thus H. foertherianum now dominates the vegetation of the islets . Additionally , there are a number of species of coralline algae , including <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Caulerpa racemosa . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 The atoll is populated by several species of birds , fish and reptiles . In the lagoon , sparse living coral still can be found ; the dominant species is <unk> <unk> ( family <unk> ) . Most of the coral in the lagoon is dead , presumed to have been killed by influxes of cold water . 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Though no terrestrial birds are found on the atoll , Ducie Island is well known for the seabirds that breed there . Birds that have been recorded nesting on the atoll include the red @-@ billed <unk> , red @-@ tailed <unk> , fairy tern , great frigatebird , bristle @-@ thighed curlew , masked booby and red @-@ footed booby . A number of gull species , including the sooty tern , blue noddy , brown noddy , lesser noddy and white tern , have been recorded , as have several members of the Procellariidae family : Kermadec petrel , Trindade petrel , Murphy 's petrel and Christmas shearwater . 
 The island is particularly important for Murphy 's petrel , as more than 90 % of its world population breeds on Ducie . Around 3000 pairs of Christmas shearwaters , about 5 % of the world 's total population , can be found on the island too . Meanwhile , the red @-@ tailed tropicbirds and fairy terns that breed on Ducie are around 1 % of the world population of each species . Phoenix petrels , which previously inhabited the atoll , apparently disappeared between the Whitney expedition in 1922 and the 1991 – 92 Pitcairn Scientific Expedition . The island has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area ( IBA ) principally for its colonies of Murphy 's , herald and Kermadec petrels , and Christmas shearwaters . 
 = = = Fish = = = 
 In the lagoon there are around 138 fish species , which also inhabit southeastern Oceania , the Western Pacific and the Indian Ocean . The lagoon is noted for its poisonous fishes and dangerous sharks . The yellow @-@ edged <unk> , the blacktip grouper , and the greasy grouper are known to cause ciguatera poisoning . The lagoon is also inhabited by Galápagos sharks and the whitetip reef shark . The Galápagos shark is dangerous to humans , while the whitetips are seldom aggressive unless provoked . Five species are found exclusively around the Pitcairn Islands : <unk> <unk> ( a species of <unk> ) , the spiny <unk> , the Henderson <unk> ( a species of <unk> blenny ) , an unnamed species of <unk> ( a genus of combtooth blenny ) and an unnamed species of Ammodytes ( a genus of sand lance ) . 
 = = = Terrestrial vertebrates = = = 
 Lizards that inhabit the island include the white @-@ bellied skink ( <unk> <unk> ) , photographed by E. H. Quayle during an expedition in 1922 , and a lizard reported in the journal of an expedition in 1935 by James Chapin . The species of the latter was uncertain , but it was thought to be a gecko , possibly either an oceanic gecko ( <unk> oceanica ) or a mourning gecko ( <unk> lugubris ) . The 1991 – 92 Pitcairn Scientific Expedition found specimens of both the mourning gecko and the white @-@ bellied skink . The only mammal known to inhabit Ducie is the Polynesian rat ; there has been a successful programme to eradicate these , to aid the conservation of bird species threatened by the increasing rat population . Green sea turtles feed on Ducie , but have not been seen to breed there . 
 = William Sterling Parsons = 
 Rear Admiral William Sterling " Deak " Parsons ( 26 November 1901 – 5 December 1953 ) was an American naval officer who worked as an ordnance expert on the Manhattan Project during World War II . He is best known for being the weaponeer on the Enola Gay , the aircraft which dropped the Little Boy atomic bomb on Hiroshima , Japan in 1945 . To avoid the possibility of a nuclear explosion if the aircraft crashed and burned on takeoff , he decided to arm the bomb in flight . While the aircraft was en route to Hiroshima , Parsons climbed into the cramped and dark bomb bay , and inserted the powder charge and detonator . He was awarded the Silver Star for his part in the mission . 
 A 1922 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , Parsons served on a variety of warships beginning with the battleship USS Idaho . He was trained in ordnance and studied ballistics under L.T.E. Thompson at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia . In July 1933 , Parsons became liaison officer between the Bureau of Ordnance and the Naval Research Laboratory . He became interested in radar and was one of the first to recognize its potential to locate ships and aircraft , and perhaps even track shells in flight . In September 1940 , Parsons and Merle Tuve of the National Defense Research Committee began work on the development of the proximity fuze , a radar @-@ triggered fuze that would explode a shell in the proximity of the target . The fuze , eventually known as the VT ( variable time ) fuze , Mark 32 , went into production in 1942 . Parsons was on hand to watch the cruiser USS Helena shoot down the first enemy aircraft with a VT fuze in the Solomon Islands in January 1943 . 
 In June 1943 , Parsons joined the Manhattan Project as Associate Director at the research laboratory at Los Alamos , New Mexico under J. Robert Oppenheimer . Parsons became responsible for the ordnance aspects of the project , including the design and testing of the non @-@ nuclear components of nuclear weapons . In a reorganization in 1944 , he lost responsibility for the implosion @-@ type fission weapon , but retained that for the design and development of the gun @-@ type fission weapon , which eventually became Little Boy . He was also responsible for the delivery program , codenamed Project Alberta . He watched the Trinity nuclear test from a B @-@ 29 . 
 After the war , Parsons was promoted to the rank of rear admiral without ever having commanded a ship . He participated in Operation Crossroads , the nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll in 1946 , and later the Operation Sandstone tests at Enewetak Atoll in 1948 . In 1947 , he became deputy commander of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project . He died of a heart attack on 5 December 1953 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Sterling Parsons was born in Chicago , Illinois , on 26 November 1901 , the oldest of three children of a lawyer , Harry Robert Parsons , and his wife Clara , née Doolittle . In 1909 , the family moved to Fort Sumner , New Mexico , where William learned to speak fluent Spanish . He attended the local schools in Fort Sumner and was home schooled by his mother for a time . He commenced at Santa Rosa High School , where his mother taught English and Spanish , rapidly advancing through three years in just one . In 1917 he attended Fort Sumner High School , from which he graduated in 1918 . 
 In 1917 Parsons travelled to Roswell , New Mexico to take the United States Naval Academy exam for one of the appointments by Senator <unk> A. Jones . He was only an alternate , but passed the exam while more favored candidates did not , and received the appointment . As he was only 16 , two years younger than most candidates , he was shorter and lighter than the physical standards called for , but managed to convince the examining board to admit him anyway . He entered the Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland in 1918 , and eventually graduated 48th out of 539 in the class of 1922 , in which Hyman G. Rickover graduated 107th . At the time , it was customary for midshipmen to acquire nicknames , and Parsons was called " Deacon " , a play on his last name . This became shortened to " Deak " . 
 = = Ordnance = = 
 On graduating in June 1922 , Parsons was commissioned as an ensign and posted to the battleship USS Idaho , where he was placed in charge of one of the 14 @-@ inch gun turrets . In May 1927 , Parsons , now a lieutenant ( junior grade ) , returned to Annapolis , where he commenced a course in ordnance at the Naval Postgraduate School . He became friends with Lieutenant Jack Crenshaw , a fellow officer attending the same training course . Jack asked Parsons to be best man at his wedding to Betty Cluverius , the daughter of the Commandant of the Norfolk Navy Yard , Rear Admiral Wat Tyler Cluverius , Jr . , at the Norfolk Navy Chapel . As best man , Parsons was paired with Betty 's maid of honor , her sister Martha . Parsons and Martha got along well , and in November 1929 , they too were married at the Norfolk Navy Chapel . This time , Jack and Betty were best man and maid of honor . 
 The ordnance course was normally followed by a relevant field posting , so Parsons was sent to the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia to further study ballistics under L.T.E. Thompson . Following the usual pattern of alternating duty afloat and ashore , Parsons was posted to the battleship USS Texas in June 1930 , with the rank of lieutenant . In November , the Commander in Chief United States Fleet , Admiral Jehu V. Chase , hoisted his flag on the Texas , bringing Cluverius with him as his chief of staff . This was awkward for Parsons , but Cluverius understood , being himself the son @-@ in @-@ law of an admiral , in his case , Admiral William T. Sampson . 
 In July 1933 , Parsons became liaison officer between the Bureau of Ordnance and the Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) in Washington , DC . At the NRL he was briefed by the head of its Radio Division , A. Hoyt Taylor , who told him about experiments that had been carried out into what the Navy would later name radar . Parsons immediately recognized the potential of the new invention to locate ships and aircraft , and perhaps even track shells in flight . For this , he realized that he was going to need high frequency microwaves . He discovered that no one had attempted this . The scientists had not considered all the applications of the technology , and the Navy bureaus had not grasped their potential . He was able to persuade the scientists to establish a group to investigate microwave radar , but without official sanction it had low priority . Parsons submitted a memorandum on the subject to the Bureau of Ordnance ( BuOrd ) requesting $ 5 @,@ 000 per annum for research . To his dismay , the BuOrd and Bureau of Engineering , which was responsible for the NRL , turned his proposal down . 
 Some thought that Parsons was ruining his career with his advocacy of radar , but he acquired one powerful backer . The Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics ( BuAer ) , Rear Admiral Ernest J. King , supported the use of radar as a means of determining aircraft altitude . When the Bureau of Engineering protested that such a device would necessarily be too large to carry on a plane , King told them that it would still be worthwhile , even if the only aircraft in the Navy big enough to carry it was the airship USS Macon . 
 Parson 's marriage produced three daughters . The first , Hannah , was born in 1932 ; the second , Margaret ( Peggy ) , followed in 1934 . Hannah died of polio in April 1935 . Parsons returned to sea in June 1936 as the executive officer of the destroyer USS Aylwin . He was promoted to lieutenant commander in May 1937 . His third daughter , Clara ( Clare ) , was born the same year . On that occasion , Parsons left Martha with the newborn and three @-@ year @-@ old Peggy to care for and reported for duty the next day , believing that his first responsibility was to his ship . His skipper , Commander Earl E. Stone , did not agree , and sent him home . In March 1938 , Rear Admiral William R. Sexton had Parsons assigned to his flagship , the cruiser USS Detroit , as gunnery officer . Parson 's task was to improve the gunnery scores of his command , and in this he succeeded . 
 = = Proximity fuze = = 
 Parsons was posted back to Dahlgren in September 1939 as experimental officer . The atmosphere had changed considerably . In June 1940 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved the creation of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , under the direction of Vannevar Bush . Richard C. Tolman , dean of the graduate school at Caltech , was given responsibility for the NDRC 's Armor and Ordnance Division . Tolman met with Parsons and Thompson in July 1940 , and discussed their needs . Within the Navy , too , there was a change of attitude , with Captain William H. P. ( Spike ) Blandy as the head of BuOrd 's Research Desk . Blandy welcomed the assistance of NDRC scientists in improving and developing weapons . 
 In September 1940 , Parsons and Merle Tuve of NDRC began work on a new concept . Shooting down an aircraft with an anti @-@ aircraft gun was a difficult proposition . As a shell had to hit a speeding aircraft at an uncertain altitude , the only hope seemed to be to fill the sky with ammunition . A direct hit was not actually required ; an aircraft might be destroyed or critically damaged by a shell detonating nearby . With this in mind , anti @-@ aircraft gunners used time fuzes to increase the possibility of damage . The question then arose as to whether radar could be used to create an explosion in the proximity of an aircraft . Tuve 's first suggestion was to have an aircraft drop a radar @-@ controlled bomb on a bomber formation . Parsons saw that while this was technically feasible , it was tactically problematic . 
 The ideal solution was a proximity fuze inside an artillery shell , but there were numerous technical difficulties with this . The radar set had to be made small enough to fit inside a shell , and its glass vacuum tubes had to first withstand the 20 @,@ 000 g force of being fired from a gun , and then 500 rotations per second in flight . A special Section T of NDRC was created , chaired by Tuve , with Parsons as special assistant to Bush and liaison between NDRC and BuOrd . 
 On 29 January 1942 , Parsons reported to Blandy that a batch of fifty proximity fuzes from the pilot production plant had been test fired , and 26 of them had exploded correctly . Blandy therefore ordered full @-@ scale production to begin . In April 1942 , Bush , now the Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , placed the project directly under OSRD . The research effort remained under Tuve but moved to the Johns Hopkins University 's Applied Physics Laboratory ( APL ) , where Parsons was BuOrd 's representative . In August 1942 , a live firing test was conducted with the newly commissioned cruiser USS Cleveland . Three pilotless drones were shot down in succession . 
 Parsons had the new proximity fuzes , now known as VT ( variable time ) fuze , Mark 32 , flown to the Mare Island Navy Yard , where they were mated with 5 " / 38 caliber gun rounds . Some 5 @,@ 000 of them were then shipped to the South Pacific . Parsons flew there himself , where he met with Admiral William F. Halsey at his headquarters in Noumea . He arranged for Parsons to take VT fuzes out with him on the cruiser USS Helena . On 6 January 1943 , Helena was part of a cruiser force that bombarded Munda in the Solomon Islands . On the return trip , the cruisers were attacked by four Aichi D3A ( Val ) dive bombers . Helena fired at one with a VT fuze . It exploded close to the aircraft , which crashed into the sea . 
 To preserve the secret of the weapon , its use was initially permitted only over water , where a dud round could not fall into enemy hands . In late 1943 , the Army obtained permission for it to be used over land . It proved particularly effective against the V @-@ 1 flying bomb over England , and later Antwerp in 1944 . The use of a version fired from howitzers against ground targets was authorized in response to the German Ardennes Offensive in December 1944 , with deadly effect . By the end of 1944 , VT fuzes were coming off the production lines at the rate of 40 @,@ 000 per day . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 = = = Project Y = = = 
 Parsons returned to Dahlgren in March 1943 . Around this time , a research laboratory was established at Los Alamos , New Mexico under the direction of J. Robert Oppenheimer as Project Y , which was part of the Manhattan Project , the top @-@ secret effort to develop an atomic bomb . The creation of a practical weapon would necessarily require an expert in ordnance , and Oppenheimer tentatively pencilled in Tolman for the role , but getting him released from OSRD was another matter . Until then , Oppenheimer had to do the job himself . In May 1943 , the Manhattan Project 's director , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , took up the matter with the Military Policy Committee , the high @-@ level committee that oversaw the Manhattan Project . It consisted of Vannevar Bush as its chairman , Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer who represented the Army , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell as the Navy 's representative . 
 Groves told them that he was looking for someone with " a sound understanding of both practical and theoretical ordnance – high explosives , guns and fusing – a wide acquaintance and an excellent reputation among military ordnance people and an ability to gain their support ; a reasonably broad background in scientific development ; and an ability to attract and hold the respect of scientists . " He said that a military officer would be his ideal , as the job might involve planning and coordinating the use of the bomb , but added that he knew of no Army officer who fit the bill . Bush then suggested Parsons , a nomination supported by Purnell . The next morning , Parsons received a phone call from Purnell , ordering him to report to Admiral King , who was now the Commander in Chief , US Fleet ( Cominch ) . In a terse ten @-@ minute meeting , King briefed Parsons on the Project , which he said had his full backing . That afternoon , Parsons met with Groves , who quickly sized him up as the right man for the job . 
 Parsons was relieved of his duties at Dahlgren and officially assigned to Admiral King 's Cominch staff on 1 June 1943 , with a promotion to the rank of captain . On 15 June 1943 he arrived at Los Alamos as Associate Director . Parsons would be Oppenheimer 's second in command . Parsons and his family moved into one of the houses on " Bathtub Row " that had formerly belonged to the headmaster and staff of the Los Alamos Ranch School . Bathtub row , so @-@ called because the houses were the only ones at Los Alamos with bathtubs , was the most prestigious address at Los Alamos . Parsons became Oppenheimer 's next @-@ door neighbor , and in fact his house was slightly larger , because Parsons had two children and Oppenheimer , at this point , had only one . With two school @-@ age children , Parsons took a keen interest in the construction of the Central School at Los Alamos , and became president of the school board . Instead of the temporary two @-@ story structure that Groves had envisioned in the interest of economy and not misusing the project 's high priorities for labor and materials , Parsons had a well @-@ built , modern , single @-@ story school constructed . On seeing the result , Groves said : " I 'll hold you personally responsible for this , Parsons . " 
 Oppenheimer had already recruited key people for Parson 's Ordnance Division . Edwin McMillan was a physicist who headed the Proving Ground Group . His first task was to establish the ordnance test area . Later he became Parsons ' deputy for the gun @-@ type fission weapon . Charles Critchfield , a mathematical physicist with ordnance experience at the Army 's Aberdeen Proving Ground , was in charge of the Target , Projectile and Source Group . Kenneth Bainbridge arrived in August to take charge of the Instrumentation Group . Parsons recruited Robert Brode from the proximity fuze project to become head of the Fuze Development Group . Joseph Hirschfelder was brought in as an expert on internal ballistics , and headed the Interior Ballistics Group . From the beginning , Parsons wanted Norman Ramsey as the head of the delivery group . Edward L. Bowles , the scientific adviser to the Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , was reluctant to part with Ramsey , but gave way under pressure from Groves , Tolman and Bush . Perhaps the most controversial group head would be Seth Neddermeyer , the head of the Implosion Experimentation Group ; for the time being , Parson accorded a relatively low priority to this work . He also recruited Hazel Greenbacker as his secretary . 
 Groves , among others , felt that Parsons had a tendency to fill positions with Naval officers . There was some aspect of service parochialism , and Parsons believed that involvement in the Manhattan Project would be important for the future of the Navy , but it was also due to the difficulty of getting highly skilled people from any source in wartime . Parsons simply found it easiest to get them through Navy channels . Lieutenant Commander Norris Bradbury said that he did not wish to join Project Y , but was soon on his way to Los Alamos anyway . Parsons recruited Commander Francis Birch , who replaced McMillan at Anchor Ranch . Commander Frederick Ashworth was a Naval ordnance officer and aviator who was senior aviator at Dahlgren when he was brought in to work on the delivery side . By the end of the war , there were 41 Naval officers at Los Alamos . 
 Over the next few months , Parsons ' division designed the gun @-@ type plutonium weapon , codenamed Thin Man . It was assumed that a uranium @-@ 235 weapon would be similar in nature . Hirschfelder 's group considered various designs , and evaluated different propellants . The ordnance test area , which became known as " Anchor Ranch " , was established on a nearby ranch , where Parsons conducted test firings with a 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft gun . Work on implosion lagged by comparison , but this was not initially a major concern , because it was expected that the gun @-@ type would work with both uranium and plutonium . However , Oppenheimer , Groves and Parsons lobbied Purnell and Tolman to get John von Neumann to have a look at the problem . Von Neumann suggested the use of shaped charges to initiate implosion . 
 Oppenheimer considered that there was a " reciprocal lack of confidence " between Parsons and Neddermeyer , and in October 1943 he brought in George Kistiakowsky , who began a new attack on the implosion design . Kistiakowsky clashed with both Parsons and Neddermeyer , but felt that " my disagreements with Deak Parsons were very minor compared to my disagreements with Neddermeyer . " The implosion design acquired a new urgency in April 1944 , when studies of reactor @-@ produced plutonium confirmed that it could not be used in a gun @-@ type weapon . An accelerated effort was called for to design and build the implosion @-@ type weapon , codenamed Fat Man . Two new groups were created at Los Alamos : X ( for explosives ) Division headed by Kistiakowsky , and G ( for gadget ) Division under Robert Bacher . Parsons was placed in charge of O ( for ordnance ) Division , with responsibility for both the gun @-@ type design and delivery . 
 The uranium gun @-@ type weapon known as Little Boy did prove to be simpler than Thin Man . The gun velocity needed to be only 1 @,@ 000 feet per second ( 300 m / s ) , a third that of Thin Man . A corresponding reduction in the barrel length reduced the bomb 's overall length to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . In turn , this made it much easier to handle , and permitted a conventional bomb shape , resulting in a more predictable flight . The main concerns with Little Boy were its safety and reliability . 
 = = = Project Alberta = = = 
 The delivery program , codenamed Project Alberta , got underway under Ramsey 's direction in October 1943 . Starting in November , the Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field , Ohio , began Silverplate , the codename for the modification of B @-@ 29s to carry the bombs . Parsons arranged for a test program at Dahlgren using scale models of Thin Man and Fat Man . Test drops were carried out at Muroc Army Air Field , California and the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California using full @-@ size replicas of Fat Man known as pumpkin bombs . The ungainly and non @-@ aerodynamic shape of Fat Man proved to be the main difficulty , but many other problems were encountered and overcome . Parsons , wrote Oppenheimer , " has been almost alone in this project to appreciate the actual military and engineering problems which we would encounter . He has been almost alone in insisting on facing these problems at a date early enough so that we might arrive at their solution . " 
 In July 1944 , Parsons joined Jack Crenshaw , who was investigating the Port Chicago disaster . The two men surveyed the disaster area , where 1 @,@ 500 tons of munitions had exploded and 320 men had lost their lives . A year later , Parsons watched the Trinity nuclear test from a circling B @-@ 29 . Afterwards , Parsons flew to Tinian , where the B @-@ 29s of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets ' 509th Composite Group were preparing to deliver the weapons . En route , he stopped off in San Diego to visit his eighteen @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ brother Bob , a marine who had been badly wounded in the Battle of Iwo Jima . Parsons also met with Captain Charles B. McVay III , the skipper of the cruiser USS Indianapolis , in Purnell 's office at the Embarcadero in San Francisco and gave McVay his orders : 
 You will sail at high speed to Tinian where your cargo will be taken off by others . You will not be told what the cargo is , but it is to be guarded even after the life of your vessel . If she goes down , save the cargo at all costs , in a lifeboat if necessary . And every day you save on your voyage will cut the length of the war by just that much . 
 Parsons was in charge of scientists and technicians from Project Alberta on Tinian , who were nominally organized as the 1st Technical Service Detachment . Their role was the handling and maintenance of the nuclear weapons . Parsons was joined by Purnell , who represented the Military Liaison Committee , and Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , Groves ' Deputy for Operations . They became , informally , the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " , with decision @-@ making authority over the nuclear mission . Before Farrell left for Tinian , Groves had told him : " Don 't let Parsons get killed . We need him ! " 
 In the space of a week on Tinian , four B @-@ 29s crashed and burned on the runway . Parsons became very concerned . If a B @-@ 29 crashed with a Little Boy , the fire could cook off the explosive and detonate the weapon , with catastrophic consequences . He raised the possibility of arming the bomb in flight with Farrell , who agreed that it might be a good idea . Farrell asked Parsons if he knew how to perform this task . " No sir , I don 't " , Parsons conceded , " but I 've got all afternoon to learn . " The night before the mission , Parsons repeatedly practiced inserting the powder charge and detonator in the bomb in the poor visibility and cramped conditions of the bomb bay . 
 Parsons participated in the bombing of Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 , flying on the Enola Gay as weaponeer and Senior Military Technical Observer . Shortly after takeoff , he clambered into the bomb bay and carefully carried out the procedure that he had rehearsed the night before . It was Parsons and not Tibbetts , the pilot , who was in charge of the mission . He approved the choice of Hiroshima as the target , and gave the final approval for the bomb to be released . For his part in the mission , Parsons was awarded the Silver Star , and was promoted to the wartime rank of commodore on 10 August 1945 . For his work on the Manhattan Project , he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = Postwar career = = 
 In November 1945 , King created a new position of Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Special Weapons , which was given to Vice Admiral Blandy . Parsons became Blandy 's assistant . In turn , Parsons had two assistants of his own , Ashworth and Horacio Rivero , Jr . He also brought Greenbacker from Los Alamos to help set up the new office . Parsons was a strong supporter of research into the use of nuclear power for warship propulsion , but disagreed with Rear Admiral Harold G. Bowen , Sr. , the head of the Office of Research and Inventions , who wanted the Navy to initiate its own nuclear project . Parsons felt that the Navy should work with the Manhattan Project , and arranged for Naval officers to be assigned to Oak Ridge . The most senior of them was his former classmate Rickover , who became assistant director there . They immersed themselves in the study of nuclear energy , laying the foundations for a nuclear @-@ powered navy . 
 On 11 January 1946 , Blandy was appointed to command Joint Task Force One ( JTF @-@ 1 ) , a special force created to conduct a series of nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll , which he named Operation Crossroads , to determine the effect of nuclear weapons on warships . Parsons , who was promoted to the rank of rear admiral on 8 January 1946 , became Blandy 's Deputy Commander for Technical Direction and Commander Task Group 1 @.@ 1 . Parsons worked hard to make a success of the operation , which he described as " the largest laboratory experiment in history " . In addition to the 95 target ships , there was a support fleet of more than 150 ships , 156 aircraft , and over 42 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 Parsons witnessed the first explosion , Able , from the deck of the task force flagship , the command ship USS Mount McKinley . An airburst like the Hiroshima blast , it was unimpressive , and even Parsons thought that it must have been smaller than the Hiroshima bomb . It failed to sink the target ship , the battleship USS Nevada , mainly because it missed it by a considerable distance . This made it difficult to assess the amount of damage caused , which was the objective of the exercise . Blandy then announced that the next test , Baker , would occur in just three weeks . This meant that Parsons had to carry out the evaluation of Able simultaneously with the preparations for Baker . This time he assisted with the final preparations on USS LSM @-@ 60 before heading back to seaplane tender USS Cumberland Sound for the test . The underwater Baker explosion was no larger than Able , but the dome and water column made it look far more spectacular . The real problem was the radioactive fallout , as Colonel Stafford L. Warren , the Manhattan Project 's medical advisor , had predicted . The target ships proved impossible to decontaminate and , lacking targets , the test series had to be called off . For his part in Operation Crossroads , Parsons was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 The Special Weapons Office was abolished in November 1946 , and the Manhattan Project followed suit at the end of the year . A civilian agency , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , was created by the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project , including development , production and control of nuclear weapons . The law provided for a Military Liaison Committee ( MLC ) to advise the AEC on military matters , and Parsons became a member . A joint Army @-@ Navy organization , the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) , was created to handle the military aspects of nuclear weapons . Groves was appointed to command the AFSWP , with Parsons and Air Force Major General Roscoe C. Wilson as his deputies . In this capacity , Parsons pressed for the development of improved nuclear weapons . During the Operation Sandstone series of nuclear weapon tests at Enewetak Atoll in 1948 , Parsons once again served as deputy commander . Parsons hoped that his next posting would be to sea , but he was instead sent to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group in 1949 . He finally returned to sea duty in 1951 , this time as Commander , Cruiser Division 6 , despite having never commanded a ship . Parsons and his cruisers conducted a tour of the Mediterranean showing the flag . He then became Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance in March 1952 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Parsons remained in contact with Oppenheimer . The two men and their wives visited each other from time to time , and the Parsons family especially enjoyed visiting its former neighbors at their new home at Olden Manor , a 17th @-@ century estate with a cook and groundskeeper , surrounded by 265 acres ( 107 ha ) of woodlands at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey . Parsons was disturbed by the rise of McCarthyism in the early 1950s . In 1953 he wrote a letter to Oppenheimer expressing his hope that " the anti @-@ intellectualism of recent months may have passed its peak " . On 4 December that year , Parsons heard of President Dwight Eisenhower 's " blank wall " directive , blocking Oppenheimer from access to classified material . Parsons became visibly upset , and that night began experiencing severe chest pains . The next morning , he went to Bethesda Naval Hospital , where he died while the doctors were still examining him . He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery alongside his daughter Hannah . He was survived by his father , brother , half @-@ brother and sister , as well as his wife Martha and daughters Peggy and Clare . 
 The Rear Admiral William S. Parsons Award for Scientific and Technical Progress was established by the Navy in his memory . It is awarded " to a Navy or Marine Corps officer , enlisted person , or civilian who has made an outstanding contribution in any field of science that has furthered the development and progress of the Navy or Marine Corps . " The Forrest Sherman @-@ class destroyer USS Parsons was named in his honor . Her keel was laid down by Ingalls Shipbuilding of Pascagoula , Mississippi on 17 June 1957 and was launched by his widow Martha on 17 August 1958 . When it was rechristened as a guided missile destroyer ( DDG @-@ 33 ) in 1967 , Clare , now a Naval officer herself , represented her family . Parsons was decommissioned on 19 November 1982 , stricken from the Navy list on 1 December 1984 , and disposed of as a target on 25 April 1989 . The Deak Parsons Center , headquarters of Afloat Training Group , Atlantic , in Norfolk , Virginia , was also named for him . Parsons ' portrait is among a series of paintings related to Operation Crossroads . His papers are in the Naval Historical Center in Washington , DC . 
 = New Jersey Route 62 = 
 Route 62 is a 0 @.@ 47 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 76 km ) long state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It begins at the centerline of U.S. Route 46 along Union Boulevard ( Passaic County Route 646 ) in the community of Totowa and continues northward to the merge of the Interstate 80 westbound off @-@ ramp at Exit 55B , where Route 62 ends . The route continues as Passaic County Route 646 in both directions , heading northbound to Paterson and southbound to Little Falls . 
 Route 62 was originally an alignment of Route S6 , which was designated in 1929 . The route went from the <unk> in Essex County to the West Paterson corporate line . Route S6 was decommissioned in the 1953 renumbering and replaced with Route 62 , which went from Totowa to West Paterson until being truncated to its current length . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 62 begins at an intersection with the off @-@ ramp from U.S. Route 46 eastbound and Passaic County Route 646 in the community of Totowa . The highway heads northward along Union Boulevard , intersecting with the on @-@ ramp from Route 62 to U.S. Route 46 eastbound . The route heads across a long bridge over the eastbound and westbound divided lanes of Route 46 . After crossing the bridge , Route 62 heads into a small industrial part of Totowa , where it intersects with the off @-@ ramp from the westbound lanes of Route 46 . The highway continues northward , interchanging with Furler Street and Lackawanna Avenue on a partial cloverleaf . Route 62 continues along Union Boulevard , becoming a divided highway . The highway crosses over Interstate 80 at interchange <unk> , where the route 's designation terminates . The route continues into Paterson as County Route 646 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 62 was designated in 1929 originally an alignment of State Highway Route S6 , a spur off of Route 6 ( currently U.S. Route 46 ) . Route S6 went to the south from current Route 62 from Paterson into Totowa and along County Route 646 towards Little Falls , terminating at Bloomfield Avenue ( old Route 6 ) near the Pine Brook Bridge in the <unk> . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering on January 1 , 1953 , Route S6 was truncated to U.S. Route 46 and renumbered to Route 62 . Route 62 remained a route heading northbound from Totowa to Paterson following Union Boulevard , Totowa Avenue and McBride Avenue , ending at the Paterson @-@ West Paterson ( now Woodland Park ) town line for several years , constituting a length of 2 @.@ 32 miles ( 3 @.@ 73 km ) . Route 62 remained along this alignment before being truncated by 1980 . Route 62 was left out of the Straight Line Diagrams produced by the New Jersey Department of Transportation in 2000 , but was returned the next year . Route 62 received improvements of the interchange with US 46 in 2006 at a cost of $ 22 @.@ 748 million ( 2006 USD ) to repair the bridge over Route 46 , ramp reconfigurations and new resurfaced roadway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Totowa , Passaic County . 
 = Capon Chapel = 
 Capon Chapel ( pronunciation : / <unk> / KAY @-@ <unk> ) , also historically known as Capon Baptist Chapel and Capon Chapel Church , is a mid @-@ 19th century United Methodist church located near to the town of Capon Bridge , West Virginia in the United States . Capon Chapel is one of the oldest existing log churches in Hampshire County , along with Mount Bethel Church and Old Pine Church . 
 A Baptist congregation was gathering at the site of the present @-@ day church by at least 1756 . Primitive Baptist minister John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) is credited for establishing a place of worship at this site ; he is interred in the church 's cemetery . The land on which Capon Chapel was built originally belonged to William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , a member of the Virginia House of Delegates ; later , it was transferred to the Pugh family . The first documented mention of a church at the Capon Chapel site was in March 1852 , when Joseph Pugh allocated the land to three trustees for the construction of a church and cemetery . 
 During the early years of Capon Chapel , no Protestant denomination was the exclusive owner or occupant , and the church was probably utilized as a " union church " for worship by any Christian denomination . Capon Chapel was used as a place of worship by Baptists until the late 19th or early 20th century . In the 1890s , Capon Chapel was added as a place of worship on the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit of the Southern Methodist Episcopal Church . As of 2015 , Capon Chapel remains a Methodist church , now a part of the United Methodist Church , holding Methodist services twice a month . 
 Capon Chapel 's cemetery is surrounded by a wrought iron fence made by Stewart Iron Works , and contains the remains of John Monroe , William C. Nixon , West Virginia House of Delegates member Captain David Pugh ( 1806 – 1899 ) , American Civil War veterans from the Union and the Confederacy , and free and enslaved African Americans . Capon Chapel , along with its cemetery , was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 12 , 2012 , in recognition of its representation of the rural religious architecture of the Potomac Highlands region , and for its service as an important rural church in Hampshire County . 
 = = Geography and setting = = 
 Capon Chapel and its associated cemetery are located to the east Christian Church Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 13 ) , approximately 2 @.@ 01 miles ( 3 @.@ 23 km ) south of Capon Bridge and 1 @.@ 14 miles ( 1 @.@ 83 km ) northeast of the unincorporated community of Bubbling Spring in southeastern Hampshire County . Capon Chapel is 894 feet ( 272 m ) east of the Cacapon River , from which the church derives its name . The church and cemetery are situated atop a grassy hill on a 0 @.@ 96 acres ( 0 @.@ 39 ha ) plot of land , at an elevation of 869 feet ( 265 m ) , in a rural agricultural area within the Cacapon River Valley . Dillons Mountain , a forested and narrow anticlinal mountain ridge , rises to the west of the Cacapon River Valley , while the forested , rolling foothills of the anticlinal Timber Ridge rise to the valley 's east . 
 The church and cemetery are accessible through a gravel driveway to the north ; to the west , a cluster of tall oak trees blocks access to the road . Capon Chapel is landscaped with boxwoods on its north and south sides , a single holly on its east side , and <unk> along its west side . The Capon Chapel property consists of the church structure ( c . 1852 ) , and its associated cemetery , which is enclosed partly by the historic wrought iron fence and partly by a chain link fence . A flagpole stands at the center of the cemetery 's eastern perimeter . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The land on which Capon Chapel is located was originally part of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a land grant that Charles II of England awarded to seven of his supporters in 1649 and renewed by an official patent in 1688 . One of these seven supporters , Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper , acquired the entire area in 1681 ; his grandson , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , inherited it in 1719 . Under Lord Fairfax 's ownership , the Cacapon River Valley was predominantly inhabited by English @-@ speaking settlers as early as the late 1730s . The majority of these settlers had come from Pennsylvania and New Jersey , many of whom were either Quakers or former Quakers who were attracted to the Baptist and Methodist denominations . 
 = = = Baptist affiliation = = = 
 The Baptists established the oldest extant churches in Hampshire County . After the end of the American Revolutionary War , Baptist preachers continued their attempt to gain a foothold in what is now the Eastern Panhandle region . During the Baptists ' early growth in Hampshire County , the best known Baptist ministers were John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) and Benjamin Stone ( 1743 – 1842 ) . Monroe preached at the North River , Crooked Run , and Patterson 's Creek churches during the early 19th century . According to historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher in History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) , Monroe was a minister for Primitive Baptists , who were adherent to a strict interpretation of the Calvinist theology of the <unk> Association . Monroe probably established a Baptist church on the site of the present @-@ day Capon Chapel , where he is buried in the church 's cemetery . However , other sources claim that a Baptist congregation began gathering at the Capon Chapel site as early as 1756 . 
 Increased settlement and the arrival of other religious denominations in the Cacapon River Valley were further facilitated following the completion of the Northwestern Turnpike in the 1830s , which connected Parkersburg with Winchester . A small community began to develop near the turnpike 's Cacapon River crossing , 2 @.@ 01 miles ( 3 @.@ 23 km ) north of Capon Chapel 's present @-@ day location . The community later became the town of Capon Bridge . 
 The land on which Capon Chapel was built belonged to William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , a member of the Virginia House of Delegates . Nixon 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Elizabeth Caudy ( 1773 – 1816 ) , was the first person to be buried in the church 's cemetery . While various sources estimate that Capon Chapel was built around the 1750s , there is no physical or documentary evidence to support this claim . The first documented mention of a church at the Capon Chapel site was in March 1852 , when Joseph Pugh allocated 88 and one @-@ half poles , or approximately 0 @.@ 55 acres ( 2 @,@ 200 m2 ) , to three trustees : David Pugh , another David Pugh , and Robert Pugh . The Pugh family , which was of Welsh descent , were early settlers in the Cacapon River Valley , and were one of the families that came from Wales through Pennsylvania in the late 17th century . The grant 's deed told the trustees to conceive " a Graveyard and for a house for the Public Worship of Almighty God for the use of all orthodox Christians " , and specified that the land was only to be used for religious worship and " for no other purpose " . The deed further stipulated that inheritors of the land had to be Pugh 's descendants . 
 During the church 's early years , no Protestant denomination was the exclusive owner or occupant of Capon Chapel , which indicates that the church was probably utilized as a " union church " for worship by any Christian denomination . Since no single denomination oversaw the church during this early period , few records of its early activities and construction exist . Later records suggest that Capon Chapel was used as a place of worship by Baptists until the late 19th or early 20th century . While it remains unclear why or how the church became associated with the Baptists , its use by the denomination is possibly associated with the Second Great Awakening , a Protestant revival movement during the early @-@ to @-@ mid 19th century that gained momentum throughout the United States . According to the December 1904 issue of The Baptist Home Mission Monthly , the Baptist Little Cacapon Church contributed one dollar to the general fund of Capon Chapel , demonstrating that the Baptist community still continued to operate from or associate with the church in 1904 . 
 = = = Methodist affiliation = = = 
 In addition to the Baptist faith , Methodists started coming to the Cacapon River Valley during the latter half of the 18th century . Methodist Episcopal Church circuit rider Francis Asbury traveled through the Capon Bridge area in 1781 . In 1890 , the Southern Methodist Episcopal Church established its presence in the Capon Bridge area under the leadership of G. O. Homan . According to Maxwell and Swisher , the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit consisted of the following places in 1897 : Capon Bridge , North River Mills , Green Mound , Augusta , Sedan , Park 's Hollow , Sandy Ridge , and Capon Chapel . Capon Chapel was not commonly used as a Baptist place of worship by the early 20th century , and developed into a permanent stop along the Capon Bridge Methodist circuit , which later grew to include Central Church at Loom and Bethel Church at Neals Run . In 1976 , the circuit 's pastor was Thomas Malcolm . 
 Capon Chapel remains a Methodist church , now a part of the United Methodist Church . As of 2015 , Capon Chapel 's congregation numbers five . The church 's Methodist circuit pastor is M. Christopher Duckworth ; and it offers services four Sundays a month . A small group of committed congregants maintain the historic church and cemetery grounds . Brenda Hiett is the church 's caretaker , as of 2015 . Throughout its existence , Capon Chapel has been known by various names , including " Capon Baptist Chapel " and " Capon Chapel Church " . 
 = = = Preservation = = = 
 According to the church 's caretaker , Brenda Hiett , the church 's roof and siding were installed around 1900 . A wrought iron fence , made by Stewart Iron Works in Cincinnati , Ohio , was installed around the church 's cemetery . Electrical conduits were added to the interior of the church when it was electrified around 1930 , and further electrical updates were made in 2011 . The church 's perimeter foundation of concrete blocks replaced the original stone piers in the early 1970s , and its wide , heart pine plank floors were sanded and re @-@ lacquered . Around 1990 , the Stewart Iron Works fence and gate were restored by White ’ s Ornamental Ironworks . 
 In 2008 , following surveys of historic properties throughout the county , the Hampshire County Historic Landmarks Commission and the Hampshire County Commission embarked upon an initiative to place structures and districts on the National Register of Historic Places . The county received funding for the surveys from the State Historic Preservation Office of the West Virginia Division of Culture and History . Capon Chapel was one of the first of eight historic properties to be considered for placement on the register . The other seven properties were Fort Kuykendall , Hickory Grove , Hook Tavern , North River Mills Historic District , Old Pine Church , Springfield Brick House , and Valley View . According to the Hampshire County Commission 's compliance officer , Charles Baker , places of worship were not typically selected for inclusion in the register ; however , Capon Chapel and Old Pine Church were exceptions , because both " started out as meeting houses " . Capon Chapel is among the earliest existing log churches in Hampshire County , along with Mount Bethel Church and Old Pine Church . Capon Chapel was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 12 , 2012 , in recognition of its representation of the rural religious architecture of the Potomac Highlands region , and for its service as an important rural church in Hampshire County . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Capon Chapel is a single @-@ story , rectangular , front gable log building , covered with white @-@ painted wooden clapboard siding , and topped with a green standing seam metal roof , along with metal snow guards . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The church 's main façade is located on its east side , facing toward Timber Ridge , and away from the Cacapon River and Christian Church Road . The east side consists of a front gable façade of white @-@ painted clapboard siding . The church has one entryway , which is a centrally @-@ located , four @-@ paneled wooden door , topped by wooden dentil molding and a rectangular , four @-@ light transom window . The transom is the only window on the church 's east side . Unpainted wooden railings are on each side of the entryway . The clapboard siding on the church 's east side is horizontal , and varies between 5 and 7 inches ( 13 and 18 cm ) in width . The overhanging eave of the church 's roof is accentuated by a single wooden drop pendant at the top of the gable . The modern electricity meter is located to the right of the main entrance . The non @-@ loadbearing concrete block perimeter wall on this side is concealed by a stone veneer . 
 The west elevation is covered with white @-@ painted clapboarding and is undecorated , with the exception of an off @-@ center concrete block chimney and a single drop pendant similar to the one located at the top of the gable . The concrete block perimeter foundation is visible on the south side of the church , as is the metal embankment doors that allow access to the church 's basement . 
 The church 's north and south sides consist of two symmetrically placed six @-@ over @-@ six double @-@ hung sash wooden windows , along with operable green @-@ painted louvered wooden window shutters . The clapboard sidings vary between 3 and 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 and 15 @.@ 2 cm ) in width . At the base of the church 's north side , concrete blocks are visible under the foundation . On the church 's south side , a small strip of the roof 's eave confirms the original location of the chimney . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior of the church consists of a large , open floor plan , with wooden pews lined perpendicular to the north and south sides , thus creating a central aisle . The altar is a small wooden pulpit , which serves as a lectern that is accessible by a small wooden step ; the altar is accented by a large wooden backdrop of casing with dentil molding . Each of the church 's interior walls is covered with pine wainscot panelling and wallpaper , and topped with wooden crown molding . Wooden swag moldings accentuate the four symmetrically @-@ placed six @-@ over @-@ six double @-@ hung sash wooden windows , the doorway 's wooden casing , and the transom window . The wooden pews are simple , with cushions added for comfortable seating . The original ceiling is obscured by a dropped ceiling , which also conceals the electrical conduits for the church 's brass chandeliers . Prior to the church 's electrification , kerosene lanterns were used for light , and the lanterns remain in the church for decorative purposes . The church 's floor consists of the original heart pine planks . Concrete blocks and cut stone border the building 's perimeter to prevent animals from entering the church 's crawl space . Within the crawl space , log carrier beams support the building , on which the bark remains extant . 
 = = Cemetery = = 
 The cemetery is less than an acre in size and is located to the immediate east of the church , surrounded by a wrought iron fence manufactured by Stewart Iron Works . As of 2012 , the cemetery contains approximately 270 interments , including John Monroe ( 1750 – 1824 ) , Virginia House of Delegates member William C. Nixon ( 1789 – 1869 ) , West Virginia House of Delegates member Captain David Pugh ( 1806 – 1899 ) , American Civil War veterans from the Union and the Confederacy , and free and enslaved African Americans . Gertrude Ward ( 1896 – 1988 ) , a local historian and orchardist , is also interred in the cemetery . Captain David Pugh was an elected representative Hampshire County , who voted to secede from the Union in 1861 . 
 Older gravestones in the cemetery are generally cut from limestone , and the gravestones placed after 1900 are predominantly made of polished granite . Most of the gravestones have weathered significantly . The gravestones are generally rounded or rectangular in shape , and are placed on small stone foundations . The gravestones of prominent local leaders are more ornate in character , including that of Captain David Pugh and his family , who are buried under a large obelisk that lists the names of his three wives and their respective children . Nixon 's gravestone is deteriorating due to advanced weathering ; it is made of limestone and contains a carving of an open book . Following the purchase of a rectangular land tract around 1990 , the cemetery was expanded on the east side . This section of the cemetery is excluded from the church 's historically @-@ recognized boundaries , as it was not associated with the church during the period of its greatest significance . 
 The cemetery perimeter is lined on three sides by a cast wrought iron fence , accessible by a gate 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) in width at its western entryway . The wrought iron fence is 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in height , and has approximately 1 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) diameter tubular fence posts , which are supported by three horizontal metal rails . The fence posts are capped with white @-@ painted stylized arrows , with a ball at the tip . A shield with the emblem reading , " The Stewart Iron Works , Cincinnati , Ohio " , is emblazoned on the fence 's gate . The cemetery 's eastern extension is surrounded by chain @-@ link fencing . 
 = Sideshow Bob = 
 Dr. Robert Underdunk Terwilliger ( Ph.D. ) , better known as Sideshow Bob , is a recurring character in the animated television series The Simpsons . He is voiced by Kelsey Grammer and first appeared briefly in the episode " The Telltale Head " . Bob is a self @-@ proclaimed genius who is a graduate of Yale University , a member of the Republican Party , and a champion of high culture . He began his career as a sidekick on Krusty the Clown 's television show , but after enduring constant abuse , Bob attempted to frame his employer for armed robbery in " Krusty Gets Busted " . The plan was foiled by Bart Simpson , and Sideshow Bob was sent to prison . 
 Bob made his second major appearance in season three 's " Black Widower " ; the writers echoed the premise of the Coyote chasing the Road Runner by having Bob unexpectedly insert himself into Bart 's life and attempt to kill him . In each appearance thereafter , Bob has assumed the role on The Simpsons of an evil genius . Episodes in which he is a central character typically involve Sideshow Bob being released from prison and executing an elaborate revenge plan , usually foiled by Bart and Lisa . His plans often involve murder and destruction , usually targeted at Bart or , less often , Krusty , though these plans often involve targeting the entire Simpson family . In 2015 , however , during the " Treehouse of Horror " episode , " Wanted : Dead , Then Alive " , Bob finally gets his wish of killing Bart , which he comments he spent 24 years trying to kill a ten @-@ year @-@ old child ; however , he becomes bored with Bart dead , so he brings him back to life so that he can repeatedly kill Bart over and over again . 
 Sideshow Bob shares some personality traits of Grammer 's character Frasier Crane from the sitcoms Cheers and Frasier , and has been described as " Frasier pickled in arsenic " . Several parallels have been explicitly drawn in The Simpsons between Bob and Frasier Crane – Bob 's brother Cecil and his father were played by David Hyde Pierce and John Mahoney respectively , echoing the roles they played in Frasier . Grammer , who based Bob 's voice on that of actor Ellis Rabb , has been praised for his portrayals of the character . In 2006 , he won an Emmy for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his work in the episode " The Italian Bob " . 
 As of 2016 , Bob has had speaking appearances in 19 episodes and been featured in 13 ; the most recent of the latter , " Gal of Constant Sorrow " , aired during the 27th season . In addition to his recurring role in the series , Sideshow Bob has made several appearances in other Simpsons media . He appears in the Simpsons Comics , cameos in the 2007 video game The Simpsons Game , and stars as the main antagonist in The Simpsons Ride at Universal Studios ' theme parks . Sideshow Bob is also known for his singing voice ; several of Grammer 's performances have been included in The Simpsons musical compilations . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = On The Simpsons = = = 
 The character of Sideshow Bob began his career as the non @-@ speaking sidekick on Krusty the Clown 's television show . The episode " Brother from Another Series " ( season eight , 1997 ) reveals that Bob only received the job after his younger brother Cecil failed an audition , because Krusty considered Bob to be a perfect comic foil . After repeated instances of abuse , including being shot from a cannon and hit constantly with pies , the Yale @-@ educated Bob became angry at Krusty and resentful of the clown 's success . In " Krusty Gets Busted " ( season one , 1990 ) Bob disguised himself as Krusty and framed him for armed robbery of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . After Krusty is arrested , Bob takes control of the show , introducing children to elements of high culture . However , Bob 's reign is short @-@ lived ; Bart Simpson exposes the plan , Krusty is released , and Bob is sent to jail . 
 In " Black Widower " ( season three , 1992 ) , Bob 's first major appearance after framing Krusty , he is released from prison and marries Bart 's aunt Selma Bouvier . As part of a scheme to inherit money she has invested in the stock market , Bob attempts to blow Selma up during their honeymoon . Bart again foils the plan and Sideshow Bob returns to prison . After being paroled from prison in " Cape Feare " ( season five , 1993 ) , Bob targets Bart directly , threatening him repeatedly and forcing the Simpsons into hiding as part of the Witness Relocation Program . Bob follows them to their hideout , a houseboat on Terror Lake , and , after subduing the family , prepares to kill Bart. He allows a final request , however , and Bart asks to hear Bob sing the entire score of H.M.S. Pinafore . The delaying tactic leads to Bob 's third arrest . 
 Bob is released from prison once again in " Sideshow Bob Roberts " ( season six , 1994 ) , and runs for Mayor of Springfield as the Republican Party candidate . He defeats Democratic Party incumbent Joe Quimby in a landslide , but Bart and Lisa discover that Bob rigged the election , leading to another incarceration . Bob escapes from prison for the first time in " Sideshow Bob 's Last Gleaming " ( season seven , 1995 ) , and threatens to blow up Springfield with a nuclear bomb unless the city stops broadcasting all television shows . He is thwarted when he finds out that the bomb itself is a dud , then kidnaps Bart and flies the Wright Brothers ' plane in an attempt to kill himself , Bart , and Krusty ( who is hiding inside a shack , improvising a performance on the Emergency Broadcast System ) . This too is thwarted , and Bob returns to prison . In the following season , Bob takes advantage of the prison 's work release program , and appears to be genuinely redeemed . In " Brother from Another Series " , Reverend Lovejoy declares him a changed man and recommends him for a work release opportunity . Bob is discharged from prison into the care of his brother Cecil , who is Springfield 's chief hydrological and hydrodynamical engineer . However , the scheming Cecil , still smarting over his failed audition for Krusty , tries to frame Bob by sabotaging the Springfield Dam . Bob , Bart , and Lisa together stop Cecil and save the town , and both brothers , despite Bob 's genuine innocence , are sent to prison . 
 In " Day of the Jackanapes " ( season 12 , 2001 ) , Bob discovers that Krusty has erased all of the early shows featuring Sideshow Bob as Krusty himself is declaring his fifth and final retirement after being annoyed with the network executives . Bob is released from prison and develops a plot to kill Krusty using Bart as a suicide bomber during Krusty 's retirement special . Just as Bob was to succeed , he overhears Krusty publicly holding himself responsible for turning Bob into a criminal , expressing his regret of mistreating Bob during his years as Sideshow . To appease things , Krusty sings himself a song on Bob 's behalf , and being touched by this , Bob decides to abort his plan of attempted murder and reconciles with Krusty , although he is returned to prison for it . Bob 's aid is sought by Springfield police in " The Great Louse Detective " ( season 14 , 2002 ) . After an attempt is made on Homer Simpson 's life , Bob is released from prison to help find the culprit . When the mystery is solved , he returns to murder Bart. However , Bob finds he is " accustomed to [ Bart 's ] face " and cannot do it . 
 It is revealed in " The Italian Bob " ( season 17 , 2005 ) that Bob has moved to Italy to make a fresh start . He is elected mayor of a village in Tuscany and marries a local woman named Francesca , with whom he has a son named Gino . The Simpson family , in Italy to retrieve a car for Mr. Burns , encounters him by chance . Bob welcomes them with hospitality on the condition that they not reveal his felonious past ; however , a drunken Lisa jokes about Bob 's criminal deeds , alienating Bob from his citizens . He , his wife and son swear a vendetta on the Simpsons . The entire Terwilliger family returns in " Funeral for a Fiend " ( season 19 , 2007 ) in which Bob 's father , Robert , and mother , Dame Judith Underdunk , make their first appearances . Bob fakes his own death and locks Bart in the coffin , which he attempts to cremate at the otherwise empty funeral home as all the <unk> laugh maniacally . They are foiled by Lisa and the rest of the Simpson family and sent to prison . Bob briefly returns in the season 20 episode " Wedding for Disaster " , when Bart and Lisa initially suspect Bob of kidnapping Homer to prevent him from attending his second wedding with Marge ( due to a keychain they found had an ' S ' and a ' B ' ) , but Krusty provides him with an alibi , explaining to the kids that Bob was with him the whole day . Eventually , Bob and the kids discover the true culprits , Patty and Selma . 
 Bob reappears again in the episode " The Bob Next Door " ( season 21 , 2010 ) , where he switches faces with his prison cellmate Walt Warren . Bob returns to Springfield and moves into the house next to the Simpson family , assuming Walt 's identity . He exploits this to make his latest attempt to kill Bart legally over state lines , but is foiled again and gets taken away by state police . Bob briefly appears in " At Long Last Leave " ( season 23 , 2012 ) , where he attends a town meeting to decide if the Simpson family should be banished from Springfield , and is one of many who express their desire for it to happen . In " The Man Who Grew Too Much " ( season 25 , 2014 ) , he was revealed as a Chief Scientist for a genetic engineering company named <unk> , having received the position after he was selected as a test subject and published the results of the experiments to which he was subjected . He and Lisa bond over their interest in Walt Whitman , but Bob soon reveals that he has also genetically modified himself to give himself various superhuman abilities , intending to acquire DNA from the relics of various historical figures stored in the Springfield Museum to make himself a superhuman dictator . However , after he is provoked into a fight , he realizes that he has become a crude monster and jumps off the Springfield Dam , surviving because the gills he gave himself allow him to survive in the lake . 
 Bob briefly appears in " Clown in the Dumps " ( season 26 , 2014 ) , where offered his condolences to Krusty after the death of his father , Rabbi Krustofsky . He also made a brief appearance on " Blazed and Confused " ( season 26 , 2014 ) , where he meets Mr. Lassen , Bart 's former teacher , who was now reduced to working in prison as a guard after Bart 's actions got him fired . Despite Lassen 's offer to get him out , Bob rejects the idea that they team up as Lassen thought that they would take turns gutting Bart. In Treehouse of Horror XXVI segment " Wanted : Dead , then Alive " , Bob successfully kills Bart , but finds his life so meaningless in Bart 's absence that he creates a machine to bring Bart back to life so that he can keep killing his enemy over and over , until the other Simpsons rescue Bart and Bart turns him into a twisted amalgamation of creatures . Bob has made a brief appearance in " Gal of Constant Sorrow " , grunting in annoyance as he wipes off Bart 's graffiti from Hettie Mae Boggs ' promo poster on the wall along with Snake Jailbird and other inmates . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 In addition to regular roles in the television series , Sideshow Bob has made several appearances in other Simpsons media . Kelsey Grammer recorded several Sideshow Bob lines for The Simpsons Movie , but the scene was cut . Sideshow Bob has made regular appearances in the monthly Simpsons Comics , and several of Kelsey Grammer 's singing performances have been included in The Simpsons CD compilations . His performance of the H.M.S. Pinafore in " Cape Feare " was later included on the album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons , and the song " The Very Reason That I Live " from " The Great Louse Detective " was included on The Simpsons : Testify . A previously unaired song , " <unk> Lula " , originally written for " Day of the Jackanapes " , was also included on that compilation . The producers modeled the song after " Zip @-@ a @-@ Dee @-@ Doo @-@ Dah " , but were forced to remove the song from the episode when they were unable to obtain the rights to it . 
 In The Simpsons Game , released in November 2007 , Bob has a speaking cameo appearance at the end of the chapter titled " Invasion of the Yokel @-@ Snatchers " in which he was working with Kang and Kodos . Sideshow Bob appears in the 1991 The Simpsons Arcade Game , on the fifth level where he is pulling a cart containing a roast chicken health pick up . Bob was also included as a level boss in the 1991 video game Bart vs. the Space Mutants . Sideshow Bob plays a lead role in The Simpsons Ride , which opened at Universal Studios Florida and Universal Studios Hollywood in May 2008 . Voiced by Grammer , he is the main villain in the ride , having escaped from prison to get revenge on the Simpson family . 
 In The Simpsons : Tapped Out , a city builder game released in February 2012 , Sideshow Bob occurs as a bonus . Popping up every couple hours , the players are given a chance to tap on him to receive a small sum of money , and " send " him to jail . In a later update to the game , Sideshow Bob also has a stand in Krusty Land , where player get to pop balloons for a chance to win donuts and Krusty tickets . The Simpsons : Tapped Out <unk> content update was released April 14 , 2015 and has several references to the Simpsons episodes with Sideshow Bob . This game event was split in 3 acts and ended June 4 , 2015 . New characters , skins and costumes include Sideshow Bob , Cecil Terwilliger , Gino Terwilliger Underdunk , Francesca Terwilliger , Dr. Robert Terwilliger Sr. , Judith Underdunk , Captain Bob and Opera Krusty . Most of the event action takes place at <unk> Research and Opera House . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Sideshow Bob first appeared in " The Telltale Head " , the eighth episode of season one . His design was relatively simple compared to later incarnations , and his hairstyle was rounded . However , towards the end of the episode , he appears again , in a panning shot of a crowd , with his familiar hairstyle . His first major appearance was in season one 's twelfth episode " Krusty Gets Busted " , written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . Bob 's design was updated for " Krusty Gets Busted " ; as the episode 's animation style evolved , director Brad Bird made the character of Sideshow Bob sleeker and more refined , to fit Grammer 's voice technique . Following the re @-@ design , animators tried to redraw his scenes in " The Telltale Head " , but had insufficient time before the show was produced . 
 Bob has no lines of dialogue during the first half of " Krusty Gets Busted " ; the character 's only communication takes the form of a slide whistle . This was designed to make Bob appear simplistic , so that when he finally spoke , viewers would be surprised to hear his sophisticated vocabulary . An early version of the script for " Krusty Gets Busted " called for James Earl Jones to voice Bob , but the producers instead selected Kelsey Grammer . For Bob 's voice , Grammer performed an impression of theatre actor and director Ellis Rabb . Grammer had once worked for Rabb , whose " lamenting tones became [ the ] foundation for Sideshow Bob " . 
 Sideshow Bob 's full name is Robert Underdunk Terwilliger . His last name was first revealed in " Black Widower " while his middle name was first mentioned in " Sideshow Bob Roberts " . Competing theories as to the origin of his name exist ; some sources say he was named after the character Dr. Terwilliker , a megalomaniac outwitted by a boy named Bart in the film The 5 @,@ 000 Fingers of Dr. T by Dr. Seuss , but others say he was named after Terwilliger Boulevard in Portland , Oregon . Yet another theory is that he was named after Sergeant Terwilliger and Mrs. Underdunk in the pilot episode of the TV show Hunter . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 For season three 's " Black Widower " , the writers echoed the premise of Wile E. Coyote chasing the Road Runner from Looney Tunes cartoons by having Bob unexpectedly insert himself into Bart 's life and attempt to kill him . Executive producer Al Jean has compared Bob 's character to that of Wile E. Coyote , noting that both are intelligent , yet always foiled by what they perceive as an inferior intellect . For " Black Widower " , director David Silverman updated the character model to reflect the animation of director Brad Bird . A rule for earlier episodes featuring Bob called for a recap of his evil deeds ; this was dropped after season eight 's " Brother from Another Series " when the chronology became too lengthy . Another rule established by the show 's writers mandated Bob 's return to prison at the end of each episode , although this pattern was abandoned in later episodes like " The Great Louse Detective " and " The Italian Bob " . 
 Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , the showrunners for the seventh and eighth seasons , believed that every season of the show should contain an episode starring Sideshow Bob . However , by the seventh season Bob had already been the focus of four stories , and writers were having trouble developing new ways to include him . Weinstein describes Bob 's dialogue as difficult to write , due to his unique and refined style of speaking . Despite these challenges , however , creators of The Simpsons usually look forward to " Sideshow Bob episodes " ; the writers consider them enjoyable to write , and former director Dominic Polcino describes them as " a treat " to work on . 
 Kelsey Grammer initially expected Sideshow Bob to be a one @-@ time role , and calls him " the most popular character I 've ever played " . Grammer usually joins the show 's " table readings " ( wherein cast members read each script together for the first time ) , and former executive producer David Mirkin described working with Grammer as very pleasant , due to his lively sense of humor . Grammer , Mirkin says , is capable of perfect readings , but noted that the actor dislikes performing Sideshow Bob 's evil laugh . In a 2007 interview , Simpsons executive producer Al Jean listed Grammer as one of his favorite guest stars ( second only to Phil Hartman ) , saying " his voice is so rich . " Writer George Meyer commented that " writing for Kelsey is great , he can give the kind of purple , florid , melodramatic speeches that most of the characters would never give . And he can sing . " 
 The show 's writers admire Grammer 's singing voice , and try to include a song for each appearance . Alf Clausen , the primary composer for The Simpsons , commented that " [ Grammer ] is so great . He 's just amazing . You can tell he has this love of musical theater and he has the vocal instrument to go with it , so I know whatever I write is going to be sung the way I 've heard it . " Clausen composed Sideshow Bob 's theme , which is played whenever Bob gets out of prison or is about to commit a sinister action , and was first used in " Cape Feare " . It is based on the score of the film Cape Fear , composed by Bernard Herrmann . The musical score for " Cape Feare " earned Clausen an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Dramatic Underscore – Series in 1994 . 
 Bob 's prisoner number is often 24601 , which is Jean Valjean 's prisoner number in Les Misérables . Another trademark for Bob is a visual gag of stepping on a rake and being struck in the face with its handle ; this joke first appeared in " Cape Feare " . To fill time , the writers added nine consecutive iterations of the same joke in quick succession . The sequence has become known as the " rake joke " and was described by Entertainment Weekly as showing " genius in its repetitive stupidity . " 
 = = = Family = = = 
 The episode " Brother from Another Series " introduces Bob 's brother Cecil . After writer Ken Keeler was assigned to write an episode featuring Sideshow Bob , he drew inspiration from episodes of Frasier . He decided to incorporate elements of Grammer 's other show into the character of Sideshow Bob , and designed Cecil to resemble Grammer 's brother on Frasier . Cecil is voiced by David Hyde Pierce , who portrayed Frasier Crane 's brother Niles . Pierce commented , " Normally , I would not do something like this . But how often do you get a chance to work with an actor like Kelsey Grammer and , more importantly , play his brother ? " Several of Frasier 's producers were asked to review the original script and provide feedback . Their comments were positive ; they only expressed concern with a very brief scene in which Cecil talks to a visible character whom he refers to as " Maris " . In Frasier , Maris Crane is an unseen character , and the producers of Frasier asked that the scene be removed . Many of the interactions between Bob and Cecil were based on those of Niles and Frasier . Cecil was drawn to resemble David Hyde Pierce , while retaining a visual similarity to Sideshow Bob . According to director Pete Michels , it was difficult to draw Bob and Cecil standing together , because of their comically oversized feet . 
 Cecil returns in season 19 's " Funeral for a Fiend " , which introduces the brothers ' previously unseen father , Dr. Robert Terwilliger , played by John Mahoney . Mahoney portrayed Martin Crane , the father of Grammer 's and Pierce 's characters in Frasier . Whereas in Frasier , Mahoney played the " down @-@ to @-@ Earth , average guy " to Grammer 's and Hyde Pierce 's " uppity snobs " , Robert Terwilliger Sr. was portrayed as equally highbrow as Bob . His wife , Bob 's mother , is Dame Judith Underdunk , " the finest classical actress of her generation . " She sports the same curly spiked hair as her two sons . Bob also has a wife named Francesca ( voiced by Maria Grazia <unk> ) and a son named Gino , both of whom were introduced in season 17 episode " The Italian Bob " and returned for " Funeral for a Fiend " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Sideshow Bob and Grammer 's voicework have received many accolades . In 2006 IGN listed him as the second @-@ best " peripheral character " on The Simpsons , commenting that Bob is " a man of contradictions ; his goofy appearance , complete with palm tree like hair , doesn 't seem to match up to the well spoken and even musically talented maniac . " Also that year , Wizard Magazine rated Bob as the 66th greatest villain of all time . Adam Finley of TV Squad wrote that " that baritone voice , the Shakespearean delivery , and the ability to go from calm and collected to stark raving mad all within the same second make Sideshow Bob one of the best recurring characters on the show . " 
 Kelsey Grammer has consistently received praise for his voicework , and has been described as " brilliant " , " inimitable " and " a feast of mid @-@ Atlantic anglophilia " . In 2006 , Grammer won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his role in " The Italian Bob " ; he had previously won four awards in the Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series category for his portrayal of the title role on Frasier . In 2008 , Grammer was included in Entertainment Weekly 's list of the sixteen best Simpsons guest stars ; Hyde Pierce was also included in that list . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Kelsey Grammer 's grand voice @-@ performance as Sideshow Bob is Frasier pickled in arsenic . " In her book My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy , Nancy Cartwright ( who performs the voice of Bart Simpson ) wrote that " Kelsey Grammer scores big @-@ time by injecting caustic , bitter , contemptuous and deliciously vile energy into his rendition of Sideshow Bob . Springfield just wouldn 't be the same without him . " 
 Most of the episodes featuring Bob have been well received by fans and critics . " Cape Feare " is generally regarded as one of the best episodes of The Simpsons and placed third on Entertainment Weekly 's 2003 list of the show 's top 25 episodes . IGN considers it the best episode of the fifth season . In 2007 , Vanity Fair called it the show 's fourth @-@ best episode , because of its " masterful integration of filmic parody and a recurring character " . Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star listed " Cape Feare " , " Sideshow Bob 's Last Gleaming " and " Brother From Another Series " among the best episodes of the series , writing " forget Frasier , these are Kelsey Grammer 's best roles . " " The Italian Bob " and its writer John Frink won a Writers Guild of America Award in 2007 in the animation category . In December 2009 , Robert Canning of IGN ranked the ten episodes to feature Bob that had aired at the time . The first five Bob episodes took up the top five , with " Cape Feare " being ranked first . " The Italian Bob " was ranked tenth , with the explanation that " All the things we love about a Sideshow Bob episode – the vengeance , the familiar settings and characters , the elaborate scheming – were missing from this half @-@ hour . Without it , Bob wasn 't nearly as entertaining , and the episode didn 't result in a whole lot of laughs . " He noted that only " The Italian Bob " and the ninth ranked " Funeral for a Fiend " were " the only ones I 'd consider clunkers . The remaining episodes are all quite fun . " 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner writes that Bob is built into a highbrow snob and conservative Republican so that the writers can continually use him as a <unk> and pincushion . He represents high culture while Krusty represents low culture , and Bart , stuck in between , always wins out . In the book Leaving Springfield , David L. G. Arnold comments that Bart is a product of a " mass @-@ culture upbringing " and thus is Bob 's enemy . Frustrated by his early role as the target of " Krusty 's cheap gags " , Bob frames Krusty and takes over the show . He changes the content of that show to present readings of classic literature and segments examining the emotional lives of pre @-@ teens . He believes that by exposing the kids to high culture he will improve their lives . Arnold writes that " Bob 's own conscience and morality are clearly unaffected by the high culture he represents . " He also tries to " manipulate the tastes of the masses " by becoming a criminal mastermind . Arnold believes that this is most apparent in " Sideshow Bob Roberts " , wherein he rigs the election to become the mayor of Springfield . When accused of election fraud , he rants , " Your guilty consciences may force you to vote Democratic , but secretly you yearn for a cold @-@ hearted Republican who ’ ll cut taxes , brutalize criminals , and rule you like a king ! You need me , Springfield ! " He considers himself a member of the social elite , and happily uses Machiavellian methods to acquire and maintain power . 
 Bob 's intelligence serves him in many ways . During the episode " Cape Feare " , for example , the parole board asks Bob why he has a tattoo that says " Die , Bart , Die " . Bob replies that it is German for " The , Bart , The " ; members of the board are impressed by his reasoning . Believing that " nobody who speaks German could be an evil man " , they release him . However , his love of high culture is sometimes used against him . In the same episode , Bob agrees to perform the operetta H.M.S. Pinafore in its entirety as a last request for Bart. The tactic stalls Bob long enough for the police to arrest him . 
 = Bobby Robson = 
 Sir Robert William " Bobby " Robson CBE ( 18 February 1933 – 31 July 2009 ) was an English footballer and football manager . His career included periods playing for and later managing the England national team . 
 Robson 's professional playing career as an inside @-@ forward spanned nearly 20 years , during which he played for three clubs : Fulham , West Bromwich Albion , and , briefly , Vancouver Royals . He also made 20 appearances for England , scoring four goals . After his playing career he found success as both a club and international manager , winning league championships in both the Netherlands and Portugal , earning trophies in England and Spain , and taking England to the semi @-@ final of the 1990 World Cup , which remains the national team 's best run in a World Cup since 1966 . His last management role was as a mentor to the manager of the Irish national football team . 
 Robson was created a Knight Bachelor in 2002 , was inducted as a member of the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003 , and was the honorary president of Ipswich Town . From 1991 onwards he suffered recurrent medical problems with cancer , and in March 2008 , put his name and efforts into the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation , a cancer research charity which has so far collected over £ 7m ( March 2014 ) . In August 2008 , his lung cancer was confirmed to be terminal ; he said : " My condition is described as static and has not altered since my last bout of chemotherapy ... I am going to die sooner rather than later . But then everyone has to go sometime and I have enjoyed every minute " . He died just under a year later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robson was born in <unk> , County Durham , the fourth of five sons of Philip and Lilian Robson ( née Watt ) . When he was a few months old , Robson 's family moved to the nearby village of Langley Park where his father was a coal miner . Their two @-@ bedroom house had no bath and an outside toilet . As a boy , he was often taken by his father to watch Newcastle United play at St James ' Park on Saturday afternoons , requiring a 34 @-@ mile round trip . Robson describes Jackie Milburn and Len Shackleton as his childhood heroes . Both played for Newcastle in the inside @-@ forward position , the position Robson would later assume during his playing career . 
 Robson attended Langley Park primary school and then <unk> Secondary Modern School but the headmaster did not allow the school football team to join a league . Instead , he began to play for Langley Park Juniors on Saturday mornings at the age of eleven , and by the time he was 15 , he was representing the club at Under @-@ 18 level . Robson played football whenever he possibly could but left school aged 15 to start work as an electrician 's apprentice for the National Coal Board in the Langley Park colliery . In May 1950 , Bill Dodgin , the Fulham manager made a personal visit to the Robson household to offer Bobby a professional contract . Despite being offered a contract by nearby Middlesbrough , the offer made by Dodgin was too attractive to turn down , so he signed for Fulham and moved to London , playing as a wing @-@ half and inside @-@ forward . Robson had also interested his beloved Newcastle , but he opted to join Fulham as , in his opinion , " Newcastle made no appreciable effort to secure [ my ] signature " . He also thought he stood a better chance of breaking into the first team at Fulham . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Club playing career = = = 
 Although Robson had signed professionally , his father insisted he continue to work as an electrician . He spent the day working at the Festival of Britain site and trained three nights a week at Fulham . Eventually this took its toll on Robson and he gave up his trade for full @-@ time professional football . 
 In 1950 Robson made his first @-@ team debut for Fulham , recently promoted to the First Division , in a match against Sheffield Wednesday . He came to regard Fulham as " a nice club , a social club ... " but " never ... a serious , championship @-@ challenging club " . Indeed , he and Fulham were relegated from the top @-@ flight in the 1951 – 52 season , but he made his return to the First Division , four years later , when he signed for Vic Buckingham 's West Bromwich Albion in March 1956 . The transfer fee of £ 25 @,@ 000 was a club record for Albion at the time . 
 He made his Albion debut in a 4 – 0 home defeat by Manchester City on 10 March 1956 . In 1957 – 58 he was the club 's top league goalscorer ; his tally of 24 goals included four in a 5 – 1 win against Burnley . Often playing as a midfielder , he went on to play 257 games and score 61 goals for West Bromwich Albion , and he captained the team for the 1960 – 61 and 1961 – 62 seasons . In August 1962 , however , he returned to Fulham after a disagreement with Albion vice @-@ chairman Jim Gaunt over his salary . The ongoing dispute over both minimum and maximum wages in the game , instigated by Robson 's team @-@ mate Jimmy Hill and the Professional Footballers ' Association , combined with the birth of Robson 's second son , prompted Robson to demand a higher salary . Gaunt refused to negotiate Robson 's contract , so Robson placed a transfer request and was sold to Fulham for £ 20 @,@ 000 in a deal which doubled his salary . Soon after Robson joined Fulham , the club sold Alan Mullery and Rodney Marsh , meaning Robson 's chances of securing any significant honour there were substantially reduced . Robson himself stated " In all my time as a footballer , I didn 't win a thing . " 
 Despite press reports of interest from Arsenal , and the offer of a player @-@ manager role by Southend United , Robson left Fulham in 1967 and accepted a three @-@ year deal with Canada 's Vancouver Royals . He was to be player @-@ manager in their inaugural 1968 season in the North American Soccer League and believed it " ... was a chance too good to miss " . The position proved difficult ; a long @-@ distance joint @-@ ownership agreement gave the Hungarian footballer Ferenc Puskás control over the San Francisco section of the squad , while Robson took care of the Vancouver squad . Robson was dissatisfied by this situation and when , in January 1968 , Fulham offered him a contract as their manager , he accepted the position at Craven Cottage . 
 = = = International playing career = = = 
 During his first spell at Fulham , Robson participated in two ambassadorial Football Association tours in the West Indies in 1955 and South Africa in 1956 . However , it was during his time at West Bromwich Albion that he graduated to the full England squad , with his first call @-@ up in 1956 . His manager , Vic Buckingham , advocated the " push and run " approach to the game , a precursor to " total football " , and playing this , Robson graduated to the full England squad in 1956 , It was also at West Bromwich Albion that Robson met future England international and assistant coach Don Howe . 
 He went on to make 20 appearances for the England national team , making his debut in a November 1957 victory against France , scoring twice in a 4 – 0 victory . Although he made a successful debut , he was dropped for England 's next game against Scotland , in favour of Bobby Charlton . He was , however , selected for the 1958 World Cup squad , ahead of Nat Lofthouse and Stanley Matthews but returned from Sweden disappointed , as England were defeated by the Soviet Union in a group play @-@ off match . 
 Following the 1958 World Cup , Robson became an established member of the England squad , enjoying considerable success in a period between October 1960 and March 1961 when he played in six England victories , including scoring a goal in the record 9 – 3 defeat of Scotland at Wembley Stadium . He was selected for the 1962 World Cup finals in Chile but an injury to his ankle sustained in a pre @-@ tournament friendly against a Chilean club side ruled him out of most of the tournament . As Robson recalled , " I never played for England again ... my international career was unfulfilled " . His place in the England team was taken by Bobby Moore . 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = Early club management = = = 
 In 1959 , the then England manager and the Football Association director of coaching Walter Winterbottom suggested to Robson that he take a coaching course at Lilleshall . He obtained coaching qualifications during his second spell at Fulham , and coached Oxford University A.F.C .. Robson made his debut as a manager in January 1968 at his former club Fulham , against Macclesfield Town , then in the Cheshire County League , in the third round of the FA Cup . Fulham were struggling with 16 points from 24 games . Despite the acquisition of the young Malcolm Macdonald , Robson could not save the club from relegation to the Second Division , and he left them in November , with the club sitting eighth in the Second Division . He discovered that he had been sacked , not from the club itself , but from the headline " Robson sacked " on an Evening Standard placard outside Putney station . 
 He moved on to Ipswich Town in 1969 and it was there that he established his reputation as a successful manager , supported by the club chairman John Cobbold and then later by his brother Patrick Cobbold . He won the vacant job at the Suffolk club after a chance encounter with Town director Murray Sangster while scouting at Portman Road for Chelsea manager Dave Sexton . After four mediocre seasons , Robson led Ipswich to fourth place in the First Division and success in the Texaco Cup in the 1972 – 73 season . In the following nine seasons , Ipswich finished lower than sixth place in the First Division only once , in the 1977 – 78 season . However , that season was a success with a 1 – 0 victory over Arsenal in the FA Cup Final . His reign at Ipswich lasted 13 years , during which time the club twice finished as League runners @-@ up , and made regular appearances in European competitions , capturing the UEFA Cup in 1981 with a 5 – 4 aggregate victory over Dutch side AZ 67 Alkmaar . During his thirteen @-@ year tenure , he brought in only 14 players from other clubs most notably Allan Hunter , Bryan Hamilton and Paul Mariner , relying instead on players developed through Ipswich 's youth programmes , including Terry Butcher , George Burley , John Wark , Mick Mills , Colin Viljoen , Alan Brazil , Trevor <unk> , Brian Talbot , Kevin Beattie , and Eric Gates who all went on to play international football . His imports included Dutch players Frans Thijssen and Arnold Mühren . Robson a tactical genius , also showed a talent for developing new players , with his good interpersonal skills , caring attitude , hard work and enthusiasm helping them to achieve their best . 
 In 2002 , in recognition of his achievements with the club , a life @-@ size statue of Robson was unveiled opposite the Cobbold Stand of Ipswich Town 's ground Portman Road . On 7 July 2006 , Robson was named as honorary president of Ipswich Town Football Club , the first since Lady Blanche Cobbold who had died in 1987 . 
 = = = England manager = = = 
 Robson 's achievements with Ipswich earned him a job offer from the Football Association for the position of national coach , and he declined an offer of a ten @-@ year contract extension and increased salary from Ipswich director Patrick Cobbold . On 7 July 1982 , two days after England were knocked out of the 1982 World Cup , he succeeded Ron Greenwood as coach of the English national football team , selecting former West Bromwich Albion team @-@ mate Don Howe as his chief coach . 
 Robson 's first game in charge saw immediate controversy , as he dropped Kevin Keegan for the match against Denmark . On 21 September 1983 , Robson suffered his only loss in the 28 qualifying matches he was to undertake as England manager . The defeat , again to Denmark , ultimately led to England 's failure to qualify for the 1984 European Championships , and resulted in Robson offering to resign in favour of Brian Clough . The resignation was rejected by the FA chairman , Bert Millichip ( primarily down to his and the FA 's disdain for Clough ) , and Robson went on to lead the England team to qualify for the 1986 World Cup in Mexico . 
 England began the competition poorly and captain Bryan Robson was injured with a recurrence of a dislocated shoulder . Bobby Robson changed the team 's tactics for the final match of the first round , selecting Peter Beardsley ahead of Mark Hateley as a striking partner for Gary Lineker . The team won its next two matches , against Poland and Paraguay , 3 – 0 and qualified for the quarter @-@ finals . England were defeated in the last eight by Argentina with a brace of goals from Diego Maradona ; the infamous " Hand of God " goal , and the " Goal of the Century " he scored five minutes later . Robson was unimpressed by Maradona 's claim of divine intervention : 
 Robson 's England dropped only one point in qualifying for Euro 1988 which included an 8 – 0 defeat of Turkey . However , this was followed by failure at the tournament itself , held in West Germany , where England were knocked out in the group stage . They finished bottom of their group , succumbing to defeats against Ireland , eventual winner the Netherlands and eventual runner @-@ up the USSR . Robson was vilified by the British press , and after a draw in a friendly with Saudi Arabia , one newspaper demanded : " In the name of Allah , go " . Again Robson submitted his resignation , and again it was rejected by Millichip ( again Brian Clough is often cited as a reason ) . 
 Robson led England without conceding a goal through the six @-@ match qualification for the 1990 World Cup where they were one of six seeded teams . Again they were placed in a group with the Netherlands and Ireland , with Egypt the fourth side . As in the 1986 World Cup , Robson was denied the service of his captain , Bryan Robson , who suffered an achilles tendon injury which prevented him playing in the latter stages of the tournament . England topped their qualifying group , accumulating four points from their three games . However their progress was not without controversy . England changed formation from their traditional 4 – 4 – 2 to incorporate a sweeper , with some sources suggesting this was due to player revolt after the 1 – 1 draw in the first match with the Republic of Ireland . Robson denies this claim : 
 This was followed by victories over Belgium and Cameroon in the knock @-@ out stages , to set up a semi @-@ final with West Germany . England lost the match on a penalty shoot @-@ out , after the score had been tied at 1 – 1 following extra time . Robson said afterwards that " not a day goes by when [ he ] does not think about the semi @-@ final and other choices [ he ] might have made " . Robson remains only the second coach after Alf Ramsey to take England to a World Cup semi @-@ final , and the only coach to do so on foreign soil . 
 = = = Continental management = = = 
 Before the 1990 World Cup , the FA told Robson that they would not renew his contract as England manager , so he moved on to the Netherlands to coach PSV Eindhoven , succeeding manager Guus Hiddink who had left the team after leading them to the 1987 – 88 European Cup victory and four consecutive Eredivisie titles . PSV sought a manager capable of instilling discipline into a fractious squad , much as Hiddink had done previously . Robson described the move as " a culture shock " but felt " ... a sense of adventure . " News of Robson 's new position in the Netherlands became public before the start of the 1990 World Cup , leading to tabloid stories impugning Robson 's <unk> ; he sued Today for calling him a traitor . 
 The Dutch penchant for tactical debate surprised Robson . In an interview with <unk> International he lamented : " An English pro accepts the manager 's decision . After every match here , the substitutes come and visit me . " Another of his challenges at PSV was handling the Brazilian international Romário . Robson became frustrated with the Brazilian 's work ethic , although admitted " ... in some matches he would be scintillating . " Robson arranged showdown talks with Romário , with Frank Arnesen , Robson 's assistant , acting as a translator . The talks proved unsuccessful , with Romário unwilling to change his lifestyle . Despite this , PSV won the Dutch league in both the 1990 – 91 and 1991 – 92 seasons . However , the team did not make the progress expected by the board in European competitions and Robson was informed that he would be leaving the club at the end of the 1991 – 92 season . 
 Robson moved to Sporting Clube de Portugal ( better known outside Portugal as Sporting Lisbon ) in July 1992 , where his Portuguese interpreter was a young José Mourinho , future Porto , Chelsea , Internazionale , Real Madrid and Manchester United manager . Robson guided the club to a third @-@ place finish in his first season in charge while admitting the club was in " ... a terrible state " . He described the club 's president as a " loose cannon " , who frequently signed players without Robson 's consent . Robson was sacked in December 1993 with the club sitting at the top of the league table . The club President , Sousa Cintra , cited the club 's early exit from the UEFA Cup at the hands of Casino Salzburg as the reason for his dismissal . 
 Sporting 's rivals , F.C. Porto , quickly hired Robson , with Mourinho appointed as his assistant manager . Living in the same apartment block at the time was another future Porto , Chelsea and Tottenham Hotspur manager , the young André Villas @-@ Boas , who , aged 16 , introduced himself to Robson . Robson subsequently appointed Villas @-@ Boas to work in the Porto observation department and helped him gain his UEFA ' C ' coaching badge in Scotland , despite him technically being ineligible as he was aged 17 . Porto were in a poor state when Robson arrived and the average attendance had dwindled to 10 @,@ 000 . The club promptly went on to beat Robson 's former club , Sporting , in the Portuguese Cup final , following that achievement with successive League titles in the 1994 – 95 and 1995 – 96 seasons . 
 Such was the impact of Robson at Porto , he became known to the locals as " Bobby Five @-@ O " in honour of the number of matches Porto won 5 – 0 , and he signed a new contract with the club in 1995 . Suffering from malignant melanoma and missing the first few months of the 1995 – 96 season , Robson still successfully led Porto in defence of their league title . Such was the success of the team Robson had created , that they managed to claim three more consecutive championships after he had left . 
 A phone call during the summer of 1996 from Barcelona 's vice @-@ president Joan Gaspart to discuss Luís Figo resulted in an offer of employment with the Spanish club . Robson took over in July 1996 , where again his assistant was Mourinho ; Robson had made Mourinho 's move with him to the Camp Nou a condition of his employment . One of the key decisions Robson made during his brief tenure at Barcelona was the US $ 19 @.@ 5 million signing of Ronaldo , who was influential in a season when Barcelona won the Spanish Cup , Spanish Super Cup and European Cup Winners ' Cup . Robson himself was voted European Manager of the Year for 1996 – 97 , while Ronaldo stated , " as a trainer without doubt [ Robson ] is one of the greatest in the world " . 
 The 1997 – 98 season saw Robson moved " upstairs " to the position of General Manager by Barcelona , with Louis van Gaal taking over the managerial reins , but he stayed in this position for only one season before returning to manage PSV on a short @-@ term deal for the 1998 – 99 season . PSV missed out on the league title , finishing third behind Feyenoord and Willem II , but Robson still led the club to victory in the Dutch supercup and also qualification for the Champions League on the last day of the season . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 After Robson 's contract expired , he returned to England to take up a position in the Football Association 's technical department , but following the resignation of Ruud Gullit at Newcastle United , Robson moved to St James ' Park in September 1999 . Robson was disappointed with the club 's opening salary offer , stating " ... it was miles below the going rate " , but negotiated a one @-@ year , £ 1 million deal . 
 In Robson 's first home match in charge , bottom @-@ placed Newcastle faced second bottom Sheffield Wednesday , thrashing them 8 – 0 . In his first season in charge , 1999 – 2000 , Robson led the club to an 11th @-@ place finish , with 14 wins from his 32 games in charge . In late 2000 , following the resignation of ex Magpies boss Kevin Keegan as England manager , the Football Association asked Newcastle Chairman Freddy Shepherd to permit Robson to take over in a part @-@ time caretaker capacity but the request was refused . Robson guided Newcastle from bottom of the Premier League to a fourth @-@ place finish in the 2001 – 02 season . The following season , Newcastle finished third , ensuring qualification for the Champions League for the second consecutive year . Despite the qualification of third place however , Robson was unable to guide Newcastle through the Champions League qualifying rounds and the club was pushed back into the UEFA Cup for the 2003 – 04 season . At the end of the 2003 – 04 season , Newcastle United finished fifth in the table , five points short of the Champions League qualifying fourth place but reached the semi @-@ finals of the UEFA Cup before losing to Marseille . 
 Robson held the Newcastle post until 30 August 2004 , when he was dismissed by Freddy Shepherd , after a poor start to the Premier League season and alleged discontent in the dressing room . Robson 's dismissal followed publication of his off the record observation of his disappointment that only 5 @,@ 000 fans stayed to see the traditional lap of honour made by the players at St James ' Park at the end of the previous season . However , he remains held in the highest esteem by the fans ; he was granted the Freedom of the City of Newcastle upon Tyne on 2 March 2005 . 
 Robson 's autobiography , entitled Bobby Robson : Farewell but not Goodbye was released in 2005 . The title is based on one of his quotes upon leaving the England job in 1990 : " I 'm here to say goodbye — maybe not goodbye but farewell " . In the book , Robson was critical of Shepherd , claiming that while manager he was denied information regarding the players ' contracts and transfer negotiations . He also criticised Shepherd and the club 's deputy chairman Douglas Hall , for their focus on the first team and St James ' Park , causing them to neglect less glamorous issues , such as the training ground , youth development and talent scouts . The club 's training ground was later blamed by Graeme Souness , Robson 's successor , for a series of injuries to first team players . 
 = = = Football consultant = = = 
 On 7 June 2005 Robson declined the invitation to become Director of Football of Heart of Midlothian because he wanted to stay in the Newcastle area . On 13 January 2006 , Steve Staunton was appointed manager of the Republic of Ireland national team , with Robson named in a support role as International Football Consultant . Robson stepped down from his role of consultant on 17 November 2007 , after the Republic 's final match in their unsuccessful qualifying campaign for Euro 2008 . Robson was a former Vice President of the League Managers Association , a non @-@ executive role . 
 = = Life outside football = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Robson met Elsie Gray on a trip back to his parents ' home in Langley Park . She was a student nurse , and later a teacher . They were married in June 1955 and Fulham teammate Tom Wilson was Robson 's best man . Since 1991 , Robson was repeatedly diagnosed as suffering from cancer . He had several operations and , in 2006 , was operated on for a brain tumour . This , on occasion , affected his work ; while at Porto for example , Robson suffered from malignant melanoma , which resulted in his missing the first few months of the 1995 – 96 season . 
 On 17 October 2006 , it was revealed that Robson had been given the all @-@ clear and was set to see out his contract as consultant to the Irish team . Robson revealed on 7 May 2007 that he had been diagnosed with cancer for the fifth time . On Saturday 17 May 2008 , Sir Bobby was the guest of honour at the FA Cup Final at Wembley Stadium when Portsmouth beat Cardiff City 1 – 0 . He presented the trophy to the victorious captain , Sol Campbell . 
 = = = Other activities = = = 
 Robson made a number of product endorsements , including an appearance in Carlsberg 's " Best Pub Side " television commercial . He also acted as a pundit for ITV during the 2002 World Cup and the 2004 European Championship . In 2004 , following the death of Brian Clough , Robson briefly stood in for Clough as a columnist at FourFourTwo magazine , and from 2004 onwards wrote a weekly column for The Mail on Sunday . 
 = = = Bobby Robson Foundation = = = 
 Robson defeated bowel cancer in 1992 , a malignant melanoma in 1995 , and a tumour in his right lung and a brain tumour , both in 2006 . Treatment of these conditions had left him partially paralysed due to a stroke caused by the brain tumour , and also with a partially prosthetic upper jaw after the melanoma was surgically removed . His fifth diagnosis of cancer in 2007 , consisting of cancerous nodules in both lungs , was diagnosed as terminal in February 2007 , and as of December 2008 was being controlled through bouts of chemotherapy . After these experiences , and following his fifth diagnosis with cancer , Robson devoted the remaining years of his life to helping fight the disease . On 25 March 2008 , he launched the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation . By November 2008 , the Foundation had raised £ 1 million . The money raised by the Foundation funded equipment for the Sir Bobby Robson Cancer Trials Research Centre , in the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle upon Tyne , and would go on to fund other cancer projects in the North East of England . 
 In aid of the Foundation , Robson 's 1990 World Cup semi @-@ final 4 – 3 loss after penalties against West Germany , was replayed on 26 July 2009 as the Sir Bobby Robson Trophy match at St James ' Park , featuring players from the original 1990 World Cup squads and other special guests . Robson was given a guard of honour before the game , which finished 3 – 2 to the England side . 
 At the time of Robson 's death , the Foundation had raised £ 1 @.@ 6 million . Donations totalling £ 156 @,@ 000 were received by the Foundation in the 18 days following his death , and on 15 October 2009 , it was announced that the Foundation had raised over £ 2 million , and that at the request of Robson 's family , Alan Shearer would take over Robson 's role as the Foundation 's patron . It passed the £ 2 @.@ 5 million mark in September 2010 . Three other patrons were added in 2010 , Steve Gibson , Mick Mills and Niall Quinn . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 31 July 2009 , Robson died of lung cancer at his home in County Durham , aged 76 , after a long battle with the disease . After the news of his death , leading figures from the world of football and politics paid tribute to him . Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson called him a " great friend , a wonderful individual and tremendous football man . " UEFA president Michel Platini said : " He will be remembered not only for his playing career and his outstanding managerial career at both club and international level , but also because he was a truly warm and passionate human being . " Gary Lineker said : " It is a sad day and a great loss . He was a wonderful man and will be deeply missed by everybody in the country . I never played for a more enthusiastic man . He gave so much to the game . " Former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Tony Blair , described Sir Bobby as a " real Geordie gentleman . " According to the then Prime Minister Gordon Brown , Robson " epitomised everything that is great about football in this country . " His friend , the broadcaster Michael Parkinson , said : " Robson will be remembered long after the present lot are old bones . By his decency , his humour , his love of the game 's traditions and origins and confusion at what it had become , he made present day football look what it is – shabby by comparison . I can think of no more fitting epitaph . " 
 Robson 's funeral , a private family ceremony , took place on 5 August 2009 . The location remained undisclosed at the request of his family until the funeral had taken place . It was later revealed to be Esh , County Durham . A thanksgiving service for Robson was held on 21 September 2009 at Durham Cathedral . One thousand invited guests attended the service , which was also broadcast live on national television , and to Newcastle United 's St James ' Park , Ipswich Town 's Portman Road ground , and Fulham 's Craven Cottage . Robson was survived by his wife and their three sons : Andrew , Paul and Mark . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Robson was awarded a number of honours for his contributions to football . In 1990 , at the end of his eight @-@ year reign as England manager , he was awarded a CBE and in 2002 , he was knighted ; both awards were for services to football . 
 In 2002 ( during his time as Newcastle manager ) , the 69 @-@ year @-@ old Robson was awarded the freedom of Newcastle upon Tyne and the UEFA President 's Award for ' services to football ' . He was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003 in recognition of his impact as a manager . Following his time as Newcastle United manager in 2005 , Robson was made an Honorary Freeman of Newcastle , which , in his autobiography , he described as being " the proudest moment of my life " . Robson also won the 1992 Football Writers ' Association Tribute Award for an outstanding contribution to the national game , and the 2001 British Sports Writers ' Association Pat <unk> Trophy for Outstanding Achievement . In 2005 he received a lifetime achievement award from the Sports Coach UK Awards , and was also awarded the <unk> International Personality of the Year in 2006 . On 9 December 2007 , Robson was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award at the BBC 's Sports Personality of the Year show in recognition of " his contribution as both player and manager in a career spanning more than half a century " . 
 On 5 May 2008 , during the 30th anniversary celebrations of Ipswich Town 's 1978 FA Cup win , Robson was granted the Freedom of Ipswich by the Lady Mayor . On 8 December 2008 , he earned another such accolade when he was given the Freedom of the City of Durham . In March 2009 , UEFA awarded Robson the Emerald UEFA Order of Merit award , awarded to " individuals who have dedicated their talents to the good of the game " . The award was presented to Sir Bobby at St James ' Park on 26 July 2009 , prior to the Sir Bobby Robson Trophy match , and just five days before his death . 
 = = = Posthumous honours = = = 
 In December 2009 , Robson was posthumously awarded the FIFA Fair Play Award , for the " gentlemanly qualities he showed throughout his career as a player and coach " . All English football league matches held a one minute 's applause in his memory at the beginning of the 2009 – 10 season . 
 The Football League gave Newcastle United and Ipswich Town special dispensation to wear special commemorative kits for their Championship match on 26 September 2009 at Portman Road , in aid of Sir Bobby 's Foundation . At half @-@ time during this match , the North Stand of Portman Road was renamed the Sir Bobby Robson Stand . 
 The first anniversary of Robson 's death on 31 July 2010 was marked with a ceremony and pre @-@ season friendly match at Newcastle 's St James ' Park , between two of his former clubs Newcastle United and PSV Eindhoven , involving Robson 's PSV captain Stan <unk> presenting a PSV shirt to the club . 
 In July 2010 , plans were unveiled for a memorial garden to Robson to be built in Newcastle . It was to be created by the city council in partnership with the regeneration company <unk> , and located on Gallowgate street close to the Newcastle United stadium St James ' Park . Work began on the site in November 2010 , which was completed by Spring 2011 . The garden covers 400 square meters , and features a tiered seating area and sculpted stone plinths reflecting aspects of his life and work . The area also hosts 400 square metre memorial garden to Sir Bobby Robson . 
 With a keen interest in cricket as well as football , Robson was to have replaced Mike Gatting as President of the Lord 's Taverners charity and cricket club in 2007 , but this was prevented by his ill @-@ health . After his death , the club held a dinner in his honour , as " The best President we never had " . 
 In March 2011 , the East Coast train operating company named one of its Class 91 electric locomotives Sir Bobby Robson , unveiled at Newcastle Central Station by his widow Elsie and Alan Shearer . Similarly , in December 2011 , the Port of Tyne Authority named its new work boat the Sir Bobby Robson . On 6 May 2012 , a statue of Robson created by sculptor Tom Maley was unveiled at St James ' Park before a 2 – 0 defeat to eventual champions Manchester City . On 16 July 2013 , marking the 150th anniversary celebrations of the FA , the FA designated 10 August as the Sir Bobby Robson National Football Day , celebrated as a day to celebrate the national game . 
 = = Playing career statistics = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list England 's goal tally first . 
 = = Managerial career statistics = = 
 = = = Performance by club = = = 
 = = = Managerial honours = = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Ipswich Town 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 1977 – 78 
 UEFA Cup ( 1 ) : 1980 – 81 
 Texaco Cup ( 1 ) : 1973 
 PSV Eindhoven 
 Eredivisie ( 2 ) : 1990 – 91 , 1991 – 92 
 Porto 
 Primeira Liga ( 2 ) : 1994 – 95 , 1995 – 96 
 Taça de Portugal ( 1 ) : 1993 – 94 
 Barcelona 
 Copa del Rey ( 1 ) : 1996 – 97 
 Supercopa de España ( 1 ) : 1996 
 European Cup Winners ' Cup ( 1 ) : 1997 
 = = = International = = = 
 England 
 FIFA World Cup – Fourth Place ( 1 ) : 1990 
 Rous Cup ( 3 ) : 1986 , 1988 , 1989 
 = Dress You Up = 
 " Dress You Up " is a song by American singer Madonna from her second studio album Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) . It was released on July 24 , 1985 as the album 's final single , by Sire Records . The song was the last track to be added to the album as it was submitted late by songwriters Andrea LaRusso and Peggy Stanziale . Madonna pushed for the song 's inclusion on Like a Virgin as she particularly liked its lyrics . Musically , the song is a drum beat driven dance track featuring instrumentation from guitars and vocals from a choir and a guitar solo played by Nile Rodgers , who also produced the song . The lyrics are an extended metaphor for fashion and sex , comparing dressing up with passion . A live performance from Madonna 's first tour was used as the music video . 
 Critics reacted positively to the dance @-@ pop nature of the track . " Dress You Up " became Madonna 's sixth consecutive top @-@ five single in the United States . It also reached the top @-@ ten in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . The song was performed on four of Madonna 's concert tours , most recently on the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . " Dress You Up " was added to the " Filthy Fifteen " list of the Parents Music Resource Center , due to the sexual nature of its lyrics . The song has been covered in different forms by a number of artists . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Dress You Up " was the last song to be included on the Like a Virgin album . Producer Nile Rodgers had initially asked songwriters Andrea LaRusso and Peggy Stanziale to write a song for Madonna in the style of Rodgers ' band Chic . However , the writing took time , since both LaRusso and Stanziale were busy with other projects . When the lyrics of the song was submitted , Rodgers rejected it as there was no time to compose a melody and record it for the album . But Madonna liked the lyrics of the song , and persuaded Rodgers to include it on Like a Virgin . In Britain , the song was released as a limited @-@ edition shaped picture disc . In this case , it was star @-@ shaped to tie in with the Christmas release date for the single . The song is one of several of Madonna 's hit singles not included on The Immaculate Collection compilation , released in 1990 . " Dress You Up " was , however , later included on Madonna 's 2009 compilation album Celebration . Although no music video was separately made for the song , a live performance of " Dress You Up " from The Virgin Tour , filmed in Detroit was used as the video . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Dress You Up " is a characteristic drum machine driven dance track and consists of a two @-@ chord verse . The chorus is supported by vocals from a choir , a four @-@ chord progression and a single guitar note , played by Rodgers . A rock guitar solo plays during the bridge . Towards the end of the song , the sound of the drums are decreased , while the treble is increased . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C minor , with Madonna 's vocals ranging from a low @-@ note of B ♭ 3 to a high @-@ note of F ♯ 5 . The song has a basic sequence of Cm – B ♭ – G7 in the verses and A ♭ – B ♭ – Cm – Cm / G in the chorus , as its chord progression . 
 The lyrics of the song are a metaphor for fashion and sex . Madonna sings about clothes she would like to drape over her man , so that she can caress his body with her hands , and cover him with " Velvet Kisses " . According to Rikky Rooksby , author of Madonna : The Complete Guide To Her Music , the line " I 'll create a look that 's made for you " , later became synonymous with Madonna 's re @-@ invention of her image throughout her career . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nancy <unk> from Billboard said that the song felt like " [ Madonna ] The pin @-@ up girl in character ; part saucy , eager to please . " Alex Henderson from Allmusic , commented that " Rodger 's [ producer ] gift for sleek , seductive dance music [ Chic 's specialty ] is evident on such gems as ' Dress You Up ' . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic , called " Dress You Up " an excellent , standard @-@ issue dance @-@ pop . Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández and Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens , authors of Madonna 's Drowned Worlds : New Approaches To Her Cultural Transformations , commented that Madonna sounded like a " sex @-@ kitten " in the song . <unk> Cinquemani from Slant Magazine called the song irresistible . William McKeen , author of Rock and roll is here to stay , said that the melody of " Dress You Up " was insistently chugging . Debby Miller from Rolling Stone said that " Despite her little @-@ girl voice , there 's an undercurrent of ambition that makes her more than the latest Betty Boop . " While reviewing the album in 1995 , Dave Karger from Entertainment Weekly commented that the song came off as a bit repetitious and immature . Jim Farber from the same publication commented that " the song was built to transcend the Dynasty era . " 
 While reviewing The Immaculate Collection , Alfred Soto from Stylus Magazine commented : " Like A Virgin 's Top Five absentees ' Dress You Up ' and ' Angel ' do a better job than the two big singles of delineating the boundaries of Madonna 's determined shallowness , an act that confounds Philistines today and made the appreciation of her musical skills a lot harder than it took these critics to dismiss Cyndi Lauper as the real charlatan . " In 2003 , when fans were asked to vote for the top twenty Madonna singles of all time , by Q magazine , " Dress You Up " was allocated the eighth spot . The video was nominated at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards , in the category for Best Choreography , but lost to " Raspberry Beret " by Prince and The Revolution . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Dress You Up " debuted at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 on August 17 , 1985 . After seven weeks , the song reached number five on the Hot 100 , becoming Madonna 's sixth consecutive top @-@ five hit . It also peaked at number 34 on Adult Contemporary , number three on Hot Dance Club Songs and number 64 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It placed at number 94 on the year @-@ end chart for 1985 , with Madonna becoming the top pop artist for the year . In Canada , the song debuted at number 90 on the RPM singles chart on August 24 , 1985 . The song was present for a total of 20 weeks on the chart , peaking at number ten after six weeks . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Dress You Up " was released on December 12 , 1985 . It entered the UK Singles Chart at number 12 , and reached a peak of five , being present on the chart for a total of 13 weeks . The song was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . According to Official Charts Company , the song has sold 210 @,@ 000 copies there . In Australia , the song peaked at five in October 1985 , becoming Madonna 's sixth top @-@ ten single there . The song also reached the top 20 in Belgium , France , Ireland , Netherlands , New Zealand , Spain , Switzerland and the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles , while peaking just outside the top 20 in Italy . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna has performed " Dress You Up " on four of her world tours , namely The Virgin Tour in 1985 , the Who 's That Girl World Tour in 1987 , the 2009 leg of the Sticky & Sweet Tour , and Rebel Heart Tour in 2015 – 16 . On The Virgin Tour , " Dress You Up " was the opening song of the set . Madonna wore a blue see @-@ through crop @-@ top , revealing her characteristic black bra . She also had lacy leggings and crucifixes around her ear and her neck . As the beat of the song started , Madonna entered the stage and posed on the stairs before reaching the microphone to sing the track . A performance of the song from the Virgin Tour was included on the VHS release Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour . 
 During the Who 's That Girl World Tour of 1987 , Madonna performed it in a medley with " Material Girl " and " Like a Virgin " . She wore an elaborate costume , inspired by Dame Edna Everage . It consisted of a hat strewn with fake fruits , flowers and feathers , jeweled batwing spectacles with heavy , black frames , a ruffled skirt and a bodice covered with objects such as watches and dolls and fishnets . Author Carol Clerk stated that the dress was more " ludicrous for Madonna , than humorous . " Two different performances of the song on this tour can be found on the videos : Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan , filmed in Tokyo , Japan , on June 22 , 1987 , and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy , filmed in Turin , Italy , on September 4 , 1987 . 
 A backing track was created to accompany the performance of " Dress You Up " on her 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour , however Madonna found it difficult to learn the guitar chords for the song , choosing to perform " Material Girl " instead . In 2008 , Madonna performed the first verse and chorus of the song during the request section of the Sticky & Sweet Tour . The song was performed at Chicago , Los Angeles , Philadelphia , Rio de Janeiro , Toronto , Valencia and Vienna . Madonna finally added " Dress You Up " to the 2009 leg of the Sticky & Sweet Tour , replacing the rock version of " Borderline " . It was performed as part of the ' old school ' segment and featured the groove from The Knack 's song " My Sharona " and " God Save The Queen " by the Sex Pistols . 
 In 2015 , while appearing on The Ellen DeGeneres Show as part of promotion for her thirteenth studio album , Rebel Heart , Madonna and host Ellen DeGeneres sang the song during a revival of DeGeneres ' bathroom concert series . They were dressed in matching robes and sang the song while sitting on a chair , adding commentary in between . At one point , Madonna removed the robe to reveal another dress with prints of hearts on it , and danced around DeGeneres , who also used props like oversized sunglasses and a leopard print cowboy hat for Madonna . The song was later included in the setlist of the Rebel Heart Tour , performed in a flamenco @-@ style medley with " Into the Groove " , " Everybody " and " Lucky Star " . During the sequence the singer dressed in a Latin and gypsy inspired dress , created by Alessandro Michele for Gucci , consisting off a shawl , flamenco hat , lace , skirts and jacquard bodysuit . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1985 , the song was included on the Parents Music Resource Center 's ( PMRC ) " Filthy Fifteen " list , for the perceived sexual content of its lyrics . The Center 's founder Tipper Gore had heard her daughter listening to the song , and considered the line " Gonna dress you up in my love " as exemplifying ' vulgar music ' . The PMRC called upon the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) to give parents a consumer @-@ friendly means of identifying rock records unsuitable for minors – a rating system based on lyrical content . " Dress You Up " received a rating of ' S ' , for " sex and obscenity " , from the RIAA . Gore commented on the song : " Popular culture is morally bankrupt , flagrantly licentious and utterly materialistic — and Madonna is the worst of all . " According to Bruce David Forbes and H. Mahan in their book Religion and Popular Culture in America , Madonna 's fans took the attitude " Can 't you cultural conservatives see what she is trying to do — to annoy people like you ! If you don 't like it , don 't listen to it . Stop trying to police my morality ! " The campaign was successful and led to the creation of the Parental Advisory sticker . 
 In 1999 " Dress You Up " was sung by a group that included Alex Greenwald , Rashida Jones and Jason Thompson , for Gap 's " Everybody in <unk> " TV commercial . Music for the song was created by the Dust Brothers . A cover of the song by Apollo Heights was included on the 2007 Madonna tribute compilation Through the Wilderness . The band <unk> the Rock & Roll Destroyer , and Reel Big Fish , covered the song on their 2007 EP Duet All Night Long . United Kingdom dance artist Kelly <unk> recorded a new version of the song in 2008 . The cover was released as a single in 2009 . In 2013 , the song was covered in the Glee episode " Feud " , mashed @-@ up with Elton John 's " The Bitch Is Back " . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals 
 Nile Rodgers – producer , guitarist 
 Andrea LaRusso – writer 
 Peggy Stanziale – writer 
 Jimmy Bralower – drum programming 
 Rob Sabino – bass synthesizer , acoustic piano 
 Curtis King – background vocals 
 Frank Simms – background vocals 
 George Simms – background vocals 
 Credits adapted from the Like a Virgin album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Statute of Anne = 
 The Statute of Anne , also known as the Copyright Act 1709 ( cited either as 8 <unk> c . 21 or as 8 <unk> c . 19 ) , is an act of the Parliament of Great Britain passed in 1710 , which was the first statute to provide for copyright regulated by the government and courts , rather than by private parties . 
 Prior to the statute 's enactment in 1710 , copying restrictions were authorized by the Licensing of the Press Act 1662 . These restrictions were enforced by the Stationers ' Company , a guild of printers given the exclusive power to print — and the responsibility to censor — literary works . The censorship administered under the Licensing Act led to public protest ; as the act had to be renewed at two @-@ year intervals , authors and others sought to prevent its <unk> . In 1694 , Parliament refused to renew the Licensing Act , ending the Stationers ' monopoly and press restrictions . 
 Over the next 10 years the Stationers repeatedly advocated bills to re @-@ authorize the old licensing system , but Parliament declined to enact them . Faced with this failure , the Stationers decided to emphasise the benefits of licensing to authors rather than publishers , and the Stationers succeeded in getting Parliament to consider a new bill . This bill , which after substantial amendments was granted Royal Assent on 5 April 1710 , became known as the Statute of Anne due to its passage during the reign of Queen Anne . The new law prescribed a copyright term of 14 years , with a provision for renewal for a similar term , during which only the author and the printers they chose to license their works to could publish the author 's creations . Following this , the work 's copyright would expire , with the material falling into the public domain . Despite a period of instability known as the Battle of the Booksellers when the initial copyright terms under the Statute began to expire , the Statute of Anne remained in force until the Copyright Act 1842 replaced it . 
 The statute is considered a " watershed event in Anglo @-@ American copyright history ... transforming what had been the publishers ' private law copyright into a public law grant " . Under the statute , copyright was for the first time vested in authors rather than publishers ; it also included provisions for the public interest , such as a legal deposit scheme . The Statute was an influence on copyright law in several other nations , including the United States , and even in the 21st century is " frequently invoked by modern judges and academics as embodying the utilitarian underpinnings of copyright law " . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the introduction of the printing press to England by William Caxton in 1476 , printed works became both more common and more economically important . As early as 1483 , Richard III recognised the value of literary works by specifically exempting them from the government 's protectionist legislation . Over the next fifty years , the government moved further towards economic regulation , abolishing the provision with the Printers and <unk> Act 1534 , which also banned the import of foreign works and empowered the Lord Chancellor to set maximum pricing for English books . This was followed by increasing degrees of censorship . A further proclamation of 1538 , aiming to stop the spread of Lutheran doctrine , saw Henry VIII note that " <unk> contentious and <unk> <unk> , have by wrong <unk> and <unk> <unk> <unk> and <unk> within this his realme of England " , and declare that all authors and printers must allow the Privy Council or their agents to read and censor books before publication . 
 = = = Stationers ' Company = = = 
 This censorship peaked on 4 May 1557 , when Mary I issued a royal warrant formally incorporating the Stationers ' Company . The old method of censorship had been limited by the Second Statute of Repeal , and with Mary 's increasing unpopularity the existing system was unable to cope with the number of critical works being printed . Instead , the royal warrant devolved this power to the Company . This was done by decreeing that only the Company 's publishers could print and distribute books . Their Wardens were given the power to enter any printing premises , destroy illegal works and imprison anyone found manufacturing them . In this way the government " harnessed the self interest of the publishers to the yoke of royal incentive " , guaranteeing that the Company would follow the rules due to the economic monopoly it gave their members . With the abolition of the Star Chamber and Court of High Commission by the Long Parliament , the legal basis for this warrant was removed , but the Long Parliament chose to replace it with the Licensing Act 1662 . This provided that the Company would retain their original powers , and imposed additional restrictions on printing ; King 's Messengers were permitted to enter any home or business in search of illegal presses . The legislation required renewal every two years , and was regularly <unk> . 
 This was not " copyright " as is normally understood ; although there was a monopoly on the right to copy , this was available to publishers , not authors , and did not exist by default ; it only applied to books which had been accepted and published by the Company . A member of the Company would register the book , and would then have a perpetual copyright over its printing , copying and publication , which could be leased , transferred to others or given to heirs upon the member 's death . The only exception to this was that , if a book was out of print for more than 6 months and the publisher ignored a warning to make it available , the copyright would be released and other publishers would be permitted to copy it . Authors themselves were not particularly respected until the 18th century , and were not permitted to be members of the Company , playing no role in the development or use of its licenses despite the Company 's sovereign authority to decide what was published . There is evidence that some authors were recognised by the Company itself to have the right to copy and the right to alter their works ; these authors were uniformly the writers of uneconomical books who were underwriting their publication . 
 The Company 's monopoly , censorship and failure to protect authors made the system highly unpopular ; John Milton wrote <unk> as a result of his experiences with the Company , accusing Parliament of being deceived by " the fraud of some old <unk> and <unk> in the trade of bookselling " . He was not the first writer to criticise the system , with John Locke writing a formal memorandum to the MP Edward Clarke in 1693 while the Licensing Act was being renewed , complaining that the existing system restricted the free exchange of ideas and education while providing an unfair monopoly for Company members . Academic Mark Rose attributes the efforts of Milton to promote the " bourgeois public sphere " , along with the Glorious Revolution 's alterations to the political system and the rise of public coffee houses , as the source of growing public unhappiness with the system . At the same time , this was a period in which clearly defined political parties were taking shape , and with the promise of regular elections , an environment where the public were of increasing importance to the political process . The result was a " developing public sphere [ which ] provided the context that enabled the collapse of traditional press controls " . 
 = = = Lapse of the Licensing Act = = = 
 The result of this environment was the lapse of the Licensing Act . In November 1694 , a committee was appointed by the Commons to see what laws were " lately expired and expiring [ and ] fit to be revived and continued " . The Committee reported in January 1695 , and suggested the renewal of the Licensing Act ; this was included in the " Continuation Bill " , but rejected by the House of Commons on 11 February . When it reached the House of Lords , the Lords re @-@ included the Licensing Act , and returned the bill to the Commons . In response , a second committee was appointed - this one to produce a report indicating why the Commons disagreed with the inclusion of the Licensing Act , and chaired by Edward Clarke . This committee soon reported to the Commons , and Clarke was ordered to carry a message to the Lords requesting a conference over the Act . On 18 April 1695 , Clarke met with representatives of the Lords , and they agreed to allow the Continuation Bill to pass without the renewal of the Licensing Act . With this , " the Lords ' decision heralded an end to a relationship that had developed throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries between the State and the Company of Stationers " , ending both nascent publishers ' copyright and the existing system of censorship . 
 John Locke 's close relationship with Clarke , along with the respect he commanded , is seen by academics as what led to this decision . Locke had spent the early 1690s campaigning against the statute , considering it " ridiculous " that the works of dead authors were held perpetually in copyright . In letters to Clarke he wrote of the absurdity of the existing system , complaining primarily about the unfairness of it to authors , and " [ t ] he parallels between Locke 's commentary and those reasons presented by the Commons to the Lords for refusing to renew the 1662 Act are striking " . He was assisted by a number of independent printers and booksellers , who opposed the monopolistic aspects of the Act , and introduced a petition in February 1693 that the Act prevented them from conducting their business . The " developing public sphere " , along with the harm the existing system had caused to both major political parties , is also seen as a factor . 
 The failure to renew the Licensing Act led to confusion and both positive and negative outcomes ; while the government no longer played a part in censoring publications , and the monopoly of the Company over printing was broken , there was uncertainty as to whether or not copyright was a binding legal concept without the legislation . Economic chaos also resulted ; with the Company now unable to enforce any monopoly , provincial towns began establishing printing presses , producing cheaper books than the London booksellers . The absence of the censorship provisions also opened Britain up as a market for internationally printed books , which were similarly cheaper than those British printers could produce . 
 = = = Attempts at replacement = = = 
 The rejection of the existing system was not done with universal approval , and there were ultimately twelve unsuccessful attempts to replace it . The first was introduced to the House of Commons on 11 February 1695 . A committee , again led by Clarke , was to write a " Bill for the Better Regulating of Printing and the Printing Presses " . This bill was essentially a copy of the Licensing Act , but with a narrower jurisdiction ; only books covering religion , history , the affairs of the state or the law would require official authorisation . Four days after its introduction , the Stationers ' held an emergency meeting to agree to petition the Commons - this was because the bill did not contain any reference to books as property , eliminating their monopoly on copying . Clarke also had issues with the provisions , and the debate went on until the end of the Parliamentary session , with the bill failing to pass . 
 With the end of the Parliamentary session came the first general election under the Triennial Act 1694 , which required the Monarch to dissolve Parliament every 3 years , causing a general election . This led to the " golden age " of the English electorate , and allowed for the forming of two major political parties - the Whigs and Tories . At the same time , with the failure to renew the Licensing Act , a political press developed . While the Act had been in force only one official newspaper existed ; the London Gazette , published by the government . After its demise , a string of newspapers sprang into being , including the Flying Post , the Evening Post and the Daily Courant . Newspapers had a strong bias towards particular parties , with the Courant and the Flying Post supporting the Whigs and the Evening Post in favour of the Tories , leading to politicians from both parties realising the importance of an efficient propaganda machine in influencing the electorate . This added a new dimension to the Commons ' decision to reject two new renewals of the Licensing Act in the new Parliamentary session . 
 Authors , as well as Stationers , then joined the demand for a new system of licensing . Jonathan Swift was a strong advocate for licensing , and Daniel Defoe wrote on 8 November 1705 that with the absence of licensing , " One Man Studies Seven Year , to bring a finish 'd <unk> into the World , and a <unk> Printer , Reprints his Copy immediately , and Sells it for a quarter of the Price ... these things call for an Act of Parliament " . Seeing this , the Company took the opportunity to experiment with a change to their approach and argument . Instead of lobbying because of the impact the absence of legislation was having on their trade , they lobbied on behalf of the authors , but seeking the same things . The first indication of this change in approach comes from the 1706 pamphlet by John How , a stationer , titled Reasons humbly Offer 'd for a Bill for the Encouragement of Learning and the Improvement of Printing . This argued for a return to licensing , not with reference to the printers , but because without something to protect authors and guarantee them an income , " Learned men will be wholly discouraged from Propagating the most useful Parts of Knowledge and Literature " . Using these new tactics and the support of authors , the Company petitioned Parliament again in both 1707 and 1709 to introduce a bill providing for copyright . 
 = = Act = = 
 = = = Passage = = = 
 Although both bills failed , they led to media pressure that was exacerbated by both Defoe and How . Defoe 's A Review , published on 3 December 1709 and demanding " a Law in the present Parliament ... for the Encouragement of Learning , Arts , and Industry , by securing the Property of Books to the Authors or Editors of them " , was followed by How 's Some Thoughts on the Present State of Printing and <unk> , which hoped that Parliament " might think fit to secure Property in Books by a Law " . This was followed by another review by Defoe on 6 December , in which he even went so far as to provide a draft text for the bill . On 12 December , the Stationers submitted yet another petition asking for legislation on the issue , and the House of Commons gave three MPs – Spencer Compton , Craven Peyton and Edward Wortley – permission to form a drafting committee . On 11 January 1710 , Wortley introduced this bill , titling it A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning and for Securing the Property of Copies of Books to the rightful Owners thereof . 
 The bill allowed for fines for anyone who imported or traded in unlicensed or foreign books , required every book that would be given copyright protection to be entered into the Stationers ' Register , provided a legal deposit system centred around the King 's Library , the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge , but said nothing about limiting the term of copyright . It also specified that books were property ; an emphasis on the idea that authors deserved copyright simply due to their efforts . The Stationers were enthusiastic , urging Parliament to pass the bill , and it received its second reading on 9 February . A Committee of the Whole met to amend it on 21 February , with further alterations made when it was passed back to the House of Commons on 25 February . Alterations during this period included minor changes , such as extending the legal deposit system to cover Sion College and the Faculty of Advocates , but also major ones , including the introduction of a limit on the length of time for which copyright would be granted . 
 Linguistic amendments were also included ; the line in the preamble emphasising that authors possessed books as they would any other piece of property was dropped , and the bill moved from something designed " for Securing the Property of Copies of Books to the rightful Owners thereof " to a bill " for the Encouragement of Learning , by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors or Purchasers of such Copies " . Another amendment allowed anyone to own and trade in copies of books , undermining the Stationers . Other changes were made when the bill went to the House of Lords , and it was finally returned to the Commons on 5 April . The aims of the resulting statute are debated ; Ronan <unk> suggests that the intent was to balance the rights of the author , publisher and public in such a way as to ensure the maximum dissemination of works , while other academics argue that the bill was intended to protect the Company 's monopoly or , conversely , to weaken it . Oren Bracha , writing in the Berkeley Technology Law Journal , says that when considering which of these options are correct , " the most probable answer [ is ] all of them " . Whatever the motivations , the bill was passed on 5 April 1710 , and is commonly known simply as the Statute of Anne due its passage during the reign of Queen Anne . 
 = = = Text = = = 
 Consisting of 11 sections , the Statute of Anne is formally titled " An Act for the Encouragement of Learning , by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors or Purchasers of Copies , during the Times therein mentioned " . The preamble for the Statute indicates the purpose of the legislation - to bring order to the book trade - saying : 
 Whereas Printers , Booksellers , and other Persons , have of late frequently taken the Liberty of Printing , Reprinting , and Publishing , or causing to be Printed , Reprinted , and Published Books , and other Writings , without the Consent of the Authors or Proprietors of such Books and Writings , to their very great <unk> , and too often to the Ruin of them and their Families : For Preventing therefore such Practices for the future , and for the Encouragement of Learned Men to <unk> and Write useful Books ; May it please Your Majesty , that it may be Enacted ... 
 The Statute then moved on to stating the nature of copyright . The right granted was the right to copy ; to have sole control over the printing and reprinting of books , with no provision to benefit the owner of this right after the sale . This right , previously held by the Stationers ' Company 's members , would automatically be given to the author as soon as it was published , although they had the ability to license these rights to another person . The copyright could be gained through two stages ; first , the registration of the book 's publication with the Company , to prevent unintentional infringement , and second , the deposit of copies of the book at the Stationers ' Company , the royal library and various universities . One restriction on copyright was a " cumbersome system " designed to prohibit unreasonably high prices for books , which limited how much authors could charge for copies . There was also a prohibition on importing foreign works , with exceptions made for Latin and Greek classics . 
 Once registration had been completed and the deposits were made , the author was granted an exclusive right to control the copying of the book . Penalties for infringing this right were severe , with all infringing copies to be destroyed and large fines to be paid to both the copyright holder and the government ; there was only a three @-@ month statute of limitations on bringing a case , however . This exclusive right 's length was dependent on when the book had been published . If it was published after 10 April 1710 , the length of copyright was 14 years ; if published before that date , 21 years . An author who survived until the copyright expired would be granted an additional 14 @-@ year term , and when that ran out , the works would enter the public domain . Copyright under the Statute applied to Scotland and England , as well as Ireland when that country joined the union in 1800 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The passage of the Statute was initially much welcomed , ushering in " stability to an insecure book trade " while providing for a " pragmatic bargain " between the rights of the author , publisher and public intended to boost public learning and the availability of knowledge . The clause requiring book deposits , however , was not seen as a success . If the books were not deposited , the penalties would be severe , with a fine of £ 5 . The number of deposits required , however , meant that it was a substantial burden ; a print run might only be of 250 copies , and if they were particularly expensive to print , it could be cheaper to ignore the law . Some booksellers argued that the deposit provision only applied to registered books , and so deliberately avoided registration just to be able to minimise their liability . This was further undermined by the ruling in Beckford v Hood , where the Court of King 's Bench confirmed that , even without registration , copyright could be enforced against <unk> . 
 Another failure , identified by Bracha , is not found in what the Statute covered , but in what it did not . The Statute did not provide any means for identifying authors , did not identify what constituted authored works , and covered only " books " , even while discussing " property " as a whole . Moreover , the right provided was merely that of " making and selling ... exact reprints . To a large extent , the new regime was the old stationer 's privilege , except it was universalised , capped in time , and formally conferred upon authors rather than publishers " . The impact of the Statute on authors was also minimal . Previously , publishers would have bought the original manuscript from writers for a lump sum ; with the passage of the Statute , they simply did the same thing , but with the manuscript 's copyright as well . The remaining economic power of the Company also allowed them to pressure booksellers and distributors into continuing their past arrangements , meaning that even theoretically " public domain " works were , in practise , still treated as copyrighted . 
 = = = Battle of the Booksellers = = = 
 When the copyrights granted to works published before the Statute began to expire in 1731 , the Stationers ' Company and their publishers again began to fight to preserve the status quo . Their first port of call was Parliament , where they lobbied for new legislation to extend the length of copyright , and when this failed , they turned to the courts . Their principal argument was that copyright had not been created by the Statute of Anne ; it existed beforehand , in the common law , and was perpetual . As such , even though the Statute provided for a limited term , all works remained in copyright under the common law regardless of when statutory copyright expired . Starting in 1743 , this began a thirty @-@ year campaign known as the " Battle of the Booksellers " . They first tried going to the Court of Chancery and applying for injunctions prohibiting other publishers from printing their works , and this was initially successful . A series of legal setbacks over the next few years , however , left the law ambiguous . 
 The first major action taken to clarify the situation was Millar v Taylor . Andrew Millar , a British publisher , purchased the rights to James Thomson 's The Seasons in 1729 , and when the copyright term expired , a competing publisher named Robert Taylor began issuing his own reprints of the work . Millar sued , and went to the Court of King 's Bench to obtain an injunction and advocate perpetual copyright at common law . The jury found that the facts submitted by Millar were accurate , and asked the judges to clarify whether common law copyright existed . The first arguments were delivered on 30 June 1767 , with John Dunning representing Millar and Edward Thurlow representing Taylor . A second set of arguments were submitted for Millar by William Blackstone on 7 June , and judgment was given on 20 April 1769 . The final decision , written by Lord Mansfield and endorsed by Aston and Willes JJ , confirmed that there existed copyright at common law that turned " upon Principles before and independent " of the Statute of Anne , something justified because it was right " that an Author should reap the pecuniary Profits of his own Ingenuity and Labour " . In other words , regardless of the Statute , there existed a perpetual copyright under the common law . Yates J dissented , on the grounds that the focus on the author obscured the impact this decision would have on " the rest of mankind " , which he felt would be to create a virtual monopoly , something that would have a detrimental impact on the public and should certainly not be considered " an encouragement of the propagation of learning " . 
 Although this decision was a boon to the Stationers , it was short @-@ lived . Following Millar , the right to print The Seasons was sold to a coalition of publishers including Thomas Becket . Two Scottish printers , Alexander and John Donaldson , began publishing an unlicensed edition , and Becket successfully obtained an injunction to stop them . This decision was appealed in Donaldson v Beckett , and eventually went to the House of Lords . After consulting with the judges of the King 's Bench , Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas , the Lords concluded that copyright was not perpetual , and that the term permitted by the Statute of Anne was the maximum length of legal protection for publishers and authors alike . 
 = = = Expansion and repeal = = = 
 Until its repeal , most extensions to copyright law were based around provisions found in the Statute of Anne . The one successful bill from the lobbying in the 1730s , which came into force on 29 September 1739 , extended the provision prohibiting the import of foreign books to also prohibit the import of books that , while originally published in Britain , were being reprinted in foreign nations and then shipped to England and Wales . This was intended to stop the influx of cheap books from Ireland , and also repealed the price restrictions in the Statute of Anne . Another alteration was over the legal deposit provisions of the Statute , which many booksellers found unfair . Despite an initial period of compliance , the principle of donating copies of books to certain libraries lapsed , partly due to the <unk> of the statute 's provisions and partly because of a lack of cooperation by the publishers . In 1775 Lord North , who was Chancellor of the University of Oxford , succeeded in passing a bill that reiterated the legal deposit provisions and granted the universities perpetual copyright on their works . 
 Another range of extensions came in relation to what could be copyrighted . The Statute only referred to books , and being an Act of Parliament , it was necessary to pass further legislation to include various other types of intellectual property . The Engraving Copyright Act 1734 extended copyright to cover engravings , statutes in 1789 and 1792 involved cloth , sculptures were copyrighted in 1814 and the performance of plays and music were covered by copyright in 1833 and 1842 respectively . The length of copyright was also altered ; the Copyright Act 1814 set a copyright term of either 28 years , or the natural life of the author if this was longer . Despite these expansions , some still felt copyright was not a strong enough regime . In 1837 , Thomas Noon Talfourd introduced a bill into Parliament to expand the scope of copyright . A friend of many men of letters , Talfourd aimed to provide adequate rewards for authors and artists . He campaigned for copyright to exist for the life of the author , with an additional 60 years after that . He also proposed that existing statutes be codified under the bill , so that the case law that had arisen around the Statute of Anne was clarified . 
 Talfourd 's proposals led to opposition , and he reintroduced modified versions of them year on year . Printers , publishers and booksellers were concerned about the cost implications for original works , and for reprinting works that had fallen out of copyright . Many within Parliament argued that the bill failed to take into account the public interest , including Lord Macaulay , who succeeded in defeating one of Talfourd 's bills in 1841 . The Copyright Act 1842 passed , but " fell far short of Talfourd 's dream of a uniform , consistent , codified law of copyright " . It extended copyright to life plus seven years , and , as part of the codification clauses , repealed the Statute of Anne . 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 The Statute of Anne is traditionally seen as " a historic moment in the development of copyright " , and the first statute in the world to provide for copyright . Craig Joyce and Lyman Ray Patterson , writing in the Emory Law Journal , call this a " too simple understanding [ that ] ignores the statute 's source " , arguing that it is at best a derivative of the Licensing Act . Even considering this , however , the Statute of Anne was " the watershed event in Anglo @-@ American copyright history ... transforming what had been the publishers ' private law copyright into a public law grant " . Patterson , writing separately , does note the differences between the Licensing Act and the Statute of Anne ; the question of censorship was , by 1710 , out of the question , and in that regard the Statute is distinct , not providing for censorship . 
 It also marked the first time that copyright had been vested primarily in the author , rather than the publisher , and also the first time that the injurious treatment of authors by publishers was recognised ; regardless of what authors signed away , the second 14 @-@ year term of copyright would automatically return to them . Even in the 21st century , the Statute of Anne is " frequently invoked by modern judges and academics as embodying the utilitarian underpinnings of copyright law " . In <unk> v Nine Network , for example , the High Court of Australia noted that the title of the Statute " echoed explicitly the emphasis on the practical or utilitarian importance that certain seventeenth @-@ century philosophers attached to knowledge and its encouragement in the scheme of human progress " . Despite " widely recognised flaws " , the Act became a model copyright statute , both within the United Kingdom and internationally . Christophe Geiger notes that it is " a difficult , almost impossible task " to analyse the relationship between the Statute of Anne and early French copyright law , both because it is difficult to make a direct connection , and because the ongoing debate over both has led to radically different interpretations of each nation 's law . 
 Similarly , Belgium took no direct influence from the Statute or English copyright theory , but Joris Deene of the University of Ghent identifies an indirect influence " at two levels " ; the criteria for what constitutes copyrightable material , which comes from the work of English theorists such as Locke and Edward Young , and the underlying justification of copyright law . In Belgium , this justification is both that copyright serves the public interest , and that copyright is a " private right " that serves the interests of individual authors . Both theories were taken into account in Donaldson v Beckett , as well as in the drafting of the Statute of Anne , and Deene infers that they subsequently had an impact on the Belgian debates over their first copyright statute . In the United States , the Copyright Clause of the United States Constitution and the first Federal copyright statute , the Copyright Act of 1790 , both draw on the Statute of Anne . The 1790 Act contains provisions for a 14 @-@ year term of copyright and sections that provide for authors who published their works before 1790 , both of which mirror the protection offered by the Statute 80 years previously . 
 = Grindcore = 
 Grindcore is an extreme genre of music that originated in the early to mid @-@ 1980s . It draws inspiration from some of the most abrasive @-@ sounding genres – including hardcore punk , thrash metal , crust punk , industrial and noise rock . Grindcore is characterized by a noise @-@ filled sound that uses heavily distorted , down @-@ tuned guitars , grinding overdriven bass , high speed tempo , blast beats , and vocals which consist of growls and high @-@ pitched shrieks . Early groups like Napalm Death are credited with laying the groundwork for the style . It is most prevalent today in North America and Europe , with popular contributors such as Brutal Truth and <unk> . Lyrical themes range from a primary focus on social and political concerns , to gory subject matter and black humor . 
 A trait of grindcore is the " microsong " . Several bands have produced songs that are only seconds in length . British band Napalm Death holds the Guinness World Record for shortest song ever recorded with the one @-@ second " You Suffer " ( 1987 ) . Many bands , such as Agoraphobic Nosebleed , record simple phrases that may be rhythmically sprawled out across an instrumental lasting only a couple of bars in length . 
 A variety of " <unk> " have subsequently emerged , often labeling bands according to traits that deviate from regular grindcore , including goregrind , focused on themes of gore , and <unk> , fixated on pornographic lyrical themes . Other offshoots include <unk> ( especially raw and chaotic ) and <unk> ( incorporating electronic elements such as sampling and programmed drums ) . Although an influential phenomenon on hardcore punk and other popular genres , grindcore itself remains an underground form of music . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Grindcore evolved as a blend of thrash metal and hardcore punk . The name derives from the fact that grind is a British term for thrash ; that term was appended to <unk> from hardcore . Grindcore relies on standard hardcore punk instrumentation : electric guitar , bass and drums . However , grindcore alters the usual practices of metal or rock music in regard to song structure and tone . The vocal style is " ranging from high @-@ pitched shrieks to low , throat @-@ shredding growls and barks . " In some cases , no clear lyrics exist . Vocals may be used as merely an added sound effect , a common practice with bands such as the experimental Naked City . 
 A characteristic of some grindcore songs is the " microsong , " lasting only a few seconds . In 2001 , the Guinness Book of World Records awarded Brutal Truth the record for " Shortest Music Video " for 1994 's " Collateral Damage " ( the song lasts four seconds ) . In 2007 , the video for the Napalm Death song " You Suffer " set a new " Shortest Music Video " record : 1 @.@ 3 seconds . Beyond the microsong , it is characteristic of grindcore to have short songs in general ; for example , Carcass ' debut album Reek of <unk> ( 1988 ) consists of 22 tracks with an average length of 1 minute and 48 seconds . It is also not uncommon for grindcore albums to be very short when compared to other genres , usually consisting of a large tracklist but having a total length of only 15 to 20 minutes . 
 Many grindcore groups experiment with down @-@ tuned guitars . While the vinyl A @-@ side of Napalm Death 's debut , 1987 's <unk> , is set to standard tuning , on side B , the guitars are tuned down 2 ½ steps . Their second album From Enslavement to Obliteration and the Mentally Murdered EP were tuned to C ♯ . Harmony Corruption , their third full @-@ length album , was tuned up to a D. Bolt Thrower went further , dropping 3 ½ steps down ( A ) . Bass is tuned low as well , and is often distorted . 
 = = = Blast beat = = = 
 The blast beat is a drum beat characteristic of grindcore in all its forms , although its usage predates the genre itself , as it is native to jazz . In Adam MacGregor 's definition , " the blast @-@ beat generally comprises a repeated , sixteenth @-@ note figure played at a very fast tempo , and divided uniformly among the kick drum , snare and ride , crash , or hi @-@ hat cymbal . " Blast beats have been described as " maniacal percussive explosions , less about rhythm per second than sheer sonic violence . " Napalm Death coined the term , though this style of drumming had previously been practiced by others . Daniel <unk> argues that the blast beat was first performed by the Swedish group <unk> on their 1982 demo . D.R.I. ( " No Sense " ) , S.O.D. ( " Milk " ) , Sarcófago ( " <unk> " ) , Sepultura ( " Antichrist " ) , and Repulsion also included the technique prior to Napalm Death 's emergence . According to some sources , it was <unk> that first used the blast beat . <unk> and Napalm Death became bands around the same time . 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 Grindcore lyrics are typically provocative . A number of grindcore musicians are committed to political and ethical causes , generally leaning towards the far left in connection to grindcore 's punk roots . For example , Napalm Death 's songs address a variety of anarchist concerns , in the tradition of anarcho @-@ punk . These themes include anti @-@ racism , feminism , anti @-@ militarism , and anti @-@ capitalism . Other grindcore groups , such as Cattle Decapitation and Carcass , have expressed disgust with human behavior , animal abuse , and are , in some cases , vegetarians or vegans . Carcass ' work in particular is often identified as the origin of the goregrind style , which is devoted to " bodily " themes . Groups that shift their bodily focus to sexual matters , such as Gut and the Meat <unk> , are sometimes referred to as <unk> . Seth Putnam 's lyrics are notorious for their black comedy , while The Locust tend toward satirical collage , indebted to William S. Burroughs ' cut @-@ up method . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 The early grindcore scene relied on an international network of tape trading and DIY production . The most widely acknowledged precursors of the grindcore sound are Siege , a hardcore punk group , and Repulsion , an early death metal outfit . Siege , from Weymouth , Massachusetts , were influenced by classic American hardcore ( Minor Threat , Black Flag , Void ) and by British groups like Discharge , Venom , and Motörhead . Siege 's goal was maximum velocity : " We would listen to the fastest punk and hardcore bands we could find and say , ' Okay , we 're gonna deliberately write something that is faster than them ' " , drummer Robert Williams recalled . 
 Repulsion is often credited with inventing the classic grind blast beat ( played at 190 bpm ) , as well as its distinctive bass tone . Shane Embury , in particular , advocates the band as the origin of Napalm Death 's later innovations . Kevin Sharp of Brutal Truth declares that " Horrified was and still is the defining core of what grind became ; a perfect mix of hardcore punk with metallic gore , speed and distortion . " 
 Other groups in the British grindcore scene , such as Heresy and Unseen Terror , have emphasized the influence of American hardcore punk , including Septic Death , as well as Swedish D @-@ beat . Sore Throat cites Discharge , Disorder , and a variety of European D @-@ beat and thrash metal groups , including Hellhammer , and American hardcore groups , such as Poison Idea and <unk> .. Japanese hardcore , particularly <unk> , is also mentioned by a number of originators of the style . Other key groups cited by current and former members of Napalm Death as formative influences include Discharge , Amebix , Throbbing Gristle , and the aforementioned Dirty Rotten Imbeciles . Post @-@ punk , such as Killing Joke and Joy Division , was also cited as an influence on early Napalm Death . 
 = = = British grindcore = = = 
 Grindcore , as such , was developed during the mid @-@ 1980s in the United Kingdom by Napalm Death , a group who emerged from the anarcho @-@ punk scene in Birmingham , England . While their first recordings were in the vein of Crass , they eventually became associated with crust punk . The group began to take on increasing elements of thrashcore , post @-@ punk , and power electronics . The group also went through many changes in personnel . A major shift in style took place after Mick Harris became the group 's drummer . Punk historian Ian Glasper indicates that " For several months gob @-@ smacked audiences weren 't sure whether Napalm Death were actually a serious band any longer , such was the undeniable novelty of their hyper @-@ speed new drummer . " Albert <unk> 's research suggests that the name " grindcore " was coined by Harris . When asked about coming up with the term , Harris said : 
 Grindcore came from " grind " , which was the only word I could use to describe Swans after buying their first record in ' 84 . Then with this new hardcore movement that started to really blossom in ' 85 , I thought " grind " really fit because of the speed so I started to call it grindcore . 
 Other sources contradict Harris ' claim . In a Spin magazine article written about the genre , Steven Blush declares that " the man often credited " for dubbing the style grindcore was Shane Embury , Napalm Death 's bassist since 1987 . Embury offers his own account of how the grindcore " sound " came to be : 
 As far as how this whole sound got started , we were really into Celtic Frost , Siege – which is a hardcore band from Boston – a lot of hardcore and death @-@ metal bands , and some industrial @-@ noise bands like the early Swans . So , we just created a mesh of all those things . It 's just everything going at a hundred miles per hour , basically . 
 Earache Records founder Digby Pearson concurs with Embury , saying that Napalm Death " put hardcore and metal through an accelerator . " Pearson , however , said that grindcore " wasn 't just about the speed of [ the ] drums , blast beats , etc . " He claimed that " it actually was coined to describe the guitars - heavy , downtuned , bleak , harsh riffing guitars [ that ] ' grind ' , so that 's what the genre was described as , by the musicians who were its innovators [ and ] proponents . " 
 While abrasive , grindcore achieved a measure of mainstream visibility . New Musical Express featured Napalm Death on their cover in 1988 , declaring them " the fastest band in the world . " As James Hoare , deputy editor of Terrorizer , writes : 
 It can be argued that no strand of extreme metal ( with a touch of hardcore and post @-@ punk tossed in for flavouring ) , has had so big an impact outside the gated community of patch @-@ jackets and circle @-@ pits as grindcore has in the UK . [ ... ] the genre is a part of the British musical experience . 
 Napalm Death 's seismic impact inspired other British grindcore groups in the 1980s , among them Extreme Noise Terror , Carcass and Sore Throat . Extreme Noise Terror , from Ipswich , formed in 1984 . With the goal of becoming " the most extreme hardcore punk band of all time , " the group took Mick Harris from Napalm Death in 1987 . Ian Glasper describes the group as " pissed @-@ off hateful noise with its roots somewhere between early Discharge and Disorder , with [ vocalists ] Dean [ Jones ] and Phil [ Vane ] pushing their trademark vocal extremity to its absolute limit . " In 1991 , the group collaborated with the acid house group The KLF , appearing onstage with the group at the Brit Awards in 1992 . Carcass released Reek of <unk> in 1988 , which John Peel declared his favorite album of the year despite its very poor production . The band 's focus on gore and anatomical decay , lyrically and in sleeve artwork , inspired the goregrind subgenre . Sore Throat , said by Ian Glasper to have taken " perhaps the most uncompromisingly anti @-@ music stance " were inspired by crust punk as well as industrial music . Some listeners , such as Digby Pearson , considered them to be simply an in @-@ joke or parody of grindcore . 
 In the subsequent decade , two pioneers of the style became increasingly commercially viable . According to Nielsen Soundscan , Napalm Death sold 367 @,@ 654 units between May 1991 and November 2003 , while Carcass sold 220 @,@ 374 units in the same period . The inclusion of Napalm Death 's " Twist the Knife ( Slowly ) " on the Mortal Kombat soundtrack brought the band much greater visibility , as the compilation scored a Top 10 position in the Billboard 200 chart and went platinum in less than a year . The originators of the style have expressed some ambivalence regarding the subsequent popularity of grindcore . Pete Hurley , the guitarist of Extreme Noise Terror , declared that he had no interest in being remembered as a pioneer of this style : " ' grindcore ' was a legendarily stupid term coined by a hyperactive kid from the West Midlands , and it had nothing to do with us whatsoever . ENT were , are , and - I suspect - always will be a hardcore punk band ... not a grindcore band , a <unk> band , a <unk> band , or any other sub @-@ sub @-@ sub @-@ core genre @-@ defining term you can come up with . " Lee Dorian of Napalm Death indicated that " Unfortunately , I think the same thing happened to grindcore , if you want to call it that , as happened to punk rock - all the great original bands were just plagiarised by a billion other bands who just copied their style identically , making it no longer original and no longer extreme . " 
 = = = North American grindcore = = = 
 Journalist Kevin Stewart @-@ Panko argues that the American grindcore of the 1990s borrowed from three sources : British grindcore , the American precursors , and death metal . As early Napalm Death albums were not widely distributed in the United States , American groups tended to take inspiration from later works , such as Harmony Corruption . American groups also often employ riffs taken from crossover thrash or thrash metal . Early American grind practitioners included Terrorizer and <unk> . Anal Cunt , a particularly dissonant group who lacked a bass player , were also particularly influential . Their style was sometimes referred to as " <unk> " or " <unk> " , described by Giulio of Cripple Bastards as " the most anti @-@ musical and nihilistic face of extreme music at that time . " Brutal Truth was a groundbreaking group in the American scene at the beginning of the 1990s . 
 However , Sharp indicates that they were more inspired by the thrash metal of Dark Angel than the British groups . <unk> Axis had a more technical style of playing than many of the predecessors , and had a much more ornate visual and production style . Scott Hull is prominent in the contemporary grindcore scene , through his participation in Pig Destroyer and Agoraphobic Nosebleed . <unk> 's Frozen Corpse Stuffed with Dope has been described as " the Paul 's Boutique of grindcore " , by Village Voice critic Phil Freeman , for its " hyper @-@ referential , impossibly dense barrage of samples , blast beats , answering machine messages , and incomprehensibly bellowed rants . " Pig Destroyer is inspired by thrash metal , such as Dark Angel and Slayer , the sludge metal of The Melvins , and grindcore practiced by Brutal Truth , while Agoraphobic Nosebleed takes cues from thrashcore and powerviolence , like D.R.I. and Crossed Out . Pig Destroyer 's style is sometimes referred to as " deathgrind " , because of the prevalence of death metal influences , as are Cattle Decapitation . 
 The Locust , from San Diego , also take inspiration from powerviolence ( Crossed Out , <unk> ) , first @-@ wave screamo ( Angel Hair ) , obscure experimental rock ( Art Bears , Renaldo and the Loaf ) , and death metal . The Locust were sometimes described as " hipster grind " because of their fan base and fashion choices . In Los Angeles , Hole also initially drew influence from grindcore in their early releases , particularly on their singles " Dicknail " and " Teenage Whore " , as well as on their debut album , Pretty on the Inside ( 1991 ) , all of which featured sexually provocative and violent lyrics , as well as the heavy distortion and fluctuating tempo that distinguished the genre . <unk> Courtney Love stated that she wanted to capture the distinguishing elements of grindcore while incorporating more pop @-@ based melodic structure , although the band distanced themselves from the style in their later releases . 
 Other later prominent grindcore groups of North America include <unk> , <unk> Green , Cephalic Carnage , <unk> , and Circle of Dead Children . Fuck the Facts , a Canadian group , practice classic grindcore , characterized by the " metronome @-@ precision drumming and riffing [ that ] abound , as well as vocal screams and growls " by AllMusic reviewer Greg Prato . 
 = = = Continental European grindcore = = = 
 European groups , such as Agathocles , from Belgium , <unk> , of Croatia , and Fear of God , from Switzerland , are important early practitioners of the style . Filthy Christians , who signed to Earache Records in 1989 , introduced the style in Sweden , <unk> & Fear of Dog were pioneering grind & noise in Serbia since mid @-@ end of ' 80 , Extreme Smoke 57 in Slovenia at the early beginning of the ' 90 , while Cripple Bastards established Italian grindcore . Giulio of Cripple Bastards asserts that the name itself took some time to migrate from Britain , with the style being referred to as " death @-@ thrashcore " for a time in Europe . <unk> , who emerged from the Swedish death metal scene , became a popular group , addressing political topics from a personal perspective . 
 Anders Jakobson , their drummer , reported that " It was all these different types of people who enjoyed what we were doing . [ ... ] We made grindcore a bit easier to listen to at the expense of the diehard grindcore fans who thought that we were , well , not sellouts , but not really true to the original essence of grindcore . " Other Swedish groups , such as General Surgery and <unk> , practiced goregrind . <unk> , from the Netherlands , Rotten Sound , from Finland , and Leng <unk> 'e , from Belgium , were subsequent European groups who practiced grindcore with death metal inflections . In 2000s , the Belgium @-@ based Aborted " had grown into the role of key contributors to the death @-@ grind genres " . 
 = = Influence on other genres = = 
 Japanese noise rock group Boredoms have borrowed elements of grind , and toured with Brutal Truth in 1993 . The Japanese grindcore group Gore Beyond <unk> formed in 1989 , and later collaborated with noise music artist Merzbow . Naked City , led by avant @-@ garde jazz saxophonist John Zorn , performed an avant @-@ garde form of <unk> , grindcore @-@ influenced punk jazz . Zorn later formed the Painkiller project with ambient dub producer Bill Laswell on bass guitar and Mick Harris on drums , which also collaborated with Justin Broadrick on some work . In addition , grindcore was one influence on the powerviolence movement within American hardcore punk , and has affected some strains of metalcore . Some musicians have also produced hybrids between grind and electronic music . 
 = = = Powerviolence = = = 
 Powerviolence is a raw and dissonant subgenre of hardcore punk . The style is closely related to thrashcore and similar to grindcore . While powerviolence took inspiration from Napalm Death and other early grind bands , powerviolence groups avoided elements of heavy metal . Its nascent form was pioneered in the late 1980s in the music of hardcore punk band <unk> , who mixed youth crew hardcore elements with noisier , <unk> qualities of <unk> and Siege . The microgenre solidified into its most commonly recognized form in the early 1990s , with the sounds of bands such as Man Is the Bastard , Crossed Out , No Comment , Capitalist Casualties , and <unk> . 
 Powerviolence bands focus on speed , brevity , bizarre timing breakdowns , and constant tempo changes . Powerviolence songs are often very short ; it is not uncommon for some to last less than 30 seconds . Some groups , particularly Man Is the Bastard , took influence from sludge metal and noise music . Lyrically and conceptually , powerviolence groups were very raw and <unk> , both sonically and in their packaging . Some groups ( Man Is the Bastard and <unk> ) took influence from anarcho @-@ punk and crust punk , emphasizing animal rights and anti @-@ militarism . The Locust and Agoraphobic Nosebleed later reincorporated elements of powerviolence into grindcore . 
 = = = Industrial and electronic music = = = 
 Among other influences , Napalm Death took impetus from the industrial music scene . Subsequently , Napalm Death 's former guitarist , Justin Broadrick , went on to a career in industrial metal with Godflesh . Mick Harris , in his post @-@ Napalm Death project , Scorn , briefly experimented with the style . Scorn also worked in the industrial hip hop and isolationist styles . Fear Factory have also cited debts to the genre . Digital hardcore is an initially German hybrid of hardcore punk and hardcore techno . Agoraphobic Nosebleed and the Locust have solicited remixes from digital hardcore producers and noise musicians . James Plotkin , Dave Witte , and <unk> participated in the <unk> project , which melds grindcore and digital hardcore . Alec Empire collaborated with Justin Broadrick , on the first Curse of the Golden Vampire album , and with Gabe Serbian , of the Locust , live in Japan . Japanoise icon Merzbow also participated in the Empire / Serbian show . 
 The 21st century also saw the development of " <unk> " ( or " <unk> " ) , practiced by The Berzerker , Body Hammer , Gigantic Brain and Genghis Tron which borrows from electronic music . These groups built on the work of Agoraphobic Nosebleed , Enemy Soil and The Locust , as well as industrial metal . The Berzerker also appropriated the distorted Roland TR @-@ 909 kick drums of <unk> producers . Many later <unk> groups were caricatured for their hipster connections . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , mathcore groups such as The Dillinger Escape Plan , Some Girls , and Daughters began to take inspiration from developments in grindcore . These groups also include elements of post @-@ hardcore . In addition to mathcore some early screamo groups , like Circle Takes the Square and Orchid , have been associated with grindcore by some commentators . 
 = José de San Martín = 
 José Francisco de San Martín y <unk> ( 25 February 1778 – 17 August 1850 ) , known simply as José de San Martín ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ðe san <unk> ] ) , was an Argentine general and the prime leader of the southern part of South America 's successful struggle for independence from the Spanish Empire . Born in <unk> , Corrientes , in modern @-@ day Argentina , he left his mother country at the early age of seven to study in Málaga , Spain . 
 In 1808 , after taking part in the Peninsular War against France , San Martín contacted South American supporters of independence from Spain . In 1812 , he set sail for Buenos Aires and offered his services to the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata , present @-@ day Argentina . After the Battle of San Lorenzo and time commanding the Army of the North during 1814 , he organized a plan to defeat the Spanish forces that menaced the United Provinces from the north , using an alternative path to the Viceroyalty of Peru . This objective first involved the establishment of a new army , the Army of the Andes , in Cuyo Province , Argentina . From there , he led the Crossing of the Andes to Chile , and triumphed at the Battle of Chacabuco and the Battle of Maipú ( 1818 ) , thus liberating Chile from royalist rule . Then he sailed to attack the Spanish stronghold of Lima , Peru . 
 On 12 July 1821 , after seizing partial control of Lima , San Martín was appointed Protector of Peru , and Peruvian independence was officially declared on 28 July . On 22 July 1822 , after a closed @-@ door meeting with fellow <unk> Simón Bolívar at Guayaquil , Ecuador , Bolívar took over the task of fully liberating Peru . San Martín unexpectedly left the country and resigned the command of his army , excluding himself from politics and the military , and moved to France in 1824 . The details of the 22 July meeting would be a subject of debate by later historians . 
 San Martín is regarded as a national hero of Argentina and Peru , and , together with Bolívar , one of the Liberators of Spanish South America . The Order of the Liberator General San Martín ( Orden del Libertador General San Martín ) , created in his honor , is the highest decoration conferred by the Argentine government . 
 = = Early life = = 
 José de San Martín was the fifth and last son of Juan de San Martín , an unsuccessful Spanish soldier , and Gregoria <unk> del Ser . He was born in <unk> , Corrientes , an Indian reduction of Guaraní people . The exact year of his birth is disputed , as there are no records of his baptism . Later documents formulated during his life , such as passports , military career records and wedding documentation , gave him varying ages . Most of these documents point to his year of birth as either 1777 or 1778 . The family moved to Buenos Aires in 1781 , when San Martín was three or four years old . 
 Juan requested to be transferred to Spain , leaving the Americas in 1783 . The family settled in Madrid , but as Juan was unable to earn a promotion , they moved to Málaga . Once in the city , San Martín enrolled in Málaga 's school of temporalities , beginning his studies in 1785 . It is unlikely that he finished the six @-@ year @-@ long elementary education , before he enrolled in the Regiment of Murcia in 1789 , when he reached the required age of 11 . He began his military career as a cadet in the <unk> Infantry Unit . 
 = = = Military career in Europe = = = 
 San Martín took part in several Spanish campaigns in Africa , fighting in Melilla and in Oran against the Moors in 1791 , among others . His rank was raised to Sub @-@ Lieutenant in 1793 , at the age of 15 . He began a naval career during the War of the Second Coalition , when Spain was allied with France against Great Britain , during the time of the French Revolution . His ship " Santa Dorotea " was captured by British forces , who kept him prisoner for some time . Soon afterward , he continued to fight in southern Spain , mainly in Cadiz and Gibraltar with the rank of Second Captain of light infantry . He continued to fight Portugal on the side of Spain in the War of the Oranges in 1801 . He was promoted to captain in 1804 . During his stay in Cádiz he was influenced by the ideas of the Spanish Enlightenment . 
 At the outbreak of the Peninsular War in 1808 , San Martín was named adjutant of Francisco María Solano Ortiz de Rosas . Rosas , suspected of being an afrancesado , was killed by a popular uprising which overran the barracks and dragged his corpse in the streets . San Martín was appointed to the armies of Andalucía , and led a battalion of volunteers . In June 1808 his unit is incorporated into a guerrilla force led by Juan de la Cruz <unk> . He was nearly killed during the battle of <unk> , but was saved by Sergeant Juan de Dios . On 19 July 1808 , Spanish and French forces engaged in the battle of Bailén , a Spanish victory that allowed the Army of Andalusia to attack and seize Madrid . For his actions during this battle , San Martín was awarded a gold medal , and his rank raised to lieutenant colonel . On 16 May 1811 , he fought in the battle of Albuera under the command of general William Carr Beresford . By this time , the French armies held most of the Iberian Peninsula under their control , except for Cádiz . 
 San Martín resigned from the Spanish army , for controversial reasons , and moved to South America , where he joined the Spanish American wars of independence . Historians propose several explanations for this action : the common ones are that he missed his native country , that he was a British agent and the congruence of the goals of both wars . The first explanation suggests that when the wars of independence began San Martín thought that his duty was to return to his country and serve in the military conflict . The second explanation suggests that Britain , which would benefit from the independence of the South American countries , sent San Martín to achieve it . The third suggests that both wars were caused by the conflicts between Enlightenment ideas and absolutism , so San Martín still waged the same war ; the wars in the Americas only developed separatist goals after the Spanish Absolutist Restoration . 
 San Martín was initiated in the Lodge of Rational Knights in 1811 . They met at the house of Carlos María de Alvear , other members were José Miguel Carrera , <unk> , Blanco Encalada and other criollos , American @-@ born Spaniards . They agreed to return to their home countries and join the local revolutionary movements . San Martín asked for his retirement from the military , and moved to Britain . He stayed in the country for a short time , and met many other South Americans at a lodge held at the house of Venezuelan general Francisco de Miranda at 27 Grafton Street ( now 58 Grafton Way ) , Bloomsbury , London ( the house now has a blue plaque with Miranda 's name ) . Then he sailed to Buenos Aires aboard the frigate George Canning , along with the South Americans Alvear , Francisco José de Vera and Matías Zapiola , and the Spaniards Francisco <unk> and Eduardo <unk> . They arrived on 9 March 1812 , to serve under the First Triumvirate . 
 = = South America = = 
 = = = Argentina = = = 
 A few days after his arrival in Buenos Aires in the United Provinces ( formally named the Argentine Republic in 1826 ) , San Martín was interviewed by the First Triumvirate . They appointed him a lieutenant colonel of cavalry , and asked him to create a cavalry unit , as Buenos Aires did not have good cavalry . He began to organize the Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers with Alvear and Zapiola . As Buenos Aires lacked professional military leaders , San Martín was entrusted with the protection of the whole city , but kept focused in the task of building the military unit . 
 San Martín , Alvear and Zapiola established a local branch of the Lodge of Rational Knights , along with <unk> , the former supporters of the late Mariano Moreno . This lodge sought to promote liberal ideas ; its secrecy hides whether it was a real Masonic lodge , or a lodge with political goals . It had no ties to the Premier Grand Lodge of England . San Martín married María de los Remedios de Escalada , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl from one of the local wealthy families . 
 The lodge organized the Revolution of October 8 , 1812 when the terms of office of the triumvirs Manuel de Sarratea and Feliciano Chiclana ended . Juan Martín de Pueyrredón promoted <unk> new members , Manuel <unk> and Pedro Medrano , by preventing the vote of three deputies and thus achieving a majority . As this caused a commotion , San Martín and Alvear intervened with their military force , and the Buenos Aires Cabildo disestablished the triumvirate . It was replaced by the Second Triumvirate of Juan José Paso , Nicolás Rodríguez Peña and Antonio Álvarez <unk> . The new triumvirate called the Assembly of the Year XIII and promoted San Martín to colonel . 
 = = = = San Lorenzo = = = = 
 Montevideo , on the other shore of the Río de la Plata , was still a royalist stronghold . José Rondeau laid siege to it , but the Montevidean navy eluded it by pillaging nearby cities . San Martín was sent with the new Regiment to watch the activities in the Paraná River shore . 
 The Regiment followed the navy from a distance , avoiding detection . They hid in the San Carlos Convent , in San Lorenzo , Santa Fe . San Martín watched the enemy ships from the top of the convent during the night . The royalists disembarked at dawn , ready to pillage and the regiment charged into battle . San Martín employed a pincer movement to trap the royalists . He led one column and Justo Bermúdez the other . 
 San Martín 's horse was killed during the battle , and his leg was trapped under the corpse of the animal after the fall . A royalist , probably Zabala himself , attempted to kill San Martín while he was trapped under his dead horse where he suffered a saber injury to his face , and a bullet wound to his arm . Juan Bautista Cabral and Juan Bautista Baigorria of San Martín 's regiment intervened and saved his life ; Cabral was mortally wounded , and died shortly afterwards . 
 The battle did not have a notable influence on the war and did not prevent further pillage . Montevideo was finally subdued by Admiral Brown during the Second Banda Oriental campaign . Antonio Zabala , the leader of the Montevidean army , served under San Martín during the crossing of the Andes years later . 
 = = = = Army of the North = = = = 
 Once again in Buenos Aires , San Martín and his wife attended to the first official performance of the Argentine National Anthem , on 28 May 1813 at the Coliseo Theater . Oral tradition has it that the premiere took place on 14 May 1813 at the home of aristocrat Mariquita Sánchez de Thompson , with San Martín also attending , but there is no documentary evidence of that . The lyrics of the new anthem included several references to the secessionist will of the time . 
 Although they were still allies , San Martín began to distance himself from Alvear , who controlled the Assembly and the lodge . Alvear opposed the merchants and the Uruguayan caudillo José Gervasio Artigas , San Martín thought that it was risky to open such conflicts when the royalists were still a threat . The Army of the North , which was operating at the Upper Peru , was defeated at the battles of Vilcapugio and Ayohuma , so the triumvirate appointed San Martín to head it , replacing Manuel Belgrano . 
 San Martín and Belgrano met at the Yatasto relay . The army was in poor condition , and San Martín initially refused to remove Belgrano from the army , as it would hurt the soldiers ' morale . However , the supreme director Gervasio Posadas ( who replaced the triumvirate in government ) insisted , and San Martín acted as instructed . San Martín stayed only a few weeks in Tucumán , reorganizing the army and studying the terrain . He also had a positive impression of the guerrilla war waged by Martín Miguel de Güemes against the royalists , similar to the Peninsular War . It was a defensive war , and San Martín trusted that they could prevent a royalist advance in Jujuy . 
 San Martín had health problems in April 1814 , probably caused by <unk> . He temporarily delegated the command of the Army to colonel Francisco Fernández de la Cruz and requested leave to recover . He moved to Santiago del Estero , and then to Córdoba where he slowly recovered . During this time King Ferdinand VII returned to the throne , began the absolutist restoration and began to organize an attack on the rogue colonies . After an interview with Tomás Guido , San Martín came up with a plan : organize an army in Mendoza , cross the Andes to Chile , and move to Peru by sea ; all while Güemes defended the north frontier . This would place him in Peru without crossing the harsh terrain of Upper Peru , where two campaigns had already been defeated . To advance this plan , he requested the governorship of the Cuyo province , which was accepted . He took office on 6 September . 
 = = = = Governor of Cuyo = = = = 
 The absolutist restoration in Spain and the growing influence of Artigas generated a political crisis in Buenos Aires , forcing Posadas to resign . Alvear became the new Supreme Director , but had to resign after three months . San Martín 's plan was complicated as well by the Disaster of Rancagua , a royalist victory that restored absolutism in Chile , ending the Patria Vieja period . San Martín initially proposed a regular @-@ sized army , simply to reinforce Chile , but changed to propose a larger one , to liberate the country from the occupation . Chileans Bernardo O 'Higgins , José Miguel Carrera , Luis Carrera and Manuel Rodríguez , the leaders of the deposed Chilean rule , sought refugee in Cuyo , along with their armies . O 'Higgins and Rodríguez were well received , but the Carrera brothers intended to act as a government in exile . They ignored the local laws of Cuyo , and their soldiers committed acts of vandalism . San Martín imprisoned them and sent them to Buenos Aires . They proposed a plan to liberate Chile , different to the one outlined by San Martín , who rejected it as impractical . This initiated a rivalry between the Carrera and San Martín . 
 San Martín began immediately to organize the Army of the Andes . He drafted all the citizens who could bear arms and all the slaves from ages 16 to 30 , requested reinforcements to Buenos Aires , and reorganized the economy for war production . He took another leave to restore his health four months after taking power , so Alvear appointed Gregorio <unk> . This appointment was resisted by the Mendoza Cabildo , which ratified San Martín . 
 The government of San Martín repeated some of the ideas outlined in the Operations plan , drafted by Mariano Moreno at the beginning of the war . A combination of incentives , confiscations and planned economy allowed the country to provision the army : gunpowder , pieces of artillery , mules and horses , food , military clothing , etc . Mining increased , with increased extraction of lead , copper , saltpeter , sulfur and borax , which had several usages and improved local finances . Hundreds of women wove clothing used by the soldiers . Father José Luis Beltrán headed a military factory of 700 men , which produced rifles and horseshoes . San Martín stayed on good terms with both the government of Buenos Aires and the provincial caudillos , without fully allying with either one . He was able to receive provisions from both . He considered that the war of independence took priority over the civil wars . 
 The army was not ready as of the summer of 1815 , delaying the crossing . Given the harsh conditions on the mountains , the crossing could only be done in the summer season , when there is less snow . Buenos Aires did not send more provisions after the ousting of Alvear . San Martín proposed to resign and serve under Balcarce , if they would support the campaign . San Martín and Guido wrote a report in the autumn of 1816 , detailing to the Supreme Director Antonio González de Balcarce the full military plan of operations . 
 San Martín proposed that the country declare independence immediately , before the crossing . That way , they would be acting as a sovereign nation , and not as a mere rebellion . He had great influence over the Congress of Tucumán , a Congress with deputies from the provinces , which was established in March 1816 . He opposed the appointment of José <unk> , a soldier from Salta who was against the policies of Buenos Aires , as he feared <unk> would break national unity . He rejected proposals to be appointed Supreme Director himself . He supported his friend and lodge member Juan Martín de Pueyrredón for the office . Pueyrredón resumed the military aid to Cuyo . The Congress of Tucumán declared independence on 9 July 1816 . Congress discussed the type of government of the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata ( modern Argentina ) . General Manuel Belgrano , who had made a diplomatic mission to Europe , informed them that independence would be more easily acknowledged by the European powers if the country established a monarchy . For this purpose , Belgrano proposed a plan to crown a noble of the Inca Empire as king ( the Sapa Inca dynasty had been dethroned in the 16th century ) . San Martín supported this proposal , as well as Güemes and most deputies , except for those from Buenos Aires , who undermined the project and prevented its approval . 
 Needing even more soldiers , San Martín extended the emancipation of slaves to the ages from 14 to 55 , and even allowed them to be promoted to higher military ranks . He proposed a similar measure at the national level , but Pueyrredón encountered severe resistance . He included as well the Chileans who escaped Chile after the disaster of Rancagua , and organized them in four units , each one of infantry , cavalry , artillery and dragoons . At the end of 1816 , the Army of the Andes had 5 @,@ 000 men , 10 @,@ 000 mules and 1 @,@ 500 horses . San Martin organized military intelligence , propaganda and disinformation to confuse the royalist armies ( such as the specific routes taken in the Andes ) , boost the national fervor of his army and promote desertion among the royalists . 
 = = = = Crossing of the Andes = = = = 
 Although the Congress of Tucumán had already formalized the flag of Argentina , the Army of the Andes did not use it , choosing a banner with two columns , light blue and white , and a coat of arms roughly similar to the Coat of arms of Argentina . The army did not use the flag of Argentina because it was not exclusively an Argentine army . 
 Contrary to the common understanding , the crossing of the Andes was not the first time that a military expedition crossed the mountain range . The difference from previous operations was the size of the army , and that it had to be ready for combat right after the crossing . The army was divided in six columns , each taking a different path . Colonel Francisco <unk> in La Rioja took the Come @-@ Caballos pass towards Copiapó . Juan Manuel Cabot , in San Juan , moved to Coquimbo . Ramón Freire and José León Lemos led two columns in the south . The bulk of the armies left from Mendoza . San Martín , O 'Higgins and Soler led a column across the Los <unk> pass , and Juan Gregorio de Las Heras another one across the <unk> Pass . 
 The whole operation took nearly a month . The armies took dried food for the soldiers and fodder for the horses , because of the inhospitable conditions . They also consumed <unk> and onions , to prevent altitude sickness . Only 4 @,@ 300 mules and 511 horses survived , less than half the original complement . 
 Manuel Rodríguez had returned to Chile before the crossing , and began a guerrilla war in Santiago de Chile against the royalists , in support of the upcoming army . He was supported in the south of the city and the countryside . The strategy was to occupy nearby villages , seize the royalists ' weapons and flee . The attacks on Melipilla and San Fernando , and a failed one at Curicó , demoralized the royalists . 
 = = = Chile = = = 
 = = = = Battle of Chacabuco = = = = 
 The columns that crossed the Andes began to take military actions . The column in the north led by Cabot defeated the royalists in Salala , seized Coquimbo and then Copiapó . In the south , Freire captured Talca . Las Heras routed royalist outposts in <unk> and <unk> . Bernardo O 'Higgins , who came from Los <unk> pass , defeated the royalists at Las <unk> . This allowed the main columns to gather at Aconcagua valley , meeting at the slopes of Chacabuco . Royalist commander Rafael Maroto converged his armies on that location as well . Maroto had 2 @,@ 450 men and 5 pieces of artillery , San Martín had 3 @,@ 600 men and 9 pieces of artillery . The misdirection that concealed the path of the bulk of the Army allowed San Martín this advantage , as other royalist forces were scattered in other regions of Chile . 
 The battle began on 12 February . San Martín organized a pincer movement , with Soler leading the west column and O 'Higgins the east one . O 'Higgins , eager to avenge the defeat at Rancagua , rushed to the attack , instead of coordinating with Soler . This gave the royalists a brief advantage . San Martín instructed Soler to rush the attack as well . The combined attack was successful and San Martín 's column secured the final victory . The battle ended with 600 royalists dead and 500 prisoners , with only 12 deaths and 120 injuries in the Army of the Andes . 
 The army triumphantly entered Santiago de Chile the following day . Governor Francisco <unk> del Pont attempted to escape to Valparaíso and sail to Peru , but he was captured on 22 February and returned to Santiago . Several other officials were captured as well and sent as prisoners to San Luis , Argentina . San Martín sent <unk> del Pont prisoner to Mendoza . 
 = = = = Patria Nueva = = = = 
 Three deputies from Coquimbo , Santiago and Concepción organized a new government , and proposed San Martín as Supreme Director of Chile . He declined the offer and proposed O 'Higgins in his stead : he recommended that the Supreme Director should be someone from Chile . San Martín would instead organize the navy to take the fight to Peru . He established a local chapter of the lodge of Rational Knights , named as Logia Lautaro , in reference to <unk> leader Lautaro . 
 The victory in Chacabuco did not liberate all Chile . Royalist forces still resisted in southern Chile , allied with the <unk> . Las Heras occupied Concepción , but failed to occupy Talcahuano . The royalist resistance lasted for several months , and Talcahuano was only captured when most of the continent was already free . 
 San Martín left O 'Higgins in charge of the Army , and returned to Buenos Aires to request resources for the campaign to Peru . He did not have a good reception this time . Pueyrredón thought that Chile should compensate Buenos Aires for the money invested in their liberation , as the support to San Martín reduced the support to Belgrano , and the Portuguese @-@ Brazilian invasion of the Eastern Bank menaced Buenos Aires . Incapable of financial support , Buenos Aires sent lawyer Manuel Aguirre to the United States , to request aid and acknowledge the declaration of independence . However , the mission failed , as the United States stayed neutral in the conflict because they negotiated the purchase of Florida with Spain . The Chilean José Miguel Carrera had obtained ships on his own after the disaster of Rancagua , which he intended to use to liberate Chile ; but as San Martín had already done that , he refused to place his fleet under the Army of the Andes . Carrera was an enemy of O 'Higgins and sought to navigate to Chile and depose him , so Pueyrredón imprisoned him , and confiscated his ships . 
 San Martín requested help from British Admiral William Bowles . He wrote from Chile and expected to find him in Buenos Aires , but Bowles had embarked for Río de Janeiro . Bowles considered that San Martín was more trustworthy than Alvear , and praised his monarchism . San Martín did not obtain the ships and interrupted the correspondence with Bowles for some months . He returned to Chile ; his wife Remedios stayed in Buenos Aires with her daughter Mercedes because of her health problems . Unable to get help from either Buenos Aires or foreign powers , San Martín promoted a more decisive commitment from Chile to finance the navy . 
 = = = = Battle of Cancha Rayada = = = = 
 The failure to liberate Talcahuano was followed by naval reinforcements from the North . The viceroy of Peru sent Mariano Osorio in an attempt to reconquer Chile . The royalists would then advance by land to the northern Chile . San Martín thought that it was not possible to defend Concepción , so he ordered O 'Higgins to leave the city . 50 @,@ 000 Chileans took cattle and grain and moved north , burning everything else , so that they did not leave supplies for the royalists . As he had done with the Tucumán Congress , San Martín urged a declaration of independence , to legitimize the government and the military actions . The Chilean Declaration of Independence was issued on 18 February 1818 , one year after the battle of Chacabuco . 
 San Martín , Las Heras and Balcarce met in Curicó , and the royalists in Talca , in a plain known as " Cancha <unk> " . As the patriots had a numeric advantage , 7 @,@ 000 against 4 @,@ 600 , Osorio tried to avoid open battle , and tried instead a stealth operation . A spy informed San Martín that Osorio would make a surprise attack in the night , but the army could not be prepared in time . 1 @,@ 000 soldiers fled , 120 died , and San Martín 's assistant was killed . O 'Higgins tried to resist with his unit , but retired when he was shot in the arm . Las Heras managed to retire his army in order , saving his 3 @,@ 500 men . The patriots escaped to Santiago . 
 Despite the defeat , the soldiers were received as heroes in Santiago . Thanks to Las Heras , a potential disaster for the patriot armies turned into a minor setback . The army was reorganized again , but the deaths , injuries and desertions caused by the defeat at Cancha Rayada reduced its size to 5 @,@ 000 soldiers , which was closer to the royalist forces . They took position next to the Maipo River , near Santiago . 
 = = = = Battle of Maipú = = = = 
 San Martín made a brief reconnaissance of the royalist army , and noticed several flaws in their organization . Feeling secure of victory , he claimed that " Osorio is <unk> than I thought . Today 's triumph is ours . The sun as witness ! " . The battle began at 11 : 00 am . The patriot artillery on the right fired on the royalist infantry on the left . Manuel Escalada led mounted grenadiers to capture the royalist artillery , turning them against their owners . Burgos ' regiment severely punished the patriot left wing , mainly composed of emancipated slaves , and took 400 lives . San Martín ordered the mounted grenadiers led by <unk> de la Quintana to charge against the regiment . The firing suddenly ended and royalists began to fight with sword bayonets , under the cries " Long live the king ! " and " Long live the homeland ! " respectively . Finally , the royalists ended their cries and began to disperse . 
 When the regiment of Burgos realized that their line was broken , they stopped resisting , and the soldiers began to disperse . The cavalry pursued and killed most of them . At the end of the battle , the royalists had been trapped among the units of Las Heras in the west , Alvarado in the middle , Quintana in the east and the cavalries of Zapiola and Freire . Osorio tried to fall back to the hacienda " Lo Espejo " but could not reach it , so he tried to escape to Talcahuano . Ordóñez made his last stand at that hacienda , where 500 royalists died . 
 The battle ended in the afternoon . O 'Higgins , still injured by the wound received in Cancha Rayada , arrived during the final action at the hacienda . He claimed " Glory to the savior of Chile ! " , in reference to San Martín , who praised him for going to the battlefield with his unhealed wound . They made an embrace on their horses , now known as the " Embrace of Maipú " . 
 The battle of Maipú secured Chilean independence . Except for Osorio , who escaped with 200 cavalry , all top royalist military leaders were captured . All their armed forces were either killed or captured , and all their artillery , weapons , military hospitals , money and resources were lost . The victory was praised by Güemes , Bolívar and the international press . 
 = = = = Fleet of the Pacific = = = = 
 San Martín made a new request for ships to Bowles , but received no answer . He moved again to Buenos Aires , to make a similar request . He arrived to Mendoza a few days after the execution of the Chileans Luis and Juan José Carrera , brothers of José Miguel Carrera . The specific initiative of those executions is controversial . Chilean historian Vicuña Mackenna indicts San Martín , while J. C. <unk> de la Reta blames O 'Higgins instead . Manuel Rodríguez was also imprisoned and then killed in prison ; this death may have been decided by the Lautaro lodge . San Martín could not have taken part in it , as he was already on the way to Buenos Aires . 
 San Martín was not well received in Buenos Aires . Pueyrredón initially declined to give further help , citing the conflicts with the federal caudillos and the organization of a huge royalist army in Cádiz that would try to reconquer the La Plata basin . He thought that Chile should organize the navy against Peru , not Buenos Aires . San Martín discussed with him and finally got financing of 500 @,@ 000 pesos . He returned to Mendoza with his wife and daughter and received a letter from Pueyrredón , who said that Buenos Aires could only deliver one @-@ third of the promised funds . This complicated the project , as neither Santiago de Chile nor Mendoza had the resources needed . San Martín resigned from the Army , but it is unclear whether his decision to resign was sincere or was to apply pressure to his backers . The government of Buenos Aires still considered San Martín vital to the national defense , so Pueyrredón agreed to pay the 500 @,@ 000 pesos requested , and encouraged San Martín to withdraw his resignation . 
 San Martín proposed to mediate between Buenos Aires and the Federal League led by Artigas . He thought that the civil war was counter @-@ productive to national unity , and that an end to hostilities would free resources needed for the navy . He calculated that Artigas might condition the peace on a joint declaration of war to colonial Brazil ; so San Martín proposed to defeat the royalists first and then demand the return of the Eastern Bank to the United Provinces . O 'Higgins recommended caution , fearing that San Martín might be captured . Pueyrredón rejected the mediation , as he did not recognize Artigas as an equal to negotiate with him . 
 = = = = Act of Rancagua = = = = 
 Although Artigas was defeated by the Luso @-@ Brazilian armies , his allies Estanislao López and Francisco Ramírez continued hostilities against Buenos Aires for its inactivity against the invasion . Pueyrredón called the Army of the Andes and the Army of the North ( led by Belgrano ) to aid Buenos Aires in the conflict . Guido noted to San Martín that if both armies did that , the north of Argentina and Chile would be easily reconquered by the royalists . San Martín also knew that most of the soldiers of the Army of the Andes would not be willing to aid Buenos Aires in the civil war , as most were from other provinces or from Chile . San Martín had doubts as well about the projected arrival of a large military expedition from Spain , as the absolutist restoration of Ferdinand VII had met severe resistance in Spain . San Martín finally kept the Army in Chile when Belgrano 's lieutenant Viamonte signed an armistice with López ; he thought that the conflict had ended . 
 However , the minister of war Matías de Irigoyen ordered once more the return of the Army of the Andes , and appointed Francisco Fernández de la Cruz as its leader , displacing San Martín . San Martín resigned again , and observed that the Army would not be able to cross the Andes from Chile to Buenos Aires because the winter snow was blocking the trails . All the leaders of the military units of the Army of the Andes refused to go to Buenos Aires , as their soldiers would mutiny or desert . Facing both the resignation of San Martín and the refusals to obey the orders , the Supreme Director canceled the orders , and the Army of the Andes stayed in Chile . With the sanction of the Argentine Constitution of 1819 , Pueyrredón ended his mandate as Supreme Director , replaced by José Rondeau . 
 The navy was finally completed in Chile , and British Earl Thomas Cochrane was appointed to lead it . But it was not sent to Peru immediately : there were still rumors of an attack from Spain , and if needed the navy would move to Buenos Aires and fight the Spanish ships . The civil war resumed and San Martín attempted once more to mediate , to no effect . Rondeau again requested the return of the Army of the Andes , without success . San Martín returned to Chile and prepared to take part in the naval actions against Peru , ignoring Buenos Aires . The Army of the North refused to join the conflict as well , revolting in <unk> and disbanding . Without either reinforcements , Rondeau was defeated by federal forces in the Battle of Cepeda . The Congress of Tucumán and the office of the Supreme Director of the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata were dissolved and the country turned into a confederation of 13 provinces , without a central state . This period is known as the Anarchy of the year XX . The rebellion of Spanish general Rafael del Riego and an outbreak of yellow fever in the punitive expedition organized in Cádiz ended the royalist threat to Buenos Aires . The Act of Rancagua invested San Martín with the full authority over the Army of the Andes , as it now lacked a national authority over it . 
 = = = Peru = = = 
 Peru had armed forces nearly four times the strength of those of San Martín : 6 @,@ 244 soldiers in Lima , 8 @,@ 000 at the northern provinces , 1 @,@ 263 in the coast , 1 @,@ 380 in Arequipa and 6 @,@ 000 in the Upper Peru ; nearly 23 @,@ 000 soldiers in total . The Army of the Andes had 4 @,@ 000 soldiers instead , and Cochrane 's navy another 1 @,@ 600 . With this disparity of forces , San Martín tried to avoid battles . He tried instead to divide the enemy forces in several locations , as he did during the Crossing of the Andes , and trap the royalists with a pincer movement with either reinforcements of the Army of the North from the South or the army of Simón Bolívar from the North . He also tried to promote rebellions and insurrection within the royalist ranks , and promised the emancipation of any slaves that deserted their Peruvian masters and join the army of San Martín . The spreading of the news of the Liberal Triennium , a liberal rebellion in Spain that reinstated the Spanish Constitution of 1812 , also sought to undermine royalist loyalty . 
 The navy sailed from Chile on 20 August 1820 . It was composed of eight warships , eleven gunboats , 247 cannons and a crew of 1 @,@ 600 , most of them Chileans . There were 12 frigates , and a brig with the 4 @,@ 000 soldiers of the Army of the Andes . San Martín was the leader of the military expedition . They landed in Paracas , 200 km to the south of Lima , on 7 September , and occupied the nearby city of Pisco , which was abandoned by the royalists . 
 = = = = Expedition of Peru = = = = 
 Peruvian viceroy Joaquín de la Pezuela had instructions from Spain to negotiate with the patriots . Under an armistice the opponents celebrated a meeting in Miraflores . The viceroy 's deputies proposed to adopt the liberal Spanish constitution if San Martín left the country , but his deputies requested instead that Spain grant the independence of Peru . The negotiations did not bear fruit . 
 San Martín isolated Lima from the surrounding countryside , and sent Juan Antonio Álvarez de Arenales to promote rebellions among the natives . The Army of the Andes moved north of Lima by sea . San Martín and Arenales besieged the city from two directions , and Cochrane attacked the port of El Callao . Cochrane captured the ship " Esmeralda " , and the royalist regiment Numancia . Nearly 700 expeditionary soldiers of New Granada deserted and joined the patriots . Several populations in the north of Peru supported San Martín , and Arenales defeated the royalists at the battle of Pasco . More than 300 royalists joined the patriots , including Andrés de Santa Cruz . 
 However , the plans did not fully work as intended . The native populations that joined Arenales could not resist the royalist counter @-@ attacks , and the slaves did not join the army in the expected numbers . The Argentine provinces could not send the supporting army that San Martín had requested earlier , and the Army of the North no longer existed . As a result , he wrote to Simón Bolívar , trying to coordinate actions with him . 
 Pezuela was deposed by a military @-@ liberal coup , and José de la Serna e Hinojosa became the new viceroy . De la Serna called San Martín to negotiate an end of hostilities . The result was the same than with Pezuela : De la Serna proposed to enact the 1812 Spanish constitution ( Perú inside Spain ) , and San Martín demanded the independence of Peru ( with an independent monarchy ) . The rejection of the Spanish constitution was motivated by the disproportional representation of the Americas in the Constituent Assembly that wrote it . Both armies agreed a temporary armistice . San Martín proposed to establish an constitutional monarchy with a European monarch , with a regency ruling in the interim . The proposal was rejected , on the grounds that they could not accept it without Ferdinand 's approval . 
 = = = = Protector of Peru = = = = 
 As hostilities renewed , San Martín organized several guerrilla groups in the countryside , and laid siege to Lima , but did not force his entry , as he did not want to appear as a conqueror to the local population . However , De la Serna suddenly left the city with his army , for unknown reasons . San Martín called for an open cabildo to discuss the independence of the country , which was agreed . With this approval , the authority in Lima , the support of the northern provinces and the port of El Callao under siege , San Martín declared the independence of Peru on 28 July 1821 . The war , however , had not ended yet . 
 Unlike Chile , Peru had no local politicians of the stature of O 'Higgins , so San Martín became the leader of the government , even though he did not want to . He was appointed Protector of Peru . As Peruvian society was highly conservative , San Martín did not take the liberal ideas too far immediately . The provisional statutes contained few changes and ratified several existing laws . All the types of servitude imposed on the natives , such as mita and <unk> , were abolished , and the natives received citizenship . He did not abolish slavery completely , as Peru had 40 @,@ 000 slaveowners , and declared " freedom of <unk> " instead , which emancipated the sons of slaves ; he emancipated as well the slaves of the royalists who left Lima . He also abolished the Inquisition and corporal punishment , and enacted freedom of speech . During his stay in Peru , San Martín had a romance with Rosa <unk> , a woman from Guayaquil . 
 The royalist armies that stayed in the Peruvian countryside headed to Lima , led by Canterac . In a confusing episode , there was no battle , as neither one attacked . Canterac changed his path to El Callao , took resources from it , and returned to his base . There was no battle during their return either . Without resources , El Callao surrendered in a few days . Both armies took inadvisable actions : San Martín allowed Canterac to receive reinforcements , and Canterac left a key military objective incapable to resist . There is no known documentation that provides a reasonable explanation of those events . 
 Cochrane had several disputes with San Martín . He discussed several of his actions and tried to bypass his authority . During the blockade of El Callao , he proposed that O 'Higgins take control of the mission and send any spoils of battle to Chile . As San Martín was appointed Protector of Peru , Cochrane reasoned that San Martín was no longer under Chilean command , and took the navy away . In later years Cochrane made accusations against San Martín in Chile . 
 Bolívar took control of Caracas with his victory at the battle of Carabobo , and the Congress of <unk> issued laws similar to those in Perú . Guayaquil declared independence , and Bolivar sent Antonio José de Sucre to reinforce them . Sucre 's forces were not enough , and requested help from San Martín . Peru sent a military force of 1 @,@ 300 men . Bolívar entered the city a month later , and claimed that for historical reasons Quito should be part of Colombia . San Martín and Bolívar sought to generate Latin American integration , but disagreed on the type of government : Bolívar proposed a republic , and San Martín a constitutional monarchy , reasoning that it would be easier to receive international recognition for the now @-@ independent South American nations . Peru and Colombia signed a treaty of integration , to be proposed to Chile , the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata and Paraguay , and at a later point to the United Provinces of Central America and the Empire of Brazil . 
 = = = Guayaquil conference = = = 
 San Martín thought that if he joined forces with Bolívar he would be able to defeat the remnant royalist forces in Peru . Both liberators would meet in Quito , so San Martín appointed Torre Tagle to manage the government during his absence . Bolivar was unable to meet San Martín at the arranged date , so San Martín returned to Lima , but still left Tagle in government . Bolívar moved from Quito to Guayaquil , which secured its independence . There were discussions on the future of the region : some factions wanted to join Colombia , others to join Peru , and others to become a new nation . Bolívar ended the discussion by annexing Guayaquil into Colombia . There was Peruvian pressure on San Martín to do a similar thing , to annex Guayaquil to Peru . 
 The Guayaquil conference took place on 26 July 1822 . They had two private meetings , on that day and the following one . As there were no witnesses or minutes , the content of their discussions can only be inferred from their later actions and their letters to other people . Some likely topics of discussion may have been a request of reinforcements , and an offer to combine the armies into a single one , with San Martín ranked second to Bolívar . 
 The minister Bernardo Monteagudo was removed from office by a Peruvian rebellion , during San Martín 's absence . San Martín resigned as Protector of Peru a few days later and returned to Valparaíso , Chile . Several reasons influenced him to resign . The military discipline of the Army of the Andes was compromised , but San Martín was reluctant to take drastic action against his officers . The authority of San Martín and Bolívar , and the local rivalry of their respective countries Peru and Colombia , limited their options for joint work : Colombians would not have liked Bolívar to give many of his forces to San Martín , whilst Peruvians would not have liked their Protector to be second in command to Bolívar , and a joint command would complicate the maintenance of military discipline . Unlike Bolívar , backed up by the Colombian government , San Martín did not have more resources than those he already had : Buenos Aires denied him any support , the other Argentine governors ( such as Juan Bautista Bustos ) supported him but did not have resources to provide , O 'Higgins was about to be deposed in Chile , and Cochrane took the navy and left him without naval power . Finally , he felt that only a very strong authority would be able to prevent <unk> , but refused to rule as a dictator himself . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his retirement , San Martín intended to live in Cuyo . Although the war of independence had ended in the regions , the Argentine Civil Wars continued . The unitarians wanted to organize the country as a unitary state centered on Buenos Aires , and the federals , who preferred a federation of provinces . San Martín had good relations with the federal caudillos and a personal feud with unitarian leader Bernardino Rivadavia , but tried to stay neutral . San Martín 's wife , María de los Remedios de Escalada , died in 1823 , so he returned to Buenos Aires . He took his daughter Mercedes <unk> , who was living with her mother 's family , and sailed to Europe . 
 After a failed attempt to settle in France , he moved to Britain and then to the capital of present @-@ day Belgium , Brussels , where he settled . He intended to live there until Mercedes completed her education and then return to Argentina . Rivadavia visited Brussels and San Martín intended to challenge him to a duel , but was dissuaded by Diego Paroissien . 
 Despite his feud with Rivadavia , who was appointed President of Argentina , San Martín offered his military services in the War with Brazil , but received no response . He sailed to the country when Rivadavia was deposed and replaced by the federal Manuel Dorrego , and the war ended in the interim . He intended to return anyway , as a federal government would spare him the persecution he would otherwise have received from the unitarians . He was unable to do as he planned . When his ship docked in Río de Janeiro he was informed that the unitarian Juan Lavalle had deposed Dorrego , and when he reached Montevideo he was informed that Lavalle had captured and executed Dorrego and begun a campaign of terror against all federals in the country . The ship arrived in Buenos Aires , but San Martín did not leave it , instead returning to Montevideo . Lavalle was unable to put down the federal rebellion against him , and offered San Martín the government . San Martín declined and returned to Brussels . 
 By this time the federal Juan Manuel de Rosas had begun to pacify the civil war started by Lavalle and earned San Martín 's admiration . They began to exchange friendly letters . The Belgian Revolution and the cholera epidemic of 1831 made San Martín leave Brussels and move to Paris , where both San Martín and his daughter became ill . They were helped by Mariano Balcarce . Mariano married Mercedes , and they had a daughter , María Mercedes . 
 In 1837 France began a blockade of the Rio de la Plata against Rosas . San Martín offered his military services to Rosas , which was declined because of San Martín 's advanced age , and condemned the role of the unitarians in that conflict , as they had allied themselves with France against their own nation . San Martín bequeathed his curved saber to Rosas , because of his successful defense of the country . The conflict between France and Argentina renewed in the Anglo @-@ French blockade of the Río de la Plata , which San Martín condemned as well . During this time he met Florencio Varela and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento . 
 During the 1848 revolution , San Martin left Paris and moved to Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , a small city in northern France . He was almost blind and had many health problems because of his advanced age , but continued to write letters and keep in touch with the news from South America . Shortly after receiving the news of the Argentine victory against the Anglo @-@ French blockade , he died , three o 'clock on 17 August 1850 . 
 = = Remains = = 
 José de San Martín died on 17 August 1850 , in his house at Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , France . Between 1850 and 1861 , his corpse was buried in the crypt of the Basilica of Notre @-@ Dame de Boulogne . He requested in his will to be taken to the cemetery without any funeral , and to be moved to Buenos Aires thereafter . Balcarce informed Rosas and the foreign minister Felipe Arana of San Martín 's death . Balcarce oversaw the embalming of his remains and their temporary stay in a chapel of the city . He also sent San Martin 's saber to Rosas . 
 However , the rebellion of Justo José de Urquiza against Rosas in 1851 , Rosas ' defeat at the battle of Caseros and the resulting chaos delayed the move of San Martín 's remains to Buenos Aires . Still , both Rosas and Urquiza organized public homages to San Martín , despite the conflict . Buenos Aires seceded from Argentina as the state of Buenos Aires , dominated by Unitarians who despised San Martín . Thus , the move of his remains was postponed indefinitely . Aware that there were no favorable conditions for the project , Balcarce arranged a creation of a tomb in the Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer cemetery . 
 San Martín 's remains were finally repatriated on 29 May 1880 , during the presidency of Nicolás Avellaneda . The mausoleum was placed inside the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral . As San Martín was suspected of being a freemason , the mausoleum was placed in an expanded wing of the Cathedral . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 San Martín was first acclaimed as a national hero of Argentina by the Federals , both during his life and immediately after his death . The unitarians still resented his refusal to aid the Supreme Directors with the Army of the Andes and his constant support to Rosas . The unitarian Bartolomé Mitre wrote a biography of San Martín , " Historia de San Martín y de la <unk> <unk> " ( Spanish : History of San Martín and the South American emancipation ) . By that time , several accounts of San Martín were under way in many countries : Valentín Ledesma from Lima wrote in 1853 about San Martín 's campaign in Peru , and Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna from Chile wrote in 1856 about the Chilean War of Independence . With Mitre 's book , San Martín was universally acclaimed as the Liberator of Argentina , but his work introduced several inaccuracies to make San Martín 's campaign support Mitre 's political project . These inaccuracies were detected and fixed by later historians . 
 Statues of San Martín appear in most cities of Argentina , as well as in Santiago and Lima . There is also a bust of San Martin at the Intramuros or Walled City of Manila , which was erected in 1950 at the request of the Perón government as a reminder that San Martin 's brother , Juan Fermin , served in the Philippines from 1801 to 1822 . José Gil de Castro made the first portrait of San Martín , and several other artists made works about him . The most important films featuring San Martín are the 1970 El Santo de la Espada and the 2010 Revolución : El cruce de los Andes . 
 An equestrian statue of the General was erected in Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer ; the statue was inaugurated on October 24 , 1909 , at a ceremony attended by several units from the Argentine military . The statue was erected through purely private initiative , with the support of national government of Argentina , the municipal council of Buenos Aires and a public funding campaign . The statue is 10m high , on a 4m by 6m base ; it is well known to locals . Located on the beach , it was virtually untouched by the numerous bombings campaigns during both world wars . 
 There is also an equestrian statue of General San Martín in New York City , on the southern side of Central Park . It was dedicated in 1951 and was donated by the City of Buenos Aires , Argentina . 
 There is also an equestrian statue in Washington D.C. along NW Virginia Street . It is a copy of a statue in Buenos Aires . It was gifted in 1925 from Argentina . 
 General Liberator San Martin Drive roadway in the Ku @-@ ring @-@ gai National Park north of Sydney Australia is named in his honour . 
 = 1910 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1910 Giro d 'Italia was the second edition of the Giro d 'Italia , a cycling race organized and sponsored by the newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport . The race began on 18 May in Milan with a stage that stretched 388 km ( 241 mi ) to Udine , finishing back in Milan on 5 June after a 277 @.@ 5 km ( 172 mi ) stage and a total distance covered of 2 @,@ 987 @.@ 4 km ( 1 @,@ 856 mi ) . The race was won by the Italian rider Carlo Galetti of the Atala @-@ Continental team , with fellow Italians Eberardo Pavesi and Luigi Ganna coming in second and third respectively . 
 Eberardo Pavesi was the first rider to lead the race after winning the first stage into Udine . After the second stage , Carlo Galetti took the lead of the race . Galetti then successfully defended the lead all the way to the race 's finish in Milan . En route to his overall victory , Galetti won two stages . The Atala @-@ Continental team finished as winners of the team classification . 
 = = Changes from the 1909 Giro d 'Italia = = 
 One major change was made to the calculation for the general classification before the start of the second Giro d 'Italia . Originally a point was given to each rider for his placing on each stage , but the organizers chose to give the riders who placed 51st or higher in a stage 51 points and keep the point distribution system the same for the riders who placed 1st through 50th in a stage . 
 The organizers chose to increase the length of their race after the success from the first edition . The original race was eight stages long and the 1910 edition was increased by two stages , to ten . The overall length of the race was increased to close to 3 @,@ 000 kilometers , which made the race close to 500 kilometers longer than the inaugural edition of the race . 
 = = Participants = = 
 A total of 101 riders started the second Giro d 'Italia out of the 118 that signed up to participate . Of the 101 riders that began the Giro d 'Italia on 18 May , twenty of them made it to the finish in Milan on 5 June . Riders were allowed to ride on their own or as a member of a team . There were six teams that competed in the race : Atala @-@ Continental , <unk> @-@ Dunlop , Bianchi @-@ Dunlop , Legnano @-@ Dunlop , <unk> @-@ Pirelli , and <unk> @-@ Pirelli . 
 The notable participants included the reigning champion of the Giro d 'Italia , Luigi Ganna . The peloton also contained some of the most famous Italian cyclists at the time in Carlo Galetti , Ezio Corlaita , Giovanni Rossignoli , and Eberardo Pavesi . Two @-@ time Tour de France champion Lucien Petit @-@ Breton rode the Giro for the second straight year , along with his fellow countryman Jean @-@ Baptiste Dortignacq who had been successful in the Tour . The Giro also saw its first German participants , neither of whom completed the race . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The first stage of the second Giro d 'Italia began with a large send off in the start city of Milan . The finish in Udine was hotly contested as five riders came to the finish line in a pack . Ernesto <unk> managed to out @-@ sprint the other four riders in the leading group to win the stage . The next stage saw the first non @-@ Italian stage winner in the history of the Giro d 'Italia , the Frenchman Jean @-@ Baptiste Dortignacq . Dortignacq managed to breakaway from his fellow group member Carlo Galetti and then solo to the stage victory while five other riders chased close behind . Galetti 's second @-@ place finish on the stage was high enough for him to take the lead of the race . The French success enraged the Italian fans and led the competing riders to ban unite against the foreign riders . The third stage saw three major Italian riders , Luigi Ganna , Carlo Galetti , and Eberardo Pavesi , and attack early on in the stage . The three riders then rode together all the way to the finish in <unk> . Galetti went on to win the stage , with Ganna and Pavesi following in quick succession . 
 The Giro 's fourth stage saw a tough stage with poor conditions for the riders , which ultimately led to the withdrawal of many riders including the likes of Lucien Petit @-@ Breton - who was ranked third overall at the time . The peloton 's pace was slower due to the w poor conditions , which caused the riders to arrive two hours later than expected in Naples . <unk> Albini beat out the Frenchman Maurice <unk> by 36 seconds for stage victory . Prior to the fifth stage 's start , Frenchman Jean @-@ Baptiste Dortignacq withdrew from the race after citing an illness . The police suspected foul play and looked into the situation , but their results are disputed through contradicting stories . Due to impassable roads , the start of the fifth stage was moved from Naples to Capua and decreased the distance of the stage from 224 @.@ 1 km ( 139 mi ) to 192 @.@ 3 km ( 119 mi ) . Eberardo Pavesi won the fifth stage after leading for most of the race . 
 The peloton remained intact for roughly the first half of the sixth stage . Luigi Ganna and Carlo Galetti broke away from the pack and made it to the finish in Rome where Ganna then edged out Galetti for the stage victory . During the next stage , a group of six riders lead for the most part before Galetti and Ganna broke away again . The two riders made their way to the finish in Genoa , where a large crowd of spectators came to see the finish . Ganna went on to win his second consecutive stage , while Galetti extended his lead over the rest of the field . The race 's eighth stage contained some harsh climbs , most notably the <unk> . The finish of the stage was hotly contested as Galetti , Ganna , and Eberardo Pavesi finished at the same time , with Galetti winning the stage in the end . 
 Eberardo Pavesi dominated the difficult ninth stage that contained the major climbs of the Nava , Tenda , and San Bartolomeo . Pavesi went on to win the stage by close to six minutes over the second @-@ place finisher Luigi Ganna . The race 's tenth and final stage was marred by rain . Race leader Carlo Galetti crashed into a hay wagon early on in the stage and sustained some heavy wounds , he would get back on his bike and finish the stage in fifth place . Despite the rain in Milan , many spectators still came to watch the riders arrive . Luigi Ganna was the first rider to cross the finish line in Milan and in doing so , he won his third stage of the 1910 Giro d 'Italia . Carlo Galetti won the Giro d 'Italia by a margin of eighteen points over Pavesi . Galetti and his team , Atala @-@ Continental , won the team classification . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 There were 20 cyclists who had completed all ten stages . For these cyclists , the points they received from each of their stage placing 's were added up for the general classification . The cyclist with the least accumulated points was the winner . 
 = St Deiniol 's Church , Llanddaniel Fab = 
 St Deiniol 's Church , Llanddaniel Fab , is a small 19th @-@ century parish church in the centre of Llanddaniel Fab , a village in Anglesey , north Wales . The first church in this location is said to have been established by St Deiniol Fab ( to whom the church is dedicated ) in 616 . He was the son of St Deiniol , the first Bishop of Bangor . The current building , which is in Early English style , incorporates some material and fittings from an earlier church on the site , including the font and an 18th @-@ century memorial in the porch . The vestry door has medieval jambs and the keystone of its arch , which is also medieval , is a carved human face . Some parts of the nave walls may also come from a previous building here . 
 The church is no longer used for worship , and the village is now served by a church in Llanfairpwll . As of 2011 , the building ( without the surrounding grounds ) was for sale . It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is regarded as " a good example of a simple 19th @-@ century rural church " . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Deiniol 's Church is near the centre of Llanddaniel Fab , a village in the south of Anglesey , north Wales . It is reached from the street by passing through a lychgate by the local war memorial . The village takes its name from the church ; the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and <unk> is a modified form of the saint 's name . 
 The date of first construction of a Christian place of worship in the area is uncertain , but it is said by 19th @-@ century writers that a son of St Deiniol ( the first Bishop of Bangor ) established a church here in 616 . The son , also a saint , was known as Deiniol Fab ( Welsh for " Deiniol the son " ) , to distinguish him from his father . No part of a building from that time survives . A later edifice , dating from the 16th century or perhaps earlier , was replaced in the 19th century . Some parts of that structure may have been reused in the current church , as the 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire considered that sections of the walls of the nave may be from the older building . 
 In 1833 , the antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the old church as " a very ancient and dilapidated structure " , which had " some good specimens of the architecture of a very remote period " . Writing in 1846 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones described it as one " so much altered by successive reparations , that little of its original architectural character has been preserved " . Repairs were carried out to the new church , and a vestry added to the north side , in 1873 . The work was overseen by Henry Kennedy , architect of the Diocese of Bangor . 
 St Deiniol 's is no longer in use ; in 2006 , a guide to the churches of Anglesey noted that no services had been held for a number of years , and added that ivy was growing across the building . The church 's former parish has been merged with that of the adjoining village of Llanfairpwll , served by St Mary 's , Llanfairpwll . As of January 2011 , the church ( without the grounds ) was on sale for £ 50 @,@ 000 ; it was suggested by the estate agents handling the sale that it could be used as a studio or for storage , subject to necessary consents being obtained . 
 People associated with St Deiniol 's include the clergymen Henry Rowlands and Isaac Jones . Rowlands , who wrote a history of Anglesey ( Mona Antiqua Restaurata ) in 1723 , served as priest here and in nearby parishes from 1696 onwards . Jones , a translator , was curate of St Deiniol 's from 1840 until his death in 1850 . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The Gothic Revival church is in the Early English style . It is built from rubble masonry dressed with limestone and has a slate roof . The vestry is partially built from material used in the old church . The door in the vestry 's north wall has medieval doorjambs , and the keystone of the pointed arch , which is also medieval , is a carved human face . 
 The nave of the church ( where the congregation sat ) has no aisle . The chancel ( site of the altar ) is at the east end of the nave . There is a porch , which contains an 18th @-@ century memorial , on the south side of the nave towards the west end , and a vestry to the north . Each section is steeply gabled , with the west end terminating in a bellcote surmounted by a cross and containing a single bell . The windows in the nave have two lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) , save for one to the west of the porch , which has one light . The east end of the chancel has three adjoining lancet windows , the tallest in the middle . 
 Internally , the walls have panelling at the bottom and painted plasterwork above . The roof has exposed timbers . There is a pointed chancel arch and three steps between the nave and chancel , with a further step to the sanctuary , which has a mosaic floor . The east windows and those on the north have stained glass . Fittings include the rectangular pulpit , the pews , and the altar table , which are all made of pine wood , and the octagonal font , made of granite with carvings on each side . The 1937 Royal Commission survey recorded that the church owned a plain silver cup , dated 1796 – 1797 . A visual inspection of the church in 2006 determined that there were many cobwebs inside , but also that the pews and organ remained in place . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 St Deiniol 's has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 and has been listed because it is regarded as " a good example of a simple 19th @-@ century rural church " . Cadw ( the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) states that it is " coherently designed in an early Gothic style which is apt for its scale " . 
 = Song Without Words = 
 Song Without Words : A Book of Engravings on Wood is a wordless novel of 1936 by American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) . Executed in twenty @-@ one wood engravings , it was the fifth and shortest of the six wordless novels Ward completed , produced while working on the last and longest , Vertigo ( 1937 ) . The story concerns the anxiety an expectant mother feels over bringing a child into a world under the threat of fascism — anxieties Ward and writer May McNeer were then feeling over McNeer 's pregnancy with the couple 's second child . 
 = = Content and style = = 
 A woman conceives a child and suffers anguish over whether to give birth to it . She imagines one nightmare image of fascism and death after another , filled with such imagery as skulls , concentration camps , and an infant impaled on a bayonet . She ends standing defiant against the forces that threaten her , and her male partner joins her and the baby in an image of hope for the future . 
 Ward employs symbols much as he had in previous works , such as towering buildings representing capitalism . Vermin swarm in the pictures , heightening the expectant mother 's fears — nightmare images of vultures , ants crawling over an impaled infant , and rats <unk> around a Nazi concentration camp filled with children . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister and social activist Harry F. Ward ( 1873 – 1966 ) . Throughout his career the younger Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . Ward married writer May McNeer in 1926 and the couple left for Europe , where Ward spent a year studying wood engraving in Leipzig , Germany . There he encountered German Expressionist art and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . 
 Ward returned to the United States and freelanced his illustrations . In 1929 , he came across German artist Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) , which he followed with Madman 's Drum ( 1930 ) , Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) , and the short Prelude to a Million Years ( 1933 ) . 
 Ward began engraving on Song Without Words while working on his longest wordless novel , Vertigo ( 1937 ) , which took two years to complete . McNeer was pregnant with their second child and the couple were facing the same anxieties as the book 's protagonist , and having worked through these issues they carried through the birth of daughter Robin . Into adulthood Robin kept a wall of her home decorated with prints from Song Without Words . 
 Ward returned to the themes of Song Without Words in Hymn for the Night , a retelling of the birth of Christ in Nazi Germany . The book was to have been Ward 's seventh wordless novel , but he abandoned it in 1940 after engraving twenty blocks of it after finding the story too removed from his personal experiences . 
 = = Production and publication = = 
 Ward produced 21 wood engravings for the book , sized 5 5 ⁄ 8 × 3 5 ⁄ 8 inches ( 14 @.@ 3 × 9 @.@ 2 cm ) . It appeared in 1936 in a limited edition from Random House of 1250 copies . The pages were printed from the original engravings by Equinox Press co @-@ founder Lewis F. White . The original woodblocks are in the Lynd Ward Collection in the Joseph Mark Lauinger Memorial Library at Georgetown University in Washington , DC . 
 = I 'll Still Love You = 
 " I 'll Still Love You " is a song written by English musician George Harrison and first released in 1976 by his former Beatles bandmate Ringo Starr . Produced by Arif Mardin , the track appeared on Starr 's debut album for Atlantic Records and Polydor , Ringo 's Rotogravure . The composition had a long recording history before then , having been written in 1970 as " Whenever " , after which it was copyrighted with the title " When Every Song Is Sung " . 
 Harrison originally intended the song for Welsh singer Shirley Bassey , who had a hit in the summer of 1970 with a cover version of his Beatles composition " Something " . Although Harrison recorded " When Every Song Is Sung " himself during the sessions for All Things Must Pass that year , it was not included on his album . He went on to produce recordings of the track by former Ronette Ronnie Spector in February 1971 , and Cilla Black in August 1972 , but neither version was completed for release . Mary Hopkin and Leon and Mary Russell also attempted the song during the first half of the 1970s , with Harrison participating in the Russells ' recording . A later version by Black – produced by David Mackay and titled " I 'll Still Love You ( When Every Song Is Sung ) " – appeared on her 2003 compilation Cilla : The Best of 1963 – 78 . 
 Together with John Lennon and Paul McCartney 's respective contributions , the song 's inclusion on Rotogravure marked the second occasion when Starr 's former bandmates had each supplied a song for one of his albums , after Ringo in 1973 . While Starr 's rendition is often held in low regard , some commentators consider " When Every Song Is Sung " to be one of Harrison 's finest love songs and on a par with " Something " . Author Ian Inglis describes the song as " an unfinished masterpiece " . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In late 1969 , after George Harrison 's song " Something " had been issued on the A @-@ side of a single by the Beatles – the first time that one of his compositions had been given that honour – he remarked in an interview : " There 's a lot of songs like that in my head . I must get them down . Maybe even other people would like to sing them . " In the summer of 1970 , " Something " gave Welsh singer Shirley Bassey her biggest UK hit in nine years , an achievement that led her to tell the press that she and Harrison could become a singer @-@ and @-@ songwriter pairing on the scale of Dionne Warwick and Burt Bacharach . Although he would later be dismissive of Bassey 's version of " Something " , Harrison wrote a new song for her to record after reading these comments . Originally titled " Whenever " , it became " When Every Song Is Sung " and later " I 'll Still Love You " . 
 As he had with " Something " , Harrison composed the melody on a piano , part @-@ way through a recording session – in this case , while working on his first post @-@ Beatles solo album , All Things Must Pass ( 1970 ) . As reproduced in his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison 's original lyrics carried the title " <unk> ( by Shirley Bassey ) " . He recalls in the book : " I got the chord sequence , and ' When every song is sung ' were the first words to come out of my mouth , and it developed from there . " 
 Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , considers it to be an " emotionally complex lyric that ponders how love will even survive , ' when every soul is free ' " . Christian theologian Dale Allison interprets the subject matter of the song as moksha , or liberation from rebirth , in the Hindu faith . He writes : " ' I 'll Still Love You ( When Every Song Is Sung ) ' looks forward to the time when all souls are ' free , ' when all eyes will ' see , ' and when all human beings will be of the same mind . ' All Things Must Pass , ' but no one really ever passes away . " 
 Author Robert Rodriguez describes the musical tone as that of a " moody torch song " . Leng notes that the verses have the same descending semitone pattern as " Something " and , structurally , it features a middle eight that is " harsher " and " dramatic " compared to the verses , just like the middle eight in Harrison 's 1969 composition . 
 = = Pre @-@ Ringo 's Rotogravure recording history = = 
 = = = George Harrison = = = 
 Still using the title " Whenever " , Harrison recorded " When Every Song Is Sung " for All Things Must Pass in 1970 but did not include it on the album . The sessions took place between late May and August that year , at London 's Abbey Road and Trident studios . According to bootlegs subsequently compiled from the sessions , 44 takes of the song were taped . The recordings reveal a musical arrangement featuring acoustic guitars , piano , bass , drums and horns . 
 Along with other unreleased material from the All Things Must Pass sessions , Harrison 's " When Every Song Is Sung " became available in the 1990s on unofficial outtake compilations such as Songs for Patti , some of which list the track as " I 'll Still Love You " . AllMusic critic Richie Unterberger describes this early version of the song as " haunting " and " a noteworthy find " among outtakes from Harrison 's 1970 triple album . 
 = = = Ronnie Spector = = = 
 " When Every Song Is Sung " was one of up to six Harrison compositions recorded in February 1971 for what was intended to be a debut solo album by Ronnie Spector . The latter was the former lead singer of the Ronettes and the wife of Harrison 's All Things Must Pass co @-@ producer , Phil Spector . As in 1970 , Harrison and Spector co @-@ produced the sessions . 
 Basic tracks for this and the other songs were taped at Abbey Road Studios with some of the musicians who had played on All Things Must Pass – including Jim Gordon , Klaus Voormann and Gary Wright – along with Leon Russell on piano . The recording was not completed , however , since Phil Spector 's erratic behaviour led to the project being abandoned . Issued on Apple Records in April 1971 , the single " Try Some , Buy Some " was the only official Ronnie Spector release from these sessions . 
 = = = Cilla Black = = = 
 Due to his commitment to the Bangladesh relief effort , Harrison 's music @-@ making was limited for much of 1971 and the following year . In early August 1972 , shortly after the UK release of the Concert for Bangladesh film , he resumed his role as a record producer with a session for a new Cilla Black single , the A @-@ side of which was to be " When Every Song Is Sung " . The recording took place at Apple Studio in London , during Black 's day off from her summer variety season in Blackpool . Among the support musicians were Voormann , Ringo Starr and Eric Clapton . 
 A second Harrison composition , " You Got to Stay With Me " , was also attempted at the session , but as with the Ronnie Spector solo album , the project was not completed . Black told radio presenter Spencer Leigh that her ability to record that day was hindered by her discomfort following a dental appointment just before the session began . The B @-@ side that Harrison started writing for her similarly took an alternative route , ending up as the autobiographical " The Light That Has Lighted the World " , which he chose to include on his 1973 album Living in the Material World . 
 According to author Alan Clayson , former Apple artist Mary Hopkin also recorded a version of " When Every Song Is Sung " during this period . Black still thought the song was " super " , she told Leigh , and so re @-@ recorded it over 1974 – 75 , this time with producer David Mackay . She said of this later recording : " even then , [ the song ] didn 't have the magic it deserved . It should have had a ' Yesterday ' -type arrangement . " 
 In his book The Beatles Diary Volume 2 , Keith Badman writes that Harrison and Black met in a London restaurant over Christmas in 1982 and discussed completing their recordings from ten years before . Black 's Mackay @-@ produced version of the song was eventually released in May 2003 , as " I 'll Still Love You ( When Every Song Is Sung ) " , on her three @-@ CD compilation Cilla : The Best of 1963 – 78 . 
 = = = Leon and Mary Russell = = = 
 After their various projects together between 1969 and 1971 , including the Concert for Bangladesh , Harrison renewed his musical association with Leon Russell in 1975 , while recording Extra Texture in Los Angeles . Aside from contributing to that album , Russell made a new recording of " When Every Song Is Song " with his wife Mary – formerly Mary McCreary of the vocal group Little Sister , and subsequently a solo artist signed to Russell 's Shelter record label . The couple married in June 1975 , after which they began recording the first of their two albums together , titled Wedding Album . 
 Harrison participated in the session for " When Every Song Is Sung " . According to Tom Petty , who was a Shelter artist at the time , recording took place at Russell 's home studio in Encino , with Ringo Starr also at the session . As before , this attempt failed to produce a finished recording of the song . 
 = = Ringo 's Rotogravure recording = = 
 Starr was another admirer of the song , describing it in an NME interview as " a big ballady thing " and a track " I 've always loved " . In April 1976 , John Lennon and Paul McCartney had each agreed to donate a song and participate in the sessions for Ringo 's Rotogravure , Starr 's first album on Atlantic Records and Polydor . While he had been Starr 's most frequent collaborator out of all of Starr 's former bandmates after the Beatles ' break @-@ up , Harrison was unable to attend the sessions , since he was under pressure to deliver his first Dark Horse Records album , after being waylaid by hepatitis . Starr instead received his permission to record " When Every Song Is Sung " , now titled " I 'll Still Love You " . Ringo 's Rotogravure thereby became the second album by an ex @-@ Beatle , after Starr 's Ringo in 1973 , to feature compositions by all four former members of the band . 
 The Rotogravure sessions took place between April and July 1976 , mostly at Cherokee Studios in Los Angeles . Arif Mardin produced the album , since Richard Perry , Starr 's usual producer , was committed to another project . The musicians on " I 'll Still Love You " included pianist Jane Getz and a rhythm section comprising Starr and Jim Keltner ( both on drums ) and Voormann ( on bass ) . Lon Van Eaton , a former Apple Records signing , played lead guitar on the track . 
 As further contributions to a recording that Rodriguez describes as a " dramatic ballad " , Mardin added a string synthesizer part , played on an ARP String Ensemble , and Gene Orloff arranged and conducted orchestral strings . Mardin recorded these overdubs at Atlantic Studios in New York , without Starr . According to Keith Badman , Harrison was " not pleased " with Starr 's version of the song and took legal action against him , which was soon settled out of court . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ringo 's Rotogravure was issued on 17 September 1976 in Britain and ten days later in the United States , with " I 'll Still Love You " sequenced as the second track on side two of the LP . The US release coincided with heightened speculation regarding the possibility of a Beatles reunion , following promoter Sid Bernstein 's offer of $ 230 million for a single concert by the group . While Starr was often asked about his former bandmates ' contributions to the album , he was frustrated by the media 's preference for discussing the Beatles . Starr also dismissed the idea that Harrison 's non @-@ appearance on " I 'll Still Love You " was to avoid Rotogravure being seen as a work by " The New Beatles ' " , as one interviewer had suggested . Although it was not selected for release as a single , Starr made a promotional film for the song , along with two other tracks from the album . The film clip , which was rarely seen at the time , shows Starr and a woman dancing together in a park in Hamburg . 
 As with its parent album , " I 'll Still Love You " received a mixed response from music critics . In one of the more favourable reviews , Ray Coleman of Melody Maker admired Rotogravure as " a pleasing album of uncomplicated pop music " and added that the song was " simplicity itself " , likening it to " Something " . Less impressed , Bob Woffinden of the NME said : " ' I 'll Still Love You ' is a song Harrison wrote some years back . Lyrics are dreadful , but the melody 's quite pretty . " In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner described the contributions from Starr 's former bandmates as " sound [ ing ] more like throwaways " , in contrast with their " inspired work " on Ringo . Schaffner lamented that the treatment of " I 'll Still Love You " was almost a " Harrison parody " , complete with Van Eaton 's " fluid imitation " of the guitarist 's playing style . 
 Writing more recently , Robert Rodriguez describes " I 'll Still Love You " as one of the highlights of Ringo 's Rotogravure , and evidence that " when it came to George , Ringo was the recipient of his strongest giveaways " . In his book on Harrison , for the Praeger Singer @-@ Songwriter Collection , Ian Inglis writes dismissively of Starr 's " boisterous shouts " of " Yes I will " and finds Mardin 's production similarly unsuitable . Inglis laments that Harrison never revisited the song himself , adding : " It has the potential , lyrically and musically , to become one of his loveliest creations . As it stands , it is an unfinished masterpiece . " In Simon Leng 's estimation , " When Every Song Is Sung " is among Harrison 's finest love songs and it " deserved better " than the " sub @-@ Spector production " of Starr 's version . Alan Clayson similarly describes it as a Harrison composition that " [ satisfied ] every musical and lyrical qualification required of an evergreen like ' Yesterday ' or his own ' Something ' " , yet the song received " its burial " beside the " <unk> bagatelles " on side two of Rotogravure . 
