 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in the musicians ' credits on the Ringo 's Rotogravure LP : 
 Ringo Starr – vocals , drums 
 Lon Van Eaton – electric guitar 
 Jane Getz – piano 
 Arif Mardin – ARP string synthesizer 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 Gene Orloff – string arrangement and direction 
 David Lasley – backing vocals 
 = U.S. Route 9 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) is a U.S. highway in the northeast United States , running from Laurel , Delaware north to Champlain , New York . In New Jersey , the route runs 166 @.@ 80 mi ( 268 @.@ 44 km ) from the Cape May – Lewes Ferry terminal in North Cape May , Cape May County , where the ferry carries US 9 across the Delaware Bay to Lewes , Delaware , north to the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee , Bergen County , where the route along with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) and US 1 continue into New York City . US 9 is the longest U.S. highway in the state . From North Cape May north to Toms River in Ocean County , US 9 is mostly a two @-@ lane undivided road that closely parallels the Garden State Parkway and runs near the Jersey Shore . Along this stretch , it passes through the communities of Rio Grande , Cape May Court House , Somers Point , Pleasantville , Absecon , Tuckerton , Manahawkin , and Beachwood . In the Toms River area , US 9 runs along the Garden State Parkway for a short distance before heading northwest away from it and the Jersey Shore into Lakewood Township . Upon entering Monmouth County , the route transitions into a multilane suburban divided highway and continues through Howell Township , Freehold Township , Manalapan Township , Marlboro Township , Old Bridge Township , Sayreville , and South Amboy . In Woodbridge Township , US 9 merges with US 1 and the two routes continue through northern New Jersey as US 1 / 9 to the George Washington Bridge . 
 Prior to 1927 , the current alignment of US 9 had been legislated as parts of several state highways , including pre @-@ 1927 Route 14 from Cape May to Seaville , pre @-@ 1927 Route 19 between Seaville and Absecon , pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Absecon and Lakewood and South Amboy and Rahway , a spur of pre @-@ 1927 Route 7 between Lakewood and Freehold , and pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 between Rahway and Jersey City . US 9 was signed through New Jersey in 1926 to run from US 30 in Absecon north to the New York border in Alpine , where it became US 9W ; it ran more to the east of its current alignment between Lakewood and South Amboy . In 1927 , US 9 became Route 4 between Absecon and Lakewood and South Amboy and Rahway , Route 35 between Lakewood and Belmar and Eatontown and South Amboy ( now Route 88 south of Point Pleasant ) , Route 4N ( now Route 71 ) between Belmar and Eatontown , Route 27 between Rahway and Newark , Route 25 between Newark and Jersey City , and New Jersey Route 1 north of Jersey City . 
 By the 1940s , US 9 had been extended south on Route 4 to Cape May and rerouted to current Route 4 between Lakewood and South Amboy . In addition , the route was moved to its current alignment between South Amboy and Jersey City , following Route 35 and Route 25 , and routed to cross the Hudson River on the George Washington Bridge , using a part of Route 6 . The state highway concurrencies were removed in 1953 and two realignments occurred to the route as a result of the construction of the Garden State Parkway in the 1950s . In the 1970s , US 9 was extended across the Cape May – Lewes Ferry to continue into Delaware with the former route into Cape May becoming Route 109 . Also around this time , two freeways were proposed for US 9 in Atlantic and Monmouth counties , but never built . The Beesley 's Point Bridge over Great Egg Harbor Bay was closed in 2004 , with US 9 rerouted to use the Great Egg Harbor Bridge along the Garden State Parkway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Cape May County = = = 
 From the dock of the Cape May – Lewes Ferry , which carries US 9 across the Delaware Bay to Lewes , Delaware , US 9 continues eastward on four @-@ lane divided Lincoln Boulevard , which is under the maintenance of the Delaware River and Bay Authority . It runs between the residential community of North Cape May to the north and wetlands to the south within Lower Township , Cape May County . The road becomes Sandman Boulevard at the intersection with CR 603 , where it enters woodland and narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road . After a turn southeast , US 9 comes to a crossroads with CR 626 , which heads south to cross the Cape May Canal as Route 162 . After crossing the Cape May Seashore Lines railroad tracks , US 9 turns north onto Shore Road , while Route 109 continues straight to head into Cape May . Shore Road , which is maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation , carries the route northward through a mix of woods and marshland containing some development , with the Cape May Seashore Lines tracks running immediately to the west and the Garden State Parkway a short distance to the east . The road passes near Historic Cold Spring Village prior to a brief bend farther to the east of the railroad tracks as the route continues through Erma . 
 US 9 crosses into Middle Township , where it continues northeast into the commercial community of Rio Grande . Here , the road briefly widens to four lanes as it has an intersection with Route 47 , which runs up the west bank of the cape . From this point , the two @-@ lane route continues into a mix of woods and development . Continuing into Burleigh , US 9 intersects Route 147 and CR 618 . Route 147 / CR 618 , as well as Route 47 , provide access to The Wildwoods resort area on the Jersey Shore . North of the Route 147 intersection , US 9 draws alongside the Garden State Parkway as it passes near the Wildwood Golf and Country Club . Shortly after pulling away from the Garden State Parkway once again , the highway continues into Cape May Court House , the county seat of Cape May County . 
 In this community , US 9 runs past a mix of homes and businesses , intersecting <unk> Avenue and CR 657 , both of which provide access to the Garden State Parkway at at @-@ grade intersections . At the CR 657 intersection , US 9 briefly gains a center left @-@ turn lane and passes by Cape Regional Medical Center . Upon leaving Cape May Court House , the route runs into more rural surroundings , passing the Cape May County Park & Zoo prior to an intersection with CR 609 that connects to the Garden State Parkway . Past here , the road again draws closer to the parkway and comes to a ramp that provides access to the southbound direction of the parkway . Continuing northeast through more wooded development , US 9 intersects CR 601 before passing by <unk> 's Run Gardens and entering Dennis Township . 
 A short distance later , in the community of Clermont , Route 83 splits off to the northwest . Past this intersection , US 9 continues northeast through more rural areas , reaching an intersection with CR 625 after passing by Magnolia Lake . Following the CR 625 intersection , the road comes to CR 550 , which heads to the west . Not long after the CR 550 intersection , US 9 continues into Upper Township , where it passes rural development before reaching Seaville . Here , there is an intersection with the southern terminus of Route 50 and a ramp providing access to and from the southbound direction of the Garden State Parkway . At this intersection , the route is briefly a divided highway . Past this junction , the road continues northeast , where residential development becomes more constant alongside the road as it passes through Palermo . 
 US 9 reaches the community of Marmora , where it heads into commercial areas and briefly becomes a divided highway as it intersects CR 623 . At this intersection , US 9 turns southeast to join CR 623 on Roosevelt Boulevard , while Shore Road continues north into Beesleys Point to the site of the former Beesley 's Point Bridge . US 9 / CR 623 runs southeast as five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane that passes businesses . The road comes to an interchange with the Garden State Parkway , at which point US 9 heads northeast on the four @-@ lane limited @-@ access parkway . The parkway , which has a wide median , carries the route through wooded areas between Beesleys Point to the west and marshland to the east . The median narrows as the highway comes to the Great Egg Harbor Bridge over the Great Egg Harbor Bay . 
 = = = Atlantic County = = = 
 The highway crosses the Great Egg Harbor Bay into Egg Harbor Township , Atlantic County , where it runs across marshy Drag Island into Somers Point before passing over the Drag Channel . The parkway has a southbound toll plaza before US 9 leaves the roadway at a partial interchange . Now called New Road , the route runs through developed areas prior to crossing CR 559 . The road winds east through the Greate Bay Golf Club before turning north and intersecting the northern terminus of Route 52 and Laurel Drive , the latter of which provides access to and from the northbound Garden State Parkway . At this intersection , the road contains a median . From this point , the two @-@ lane undivided US 9 is lined with businesses and continues northeast , gaining a center left @-@ turn lane prior to the CR 559 Alternate intersection . Here , the route enters Linwood and the turn lane ends as it heads through suburban areas . The road continues into Northfield , where it comes to CR 563 . US 9 enters Pleasantville , intersecting US 40 / US 322 ( Black Horse Pike ) , a surface route to nearby Atlantic City to the east . The road turns more north @-@ northeast past this intersection , crossing a former railroad line used as a rail trail . The route reaches an interchange with the Atlantic City Expressway , the toll road leading into Atlantic City . 
 After this interchange , US 9 crosses CR 646 and enters Absecon . The route crosses the marshy Absecon Creek prior to passing businesses . After crossing under New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line , another route into Atlantic City , US 30 ( White Horse Pike ) , crosses US 9 . After US 30 , the road turns east into wooded neighborhoods , becoming Wyoming Avenue . Route 157 intersects US 9 from the south , with US 9 making a left turn to head northeast onto Shore Road . The road continues into Galloway Township , with residential development becoming less dense as it runs a short distance to the west of inland bays , intersecting the southern terminus of CR 561 . 
 Past this intersection , US 9 draws farther from the inland bays and becomes New York Road . The road continues through dense woodland with some residences prior to reaching Smithville . Here , the road crosses CR 561 Alternate . Upon leaving the Smithville area , the land gets much more forested . The road turns slightly to the north @-@ northwest as it crosses the marshy <unk> Creek , entering Port Republic and continuing north . After intersecting CR 575 , the road passes a monument for the Battle of Chestnut Neck as it intersects Route 167 . Following this intersection , US 9 turns west and merges onto the Garden State Parkway at an interchange . The limited @-@ access parkway , which is four lanes wide , carries US 9 north through marshland to a crossing of the Mullica River . 
 = = = Pine Barrens = = = 
 This river crossing takes the two roads into Bass River Township , Burlington County , where US 9 merges off the Garden State Parkway . The route heads northwest onto two @-@ lane undivided New York Road through woods , intersecting the northern terminus of the northern segment of Route 167 . At this point , the route turns north and comes to a junction with CR 542 . US 9 turns east into residential New Gretna before crossing under the Garden State Parkway without an interchange and passing over the marshy Bass River . This section runs along the eastern edge of the heavily forested Pine Barrens , with occasional areas of development . 
 The road crosses the <unk> Creek into Little Egg Harbor Township in Ocean County , where US 9 becomes an unnamed road . Continuing east , the roadway enters Tuckerton and passes more dense development and the Tuckerton Seaport as " Main Street " . US 9 crosses the Tuckerton Creek near Pohatcong Lake prior to intersecting the southern terminus of CR 539 . From this point , the road resumes a north @-@ northeast bearing , passing more areas of the Pine Barrens as it continues back into Little Egg Harbor Township and runs through <unk> . Upon entering <unk> Township , US 9 passes through the residential community of West Creek . Continuing into Stafford Township , the route reaches Manahawkin , where development increases . In Manahawkin , Route 72 , the main route to Long Beach Island , meets US 9 at a cloverleaf interchange . In the vicinity of the interchange , the road is a four @-@ lane divided highway . 
 After this interchange , the two @-@ lane road passes more development before becoming more wooded . US 9 enters Barnegat Township , where it reaches the community of Barnegat , located a short distance to the west of the Barnegat Bay . In this community , there is an intersection with the eastern terminus of CR 554 . Past this intersection , the route enters Ocean Township . In this area , US 9 comes to Waretown , where it intersects CR 532 in a commercial area . Leaving Waretown , the road heads north through areas of woodland and businesses before crossing the Oyster Creek into Lacey Township . Here , the road passes to the east of the Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station before crossing over a branch of the Forked River . At this point , US 9 runs past businesses in the community of Forked River , turning back to the north @-@ northeast . 
 The land gets more built up as the road enters <unk> Harbor . A crossing of the Cedar Creek takes the route into Berkeley Township and US 9 continues north as Atlantic City Boulevard . At Bayville , the route is lined with businesses and makes a turn to the northwest . The road briefly forms the border between Berkeley Township to the southwest and Pine Beach to the northeast prior to crossing into Beachwood . In Beachwood , Route 166 heads north as the route widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway . Past Route 166 , US 9 turns more to the west past residential neighborhoods as a four @-@ lane undivided road , entering South Toms River , where it widens into a divided highway . US 9 crosses CR 530 prior to merging onto the Garden State Parkway again at another interchange . At this interchange , the southbound direction of US 9 briefly runs concurrent with eastbound CR 530 . 
 = = = Toms River to Freehold = = = 
 Joined with the eight @-@ lane Garden State Parkway , US 9 briefly passes through Berkeley Township again before crossing the Toms River and entering Toms River . Here , the road reaches the exit for CR 527 . Past CR 527 , the road comes to a cloverleaf interchange with Route 37 at exit 82 . US 9 leaves the Garden State Parkway again at the next exit , just before the Toms River toll barrier . At this point , the route intersects the northern terminus of Route 166 and heads north along Lakewood Road , a four @-@ lane divided road that comes to an intersection with CR 571 . Following this intersection , the road passes wooded suburban areas , turning more to the north @-@ northwest . After a turn to the north , US 9 reaches an interchange with Route 70 , a route connecting the northern part of the Jersey Shore to the Philadelphia area . 
 After this junction , the road takes the name River Avenue as it comes into Lakewood Township . Upon entering Lakewood , the road passes commercial establishments containing Kimball Medical Center and running through tree @-@ covered residential neighborhoods . After crossing a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line , the road passes to the east of Lake <unk> as it intersects CR 528 / CR 547 . At this intersection , CR 547 forms a concurrency with US 9 and the two routes continue north on <unk> Avenue , crossing the Metedeconk River , which Lake <unk> is formed from . After intersecting the western terminus of Route 88 , Madison Avenue continues north through the commercial and residential center of Lakewood as a four @-@ lane undivided road , with CR 547 splitting from US 9 by turning east . Entering a business area , the route crosses CR 526 , turning into a divided highway called the Lila W. Thompson Memorial Highway . 
 US 9 enters Howell Township , Monmouth County at the point where it crosses over the North Branch Metedeconk River . The road runs north , lined with businesses and shopping centers as it has several intersections with jughandles . In this area , the route reaches an interchange with I @-@ 195 , where US 9 begins a northwestward slant . After this interchange , the highway continues north and enters Freehold Township . In this area , the highway crosses CR 524 . 
 Past this intersection , the route turns north and has an intersection with Route 79 before the interchange with the Route 33 freeway . Following Route 33 , the highway continues northwest and enters Freehold , the county seat of Monmouth County , as it has an interchange with CR 537 . US 9 enters Freehold Township again as it passes between the Freehold Raceway Mall to the west and the Freehold Raceway to the east . The route turns north , widens to eight lanes , and intersects Route 33 Business at the former Freehold Circle . From this point , US 9 runs west of Freehold and east of Monmouth Battlefield State Park as a six @-@ lane highway before crossing over a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line and CR 522 , with ramps providing access to the latter . After this interchange , the highway narrows back to four lanes . 
 = = = Freehold to US 1 = = = 
 Continuing into Manalapan Township , the route runs through more suburban areas and passes to the east of the former Manalapan Mall , which is now a big – box complex . US 9 reaches an interchange with CR 3 before passing a mix of farmland and development as it crosses into Marlboro Township . In Marlboro Township , businesses predominate the road as it reaches an interchange with Union Hill Road . Following this , US 9 continues north and crosses CR 520 . 
 The road enters Old Bridge Township , Middlesex County , where it becomes the Joann H. Smith Memorial Highway and interchanges with the Route 18 freeway . Within this interchange , the travel lanes of US 9 split . From Route 18 , the route widens to six lanes as it eventually comes to interchanges with Throckmorton Lane / <unk> Road and CR 516 . Past CR 516 , the highway passes a mix of woodland and farm fields . Route 34 intersects US 9 at a directional interchange , and the highway continues past shopping centers , with an exit ramp to one . From Route 34 through to the US 1 / 9 concurrency in <unk> , there are no jughandles or other intersections , just right @-@ in / right @-@ out access and interchanges . US 9 enters Sayreville , where it passes more suburban areas , interchanging with CR 673 and CR 615 . A short distance after the latter , the road comes to a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway at exit 123 ; this interchange only has access from the Parkway southbound to US 9 south and from US 9 north to the northbound parkway . US 9 narrows to four lanes past this interchange and runs northeast as it enters South Amboy . The route comes to an interchange with Route 35 , merging onto that route for a concurrency . 
 The concurrent US 9 and Route 35 head northwest on a four @-@ lane divided highway through commercial areas and woodland , crossing over a Conrail Shared Assets Operations before turning north and interchanging with Raritan Street and Kearney Road , crossing back into Sayreville at the interchange with the former . At this point , the road widens to six lanes . The two routes split at an interchange ( the former Victory Circle ) that has access to the southbound Garden State Parkway and from the northbound Parkway by way of Chevalier Avenue . From here , US 9 closely parallels the east side of the Garden State Parkway as it crosses the Raritan River on the Edison Bridge , with the parkway crossing the river on the Driscoll Bridge . Upon crossing the Raritan River , US 9 enters Woodbridge Township , where it reaches a complex interchange with the Garden State Parkway , Route 440 , and CR 656 . Within this interchange , the Garden State Parkway ’ s travel lanes run in between the travel lanes of US 9 , with this configuration continuing past the interchange for a short distance . Along this stretch , there are ramps to and from CR 616 and to the parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) . 
 After US 9 heads east away from the parkway , it reaches a cloverleaf interchange with Route 184 / CR 501 and continues into a business district . A short distance later , the highway crosses over the access road between the Garden State Parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike just east of the toll plaza and then the New Jersey Turnpike itself . From this point , the highway passes several office parks , reaching an interchange with CR 514 . After CR 514 , the route passes some residential neighborhoods before passing to the east of the Woodbridge Center shopping mall . After passing under a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line , US 9 junctions with CR 604 prior to merging with US 1 . 
 = = = The US 1 / 9 concurrency = = = 
 US 1 and US 9 become concurrent upon merging in Woodbridge Township and continue through developed areas , interchanging with Route 35 . Soon after this interchange , jughandles and other traffic light @-@ controlled intersections resume . Upon entering Union County , US 1 / 9 pass through Rahway and Linden , interchanging with I @-@ 278 in Linden . The road continues into urban Elizabeth , crossing Route 439 before turning into a freeway prior to meeting Route 81 near Newark Liberty International Airport . US 1 / 9 continue along the west end of the airport into Newark , Essex County , reaching the Newark Airport Interchange with I @-@ 78 , US 22 , and Route 21 . From this interchange , the road continues northeast through industrial areas to an interchange with US 1 / 9 Truck that provides access to the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) . 
 US 1 / 9 continue onto the Pulaski Skyway , which carries the route over the Passaic River into Hudson County , crossing over Kearny and the Hackensack River before coming into Jersey City . Trucks are banned from the Pulaski Skyway and must use US 1 / 9 Truck to bypass it . 
 The Pulaski Skyway ends at the Tonnele Circle with US 1 / 9 Truck and Route 139 , and US 1 / 9 continue north along at @-@ grade Tonnelle Avenue toward North Bergen , where the road intersects Route 3 and Route 495 . Crossing into Bergen County , Broad Avenue carries US 1 / 9 through Fairview and Ridgefield before heading into Palisades Park . Here , the two routes join US 46 , and the combined road heads north into Fort Lee . US 1 / 9 / 46 come to an interchange with I @-@ 95 , US 9W , and Route 4 , where it joins I @-@ 95 to head east to the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River . At this point , US 46 ends and I @-@ 95 and US 1 / 9 continue into Manhattan , New York City on the Trans @-@ Manhattan Expressway . 
 = = Route 9 BBS = = 
 The Route 9 BBS , or bus bypass shoulder , are a part of the express bus system in Monmouth and <unk> counties . The road is used by New Jersey Transit 's routes 63 , 64 , 67 to Hudson County , the 130 , 132 , 136 , 139 to Port Authority Bus Terminal , and Academy Bus to Lower Manhattan . The bus lanes run for approximately 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 83 km ) in Old Bridge Township and are the first component of a planned 20 @-@ mile ( 32 @.@ 19 km ) BBS corridor into Monmouth and northern Ocean counties . An extensive analysis by consulting and planning firm Stantec released in 2010 includes recommendations regarding design , construction , and implementation of the BBS extension . The 2nd phase of the project would start at the project 's southern end near the Lakewood Bus Terminal near Route 88 . The third phase and final phase would connect the northern and southern segments passing though Freehold Township and proximate towns , where work would include some widening and deepening of the roadbed to handle bus traffic . 
 = = History = = 
 What would become US 9 was legislated as part of several state routes in the 1910s and 1920s . Between Cape May and Seaville , the road was legislated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 14 in 1917 . Pre @-@ 1927 Route 19 was designated to run along the current route between Seaville and Absecon , but was never built . From Absecon north to Lakewood , and from South Amboy to Rahway , pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 was designated in 1916 along the current route . Between Lakewood and Freehold , a spur of pre @-@ 1927 Route 7 , created in 1925 , was to run on the present US 9 alignment . Between Rahway and Elizabeth , pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 was created in 1916 ; an extension north to the Holland Tunnel was planned in 1922 . 
 When the U.S. Highway System was created in 1926 , US 9 was designated in New Jersey to run from US 30 in Absecon north to the New York border in Alpine , where it continued into New York as US 9W . In New Jersey , the route followed the entirety of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Absecon and Rahway , bending farther to the east of its current alignment between Lakewood and South Amboy by running closer to the Atlantic Ocean . In Rahway , US 9 joined US 1 and pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 for a concurrency north toward Newark . Past Newark , the road followed current US 1 / 9 Truck toward Jersey City , where US 1 and US 9 split . At this point , US 9 continued north on its current alignment in Fort Lee , where it then ran north on present @-@ day CR 501 toward the New York border . US 9 was designated along this alignment to the New York border as the original numbering plans called for it to continue up the west bank of the Hudson River to Albany , New York , with US 109 running along the east bank of the river . However , it was instead split into two suffixed routes in New York , with US 9W running along the west bank and US 9E running along the east bank , New Jersey had kept its alignment of US 9 to US 9W at the border in Alpine . 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the present @-@ day routing of US 9 between Cape May and Woodbridge became part of Route 4 , while the portion along the US 1 / 9 concurrency south of the Tonnele Circle became part of Route 25 and north of there to the George Washington Bridge became Route 1 and Route 6 . Meanwhile , what had been signed as US 9 at the time was Route 4 from Absecon to Lakewood , Route 35 between Lakewood and Belmar and Eatontown and South Amboy ( now Route 88 between Lakewood and Point Pleasant ) , Route 4N ( now Route 71 ) between Belmar and Eatontown , Route 4 ( now Route 35 ) between South Amboy and Rahway , Route 27 between Rahway and Newark , Route 25 between Newark and Jersey City , and Route 1 north of Jersey City . After the Pulaski Skyway opened in 1932 , US 9 , along with US 1 and Route 25 , was routed onto it . By the 1940s , US 9 was extended south along Route 4 to Cape May , with the small southern piece leading to US 30 in Absecon becoming an unnumbered road that is now Route 157 . In addition , US 9 was moved to its current routing between South Amboy and the George Washington Bridge . By 1947 , US 9 and Route 4 were moved to a new alignment between Freehold and Old Bridge Township , with the old alignment becoming Route 4A ( now Route 79 and a part of Route 34 ) . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the state highways running concurrent with US 9 were removed . In addition , US 1 / 9 Truck was created as a truck bypass of the Pulaski Skyway , replacing Route 25T , and US 1 / 9 Business ( now Route 139 ) was signed along the former Route 25 approach to the Holland Tunnel . After the Garden State Parkway was completed through the Toms River area in 1954 , US 9 was moved to it to bypass the center of the community and the former route became US 9 Alternate ( now Route 166 ) . Also in 1954 , a new bridge for the Garden State Parkway was built over the Mullica River at the site of the US 9 bridge ; the old bridge carrying US 9 was dismantled , and the route was designated to follow the Garden State Parkway over the Mullica River from two interchanges . The approaches to the former bridge became Route 167 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , a limited @-@ access toll road called the Garden State Thruway was planned along the US 9 alignment between Toms River and Woodbridge . This freeway was intended to serve all vehicles and provide a shortcut to the Garden State Parkway and US 9 through central New Jersey but was never built . In the early 1970s , another plan surfaced for a US 9 freeway from Route 34 in Madison Township ( now Old Bridge Township ) north to Route 35 in Sayreville . The freeway , which was to cost $ 17 million , was not built due to financial problems . A freeway was also proposed for US 9 in Atlantic County in the late 1960s , running from the proposed Route 60 freeway in Somers Point to CR 575 in Smithville . This freeway , which was to cost $ 35 million and intended to alleviate traffic on the current US 9 and the Garden State Parkway , was also never built due to financial and environmental issues . 
 In 1972 , US 9 was relocated from its southern terminus in Cape May to head west to its new southern terminus at the Cape May – Lewes Ferry terminal in North Cape May , with the former route into Cape May becoming Route 109 . US 9 was extended across the ferry to US 13 in Laurel , Delaware in 1974 . In 2001 , a new span was added to the Edison Bridge over the Raritan River in a $ 60 million project . The Victory Circle at the north end of the Route 35 concurrency in Sayreville was replaced with an interchange between 2003 and 2006 . 
 The Beesley 's Point Bridge over the Great Egg Harbor was closed to traffic in 2004 because of a crumbling deck , with the bridge owner , the Beesley ’ s Point Bridge Company , unable to fund repairs . US 9 was detoured around the closure on the Garden State Parkway . In 2008 , Cape May County acquired the bridge from the Beesley ’ s Point Bridge Company and planned to restore it by 2012 , with an estimated cost of $ 20 million . However , the Beesley 's Point Bridge was slated to be demolished in 2013 as part of a project that will also replace the Great Egg Harbor Bridge . As of 2011 , a $ 588 million project for expansion of the 7 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 59 km ) segment of Route 9 between Toms River and Lakewood was in a " design concept " phase with funding earmarked for 2016 @-@ 2017 construction . 
 The segment of US 9 in New Jersey was mentioned in the Bruce Springsteen song " Born to Run " in the lines " Sprung from cages on Highway 9 / Chrome wheeled , fuel injected and steppin ' out over the line . " 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 There is one remaining bannered spur of US 9 in the state of New Jersey : 
 U.S. Route 1 @-@ 9 Truck in Jersey City 
 The following state highways were also formerly designated as bannered spurs of US 9 : 
 Route 139 in Jersey City was formerly U.S. Route 1 @-@ 9 Business 
 Route 166 in Toms River was formerly U.S. Route 9 Alternate 
 Additionally , the following state highways are former alignments of U.S. Route 9 : 
 Route 109 in Cape May 
 Route 157 in Absecon 
 Route 167 near Bass River Township 
 = Joe Nieuwendyk = 
 Joseph " Joe " Nieuwendyk ( born September 10 , 1966 ) is a Canadian former National Hockey League ( NHL ) player . He was a second round selection of the Calgary Flames , 27th overall , at the 1985 NHL Entry Draft and played 20 seasons for the Calgary Flames , Dallas Stars , New Jersey Devils , Toronto Maple Leafs , and Florida Panthers . He is one of only 10 players in NHL history to win the Stanley Cup with three different teams , winning titles with Calgary in 1989 , Dallas in 1999 and New Jersey in 2003 . A two @-@ time Olympian , Nieuwendyk won a gold medal with Team Canada at the 2002 winter games . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2011 and his uniform number 25 was honoured by the Flames in 2014 . Joe Nieuwendyk was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 2014 . 
 An accomplished box lacrosse player , Nieuwendyk led the Whitby Warriors to the 1984 Minto Cup national junior championship before focusing exclusively on hockey . He played university hockey with the Cornell Big Red where he was a two @-@ time All @-@ American . He won the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL rookie of the year in 1988 after becoming only the second first @-@ year player to score 50 goals . He was a four @-@ time All @-@ Star , won the King Clancy Memorial Trophy in 1995 for his leadership and humanitarian work , was named the Conn Smythe Trophy winner in 1999 as most valuable player of the post @-@ season . Nieuwendyk played 1 @,@ 257 games in his career , scoring 559 goals and 1 @,@ 126 points . 
 Chronic back pain forced Nieuwendyk 's retirement as a player in 2006 . He then began a new career in management , acting first as a consultant to the general manager with the Panthers before moving onto the Maple Leafs where he was an assistant to the general manager . Nieuwendyk was the General Manager of the Dallas Stars between 2009 and 2013 . He is currently working as a pro scout and advisor for the Carolina Hurricanes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nieuwendyk was born September 10 , 1966 in Oshawa , Ontario , and grew up in Whitby . He is the youngest of four children to Gordon and Joanne Nieuwendyk , who immigrated to Canada from the Netherlands in 1958 . Gordon owned a car repair shop in Whitby . Joe grew up in a sporting family . His brother Gil was a box lacrosse player , while his uncle Ed Kea and cousin Jeff Beukeboom also played in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . His best friend growing up was future NHL teammate Gary Roberts . 
 He played both hockey and lacrosse growing up and the latter considered his better sport . At one point , Nieuwendyk was considered the top junior lacrosse player in Canada . He earned a spot with the Whitby Warriors junior A team at the age of 15 , and was named the most valuable player of the Minto Cup tournament in 1984 when he led the Warriors to the national championship . The Ontario Lacrosse Association later named its junior A rookie of the year award after Nieuwendyk . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 Nieuwendyk went undrafted by any Ontario Hockey League team , and so played a season of junior B for the Pickering Panthers in 1983 – 84 . Eligible for the 1984 NHL Entry Draft but unselected , he chose to attend Cornell University where he played hockey and lacrosse for the Big Red . He was named the Eastern College Athletic Conference ( ECAC ) hockey rookie of the year in 1984 – 85 after scoring 39 points in 23 games . At the 1985 NHL Entry Draft , the Calgary Flames selected him in the second round , 27th overall , with a pick obtained that day in a trade with the Minnesota North Stars for Kent Nilsson . The disappointment in Calgary over the trade of Nilsson resulted in some criticism of Nieuwendyk 's selection , famously leading to a local newspaper to question the moves with the headline " Joe Who ? " 
 Returning to Cornell for the 1985 – 86 season , Nieuwendyk chose to give up lacrosse in order to focus on hockey . He was named an ECAC first team All @-@ Star in 1985 – 86 and an NCAA All @-@ American after scoring 42 points in 21 games . In his final season at Cornell , he was named the team 's most valuable player and led the ECAC in scoring with 52 points . He was again named an ECAC All @-@ Star and NCAA All @-@ American , and a finalist for the 1987 Hobey Baker Award . 
 Nieuwendyk chose to forgo his senior year in favour of turning professional . In 81 games with Cornell , Nieuwendyk scored 73 goals and 151 points , both among the highest totals in the school 's history . His number 25 jersey was retired by Cornell in 2010 , shared with Ken Dryden 's number 1 as the first such numbers retired by the hockey team , and believed the first in any sport in the school 's varsity sports history . In 2011 he was named one of the 50 greatest players in ECAC history . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Once his junior season at Cornell ended , Nieuwendyk joined the national team for five games before turning professional with the Flames . He made his NHL debut on March 10 , 1987 , against the Washington Capitals and scored his first NHL goal against goaltender Pete Peeters . He appeared in nine regular season games in the 1986 – 87 NHL season , scoring five goals and one assist , and appeared in six playoff games . Playing his first full season in 1987 – 88 , Nieuwendyk captured the attention of the sports media by scoring 32 goals in his first 42 games to put him on a pace to surpass Mike Bossy 's rookie record of 53 goals . Nieuwendyk finished two goals short of Bossy 's record , but led the team with 51 goals and was the second first @-@ year player to score at least 50 goals in one season . He played in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , was named to the All @-@ Rookie Team and was voted the winner of the Calder Memorial Trophy as the NHL 's top rookie . 
 Nieuwendyk again scored 51 goals in 1988 – 89 and marked the 100th of his career in his 144th career game . At the time , he was the third fastest player to reach the milestone , behind Bossy ( 129 games ) and Maurice Richard ( 134 games ) , and was the third player in league history to score 50 goals in each of his first two seasons ( Bossy and Wayne Gretzky ) . He led the league with 11 game @-@ winning goals and set a Flames franchise record on January 11 , 1989 , when he scored five goals in one game against the Winnipeg Jets . Nieuwendyk appeared in his second of three @-@ consecutive All @-@ Star Games . In the 1989 Stanley Cup Playoffs , he scored 10 goals and four assists to help the Flames win their first Stanley Cup championship in franchise history . In the clinching game against the Montreal Canadiens , Nieuwendyk set up Lanny McDonald 's final NHL goal with a quick pass after receiving the puck from Håkan Loob . 
 A 45 @-@ goal season in 1989 – 90 was enough for Nieuwendyk to lead the team in goal scoring for the third consecutive season . He missed he first 11 games of the 1991 – 92 NHL season after suffering a knee injury during a summer evaluation camp for the 1991 Canada Cup . Nieuwendyk began the season as the 11th captain in the Flames franchise history . He was limited to 22 goals and 56 points on the season , but scored his 200th career goal on December 3 , 1991 , against the Detroit Red Wings . His 230th career goal , scored against the Tampa Bay Lightning on November 13 , 1992 , established a Flames franchise record for career goals ( since broken ) . 
 Nieuwendyk entered the 1995 – 96 season unhappy with his contract status . Unable to come to terms with the Flames , he had gone to arbitration , and was awarded a contract worth C $ 1 @.@ 85 million , but insisted on renegotiating the deal into a long @-@ term contract extension . He refused an offer of a three @-@ year , $ 6 million contract from the Flames , and as the dispute dragged on , chose not to join the team when the season began . He remained a holdout until December 19 , 1995 , when the Flames traded him to the Dallas Stars in exchange for Jarome Iginla and Corey Millen . 
 = = = Dallas Stars = = = 
 The Stars immediately signed Nieuwendyk to a new deal worth US $ 11 @.@ 3 million over five years . Bob Gainey , the team 's general manager , hoped that the acquisition of Nieuwendyk would help the franchise , which had relocated from Minnesota three years previous , establish its place in Dallas . Nieuwendyk scored 14 goals and 32 points in 52 games with the Stars to finish the 1995 – 96 season . 
 Nieuwendyk improved to 30 goals in 1996 – 97 despite missing the first month of the season with fractured rib cartilage . A 39 @-@ goal season followed , but he was again sidelined by injury after appearing in only one game of the 1998 Stanley Cup playoffs . In the opening game of the Stars ' first @-@ round series against the San Jose Sharks , he suffered a torn ACL as a result of a check by Bryan Marchment . The injury required two knee surgeries to repair and six months to heal , which caused him to miss the beginning of the 1998 – 99 NHL season . 
 He finished the regular season with 28 goals and 55 points in 67 games , and added 11 goals and 10 assists in the 1999 Stanley Cup Playoffs to help the Stars win the first Stanley Cup in their franchise history . Six of his playoff goals were game winners , and he was voted the winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy as most valuable player of the playoffs . Injuries again limited Nieuwendyk in 1999 – 2000 . He missed ten games due to a bruised chest then suffered a separated shoulder a week after his return that kept him out of the lineup for several weeks . He played only 47 regular season games , but added 23 more in the playoffs as the Stars reached the 2000 Stanley Cup Finals . They lost the series in six games to the New Jersey Devils , however . 
 Nieuwendyk played in his 1,000th career game on January 20 , 2002 , against the Chicago Blackhawks . Two months later , on March 19 , 2002 , he was traded to the Devils , along with Jamie Langenbrunner , in exchange for Jason Arnott , Randy McKay and a first round selection in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = = New Jersey , Toronto and Florida = = = 
 New Jersey , who had won the Stanley Cup in 2000 and reached the finals the following year , acquired Nieuwendyk for their playoff run in 2002 . He scored 11 points in 14 regular season games for the Devils following the trade , but New Jersey was eliminated in the first round of the 2002 Stanley Cup Playoffs by the Carolina Hurricanes . Nieuwendyk reached two offensive milestones in 2002 – 03 . He scored his 500th career goal on January 17 , 2003 , against Carolina 's Kevin Weekes . On February 23 , he scored his 1,000th point in a win over the Pittsburgh Penguins . He and the Devils reached the 2003 Stanley Cup Finals , but Nieuwendyk suffered a hip injury in the sixth game of the Eastern Conference Final that prevented him from appearing in the championship series . The Devils defeated the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in the final , capturing the franchise 's third Stanley Cup . For Nieuwendyk , it was his third title with his third different team . 
 The Toronto Maple Leafs signed Nieuwendyk to a one @-@ year contract for the 2003 – 04 season . He scored 22 goals for Toronto in a season marred by abdominal and back injuries that limited him to 64 games played , and a groin injury that forced him out of the lineup for much of Toronto 's second @-@ round series loss to the Philadelphia Flyers . He signed another one @-@ year deal for 2004 – 05 , but the season was cancelled due to a labour dispute that was feared would mark the end of the 38 @-@ year @-@ old Nieuwendyk 's career . 
 When NHL play resumed in 2005 – 06 , the Florida Panthers sought to bolster their lineup with veteran players . They signed both Nieuwendyk and Roberts , who had played together in Calgary and Toronto and wanted to finish their careers together , to two @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 5 million contracts . Nieuwendyk appeared in 65 games during the season , scoring 26 goals and 56 points . He appeared in 15 games in 2006 – 07 before chronic back pain forced him onto injured reserve . After missing 14 games , Nieuwendyk announced his retirement on December 7 , 2006 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As a member of the Canadian national junior team at the 1986 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , Nieuwendyk scored five goals in seven games to help Canada win a silver medal . His 12 points in the tournament tied him for third in scoring for Team Canada and fourth overall in the tournament . One year later , Nieuwendyk joined the senior national team for the Calgary Cup , a four @-@ team exhibition tournament that served as a preview event for the 1988 Winter Olympics . He scored a goal in each of the first two games , losses to the United States and Czechoslovakia , for the Canadian team that won the bronze medal . He joined the senior team again for the 1990 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships , but appeared in only one game after suffering a knee injury . He was invited to Team Canada 's summer camp for the 1991 Canada Cup tournament but suffered a knee injury that caused him to miss the entire tournament . 
 NHL players were first allowed to participate in the Olympic ice hockey tournament in 1998 . Nieuwendyk was among the players named to join Canada 's " dream team " . He scored two goals and three assists in six games , but was one of several Canadian players stopped by Czech goaltender Dominik Hašek in a shootout loss in the semifinals . Canada then dropped a 3 – 2 decision to Finland to finish fourth . Nieuwendyk played alongside Brendan Shanahan and Theoren Fleury on Canada 's checking line at the 2002 Olympic tournament . He scored one goal and helped Canada win its first Olympic hockey gold medal in 50 years . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Cliff Fletcher , who drafted him into the NHL , described Nieuwendyk as being a " pre @-@ eminent two @-@ way guy who had 50 @-@ goal seasons " , adding that " he had a great stick around the net , he had a great shot , he saw the ice well , he could skate , he had the size – he had everything you needed to have . History has indicated that wherever he went , the team was competitive . The more that was on the line in big games , the better Joe played . " He was an offensive centre in Calgary and power play specialist , able to withstand the physical punishment required to stand in front of the net and battle defencemen for the puck . He led the NHL in power play goals in 1987 – 88 with 31 and finished in the top ten on four other occasions . Wayne Gretzky , who also played box lacrosse in his youth , argued that the skills Nieuwendyk learned dodging opposing players in that sport aided his development as a hockey player . Nieuwendyk was regarded as a top faceoff man , a skill that Team Canada relied on during the Olympics . He was a checking @-@ line centre at the 2002 Olympics , relied on for his defensive and faceoff abilities . 
 Nieuwendyk was regarded as a leader throughout his career . He was the captain of the Flames for four seasons , and his teammates in Dallas praised him as a player who would help guide the younger players as they began their careers . His presence was considered an important factor in New Jersey 's 2003 Stanley Cup championship . Devils ' general manager Lou Lamoriello praised his impact both on and off the ice : " Certainly ( the <unk> were ) the quality player he was even at that time , how good he was defensively as well as always finding a way to get big goals . It was also about how good he was on faceoffs . And the intangibles , which are really more tangible than anything , are what he brought in the locker room from leadership and unselfishness . It was obvious that when he didn 't play he was still so active in his support . He 's genuine in every sense of the word . He was a true team player . " Nieuwendyk was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2011 , and his uniform number 25 was honoured by the Calgary Flames on March 7 , 2014 , as was named to the organization 's " Forever a Flame " program . 
 = = Management career = = 
 Remaining in hockey following the end of his playing career , Nieuwendyk joined the Florida Panthers ' front office as a consultant to general manager Jacques Martin in 2007 . He left the Panthers after one year to join the Maple Leafs as special assistant to general manager Cliff Fletcher in 2008 . He served as assistant general manager for the silver @-@ medal winning Canadian national team at the 2009 World Championships , and on June 1 , 2009 , was named General Manager of the Dallas Stars . His ability to make moves was at times limited by the financial difficulty of team owner Tom Hicks . Among Nieuwendyk 's decisions in his first two seasons as general manager was to allow popular former captain Mike Modano to leave the organization after 22 years with the franchise in 2010 . Nieuwendyk stated such moves were difficult , as he played with Modano and considered him a friend . Nieuwendyk was released as Stars ' general manager at the conclusion of the 2012 – 13 NHL season as team owner Tom <unk> stated that the team wanted to " take this organization in a different direction " . On September 3 , 2014 , the Carolina Hurricanes announced they had hired him as a pro scout and advisor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nieuwendyk and his wife Tina have three children : daughters Tyra and Kaycee and son Jackson . In 1995 , while a member of the Flames , Nieuwendyk won the King Clancy Memorial Trophy given annually to the player " who best exemplifies leadership qualities on and off the ice and who has made a significant humanitarian contribution to his community " . He was honoured by the league for his contributions to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( SPCA ) , and was a spokesman and honorary chairman of the Foothills Hospital Foundation . He remained active with the SPCA after his trade to Dallas , and following the September 11 attacks , organized a charity softball game that raised $ 115 @,@ 000 for charitable groups in the aftermath of the attack . While a member of the Maple Leafs during the lockout , he participated in a charity hockey game organized by cancer survivor and former NHL player Keith Acton that raised $ 30 @,@ 000 for cancer and leukemia charities in southern Ontario . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = HMS Hasty ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Hasty was an H @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy during the mid @-@ 1930s . She was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet until the beginning of World War II . The ship transferred to Freetown , Sierra Leone , in October 1939 to hunt for German commerce raiders in the South Atlantic with Force K. Hasty returned to the British Isles in early 1940 and covered the evacuation of Allied troops from Namsos in early May 1940 during the Norwegian Campaign . She was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet shortly afterwards and participated in the Battle of Calabria and the Battle of Cape Spada in July 1940 . The ship took part in the Battle of Cape Matapan in March and evacuated British and Australian troops from both Greece and Crete in April and May . In June , Hasty participated in the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign and was escorting convoys and the larger ships of the Mediterranean Fleet for the next year . During the Second Battle of Sirte in March 1942 she defended a convoy from an Italian battleship and several cruisers . While covering another convoy from Alexandria to Malta in June 1942 during Operation Vigorous , Hasty was torpedoed by a German motor torpedo boat and was so badly damaged that she had to be scuttled . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hasty displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Hasty carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but this increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Hasty had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 Beginning in mid @-@ 1940 , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was increased , although when exactly the modifications were made is not known . The rear set of torpedo tubes was replaced by a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ( 12 @-@ pounder ) AA gun and the quadruple .50 @-@ calibre Vickers mounts were replaced by 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon autocannon . Two more Oerlikon guns were also added in the forward superstructure . 
 = = Service = = 
 Hasty was laid down by William Denny and Brothers , of Dumbarton in Scotland on 15 April 1935 , launched on 5 May 1936 and completed on 11 November 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 248 @,@ 611 . She was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . Hasty was refitted in Devonport Dockyard in June – July 1939 and she returned to the Mediterranean afterwards . 
 Hasty escorted convoys between Port Said , Egypt and Gibraltar immediately after World War II began in September . In October the ship was transferred to Freetown to hunt for German commerce raiders in the South Atlantic with Force K. The ship and her sisters , Hardy , Hereward , and Hostile , rendezvoused with the battlecruiser Renown , the aircraft carrier Ark Royal , and the light cruiser Neptune on 17 December . They refuelled in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , before proceeding to the estuary of the River Plate in case the damaged German pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee attempted to escape from Montevideo , Uruguay , where she had taken refuge after losing the Battle of the River Plate . Hasty was ordered to the UK in January 1940 to refit and captured the German blockade runner SS Morea in the North Atlantic on 12 February en route . 
 The ship was assigned to the Home Fleet after completing her refit in March . Together with the destroyer Vivien , Hasty escorted the destroyer Jervis into Newcastle upon Tyne on 19 – 20 March after the latter ship had collided with a Swedish merchant ship in the North Sea . Weather damage prevented the ship from participating in the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign , but she escorted the aircraft carriers Glorious and Ark Royal from 21 April as their aircraft attacked German targets in Norway . Hasty was one of Glorious 's escorts when the carrier returned to Scapa Flow to refuel on 27 April . Two days later , the ship escorted the convoy that evacuated British and French troops from Namsos in early May . 
 Hasty and the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla were ordered to the Mediterranean on 16 May , and the ship escorted the French battleship Lorraine and three British cruisers as they bombarded Bardia during the night of 20 / 21 June . On 9 July Hasty participated in the Battle of Calabria as an escort for the heavy ships of Force C and unsuccessfully engaged Italian destroyers and suffered no damage . During the Battle of Cape Spada on 19 July , the ship escorted Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney and rescued some 525 survivors from the Italian cruiser Bartolomeo Colleoni together with the other escorting destroyers . Hasty and her sister Havock sank the Italian submarine Berillo on 2 October off the coast of Egypt and rescued 47 survivors between them . The ship escorted the carrier Illustrious during the Battle of Taranto on the night of 11 / 12 November . During the bombardment of Valona , Albania , on the night of 18 / 19 December , Hasty escorted the battleships Valiant and Warspite . 
 The ship participated in Operation Excess in January 1941 , during which she escorted a convoy and then escorted the battleship Barham from Souda Bay , Crete to Alexandria . In late February , the ship evacuated British commandos from the island of Kastelorizo , off the coast of Turkey , in the Italian Dodecanese . The commandos had defeated the small garrison in Operation Abstention , but the Italians were able to land troops on the island over the next several days and overwhelm the British forces . During the Battle of Cape Matapan on 28 / 29 March , Hasty escorted the four light cruisers of Force B , but was not seriously engaged during the battle . On 15 April the ship and the light cruiser Gloucester bombarded Italian positions between Bardia and Fort Capuzzo . In mid @-@ April she escorted the fast transport Breconshire and three battleships from Alexandria to Malta , before going on to escort the battleships as they bombarded Tripoli on 20 April . After refuelling in Alexandria on 23 April , Hasty sailed for Greece to begin evacuating British and Australian troops from the beaches . On 8 May , the ship again escorted the capital ships of the Mediterranean Fleet as they covered another convoy from Alexandria to Malta . Hasty escorted the light cruisers HMS Orion and Dido as they intercepted a German convoy attempting to land troops on Crete during the night of 21 / 22 May . The ship evacuated British and Commonwealth troops from Crete in late May . 
 Hasty bombarded Vichy French positions in Lebanon on 4 July during the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign , and then spent most of the rest of the year escorting convoys to Tobruk . On 25 November she was escorting the capital ships of the Mediterranean Fleet when the battleship Barham was torpedoed and sunk by German submarine U @-@ 331 . While escorting a convoy , Hasty and her sister , Hotspur , sank U @-@ 79 on 23 December north of Sollum . In January 1942 , the ship escorted Convoys <unk> and <unk> from Alexandria to Malta , but was switched to the covering force for Convoy <unk> in mid @-@ February . She was transferred to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla on 24 February Hasty was escorting the merchants ships of Convoy <unk> when the Second Battle of Sirte began on 22 March , but defended the convoy against the Italian battleship Littorio and three cruisers by threatening torpedo attacks from under the cover of a severe storm and a smoke screen . Hasty was torpedoed by the German E @-@ Boat S @-@ 55 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Horst Weber as she covered a large convoy to Malta during Operation Vigorous , killing 13 men . The torpedo blew off most of the bow structure and both boiler rooms started to flood . Hotspur took off her crew and scuttled her with a torpedo during the morning of 15 June 1942 . 
 = Applause ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Applause " is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her third studio album , Artpop ( 2013 ) . It was released as the album 's lead single through Interscope Records on August 12 , 2013 . Written and produced by Gaga , DJ White Shadow , Dino Zisis and Nick Monson , additional songwriters included Martin Bresso , Nicolas Mercier , Julien Arias and William Grigahcine . " Applause " was inspired by the cheering of her fans , which kept her motivated during the months she toured with the Born This Way Ball in pain , before cancelling it due to a hip injury . It is an electropop and Eurodance song built around synthesizers and hi @-@ NRG beats , with lyrics addressing how Gaga is dependent upon her fan 's adoration and how she lives to perform . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised its catchy chorus and favorably compared it to the material featured on Gaga 's debut album , The Fame ( 2008 ) . " Applause " achieved commercial success in a number of major music markets . In the United States , it peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Gaga 's twelfth top @-@ ten single . " Applause " has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 An accompanying music video directed by fashion photography duo Inez and Vinoodh was released on August 19 , 2013 , and broadcast on <unk> across Times Square . The video received positive reviews from critics , who saw it as a profile of Gaga herself and noted references to German Expressionist cinema and Andy Warhol . To promote the record , Gaga opened the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards with a performance of the song in which she represented her career through several on @-@ stage wardrobe changes . She also performed it live on Good Morning America , Saturday Night Live , her residency show at Roseland Ballroom , and on her tour ArtRave : The Artpop Ball . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Development of Artpop began shortly after the release of Born This Way ( 2011 ) , and by the following year , the album 's concepts started building as Gaga collaborated with producers Fernando Garibay and DJ White Shadow . Initial recording sessions for Artpop coincided with the Born This Way Ball : up to fifty songs were written and considered for inclusion . Gaga herself admitted that she intended to make audiences have " a really good time " with Artpop , engineering the album to mirror " a night at the club " . Meanwhile , the singer began presenting tracks to her record company and hoped to reveal the album 's working title by September , instead was announced one month in advance . 
 A hip surgery in February 2013 caused the singer to take a six @-@ month hiatus , during which she studied literature and music with the Haus of Gaga . It also allowed her to review and enhance her musical direction , which she described as a meticulous " gazing process " . " Applause " was written and produced by Gaga and DJ White Shadow , along with Nick Monson and Dino Zisis while on the road for her Born This Way Ball tour in 2012 . Other songwriters working on the track included Martin Bresso , Nicolas Mercier , Julien Arias and William Grigahcine . Talking to Sirius XM Radio , Gaga explained the inspiration behind the songwriting of " Applause " : 
 " I realized it was the applause of the fans that really kept me going . Because I would be ready to go onstage and just be crying hysterically not understanding even how I was feeling . I was feeling very dizzy , I had a lot of vertigo , I had pain but it 's like fuck if I know what hurts the most because I 'd been on tour for a year . But I didn 't want to let them down and I just couldn 't cancel because the thought of leaving 50 @,@ 000 kids in the arena just broke my heart . So I went out every night and I played and I played and I played until I couldn 't walk one night . " 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Recording sessions for the song took place at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , California , and Platinum Sound Recording Studio , New York City by Dave Russell , with Benjamin Rice and Andrew Robertson working as assistants . Russell also did the mixing of the track at Record Plant and at Heard It ! Studios . Additional mixing was carried out by Bill Malina , with assistance from Rice and Ghazi Hourani . Rick Pearl performed the additional programming and Gene Grimaldi completed the audio mastering at Oasis Mastering Studios in Burbank , California . 
 " Applause " is set in the time signature of common time and has a tempo of 140 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of G minor , following the chord progression of Gm – F – E ♭ – Cm – F – Gm , with Gaga 's vocals spanning from F3 to D5 . The record has been pinned to the electropop and Eurodance music genres , and has been cited as returning Gaga to her career roots by mirroring the sounds of her debut album . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters described it as " closer to ' Just Dance ' in style over any of her Born This Way @-@ era hits , but in a much more aggressive fashion , catering to the gradual EDM @-@ stranglehold of pop radio . " Erin Coulehan of Rolling Stone concurred , calling it " a throwback to ' LoveGame ' -era Gaga . " 
 The song 's production is primarily centered around hi @-@ NRG beats , " stuttering synthesizers " , and hard snares . Robbie Daw of Idolator noted that the " opening , pulsating synths are a straight @-@ up throwback to the ' Poker Face ' intro — albeit slightly sped up — while the handclap @-@ laden chorus swells and soars with the same pop frenzy that made ' Paparazzi ' such a delight . " The Guardian 's Michael Cragg described the song 's composition as " brilliantly camp – all squelchy synths and juddering beats " and likened it to a " ridiculous glam @-@ rock song given a techno makeover " . The chorus has been noted to contain " a solid mixture of EDM @-@ influenced pop , glitchy k @-@ pop @-@ lite euphoria and just a twinkle of that original joy of The Fame " and features Gaga singing the lines , " Give me the thing that I love ( I 'll turn the lights on ) / Put your hands up make ' em touch ( Make it real loud ) " . Her vocal acrobatics during the song 's verses have been compared to those of David Bowie , Annie Lennox , and Grace Jones . 
 Lyrically , " Applause " is about how Gaga is dependent upon her fan 's adoration , while also serving as " a kiss @-@ off to critics " . Bradley Stern of MuuMuse opined that " Unlike ' Born This Way ' , ' Applause ' is about celebrating no one but Mother Monster herself " . According to Gaga , the song 's lyrics highlight the difference between an artist and a celebrity . She elaborated , " I live for the applause but I don 't live for the attention in the way that people just love you because you 're famous . I live for actually performing for people and then them applauding because they 've been entertained . " 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 During the process of picking the lead single from Artpop , Gaga played numerous songs for Jimmy Iovine , an executive at Interscope Records . Of the 40 songs she played for Iovine , he preferred " Applause " , the last song played . Gaga revealed that " Applause " was almost excluded from the final cut of Artpop , due to an abundance of recorded material , until the meeting with Iovine . Gaga confirmed " Applause " as the upcoming single , and announced that it would be released on August 19 , 2013 . The official artwork for " Applause " was debuted on Women 's Wear Daily 's website on July 29 , 2013 . The cover features Gaga 's face smeared with multi @-@ colored paint and surrounded by a white sheet . Gaga explained that she chose the smeared makeup look for the cover to symbolize the moment at the end of a show when the performer is vulnerable and longing for the audience 's approval . The artwork was compared to the cover of David Bowie 's 1980 album Scary Monsters ( And Super Creeps ) . 
 On August 10 , 2013 , two snippets of the song leaked online . Gaga urged fans to " please take these down as much as possible " and provided instructions on how to report information regarding the unauthorized distribution of her song to her label 's parent company , Universal Music Group . In response , fans reported websites seen distributing or linking to the snippets of the single , with nearly 2 @,@ 500 individuals sending a singular link to Universal 's takedown page . However , despite such efforts , a leak was eminent . So Gaga released the song a week early onto various radio stations across America . The single was made available in most countries just before midnight ( EST ) on the iTunes Store , coupled with a pre @-@ order of Artpop . Following day , Gaga was seen in goth costume with clown @-@ like face paint similar to the " Applause " artwork , at various promotional events . The Huffington Post compared the style @-@ shift to Marilyn Manson , saying : " With her black hair slicked back , a face full of white powder and her black blazer and shirt combo , Gaga could have easily been mistaken for Manson if it wasn 't for her towering heels . " Gaga also premiered a short clip of " Applause " that quoted harsh journalism that attacked her credibility as an artist . In the video , Gaga was seen sitting naked in a white room and wearing a transparent visor . The sound of an audience booing and jeering was heard in the background . Direct quotations from critics and detractors appeared at the bottom of the video , which included : " Lady Gaga is over " and " Do not buy Lady Gaga 's new single ' Applause ' " . The clip was construed as an attempt at reverse psychology . 
 Due to the proximity of the single 's leak to fellow pop singer Katy Perry 's " Roar " , " Applause " was fervently compared to it . Gaga received negative press after news arose of her attempting to artificially increase the single 's placement on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , which some sources reported as an attempt to beat the sales of " Roar " . She was criticized for tweeting fans and encouraging them to purchase numerous copies of the single , with the chance to meet the singer in London offered as an incentive . The tweet provoked criticism from Billboard 's Editorial Director Bill Werde , who opined that " An artist tweeting out and <unk> a link that enables a fan to hit play and leave their computer is not in the spirit of what we chart " . Following this , Gaga stated that she would be rewarding the fans with the most creative ideas , and not those who purchased the most copies of " Applause " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Applause " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Chris Richards of The Washington Post wrote , " It 's good . Maybe even slow clap good . Because while so many ( too many ! ) of Gaga 's songs have been designed to boost the esteem of her flock , this song finds her openly pining for the mass @-@ adulation that all superstars need to survive . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard lauded the song 's hook and remarked , " As always , Gaga has turned a lofty idea into a jingle for the masses . " Lewis Corner from Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , stating that " Lady Gaga makes no secret that she 's after mass adoration , and as far as lead singles go , her next grand spectacle is off to a strong start . " Carl Williot of Idolator praised the track , saying that it " ticks all the right boxes when it comes to being a balls @-@ to @-@ the @-@ wall pop delight ... this is pop doing what good pop songs should do , which is grab you by the collar from the first listen and make you fall in love on the spot . " The Huffington Post writer <unk> described it as " pop at its best : instant , euphoric , joyful and impossible to get out of your head " . 
 Bradley Stern of MuuMuse gave the song a positive review and concluded , " Is it a solid start ? I ’ d say so . On par with " Bad Romance " ? Well , let ’ s not get ahead of ourselves . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine believed the song lacked " the bigness " of Gaga 's previous lead singles but noted that " it proves she can still craft a catchy hook " . Mof Gimmers of The Quietus noted that the song was " a bit sticky in places " but explained " if you stop expecting too much of Gaga , you 'll realise it has a furiously irresistible chorus . " Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast was critical of the song 's " disjointed verses " but noted that they were " increasingly forgivable every time the song ’ s unshakable chorus blasts " and praised it as a fitting climax to the album . Melinda Newman of Hitfix gave the song a B + rating and labelled it " a layered , dance twirler " . Positive feedback also came from Mike Driver from Clash who highlighted " Applause " as one of the tracks on Artpop that ticks " all of the prerequisite Gaga boxes – dazzling production , a clutch of clever couplets , choruses you can demolish a tower block with " , but found that it did not represent a notable musical progression for the singer . Hilary Hughes from Esquire offered similar commentary , feeling that Gaga was playing it safe and that " the song doesn 't break new ground for the reigning Queen of Pop " . 
 In a mixed review , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters called the song generic and that " were it not for her heady lyrics and warped lead @-@ in synth line , " Applause " wouldn ’ t stand out all that much in radio , which makes it an even more curious choice as a lead single . " Spin 's Marc Hogan criticized the song 's " bland dance @-@ bot foundations " as " a bit behind the times at a pop moment where the biggest song @-@ of @-@ the @-@ summer candidates have moved back toward ' 70s @-@ inflected guitars . " Another mixed review came from Harry <unk> of Contactmusic.com , who wrote " I can 't give it more than a polite clap . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , Nielsen SoundScan predicted " Applause " to sell upwards of 400 @,@ 000 units in their first week . By the end of the week , Nielsen SoundScan and Billboard had lowered the estimated amount of " Applause " ' s first week sales from 400 @,@ 000 to 200 @,@ 000 – 225 @,@ 000 . " Applause " did not enter the Billboard 's Hot 100 in its first week . It also ranked below the top 75 threshold of the US Radio Songs chart , with 16 million audience impressions across 210 stations , with the track officially impacting radio stations on August 19 , 2013 . " Applause " reached number one on the Dance / Electronic Songs chart , and entered the US Pop Songs Chart at number 20 ; the highest debut on that chart , by a solo female artist in 2013 . The following week , " Applause " debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 . Following its radio and retail release the track charted on Digital Songs at number three , Streaming Songs at number nine and Radio Songs at number forty . 
 On its second week on the Hot 100 , the song climbed to number four while reaching number three on Streaming Songs ( due the release of the music video ) , and number thirty @-@ five on Radio Songs , and falling to number five on Digital Songs with sales of 163 @,@ 000 . In its sixth week , the song sold 160 @,@ 000 copies and reached sales of 1 million copies , becoming her eleventh song to do so . In the same week , it rose to number nine on the Radio Songs chart , becoming her tenth single to reach the top @-@ ten there . It managed to stay in the top @-@ ten of the Billboard Hot 100 for 14 consecutive weeks . As of April 2016 , the song had sold 2 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , and has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 According to the Official Charts Company , " Applause " sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies within a few hours in the UK . It debuted and peaked at number five on the UK Singles Chart , making it her highest charting single since " Born This Way " ( 2011 ) . " Applause " sold 38 @,@ 042 copies by the end of the first week , and dropped to number nine on its second week . It was present for a total of 20 weeks within the top @-@ 100 of the chart . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified it Silver , and as of November 2013 , it had sold 234 @,@ 979 copies . " Applause " was also certified Gold in other international markets including Italy , New Zealand , and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " Applause " was directed by fashion photography duo Inez and Vinoodh , who had previously collaborated with Gaga on a series of fashion films in 2011 and a photoshoot for V magazine . The video was filmed at Paramount Pictures studio in Hollywood , California on two different sets over three days . Gaga was inspired by silent film and early horror films and explained that the concept behind the video is that of her passion for shape @-@ shifting and transforming . She described it as " Iconography in motion , as magic . " Gaga and her team decided to use several different looks for the video , with each being representative of different facets of her as a performer . <unk> worn in the video included designs by Gareth Pugh , vintage John Galliano , as well as outfits crafted by the Haus of Gaga . 
 Inez and Vinoodh explained that the video symbolizes " this idea that she goes through this struggle to go back onstage , which is in that pink laser tower . And she 's sort of dragging that leg as a trophy and making it back on stage as a fully @-@ realized , complete new person " . Jo Ratcliffe , a London @-@ based illustrator known for her hand @-@ drawn graphic design , was hired to provide animation effects for the video . She described Gaga as " really tough " during filming and added that she had " never seen anyone push themselves so hard . " Gaga spoke of this intensity during an interview with the radio station Z100 New York , explaining that it was difficult for her to quickly mould herself into the different personalities portrayed in the video . 
 = = = Release and synopsis = = = 
 Prior to the release of the music video , Gaga debuted a lyric video for the song . The lyrics were displayed over footage shot by Gaga at the drag nightclub Micky 's in Los Angeles . On August 19 , 2013 , Gaga announced that she would be debuting the music video for " Applause " and filming a live interview on ABC 's morning television show Good Morning America later that day . The singer arrived at the Times Square Studios in New York City , where the show is filmed , wearing a dress made entirely out of paper . The video premiered on the show after Gaga 's live interview and was broadcast on <unk> across Times Square in Midtown Manhattan simultaneously . 
 The video itself includes shots taken in both color and black @-@ and @-@ white . It drew heavy inspiration from the arts and featured references to Sandro Botticelli 's The Birth of Venus and Andy Warhol 's Marilyn Diptych . The video included artistic and complex scenes such as Gaga 's head on a swan , a scene in a bird cage , and the singer seated in a large top hat , as well as more simplistic scenes including Gaga walking in a black outfit wearing a headscarf , and the singer dancing with a white cloth in bright make @-@ up , in a scene similar to the cover art of the single . Throughout the video bursts of color are shown theatrically . As Gaga sings the line " One second I 'm a Koons then suddenly the Koons is me " , she is transformed into a black swan / human hybrid . Gaga also wears hand @-@ shaped lingerie and a seashell bra with matching shell decoration . Near the climax , the singer features in a violet , crystal @-@ like scene , and at the end , Artpop is spelled using hand gestures . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 The video received generally positive reviews . Glenn Gamboa of Newsday described it as a barrage of artistic images that continued the song 's theme of combining art with pop culture . Erin Coulehan of Rolling Stone magazine noted that the video was in " typical Gaga fashion " , further calling it a spectacle of flashing lights , vivid colors and intricate choreography . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly also echoed Coulehan 's statements about the video being in Gaga fashion , adding that it " makes the song sound infinitely better ... It doesn 't quite hit the high notes of ' Paparazzi ' or ' Bad Romance ' , but it 's definitely a step up from the middling clips from the Born This Way era . " A writer of Billboard described the video as " a collection of arty postures and scenarios " and compared the black @-@ glove bra look to Janet Jackson 's 1993 Rolling Stone magazine cover . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times saw the video as " basically like 20 different Vogue shoots documented and spliced . There is no plot other than the basic lyrical premise , " I need you to pay more attention to me , " given heft by a syllabically rocky first @-@ person observation about pop culture , fame and art that Andy Warhol noted 50 years ago . " Chiderah Monde of New York Daily News described the video as " a straight @-@ forward profile of the artist herself . " 
 A writer of Rolling Stone compared the black @-@ and @-@ white look of the video with Madonna 's " Vogue " , 1920s German Expressionist cinema and Ingmar Bergman 's The Seventh Seal . He further noted influences from Liza Minnelli , Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers ' " Don 't Come Around Here No More " , and Sandro Botticelli 's The Birth of Venus . A writer of The Independent wrote , " Showing Gaga in a number of guises ( as a Beatnik performance artist , her face smeared with clown make @-@ up , sporting David Bowie @-@ esque androgyny while wearing a bra made of black , leather gloves and as various winged creatures ) , the high energy accompaniment to her new track is a hotch @-@ potch of imagery that seems to highlight the pop princess ' ever changing appearance . " Chris Rovzar of Vanity Fair described the video as a moving photo shoot for Interview magazine " except with more sanity " . Rovzar concluded that it also featured " the standard Gaga nonsense " and praised Gaga 's smile during several scenes of the video as a highlight . James Montgomery of MTV News saw the video as Gaga " pulling the curtain back on her creative process , showing the viewer how she 's willing to do anything to please the public . " Melinda Newman of Hitfix felt Gaga " continues her one @-@ woman performance art with the very theatrical video " and interpreted it as showing that " there is nothing Lady Gaga won ’ t do to get your attention " . 
 Conversely , Spin 's March Hogan wrote , " ' Some of us just like to read ' , she sings , and hey , that includes us . But it 's easier to clap for something that moves or touches you , rather than serves as an advertisement for Gaga as incomprehensible high @-@ end brand . " Consequence of Sound wrote in their review , " Gaga 's head appears on a black swan and she <unk> down in a clam bikini . If this doesn 't bump up her sales , I no longer believe in art . " Hilary Hughes of Esquire said that the video " hits all the marks of Gaga @-@ esque eccentricity : glitter , boob grabs , weird animals , space , severed limbs , devotional imagery , nudity , neon , etc . It just doesn 't redefine those marks , as previous music videos of Gaga 's — namely " Bad Romance , " " Paparazzi " and " Judas " — have " . Spencer Kornhaber of The Atlantic believed that Gaga was parodying herself with the video and suggested that her aim was " to make a video both celebrating and poking fun at her career thus far . " However , he considered it forgettable when compared to Gaga 's previous efforts . 
 = = Live performances and media appearances = = 
 The song was performed live for the first time at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . Gaga began the performance wearing a square @-@ shaped head piece and an all @-@ white cape as pre @-@ recorded boos were quickly replaced by sound of cheers . Gaga then glided across the stage and was assisted by her dancers as she changed into a black sequin leotard and performed the intricate choreography seen in the song 's corresponding music video . Throughout the performance she cycled through costumes and wigs she had previously employed throughout her career . After dancing with a Jeff Koons blue gazing ball , she concluded the performance by emerging from behind jungle @-@ like scenery dressed in a seashell bikini ensemble and taking a bow . Gaga collaborated with experimental theater director Robert Wilson on the performance . His designed set featured a shimmering white jungle background with letters spelling " Applause " suspended from tree branches . Gaga characterized the performance as : " So beautiful , it is so indicative of me as an artist . I feel in many ways that the performance is like a giant metaphor for me . " She also commented that the production was " the most physically challenging performance I 've done , ever . " 
 " Applause " was the final song Gaga performed at London 's Roundhouse as part of a show that was broadcast live online on September 1 , 2013 for the month @-@ long iTunes Festival . Gaga completed her last look of the show with " a green ringmaster jacket , top hat and sparkly silver boots " and performed the song alongside " an endless supply of supple dancers in gothy fetish wear " who danced behind her on chairs . On September 9 , 2013 , Gaga performed the song on Good Morning America and appeared dressed as multiple characters from The Wizard of Oz . " Applause " served as the encore during the singer 's Artpop launch party event , dubbed the ArtRave , held in the Brooklyn Navy Yard in New York during the early hours of November 11 , 2013 . The singer was the host of the November 16 , 2013 episode of Saturday Night Live , where she opened the program with a Chicago @-@ style performance of " Applause " , which subsequently morphed into a rendition of " New York , New York " . Later that month , Gaga also performed the song on the television special Lady Gaga and the Muppets ' Holiday Spectacular as both a solo and a reprise with The Muppets . Another performance took place at the Jingle Bell Ball on December 8 , 2013 , where she sang " Applause " along with other songs from her discography . 
 Gaga reprised " Applause " at the South by Southwest ( SXSW ) music festival in Austin , Texas in March 2014 , where she was joined onstage by her opening acts and friends , the Dirty Pearls , Semi Precious Weapons and Lady Starlight . " Applause " was later included in the setlist of Gaga 's Manhattan residency show at Roseland Ballroom . Gaga appeared in a purple sequin studded two @-@ piece with a matching face @-@ mask and green colored wig during the performance . The song was included on the set list of her ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour . Following " Bad Romance " , Gaga joined her dancers on the catwalks , where she performed a choreographed dance routine in a rave inspired outfit . Brad Wheeler of The Globe and Mail described Gaga 's performance as " unstoppable and enthralling " but criticized the show 's production for drowning out Gaga 's vocals and said : " She ’ s not like Jennifer Lopez or Britney Spears or even Madonna , who were raised as dancers and lime @-@ lighters , not musicians . And yet , she prefers to perform spectacles that , by design , fail to showcase all of her abilities . " 
 The song was performed by the members of glee club in the Glee episode " A Katy or a Gaga " The track was also featured on the fictional radio station Non @-@ Stop @-@ Pop FM in the PS4 , Xbox One and PC versions of Grand Theft Auto V. In 2016 , it was featured in a lip sync battle ( known as the " <unk> for Your Life " segment ) between drag queens <unk> Lopez and Laila McQueen on the season premiere of RuPaul 's Drag Race ( season 8 ) . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , California and Platinum Sound Recording Studio , New York City , New York 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering Studios , Burbank , California 
 Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) Sony ATV Songs LLC / House of Gaga Publishing , LLC / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) , Maxwell and Carter Publishing , LLC ( ASCAP ) , administered by Universal Music Publishing Group and Maxwell and Carter Publishing , LLC ( BMI ) administered by Universal Music Publishing Group , Etrange Fruit ( SACEM ) , Mercer Music ( SACEM ) , Guess Publishing ( SACEM ) , Fuzion ( SACEM ) Administered by Get Familiar Music ( ASCAP ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Artpop . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Vernon Treatt = 
 Sir Vernon Haddon Treatt KBE , MM , QC ( 15 May 1897 – 20 September 1984 ) was an Australian lawyer , soldier , Rhodes Scholar and politician . Born in Singleton , New South Wales and educated at Shore School , Treatt interrupted his studies at the University of Sydney to enlist at the outbreak of the First World War . Serving in the Royal Australian Artillery , Treatt served in France and was awarded the Military Medal . Upon returning to Australia he was awarded a Rhodes scholarship and further educated at New College , Oxford . 
 After briefly practising law in 1923 in Britain , Treatt returned to Australia and was admitted to the New South Wales bar that same year , serving as a Crown Prosecutor at the supreme court . Treatt also was the Challis law lecturer at the University of Sydney . Treatt entered the New South Wales Legislative Assembly on 26 March 1938 , representing the Electoral district of Woollahra for the United Australia Party ( UAP ) . When UAP Premier Bertram Stevens was ousted from the leadership in August 1939 and Alexander Mair became Premier , Mair appointed Treatt , after serving only a few months in Parliament , as the Minister for Justice . He served in this office until the UAP lost power in 1941 . 
 During this time Treatt witnessed the break @-@ up of the UAP into the various parties including the Democratic Party , which he joined , and then the establishment of the Liberal Party of Australia as the major conservative political force in Australia in 1945 . When the second leader of the party , Alexander Mair , resigned in March 1946 , Treatt was elected to succeed him . As the third leader of the new party , Treatt became the first leader to contest an election . After serving eight years and almost winning government at the 1950 election , Treatt resigned as Leader in August 1954 following a July attempt to depose him . He continued as a member of parliament until he was defeated in 1962 and thereafter served in various organisations and posts , including as a Chief Commissioner of the City of Sydney in 1969 , until his death in 1984 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Vernon Treatt was born in Singleton , New South Wales , in 1897 , the youngest son of Frank Burford Treatt ( 1845 – 1923 ) , a Police Magistrate and migrant from Devon , England , and Kate Ellen Walsh ( 1856 – 1936 ) , and was first educated at Young District School . When the <unk> moved to Sydney , he attended the Sydney Church of England Grammar School from 1913 to 1914 , becoming a Prefect and Cadet Lieutenant . Treatt then took up residence in 1915 at St. Paul 's College while studying for a Bachelor of Arts ( BA ) at the University of Sydney . During the First World War in 1916 , Treatt interrupted his studies and enlisted as a Gunner in the Royal Australian Artillery , 6th Field Artillery Battery . He was sent over on 5 November 1917 to the Western Front and was later promoted to Sergeant . For his service he received the Military Medal on 14 May 1919 . 
 Upon returning from the military he completed his studies in 1920 and was awarded a Rhodes scholarship in the same year , at New College , Oxford . At Oxford , Treatt gained a Master of Arts and a Bachelor of Civil Law in 1923 and was briefly admitted to the Bar at Lincoln 's Inn in that year . When he returned to Australia , Treatt was appointed to the New South Wales Bar and also as the Sub Warden of St Paul 's College , University of Sydney from 1925 to 1930 . In 1927 , he played first grade Rugby Union for the Drummoyne <unk> . He married Dorothy Isabelle Henderson ( 1902 – 1992 ) on 5 June 1930 and had four children : George Vernon , John Vernon ( 1930 – 1935 ) , Rosemary Vernon ( 1930 – 1944 ) , and Diana Vernon . 
 In 1927 , Treatt was given the position of Challis lecturer in criminal law at the University of Sydney , a position he was to hold until 1959 . One of his students was the future Justice of the High Court of Australia , Michael Kirby : " I can still see Mr Vernon Treatt QC coming on to the stage of the Phillip Street Theatre where we took some of our lectures . Treatt 's task was to instruct a hundred first year law students in that most important discipline , criminal law . I can see him toss his hat onto the chair , open his notes and begin reading his latest lesson . I can hear him talking about the sections of the Crimes Act 1900 of New South Wales dealing with ' unnatural offences ' . I can recall his rasping voice as he intoned the old provisions of section 79 , spitting out the exceptionally ugly words of denunciation in the parliamentary prose " . In March 1928 , Treatt was appointed and served as a Crown Prosecutor for the Supreme Court of New South Wales and the Court of Quarter sessions for the metropolitan district . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Treatt first entered politics at the 1927 state election as an Independent Nationalist candidate for the Legislative Assembly seat of Willoughby . He narrowly lost on a margin of 49 @.@ 47 % . After several years Treatt tried again to enter parliament at the 26 March 1938 state election as the United Australia Party candidate for the seat of Woollahra . On this occasion he was successful , gaining 53 @.@ 62 % of the vote . 
 = = = Minister of the Crown = = = 
 On 16 August 1938 , after only serving a few months as a member of parliament , Treatt was appointed as the Minister for Justice in the government of Alexander Mair , who had become Premier after Bertram Stevens was defeated in a motion of no confidence in the house . In 1940 , he was made a King 's Counsel ( KC ) . 
 As Minister for Justice , Treatt generated controversy when it was alleged that he had acted to reduce a fine imposed on the <unk> Bread Company who had sold short @-@ weight bread to the Department of Defence . It resulted in a Royal Commission in the matter from March to August 1941 , chaired by Justice Maxwell , after a censure motion introduced by Labor Leader William McKell was defeated . He was removed of any suspicion in the findings with the Royal Commissioner finding that : " There is no evidence , nor any thing even remotely to suggest that the Minister was guilty of any misconduct or irregularity either in the conclusion reached by him , and fully shared by the permanent head of his department , that the fine was too severe or in the manner of his dealing with the company 's application . From start to finish I can discover nothing suggesting any irregularity in any action by the Minister . " 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 He served as Minister until the 10 May 1941 election when the Mair Government was defeated in a landslide defeat , losing 20 seats . Despite this , Treatt retained his seat with a significant margin increase of 67 @.@ 68 % . With the very poor results of the federal United Australia Party under Billy Hughes at the 1943 Federal election , the UAP disintegrated . A large number of former UAP members , including Treatt , then formed the Democratic Party in New South Wales , led by Alexander Mair , while others moved into the Commonwealth Party and the Liberal Democratic Party . The Democratic Party then merged with the Commonwealth Party in January 1944 . Mair resigned in 1944 to be replaced by Reginald Weaver , who then led the hopelessly divided conservative forces to defeat at the 27 May 1944 election , losing another three seats . Treatt retained his seat with 50 @.@ 50 % . 
 In 1945 , the divided conservative parties formed together to form the Liberal Party of Australia , which Treatt then joined . Party Leader Weaver died in office in November 1945 and was succeeded by Mair , with Treatt succeeding Athol Richardson as Deputy Leader . After five months as Leader , Mair resigned in March 1946 and Treatt was then elected to succeed him as Liberal Party Leader and hence , Leader of the Opposition . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 The third Leader of the New South Wales Liberal Party , Treatt became the first to contest an election . At the election on 3 May 1947 , Treatt 's Liberals and Michael Bruxner 's Country Party failed to defeat the Labor Government , now under new Premier James McGirr , despite an overall swing of 4 @.@ 5 % and a gain of seven seats . Treatt retained his seat with an increased 69 @.@ 75 % . 
 As opposition leader , Treatt proved effective in attacking the shortcomings of the McGirr 's Labor Government and in the Labor Party on a national level , particularly in areas of economics : " Because of the inflationary pressure , which is largely a result of the Socialists ' own low production policy , continuation of subsidies is necessary on basic everyday goods ... " and utilities : " The public is sick of seeing Ministers hunting up alibis , shifting about from one explanation to another and washing their hands of responsibility for <unk> on some flimsy pretext . " In matters of ideology , Treatt supported Federal Liberal Leader Robert Menzies in his virulent opposition to communism , particularly from the Soviet Union , China and Korea . After returning from the Empire Parliamentary Conference in London in December 1948 , Treatt declared " The Communists are on the move throughout the world . Australians must sit up and take just as much notice of what is happening across our narrow northern waters ... It is of outstanding importance to Australia that the Western Powers ' should secure some uniform policy to combat the Communist Asian menace . " 
 Treatt led the Coalition again at the 17 June 1950 election , which resulted in a hung parliament , with Treatt 's Coalition gaining 12 seats and a swing of 6 @.@ 7 % for a total of 46 seats . With the Labor Party also holding 46 seats , the balance of power lay with the two re @-@ elected Independent Labor members , James Geraghty and John Seiffert , who had been expelled from the party for disloyalty during the previous parliament . Under a legalistic interpretation of the ALP rules , Seiffert was readmitted to the party and , together with the support of Geraghty , McGirr and Labor were able to stay in power . On 20 June , Treatt declared that he and his party would not make any concessions or compromises to the Labor Party , particularly in regards to the election of a speaker . Treatt retained his seat with 76 @.@ 09 % . 
 In his third term as Leader , Treatt criticised government cuts in transport services , but supported reductions in death duty taxes . At a Remembrance Day address in 1952 , Treatt criticised radical student politics embodied by the " long @-@ haired intellectual types " : " My belief in the value of university life and in higher education generally is a strong and abiding one ... the sort of long @-@ haired type I am thinking about may not even have a university degree . He is encased in self satisfied assurance of his own mental superiority . " In his speech at the Lyceum Hall , Treatt warned of Australia 's attitudes on its success : " A sort of mental haze seems to obscure the vision splendid that lies before this country . We are proud of being a British country , a country with British traditions , institutions , and all those things which go to make up what we call our ' British heritage . But this pride is not matched by a pride in being Australian . This seems to me one of the strongest sources of our weakness . " 
 The near loss of the election by Labor further weakened McGirr 's position and he was replaced as premier by Joseph Cahill in April 1952 . Cahill had won popular support as a vigorous and impressive minister who had resolved problems with New South Wales ' electricity supply and in his first 10 months as premier had reinvigorated the party . He appeared decisive and brought order to the government 's chaotic public works program . In addition , he attacked the increasingly unpopular federal Coalition government of Robert Menzies . All this contributed to Treatt 's Coalition being defeated at the 14 February 1953 election , with a total loss of ten seats and a swing against them of 7 @.@ 2 % . Treatt retained his seat with 67 @.@ 61 % . On 3 February 1954 , Treatt received , along with Premier Cahill , Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II , Queen of Australia , at Farm Cove , Sydney , at the beginning of her first visit to Australia and the first occasion on which a reigning monarch had set foot on Australian soil . He was also present the next day on 4 February when Her Majesty opened the Parliament of New South Wales , the first time a monarch had opened an Australian parliament . 
 With confidence in his leadership demolished , Treatt 's Liberal Party descended into factional in @-@ fighting culminating in the resignation of Deputy Leader Walter Howarth on 22 July 1954 , who publicly announced it on 4 July citing that he felt that Treatt doubted his loyalty . He was replaced by Party Whip Robert Askin . The resignation split the party and sparked a leadership challenge from Pat Morton , who criticised his " lack of aggression " towards the Labor Government . At the party meeting on 6 July , Treatt narrowly defeated Morton with 12 votes to 10 . 
 With party support eroded , Treatt did not remain long as leader afterwards . On Friday 6 August 1954 , Treatt announced that he would resign as leader on 10 August : " Following the unsuccessful challenge for the Parliamentary leadership , it was expected that there would be an end to activities so damaging to the party 's morale and effectiveness . Unfortunately these activities have continued . The responsibilities of a political leader , particularly at the present time in New South Wales , are very heavy , and a leader giving of his best is infilled to receive the fullest support from every member of the party . This support has not been forthcoming , and without it the burdens on health and effectiveness would prove too much for any man . " At the following party meeting , after a deadlocked vote between Askin and Morton , Askin asked Murray Robson to nominate and subsequently he was elected to succeed Treatt . On 17 June 1955 , Queen Elizabeth II granted him retention of the title " The Honourable " for life , for having served as Leader of the Opposition and the Executive Council of New South Wales . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Robson was soon replaced in 1955 by Morton , who then led the Coalition to another defeat at the 3 March 1956 election , while Treatt increased his majority to 70 @.@ 84 % . Morton contested the next election in March 1959 , which resulted in another defeat with Cahill winning his final term in office . Treatt retained his seat uncontested . Divorcing his first wife , Treatt remarried to Frankie Jessie Embleton Wilson on 16 May 1960 . Frankie Wilson was a lawyer who attended St Mary 's Anglican Girls ' School in Perth and was the granddaughter of Frank Wilson who twice served as Premier of Western Australia . 
 Treatt stayed in Parliament until his seat was abolished before the upcoming election in 1962 , at which point he stood for the new seat of Bligh . At the 1962 election , Treatt was defeated by the Labor candidate , Tom Morey , gaining only 45 @.@ 29 % of the vote . Treatt then joined local government circles , becoming Chair of the Boundaries Commission from 1964 to 1969 and was later appointed as the Chief Commissioner for the dismissed City of Sydney from 1967 to 1969 , overseeing the redistribution of council boundaries and reorganisation of council agencies . He also served as the President of the Sydney Cricket and Sports Ground Trust from 1965 to 1967 . For his service as Chief Commissioner , he was knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in 1970 . Treatt died on 20 September 1984 in Sydney , New South Wales . 
 = Fonteynkill = 
 The Fonteynkill ( alternatively written Fonteyn Kill and also known as Fountain Kill and Mill Cove Brook ) is a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) urban stream ( or kill ) flowing through Dutchess County , New York , onto the campus of Vassar College , and into the Casperkill . The stream was first on land inhabited by the native Wappinger band before being transferred to the Dutch and then the British . A mill was built along the kill by 1714 and the stream 's presence influenced Matthew Vassar 's decision to locate his college in the area . The artificial Vassar Lake lies midway down the Fonteynkill and was once used for ice skating and boating . 
 While historically pure , the stream now suffers from urban stream syndrome , partially due to the amount of impervious surfaces within its watershed . Flowing over glacial till , the stream 's bed is rich in cobbles and the kill supports populations of benthic macroinvertebrates , trees , shrubs , fish , birds , snapping turtles , and frogs . As of 2016 , a Vassar – Cornell University program is monitoring the water quality of the Fonteynkill . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Fonteynkill is 1 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) long . Historian Helen Wilkinson Reynolds reported in 1924 that the stream is fed by a spring in Arlington , New York . More recently , the exact source of the kill has been reported as unknown . Historical records indicate a variety of courses once followed by the stream . A 2010 study observed that the Fonteynkill flows from a culvert beneath Park Avenue in an eastward direction through an urban zone before turning southward and feeding into the artificial Vassar Lake . It then flows southeastward beneath Raymond Avenue through the campus of Vassar College , beneath the college 's Bridge for Laboratory Sciences , and into the Casperkill just below Sunset Lake at a location once dubbed " The Meeting of the Waters " . The Fonteynkill is the only perennial tributary of the Casperkill , itself a tributary of the Hudson River . In 1924 , the Fonteynkill was noted as having several small tributaries , primarily " small meadow @-@ runs , largely surface @-@ water " . 
 = = Watershed and hydrology = = 
 Historically , the Fonteynkill 's water has been noted for its cleanness . In 1924 , the stream 's " purity " was noted while an 1867 book describes the kill 's waters as " pellucid " . More recently , the stream has been cited as suffering from urban stream syndrome . Surfaces surrounding the Fonteynkill are highly impervious ; the stream drains an urban zone of the city of Poughkeepsie , New York , of which over 60 % is impervious . The exact size of the kill 's watershed is not known ; an area at least as large as the known watershed is presumed to contribute to the stream 's flow in the form of storm drainage . In spite of this , the stream itself is bordered by a combination of residential lots and forested swaths ranging from 4 – 70 meters ( 13 – 230 ft ) in width . On Vassar 's campus , the kill runs along the 4 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) outdoor Edith Roberts Ecological Laboratory and past the school 's Shakespeare Garden . 
 A 2010 study of the stream found that the Fonteynkill 's specific conductance , a measure of the amount of dissolved road salt in the stream 's water , was nearly 1 @.@ 0 <unk> / cm , higher than any value recorded in the Casperkill . Sites upstream of Vassar Lake were recorded in a separate study as having specific conductances twice as high as locations downstream of the lake , suggesting a regulating effect caused by water mixing and retention in Vassar Lake . The total inorganic nitrogen in the kill , which is usually correlated with surrounding green cover , was about 0 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter ( 2 @.@ 2 × 10 − 8 lb / cu in ) , average for measurements taken in the Fonteynkill and Casperkill in that study . The study also found that the Fonteynkill 's score on the Hilsenhoff family biotic index ( HBI ) , a scale measuring pollution based on the tolerance of endemic benthic macroinvertebrates , was approximately six , indicating fairly poor water quality , with scores for the rest of the Casperkill – Fonteynkill watershed were as high as seven ( poor water quality ) to as low as four ( very good water quality ) . In 2015 , Riverkeeper was alerted of a sewage leak in the kill , noting high levels of bacteria indicating the presence of fecal matter . A New York State Department of Environmental Conservation investigation found nearby private sewer pipes and manholes to be filled with sludge ; they were cleaned and plans have been instated to ensure that sewers would stay clear henceforth . 
 Efforts are being made to monitor the water quality of the Fonteynkill , led by Vassar College 's Environmental Research Institute and the Cornell University Cooperative Extension Dutchess County Environment Program . Three sites are regularly sampled for water quality while devices such as <unk> continuously record temperature , conductivity , and pH . Benthic macroinvertebrates are frequently counted and fecal coliform counts are also run . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Cambrian to Ordovician @-@ age dolomite , part of the Wappinger Group , and calcareous shales from the Hudson River Group underlie the Fonteynkill . Between 15 – 20 kya , a glacial lake covered the land that would become the Fonteynkill . Till and to a lesser extent other glacial sediments today sit atop the dolomite and shale . Surrounding soils are loamy , either silt loam or gravelly loam depending on the underlying surficial geology . The streambed is composed of about 25 % sand , silt , and clay and approximately 75 % cobbles . Quicksand was once common around the Fonteynkill and its minor tributaries . The distance covered by the stream is noted as being relatively flat , descending between 6 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 1 meters ( 20 – 30 ft ) over the course of its run . 
 Vassar Lake , through which the kill passes , is a shallow body of water , measured in 2013 with a maximum depth of 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 5 ft 11 in ) and an average depth of 0 @.@ 55 meters ( 1 ft 10 in ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The Fonteynkill and its riparian zone are home to a variety of species . Caddisflies , clams and mussels , crayfish ( <unk> ) , damselflies , <unk> , isopods ( <unk> ) , oligochaetes , black flies , leeches , <unk> , bladder snails , and other snails were recorded in the stream in 2010 . Trees along the banks of the Fonteynkill include American elms , sugar maples , black cherries , Norway maples , and red maples , while barberry , privet , holly , Japanese knotweed , honeysuckle , spicebush , common reeds , and Japanese roses make up the kill 's riparian shrubs . Carp , mallards , great blue herons , frogs , snapping turtles , and other birds also reside in and around the stream . A 1924 source observed that trout fishing on the kill . 
 = = History = = 
 The Fonteynkill flows through land originally inhabited by the Wappinger band which , throughout the 1600s , came under Dutch control . The Dutch lost control of the territory to the British in 1664 and Dutchess County was established . In 1688 , Pieter Schuyler was granted a title to the land through which the Fonteynkill runs . He split that land and sold the Fonteynkill tract ( soon to be known as Het Oosten or " Eastward Neighborhood " ) in 1699 to <unk> <unk> and Robert Sanders . 
 A mill was built along the stream before 1714 ; in that year , Sanders 's son Thomas sold the structure to Isaac <unk> who in turn sold it to March Van Bommel in 1717 . In 1721 , an accurate survey of the land was conducted . The mill on the Fonteynkill was discovered to be the property of Catharine Brett who claimed the land and sold a farm parcel that included the mill in 1754 to Johannes Swartwout . The land remained in Swartwout 's hands until he died in 1805 . From his heirs , the land came to be owned in 1812 by Matthew Westervelt and then Reuben Tanner in 1815 . Tanner controlled the Fonteynkill land until 1844 when Caleb Morgan acquired the title to the space . In 1854 , the land was transferred to Matthew Vassar , for whom " the presence of fresh water was an important factor in deciding the college 's location " . In 1861 , the year of Vassar College 's founding , the land through which the Fonteynkill runs came under the ownership of the college proper . A millstone from the Fonteynkill mill is preserved on the Vassar College campus in front of Rockefeller Hall . 
 As Vassar developed , the area around the Fonteynkill was gradually built up . The old mill became the college 's pumping station , capable of pumping 20 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 76 @,@ 000 l ; 17 @,@ 000 imp gal ) each day . An ice house was also in place just south of the kill by 1867 , along with a garden storehouse upstream of Vassar Lake on the stream 's west side . During the winter , ice was cut from Vassar Lake and moved to the college 's Main Building to keep the school 's supply of food cold . Conflict occasionally arose between students who desired a smooth skating rink and staff at the college who were tasked with refrigerating Vassar 's foodstuffs . In 1916 , the college built its Shakespeare Garden , using seeds from many plants referenced in William Shakespeare 's plays , just north of the stream . In the 1920s and 1930s , the Edith Roberts Environmental Laboratory was developed south of the kill , across from the Shakespeare Garden . The college constructed Olmsted Hall along the stream in 1972 and more recently , the Bridge for Laboratory Sciences which opened in 2016 . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The name " Fonteynkill " is derived from the Dutch Fonteyn Kil , literally meaning " Spring Brook " . The stream 's name is also sometimes written with a space as " Fonteyn Kill " . The kill has also been known as the Fountain Kill , a hybrid name of English and Dutch origins . In the 1800s , the stream was also recorded as Mill Cove Brook . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Fonteynkill and Vassar Lake have been used recreationally since Vassar College 's establishment in the 1860s . Benson John Lossing recorded Vassar students in 1867 using Vassar Lake , then known as " Mill Cove Lake " , for rowing and boating in the summer months ; a simple dock was built to allow access to the water . In the winter , the lake froze over and students at the college would ice skate upon the surface . The shallowness of the lake became an obstacle to recreational use , and while it was suggested by Vassar 's Miscellany News that the lake be dredged or removed entirely , neither of these options were employed and the lake is no longer a recreation site . By the 1920s , the Fonteynkill 's source spring was being dammed in wintertime , flooding a nearby hollow to create an ice skating pond . 
 = = = Cited = = = 
 Bruno , M. ; Daniels , E. A. ( 2001 ) . Vassar College . Charleston , SC : Arcadia Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Lossing , B. J. ( 1867 ) . Vassar College and Its Founder . New York City : C. A. Alvord Printer . 
 Reynolds , H. W. ( 1924 ) . Poughkeepsie : The Origin and Meaning of the Word . Poughkeepsie , NY : Dutchess County Historical Society . 
 Van Lengen , K. ; Reilly , L. ( 2004 ) . The Campus Guide : Vassar College . New York City : Princeton Architectural Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 56898 @-@ 349 @-@ 2 . 
 = And the Mountains Echoed = 
 And the Mountains Echoed is the third novel by Afghan @-@ American author Khaled Hosseini . Published in 2013 by Riverhead Books , it deviates from Hosseini 's style in his first two works through his choice to avoid focusing on any one character . Rather , the book is written similarly to a collection of short stories , with each of the nine chapters being told from the perspective of a different character . The book 's foundation is built on the relationship between ten @-@ year @-@ old Abdullah and his three @-@ year @-@ old sister Pari and their father 's decision to sell her to a childless couple in Kabul , an event that ties the various narratives together . 
 Hosseini stated his intentions to make the characters more complex and morally ambiguous . Continuing the familial theme established in his previous novels , The Kite Runner and A Thousand Splendid Suns , And the Mountains Echoed centers on the rapport between siblings . Besides Abdullah and Pari , Hosseini introduced two other sibling and sibling @-@ like relationships — the children 's stepmother Parwana and her disabled sister Masooma and an Afghan @-@ American doctor named Idris and his cousin Timur . 
 As it was Hosseini 's first novel to be published in six years , And the Mountains Echoed was reportedly in high demand . It received favorable pre @-@ publication reviews and was anticipated as another strong success , reaching the top 10 on Amazon.com before its release and later becoming a bestseller . Five months after the publication of And the Mountains Echoed , it was reported that three million copies had been sold . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Khaled Hosseini was born in Afghanistan but left the country in 1976 at the age of 11 , eventually moving to the United States where he worked as a doctor . He wrote his first novel , The Kite Runner , in 2003 and became a full @-@ time writer a year and a half later . He published his second book , A Thousand Splendid Suns , in 2007 . Both novels were successful , and by the time of his third publication they had together sold over 38 million copies across 70 countries . 
 Hosseini first began to consider the plot of And the Mountains Echoed during a 2007 trip to Afghanistan with the UN Refugee Agency . While there , he heard stories from several village elders about the deaths of young , impoverished children during the winters , which gave the foundation for the fundamental event of the novel : a parent 's choice to sell a child to prevent this from occurring . " The novel began very , very small , and it began with a single image in my head that I simply could not shed , " he relayed . " It was the image of a man walking across the desert and he 's pulling a little Radio Flyer red wagon , and in it there 's a little girl about 3 years old , and there 's a boy walking behind him , and these three people are walking across the desert . " Hosseini originally planned for it to be written in a linear fashion similar to his previous novels , but , during the writing process , it was expanded to cover a series of interconnected stories surrounding a large number of characters not directly related to each other . Comparing the process to a tree , he stated that story " just branched out " and " got bigger and bigger as it went along " . 
 As is his pattern , Hosseini drew on his early experiences in Afghanistan to create the foundation of the book . He states that his travels to Afghanistan later in life also influenced his writing , albeit involuntarily . For example , during a 2009 visit he met two young sisters in a remote village outside Kabul . The older one , who he estimated to be around six years old , acted as a mother figure to the younger girl . Hosseini stated that their bond formed the foundation of the relationship between Abdullah and Pari in the novel . 
 And the Mountains Echoed became the first to not deal directly with the Taliban , which featured prominently in both of his previous works . Though Hosseini did not consciously decide to avoid that topic , he stated that he was glad that he had moved away from it in order to keep the storyline fresh . The characters ' struggles were largely personal and unrelated to the political turmoil in Afghanistan . Hosseini added , " I hope a day will come when we write about Afghanistan , where we can speak about Afghanistan in a context outside of the wars and the struggles of the last 30 years . In some way I think this book is an attempt to do that . " 
 The title was derived from a line from " The Nurse 's Song " by English poet William Blake : " And all the hills echoed " . In January 2013 , Publishers Weekly announced the publication date as May 21 of that year , and Riverhead Books released a statement that the novel was about " how we love , how we take care of one another , and how the choices we make resonate through generations " . First printed in hardback , And the Mountains Echoed was priced at $ 28 @.@ 95 in the United States and £ 14 @.@ 99 in the United Kingdom . Hosseini went on a five @-@ week tour to 41 cities across America to promote the book . In October 2013 , plans were confirmed to translate And the Mountains Echoed into 40 languages , among them Icelandic and Malay . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The novel opens in the year 1952 . Saboor , an impoverished farmer from the fictional village of Shadbagh , decides to sell his three @-@ year @-@ old daughter Pari to a wealthy , childless couple in Kabul . The choice devastates his ten @-@ year @-@ old son , Abdullah , who raised Pari following their mother 's death in childbirth . 
 Subsequent chapters expound on how the arrangement came to be : the children 's stepmother , Parwana , grew up as the less @-@ favored child to her beautiful twin sister Masooma . One day , in a flash of jealousy , she caused Masooma to suffer a debilitating injury that resulted in paraplegia . Parwana subsequently spent several years caring for her sister until the latter asked her to help her commit suicide and to then marry Saboor . Their older brother , Nabi , left to work for Mr. Wahdati , a wealthy man in Kabul , and became infatuated with his wife , Nila . After Nila expressed dismay about her inability to have children , Nabi arranged for Pari to be sold to the couple . 
 In the ensuing years , Abdullah leaves Afghanistan and Mr. Wahdati suffers a stroke , prompting Nila to take Pari and move to Paris , France . Nabi , while assuming the role of Wahdati 's primary caregiver , finds a number of sketchbooks in Wahdati 's closet filled with pictures of him drawn before the stroke . Unnerved by the discovery of his employer 's apparent obsession with him , he resolves to leave but decides against it after he is unable to find someone suitable to take over for him . Nabi subsequently spends the next 50 years working for Mr. Wahdati before ultimately assisting in the latter 's suicide . 
 Wahdati 's neighbors , meanwhile , move to the United States with their children after the Soviet invasion . Cousins Idris and Timur return to Afghanistan over two decades later in 2003 to reclaim their family 's property . While there , Timur makes a great show of publicly distributing money to street beggars while Idris privately bonds with Roshi , an Afghan girl who suffers from a horrific injury and whose family was murdered by her uncle . Idris at first promises to arrange for Roshi to undergo the operations needed for her recovery but distances himself from her and Afghanistan on returning to the States . Several years later , Idris comes across Roshi signing copies of her bestselling memoir , which she has dedicated to her adoptive mother and Timur , who paid for her surgery . 
 Nila , now living in Paris , is unhappy for much of her life , taking up a number of lovers and beginning to refer to the plain and practical Pari as her " punishment " . She commits suicide in 1974 after giving a detailed interview about her early life . Pari suspects that she is not Nila 's biological daughter and plans a trip to Afghanistan to explore her heritage . However , she postpones it indefinitely after marrying and becoming pregnant . After having three children and being widowed at the age of 48 , she receives a posthumous letter from Nabi in 2010 detailing the circumstances of her adoption by the <unk> . 
 Later chapters focus on Adel , a boy learning that his father is a war criminal and that his house is built on the land that previously belonged to Saboor , and Markos , a Greek aid worker in Afghanistan and acquaintance of Nabi . In the final chapter , narrated by Abdullah 's daughter , Abdullah and Pari are reunited in California . However , he is suffering from Alzheimer 's disease and is unable to remember her . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Khaled Hosseini chose to tell the story in a " fragmented and fluid " form ; each of the nine chapters is told from a different character 's perspective , and each narrative provides an interconnection with the others ' . Los Angeles Times critic Wendy Smith compared this style to the classic One Thousand and One Nights . 
 Abdullah is an Afghan growing up in the fictional village of Shadbagh . After his father 's choice to sell his younger sister to a couple in Kabul , he resolves to leave Afghanistan , travelling to Pakistan and eventually the United States . He opens an Afghan restaurant there and has a daughter , whom he names after his sister . Following his wife 's death , Abdullah is diagnosed with Alzheimer 's and is later unable to remember his sister after being reunited with her . 
 Pari is Abdullah 's younger sister who , at the age of three , is sold by her father to the wealthy Wahdati couple in Kabul . She and Abdullah are portrayed as having an unusually close relationship during her early years , though she forgets him along with the rest of her biological family following her adoption . She spends her adolescence and adulthood in France following her adoptive father 's stroke and eventually becomes aware of her history through a posthumous letter from her uncle Nabi , who had arranged for her to be sold as a child . When she is finally reunited with Abdullah , he is unable to remember her due to his Alzheimer 's . " I could see that if the reunion were to occur , it would occur on these terms and it wouldn 't be the reunion we 'd expect and perhaps the one we want , " Hosseini explained . 
 Nila Wahdati is a young Afghan woman renowned for her sexually charged poetry who is married off to a wealthy Kabul businessman . According to Hosseini , many aspects of her character were derived from women he encountered during parties his parents hosted in Kabul in the 1970s , many of whom he recalls as " beautiful , very outspoken , temperamental ... drinking freely , smoking " . At some point prior to the beginning of the story , she was apparently sterilized while undergoing treatment for an illness , leading her to buy Pari as an adopted daughter . Described as unusually beautiful and discontent , she later relocates to Paris following her husband 's stroke and eventually commits suicide . Hosseini explained that he was unconcerned with making Nila likable — " I just wanted her to be real – full of anger and ambition and insight and frailty and narcissism . " 
 Parwana is the stepmother of Abdullah and Pari . She grew up in Shadbagh with her brother , Nabi , and twin sister , Masooma . Parwana is ill @-@ favored for most of her life as opposed to the strikingly beautiful Masooma . This eventually results in what <unk> Zakaria describes as a " poignant tale of a plain twin whose single act of vengeance , of pushing her pretty sister off a swing results in a lifelong moral burden " . Masooma 's accident leaves her paralyzed , leaving Parwana tortured by guilt and forced to care for her from then on . After several years , Masooma persuades Parwana to leave her in the desert to die and marry Saboor , Abdullah and Pari 's father . 
 Nabi is the older brother of Parwana and Masooma . Despite being " a character who slips beneath the notice of many of the novel 's noisier characters " , he organizes the event that serves as the primary plot of the story : the adoption of Pari . After being hired as a chauffeur for the <unk> , he becomes infatuated with the childless Nila and arranges for Pari to be sold to her in hopes that she will become his lover . After Nila 's husband suffers a stroke and Nila leaves for Paris , he realizes that he had been foolish to think so and becomes the primary caregiver for his bedridden employer . 
 Amra <unk> is a Bosnian nurse working in a hospital in Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban . She cares for and later adopts Roshi , a critically wounded Afghan orphan . Amra , according to Hosseini , was created to represent the foreign aid workers serving in Afghanistan . While visiting the country in 2003 , he had encountered a number of people who had left comfortable lifestyles to help provide relief aid , and he had wanted to pay tribute to them through the portrayal of Amra . Hosseini described the character as one of his favorites and said , " She has seen humanity at its worst , having worked in war zones most of her career , and yet she has retained great capacity for compassion and mercy . She is also very street smart , fiercely intelligent , and brutally honest . " 
 Idris is an Afghan @-@ American doctor who left Afghanistan during the Soviet invasion . He later returns to Afghanistan , along with his narcissistic and childish cousin Timur , in 2003 to reclaim their family 's land . While there , Idris meets Roshi and befriends her , moved by her tragic story . Hosseini stated that Idris ' experience as an Afghan expatriate was partly based on his own . " He was a vehicle to describe what it 's like to be an Afghan in exile , to return to see how divergent my experience was from other Afghans , " Hosseini said . Idris begins to set up plans to pay for her surgery in America , but upon returning home , he loses that drive . It is later revealed Timur pays for Roshi 's surgery . 
 Markos <unk> is a plastic surgeon from the Greek island of Tinos . His childhood best friend , Thalia , suffered from severe facial disfigurement after being attacked by a dog and undergoing a botched surgery . This motivated Markos to become a surgeon and work in various developing countries , including Afghanistan . 
 Adel is the son of a wealthy war criminal who has turned Shadbagh into " Shadbagh @-@ e @-@ Nau " or " New Shadbagh " . Adel is raised in an isolated mansion with the belief that his father is a hero , witnessing him donate money and fund the building of schools . When he discovers the truth , he is deeply upset but aware of " [ t ] he part of him that over time would gradually , almost imperceptibly , accept this new identity that at present <unk> like a wet wool sweater . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Whereas The Kite Runner focused on the dynamic between fathers and sons , and Splendid Suns on that between mothers and daughters , this novel tells its story through the prism of sibling relationships — a theme refracted through the lives of several pairs of brothers and sisters . 
 Khaled Hosseini considers pain , love , and familial love to be the primary themes of And the Mountains Echoed . The separation of the two siblings , Abdullah and Pari , is " the heart of the book " . Both subsequently become " victims of the passage of time " : Abdullah , who is older and remembers Pari , agonizes over her loss for most of his life , while Pari is younger and able to forget her brother after losing him . However , towards the end of the book , Pari is informed that she was adopted and that she has a brother , Abdullah ; she locates him in the United States only to discover that he is suffering from Alzheimer 's disease and has forgotten her . Hosseini stated , " The question is raised a number of times about whether memory is a blessing — something that safeguards in all the things that are dear to you — or is memory a curse — something that makes you relive the most painful parts of your life , the toil , the struggle , the sorrows . " Thus , the combination of these events make And the Mountains Echoed " kind of like a fairytale turned on its head " . 
 I think at the core , all three of my books have been love stories — and they haven 't been traditional love stories in the sense that a romantic love story between a man and a woman , you know , they 've been stories of love between characters where you would not expect love to be found . So it is always these intense relationships that form under unexpected circumstances . 
 <unk> Zakaria , a director for Amnesty International USA , wrote that the themes of guilt and gratitude also feature prominently . She used the backstory of Parwana , Abdullah and Pari 's stepmother , and her sister Masooma as an example : " We find a poignant tale of a plain twin whose single act of vengeance , of pushing her pretty sister off a swing results in a lifelong moral burden . The sister , who was to be married to a man both sisters love , becomes an invalid for life , and both serve the sentence , the healthy one tending to the other and wrecked within by the knowledge that she was the cause of their collective misfortune . " She stated the theme of dependence also extended to the story of Nabi , the brother of Parwana who arranges the selling of Pari and who is later left as the sole caretaker of his paralyzed employer . 
 = = Critical reviews = = 
 Three million copies of And the Mountains Echoed were sold within five months of its publication . In general , the novel was received well , with Los Angeles Times critic Wendy Smith finding it " painfully sad but also radiant with love " . Fran Hawthorne of The National described the book as " masterful storytelling " and a " haunting portrayal of war @-@ ravaged Afghanistan and insight into the life of Afghan expatriates " . Susan <unk> from Philly.com wrote that it " [ captures ] at the personal level the history of his war @-@ torn homeland : Fierce loyalties alternate with bloody betrayals " . The Guardian 's Philip Hensher gave a more mediocre review and said , " I enjoyed this novel in a very undemanding sort of way . The shifts of viewpoint would be ambitious if the novel had any interest in varieties of psychology . But it serves its purpose in providing amusement for two and a half hours ; a day after finishing it , I had forgotten everything about it . " 
 Reviewers agreed that Hosseini 's succeeded in making his characters complex . Alexander Linklater from The Guardian wrote , " From the moment the realisation dawns that Saboor is going to give Pari to the wife of a wealthy man in Kabul , Hosseini saturates the various layers and characters of his novel with a yearning for the moment that brother and sister will reunite . " <unk> Kamal of Atlanta Arts was particularly favorable towards Amra , the Bosnian aid worker who cares for and adopts Roshi , as she " stuns with her hope in humanity no matter what callousness she has witnessed " . USA Today critic Kevin Nance found the story of Abdullah and Pari " devastating " but thought the large cast of characters , " including some introduced fairly late in the proceedings , when the reader just wants to return to the core cast " , was excessive . 
 The structure of the book drew mixed reactions , with Toronto Star 's Kim Hughs describing it as " the novel 's most defining feature and its most exasperating conceit " . She believed that Pari was meant to be the protagonist of the story but that the shifting focus on the numerous other personalities left her " barely [ squeaking ] through the clutter " . The Independent 's <unk> Akbar stated , " The changing points of view and leaps in time can confuse and confine , leaving characters clearly defined but lacking depth . Decades gallop by and it is as if the story of these interconnected , cross <unk> lives will simply go on echoing the original crime of Abdullah and Pari 's separation . " Michiko Kakutani from The New York Times thought the novella @-@ like storytelling was handled well and wrote , " Khaled Hosseini 's new novel , And the Mountains Echoed , may have the most awkward title in his body of work , but it 's his most assured and emotionally gripping story yet , more fluent and ambitious than The Kite Runner ( 2003 ) , more narratively complex than A Thousand Splendid Suns ( 2007 ) . " Kamal agreed , saying that the structure was " exquisitely crafted " . Scoop Empire 's Sherine El <unk> added that the focus on multiple characters allowed to readers to gain a better understanding of the diversities of Afghan culture . 
 = Ni no Kuni mobile games = 
 There are two mobile games in the Ni no Kuni series , developed and published by Level @-@ 5 . The mobile games were released in Japan , alongside main Ni no Kuni titles Dominion of the Dark Djinn and Wrath of the White Witch , and were developed and published in partnership with mobile distribution companies . The first game , Ni no Kuni : Hotroit Stories , is a role @-@ playing game set before the events of the main games . It follows the story of Oliver and his friend Mark , and their attempts to construct a car . The first chapter was released in December 2010 through Level @-@ 5 's Roid service . The second title , Ni no Kuni : Daibouken Monsters , is a social card role @-@ playing game in which players collect cards and use them in battles , and use the abilities of characters who have been trapped in the cards . It was released in a partnership with the GREE mobile service in May 2012 . 
 = = Ni no Kuni : Hotroit Stories = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Hotroit Stories ( 二ノ国 <unk> ) is an episodic role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Level @-@ 5 . The first chapter was released for mobile devices through the Roid service on December 9 , 2010 . 
 A prequel to Dominion of the Dark Djinn and Wrath of the White Witch , Hotroit Stories follows Oliver and his friend Mark , who create a custom car by finding parts around the town of Hotroit , eventually making their way to an abandoned factory in their search . They are accompanied by a cat . Throughout their search , Oliver and Mark encounter creatures similar to the imajinn / familiars of the main game , which they must fight to proceed . Unlike the main games , Hotroit Stories does not feature magic ; characters instead attack using items such as dry ice for similar effects . Anne Lee of Chic Pixel noted that the game features a similar art style to EarthBound ( 1994 ) . 
 The game was first teased at a press conference in June 2010 , as well as at the Tokyo Game Show in September 2010 , before its formal reveal at the Level @-@ 5 Vision conference in October 2010 . The first chapter , titled " Oliver and Mark " ( <unk> 〜 <unk> ) , was released in December 2010 . Since its release , there has been no news regarding the development or release of subsequent chapters . 
 = = Ni no Kuni : Daibouken Monsters = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Daibouken Monsters ( 二ノ国 <unk> ) is a social card role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Level @-@ 5 . It was released for mobile devices through the GREE service on May 11 , 2012 . 
 In the game , players travel to a different world and collect cards featuring creatures known as " <unk> " , of which there are over 200 . An occupant of the other world is trapped in every card ; by flipping the card , players can use the occupant 's abilities during battles . Rare cards are also available , granting players powers such as improved recovery and special attacks . The game also features a cooperative multiplayer mode , in which two players defend against a boss encounter in a " Raid " battle ; there are over 40 bosses in the game . All of the cards were redesigned in June 2012 . 
 The team at GREE initially contacted Level @-@ 5 to create individual games for the platform ; this eventually developed into a comprehensive partnership between the two companies , resulting in Level @-@ 5 developing three titles for GREE . Early registrations for the game began on March 21 , 2012 . The game was available for iOS and Android devices , through a membership with the GREE service . The game 's servers were terminated on September 28 , 2012 . 
 = 2009 ACC Championship Game = 
 The 2009 ACC Championship Game was a college football game between the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets and the Clemson Tigers . The game , sponsored by Dr. Pepper , was the final regular @-@ season contest of the 2009 college football season for the Atlantic Coast Conference . Georgia Tech defeated Clemson , winning the Atlantic Coast Conference football championship , 39 – 34 . However , Georgia Tech was forced to vacate the game victory and the conference title in 2011 due to sanctions stemming from an NCAA investigation . 
 According to a statement by ACC Commissioner John Swofford , there will not be a 2009 ACC Champion in football . 
 The Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets were selected to represent the Coastal Division by virtue of a 7 – 1 record in conference play and a 10 – 2 record overall . Representing the Atlantic Division was Clemson , which had an 8 – 4 record ( 6 – 2 ACC ) . The game was a rematch of a contest played September 10 in Atlanta , Georgia . In that first game , Georgia Tech won a close 30 – 27 matchup . 
 The game was held at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa , Florida on December 5 , 2009 . Tampa had been chosen to host the game after poor attendance at the game 's previous location , Jacksonville , Florida , led conference officials to seek an alternative . The 2009 championship was the last to be hosted in Tampa , as the game moved to Charlotte , North Carolina in 2010 . 
 From the start of the game , the 2009 ACC championship had a large amount of offense . Throughout the contest , neither team punted : Every offensive drive ended in a score or a turnover . Clemson scored first , a touchdown on its opening drive , and held a 7 – 3 lead at the end of the first quarter . In the second quarter , Georgia Tech scored 13 points to Clemson 's six , and the Yellow Jackets entered halftime with a 16 – 13 lead . They extended that lead in the third quarter , scoring 17 points to Clemson 's lone touchdown and extra point . In the fourth quarter , Clemson closed the gap and took a 34 – 33 lead with 6 : 11 remaining , but Georgia Tech drove down the field and scored a touchdown with 1 : 20 remaining , giving the Yellow Jackets a 39 – 34 lead that was the game 's final margin . In recognition of his significant performance despite the loss , Clemson running back C. J. Spiller was named the game 's most valuable player . 
 By winning , Georgia Tech earned a spot in the 2010 Orange Bowl football game , and Clemson was selected for the 2009 Music City Bowl . Several players that participated in the ACC championship later played in postseason all @-@ star games and were later selected in the 2010 NFL Draft . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 The ACC Championship Game features the winners of the Coastal and Atlantic divisions of the Atlantic Coast Conference . In the early 2000s , the conference underwent an expansion to add three former Big East members : the University of Miami and Virginia Tech in 2004 , and Boston College in 2005 . With the addition of a twelfth team , the ACC was allowed to hold a conference championship game under National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) rules . 
 The inaugural 2005 game featured a Florida State win over Virginia Tech , 27 – 22 . In 2006 , two different teams made their first appearances in the game , which was held in Jacksonville , Florida . Wake Forest defeated Georgia Tech , 9 – 6 . In 2007 , one team new to the championship game and championship @-@ game veteran featured in the contest as Virginia Tech faced off against Boston College . The game resulted in a 30 – 16 Virginia Tech victory . In 2008 , Virginia Tech and Boston College again played in the championship game . Virginia Tech won the rematch , 30 – 12 . 
 = = = Site selection = = = 
 Before the 2007 game , cities other than Jacksonville ( site of the 2007 ACC Championship Game ) presented their plans to be the site of the 2008 ACC Championship Game . After poor attendance in the ACC Championship Game at Jacksonville for the second straight year , ACC officials and representatives of the conference 's member schools elected not to extend the Gator Bowl Association 's contract to manage and host the game for another year . On December 12 , less than two weeks after Jacksonville had hosted the 2007 ACC Championship Game , the ACC announced that Tampa , Florida would host the game in 2008 and 2009 and Charlotte , North Carolina would host the game in 2010 and 2011 . 
 The cities were chosen based on bids presented to the ACC and its member schools . Each city requested and was granted a two @-@ year contract . Tampa was chosen as the site of the 2008 game because Charlotte was scheduled to hold the annual convention of the Association for Career and Technical Education at the same time as the game , and adequate hotel space would not be ready in time for the two events . As a result , Charlotte 's two @-@ year span of hosting the game was pushed back to 2010 . 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Before the beginning of the 2009 college football season , the annual poll by media members who cover ACC football predicted Virginia Tech to win the Coastal Division and Florida State to win the Atlantic Division . Virginia Tech received 78 of a possible 87 first @-@ place votes in its division , while Florida State received 56 in the other division . In regards to predicting the championship game 's outcome , 69 of the 87 voters chose Virginia Tech to win . Georgia Tech and Clemson were predicted to finish second in the Coastal and Atlantic divisions , respectively . 
 = = = = Georgia Tech = = = = 
 The Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets entered the 2009 season after a 2008 campaign that saw them finish 9 – 4 , including a season @-@ ending 38 – 3 loss to the LSU Tigers in the 2008 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . Georgia Tech head coach Paul Johnson , entering his second season as head of the Yellow Jackets , had high hopes that Georgia Tech would be able to improve upon its 2008 performance . Others agreed with Johnson 's assumption , as the Yellow Jackets were ranked No. 15 in the preseason Associated Press and USA Today coaches ' polls . 
 In Georgia Tech 's first game , the Yellow Jackets defeated lightly regarded Jacksonville State , 37 – 17 . Five days later , in Tech 's first competitive game of the season , the Yellow Jackets narrowly defeated Clemson , 30 – 27 , on the basis of a fake field goal for a touchdown and a late field goal . One week after the Clemson win , Tech — by then raised to No. 14 in the national polls — suffered its first loss of the season , to No. 20 Miami . 
 That loss turned out to be Georgia Tech 's last to a conference opponent during the 2009 regular season . Nine days after the Miami loss , Georgia Tech defeated No. 22 North Carolina , then followed that with a win over Southeastern Conference foe Mississippi State . Wins over Florida State and No. 4 Virginia Tech followed in subsequent weeks . The latter victory was the Yellow Jackets ' first win over a top @-@ five team since 1962 and gave Georgia Tech a lead in the divisional standings . Following the Virginia Tech win , Georgia Tech defeated Virginia , Vanderbilt , Wake Forest ( in overtime ) and Duke . The Duke victory raised Georgia Tech to 10 wins , the school 's first time at that mark since 1990 , and the Yellow Jackets were ranked No. 7 , their highest position in the national polls since that year . But following the Duke game , the Yellow Jackets faced Georgia in the rivalry known as Clean , Old @-@ Fashioned Hate . During that game , the unranked Georgia Bulldogs upset Tech , 30 – 24 . Though Georgia Tech had clinched its ACC Championship Game slot with the win over Duke , the loss was nevertheless a " huge letdown " for the team . 
 = = = = Clemson = = = = 
 The Clemson Tigers began the 2009 season after finishing 7 – 6 in 2008 , including a season @-@ ending loss in the 2009 Gator Bowl to Nebraska . Heading into 2010 , Clemson returned many of its 2009 players , but faced questions about whether those players would perform better with another year of experience . Also under question was head coach Dabo Swinney , who was beginning his first full season as head coach of the Tigers after assuming control in the seventh game of 2008 . Clemson attempted to answer some of the questions about the team 's potential in the first game of the season , a 37 – 14 win against Middle Tennessee State . 
 Clemson lost its first real test , a conference game at 15th @-@ ranked Georgia Tech , but recovered to win the following week against Boston College . The Boston College win was Clemson 's last for almost a month , however , as Clemson lost to nonconference opponent Texas Christian on September 26 , then was defeated by ACC divisional foe Maryland . 
 The two losses , piled upon the loss to Georgia Tech , left Clemson with a 2 – 3 record . An anonymous report said coach Swinney became involved in a shouting match with a position coach , while players called a private meeting in an effort to turn the team 's season around . On October 17 , The Tigers rallied from their losing streak by defeating Wake Forest , 38 – 3 , and moved back into the middle of the competition for the Atlantic Division championship . One week after defeating Wake Forest , the Tigers traveled to Miami , Florida , to play the Miami Hurricanes , who were ranked No. 10 in the Bowl Championship Series Poll . The Tigers played the Hurricanes into overtime , then upset Miami with a touchdown , 40 – 37 . 
 The Miami win tied Clemson for the lead in the division standings with Boston College , whom the Tigers had already defeated and held a head @-@ to @-@ head tiebreaker over . After the Miami game , Clemson defeated nonconference Coastal Carolina , then reeled off three wins over ACC teams . Clemson beat Florida State on November 7 , NC State on November 14 , and Virginia on November 21 . On the same day Clemson defeated Virginia , Boston College was defeated in an ACC game , giving Clemson the Atlantic Division championship outright . After the Virginia game , Clemson faced longtime in @-@ state rival South Carolina . In that game , South Carolina defeated Clemson , ending the Tigers ' winning streak just before the ACC Championship Game . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Following the last week of regularly scheduled conference games , both teams fell in the national college football polls because of their rivalry losses . Georgia Tech , which had been No. 7 in the Bowl Championship Series Poll , No. 7 in the Associated Press Poll , and No. 7 in the USA Today Coaches ' Poll , dropped to No. 10 in the BCS Poll , No. 12 in the AP Poll , and No. 12 in the coaches ' poll . Clemson , which had been No. 18 in the BCS , No. 15 in the AP , and No. 16 according to the coaches , dropped out of the BCS and coaches ' polls and was No. 25 according to the AP . Spread bettors predicted Georgia Tech would win the game . Various betting organizations favored the Yellow Jackets by one point . 
 The game was a rematch of an early regular @-@ season contest , but even though Georgia Tech won that game , there were questions about whether the victory would be repeated . Twice before , the two teams matched in the ACC Championship Game had played earlier that season . Both times , the loser of the first matchup won the second . There also were questions about each team 's quality because of their losses in rivalry games against Southeastern Conference foes . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2009 ACC Championship Game kicked off at 8 : 06 pm EST on December 5 , 2009 , at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa , Florida . The weather at kickoff was cloudy , with 88 percent humidity , an air temperature of 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) and a north wind of 6 miles per hour ( 9 @.@ 7 km / h ) . Approximately 42 @,@ 815 people were in the stands , according to turnstile attendance figures , out of 57 @,@ 227 tickets sold . The game also was seen by approximately 2 @.@ 541 million viewers on ESPN , which broadcast the game with Brad Nessler , Todd Blackledge , and Erin Andrews . The 2 @.@ 5 million viewers brought the lowest @-@ ever TV rating for an ACC Championship Game , even though the broadcast was the first ACC Championship Game to be played in prime time since 2005 . The game 's referee was Jeff Flanagan , its umpire was Keith Roden , and its linesman was Mike Owens . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 The Clemson Tigers began the game with first possession . After Georgia Tech 's kickoff and a short return , the Tigers ' offense began work at their 33 @-@ yard line . Three short plays advanced the ball to the Clemson 41 @-@ yard line and gained the Tigers a first down . On the next play , Clemson running back C. J. Spiller broke free for a 40 @-@ yard rush to the Georgia Tech 19 @-@ yard line . Two plays later , Clemson quarterback Kyle Parker completed a 15 @-@ yard pass to Jacoby Ford . On the next play , Spiller ran forward three yards , across the goal line for a touchdown and the game 's first points . 
 Clemson 's post @-@ score kickoff was returned to the Georgia Tech 15 @-@ yard line , where the Yellow Jackets began their first offensive possession . On the first two plays of the game , Georgia Tech running back Roddy Jones escaped the Clemson defense for gains of 21 yards and 22 yards , respectively . Those plays advanced the Yellow Jackets to the Clemson 42 @-@ yard line , where Georgia Tech began advancing by small gains . In three plays , Georgia Tech gained a first down , but two subsequent plays lost yardage before kicker Scott Blair came onto the field to attempt — and convert — a 48 @-@ yard field goal . The score narrowed Clemson 's lead to 7 – 3 with the quarter exactly half elapsed . 
 The Tigers began their second drive of the game from their 26 @-@ yard line and advanced the ball through short gains . The Tigers needed three plays to gain a first down , then running back Andre Ellington advanced 18 yards and into Georgia Tech territory . Clemson could not gain another first down , and kicker Richard Jackson missed a 52 @-@ yard field goal attempt . After the miss , Georgia Tech 's offense resumed the field . From the Tech 35 @-@ yard line , the Yellow Jackets advanced to the Clemson 48 @-@ yard line before running back Jonathan Dwyer gained 20 yards to the 28 @-@ yard line . Two plays later , as the Yellow Jackets advanced to the 18 @-@ yard line , the quarter ended with Clemson leading , 7 – 3 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Georgia Tech facing first down , in possession of the ball at the Clemson 18 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , Dwyer gained 10 yards and a first down with a running play to the Clemson eight @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Dwyer completed the Yellow Jackets ' scoring drive with a run into the end zone . The touchdown and extra point gave Georgia Tech its first lead of the game , 10 – 7 , with 13 : 30 remaining . 
 Clemson returned Georgia Tech 's kickoff to its 43 @-@ yard line , but despite the good field position , Clemson was unable to take advantage . On the first play of the drive , Clemson quarterback Parker threw an interception to Georgia Tech defender Dominique Reese , who went out of bounds at the Tech 45 @-@ yard line . Georgia Tech 's offense returned to the field at that point and began driving down the field . In two plays , Tech passed the 50 @-@ yard line . In six more , it penetrated the Clemson 10 @-@ yard line . Once there , however , the Yellow Jackets ' drive stalled . Three consecutive penalties against Georgia Tech pushed the Yellow Jackets back 20 yards , and Tech was unable to score a touchdown or gain a first down after that setback . Kicker Blair again returned to the field and scored a 49 @-@ yard field goal . With 5 : 35 remaining in the first half , Georgia Tech extended its lead to 13 – 7 . 
 Clemson 's offense returned to the field at its 35 @-@ yard line after Georgia Tech 's kickoff and a 30 @-@ yard return by C. J. Spiller . During the ensuing drive , Spiller was the key player for the Tigers . On five consecutive plays , he received the ball during rushing plays . He gained 3 , 13 , 6 , 2 , and 41 yards , respectively , on each of these plays en route to the end zone and a touchdown . Clemson attempted a two @-@ point conversion , but the try failed and the Tigers simply tied the Yellow Jackets , 13 – 13 . 
 Georgia Tech 's offense began the final drive of the first half with 2 : 55 remaining . The Yellow Jackets started from their 36 @-@ yard line and began slowly : Their first play gained no yards , and their second gained eight before a fumble that was recovered by a fellow Yellow Jacket . A short running play gained three yards , enough for a first down , and the drive continued . Consecutive rushing plays gained few yards at a time , and Georgia Tech used its timeouts to stop the game clock and prevent time from running out in the half . A 10 @-@ yard pass interference penalty pushed Georgia Tech inside the Clemson 20 @-@ yard line , and kicker Blair again converted a field goal . The successful kick gave Georgia Tech a 16 – 13 lead heading into halftime . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Clemson received the ball to begin the game , Georgia Tech received the ball to begin the second half . Chris Tanner returned the kickoff to the Tech 29 @-@ yard line , and the Yellow Jackets began the first offensive drive of the half . Jones opened the drive with a 16 @-@ yard run , then the Yellow Jackets converted a fourth down to continue down the field . Six plays after the fourth @-@ down conversion , Tech quarterback Nesbitt ran into the end zone for a touchdown . The following extra point gave Tech a 23 – 13 lead with 9 : 12 remaining . 
 Clemson fielded the following kickoff , and its offense continued with the success it found in its final drive of the first half . As in that drive , C. J. Spiller was a key performer . Clemson 's drive began at its 40 @-@ yard line , and it took just five plays for the Tigers to score a touchdown . Four of those plays , including the culminating one , came from Spiller , who covered 40 yards during them . Spiller 's touchdown cut Georgia Tech 's lead to 23 – 20 . But as quickly as Clemson scored , Georgia Tech moved even more quickly . From its 30 @-@ yard line , the Yellow Jackets needed only three plays , the keystone coming on a 70 @-@ yard throw from Nesbitt to Thomas for a touchdown . With 5 : 10 remaining in the quarter , the Yellow Jackets restored the 10 @-@ point margin , 30 – 20 . 
 Beginning from their 26 @-@ yard line after a kickoff , Clemson attempted to again cut into Tech 's lead . The Tigers , again guided by the running offense of Spiller and Jamie Harper , advanced to the 37 @-@ yard line , where Parker 's passing attack took over . Parker completed two passes before Georgia Tech defender Jerrard Tarrant ran in front of a long throw downfield . He intercepted Parker 's pass and returned it 50 yards to the Clemson 28 , where Tech 's offense began anew . Despite the good field position , Tech was unable to gain a first down but still was within range of a 40 @-@ yard field goal from Blair , who extended the Yellow Jackets ' lead to 33 – 20 . 
 With time running out in the third quarter , Clemson 's offense entered the field of play at its 28 @-@ yard line . After a five @-@ yard penalty for delay of game , the Tigers ' Andre Ellington gained 41 yards on two plays , pushing into Georgia Tech territory . Those plays all but exhausted the quarter 's remaining moments , however , and the third quarter ended with Georgia Tech still leading , 33 – 20 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Clemson in possession of the ball and facing second and nine from the Georgia Tech 35 @-@ yard line . The Tigers ' first two plays of the quarter failed to gain a first down , setting up a critical fourth @-@ down conversion opportunity for them . Rather than attempt a field goal , the Tigers attempted to gain a first down and were successful as Parker completed a seven @-@ yard throw . Though Georgia Tech sacked Parker on a subsequent play , the yardage loss was offset by a pass interference penalty against the Yellow Jackets . One play after the penalty , Spiller ran nine yards for a touchdown . It and the subsequent extra point cut Georgia Tech 's lead to 33 – 27 with 12 minutes remaining in the game . 
 With a solid lead and time running down in the game , Georgia Tech began a sequence of running plays intended to keep the game clock running while gaining ground . From their 25 @-@ yard line , the Yellow Jackets gained 38 yards on seven plays , advancing into Clemson territory in the process . Facing fourth down at the Clemson 37 @-@ yard line , the Yellow Jackets attempted to gain a first down rather than kick a long field goal . When they were stopped short of the first @-@ down line , Clemson 's offense returned to the field . Spiller again drove the Tigers down the field , opening the drive with a 54 @-@ yard run on its first play . Three plays later , Ellington capitalized the drive with a one @-@ yard run for a tying touchdown . The following extra point gave Clemson a one @-@ point lead , 34 – 33 , with 6 : 11 remaining in the game . 
 Clemson 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Tech 14 @-@ yard line , where the Yellow Jackets began their game @-@ winning drive . The offense began slowly ; Georgia Tech gained only nine yards in three plays , setting up a crucial fourth @-@ down conversion . A failed try would give Clemson the ball deep in Georgia Tech territory , with little time remaining in the game for Georgia Tech to reply to any score . Instead , the Yellow Jackets converted the fourth down , keeping their drive alive . On the first play after the fourth @-@ down conversion , Nesbitt completed a 21 @-@ yard pass to Dwyer , pushing Tech to near midfield . Eight plays later , Dwyer breached the Clemson defense for a 15 @-@ yard gain and the go @-@ ahead score . A false start penalty on Georgia Tech 's two @-@ point conversion try prevented any extra points , but the touchdown 's six points were enough to give Georgia Tech a 39 – 34 lead . 
 Clemson received Georgia Tech 's kickoff with 1 : 20 remaining in the game . On the Tigers ' first play , they committed a 10 @-@ yard penalty . Two incomplete passes followed from Parker , who then completed an 18 @-@ yard throw to Xavier Dye . This set up a fourth @-@ and @-@ two for the Tigers , who needed to gain a first down to keep their potential game @-@ winning drive going . Instead , Parker was stymied in his attempt to run for the needed yards , and Clemson turned the ball over on downs . Georgia Tech 's offense ran out the remaining seconds on the clock and ensured their 39 – 34 victory . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance despite a losing effort , Clemson running back C. J. Spiller was named the game 's most valuable player . Spiller set several ACC Championship game records : most yards , most yards per carry , most touchdowns , and longest run from scrimmage . Spiller finished the game with 233 rushing yards , more than Georgia Tech 's two leading rushers combined . The Yellow Jackets ' Jonathan Dwyer had 110 rushing yards and two touchdowns , while Josh Nesbitt rushed for 103 yards and one touchdown . 
 As quarterback , Georgia Tech 's Josh Nesbitt was the top performer . In addition to his rushing performance , Nesbitt completed 9 of 16 pass attempts for 136 yards and one touchdown . On the opposite side of the field , Clemson 's Kyle Parker was successful on 10 of his 17 pass attempts for 91 yards , but also had two interceptions , the game 's only turnovers . Nesbitt set an ACC Championship Game record for longest pass play with his 70 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Demaryius Thomas in the third quarter . The two teams also set records for total offense : Georgia Tech 's 469 total yards and Clemson 's 414 total yards each broke the previous record for total offense , as did each team 's rushing total break the previous team rushing record . 
 On defense , Clemson defensive end Da ’ Quan Bowers led all defenders with 11 total tackles , including one for loss . Bowers ' performance was a personal best for him and was the second @-@ most in ACC Championship Game history . For Georgia Tech , Mario Edwards was the leading tackler with seven , including two assisted tackles . Tech 's Jerrard Tarrant , who had five tackles , the second @-@ most on the team , also had one interception and returned it 50 yards . The interception and return , Tarrant 's first of the season , was the longest in ACC Championship Game history . Georgia Tech 's other interception was fielded by Dominique Reese , for no return . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Georgia Tech 's win brought it to a record of 11 – 2 , while Clemson 's loss dropped it to 8 – 5 . The win ensured Georgia Tech 's first outright conference championship since 1990 , and as a reward for winning the conference , Georgia Tech received a spot in the 2010 Orange Bowl , a Bowl Championship Series game . In that game , the Iowa Hawkeyes defeated the Yellow Jackets , 24 – 14 . Clemson also was selected to participate in a postseason bowl game . The Music City Bowl , played in Nashville , Tennessee , selected the Tigers to play against the Kentucky Wildcats . In that game , the Tigers defeated the Wildcats , 21 – 13 . 
 Three Florida State players were selected by NFL teams in the subsequent draft : Robinson was selected with the 32nd overall pick , Rolle with the 207th , and Watson with the 217th . For Georgia Tech , defensive end Derrick Morgan was taken 16th , wide receiver Demaryius Thomas 22nd , safety Morgan Burnett 71st , and running back Jonathan Dwyer 188th . Several players from each team participated in postseason all @-@ star games in preparation for the 2010 NFL Draft . Georgia Tech lineman Cord Howard played in the East @-@ West Shrine Game , while Florida State had several players in the annual Senior Bowl . Florida State defensive backs Myron Rolle and Patrick Robinson and linebacker <unk> Watson each played in the latter game . 
 = = Vacated = = 
 On July 14 , 2011 , Georgia Tech was forced to vacate the win due to an NCAA investigation . The NCAA accused Tech of fielding an ineligible player during the game , and although they were unable to obtain evidence that an ineligible player had been played , the NCAA concluded that the investigation had been hampered by Georgia Tech 's administration . This was taken as evidence of wrongdoing , and penalties for playing an ineligible player were imposed . 
 = Wells Cathedral = 
 The Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew , commonly known as Wells Cathedral , is an Anglican cathedral in Wells , Somerset . The cathedral , dedicated to St Andrew the Apostle , is the seat of the Bishop of Bath and Wells . It is the mother church of the diocese and contains the bishop 's throne ( cathedra ) . It was built between 1175 and 1490 , replacing an earlier church built on the same site in 705 . It is moderately sized among the medieval cathedrals of England , between those of massive proportion such as Lincoln and York and the smaller cathedrals in Oxford and Carlisle . With its broad west front and large central tower , it is the dominant feature of its small cathedral city and a landmark in the Somerset countryside . Wells has been described as " unquestionably one of the most beautiful " and as " the most poetic " of English cathedrals . 
 The cathedral 's architecture presents a harmonious whole which is entirely Gothic and mostly in the Early English style of the late 12th and early 13th centuries . In this respect Wells differs from most other English medieval cathedrals , which have parts in the earlier Romanesque style introduced to Britain by the Normans in the 11th century . 
 Work commenced in about 1175 at the <unk> with the building of the choir . The historian John Harvey considers it to be the first truly Gothic structure in Europe , having broken from the last constraints of Romanesque . The stonework of its pointed arcades and fluted piers is enriched by the complexity of pronounced mouldings and the vitality of its carved capitals in a foliate style known as " stiff leaf " . Its exterior has an Early English façade displaying more than 300 sculpted figures , described by Harvey as " the supreme triumph of the combined plastic arts in England " . The east end retains much ancient stained glass , which is rare in England . 
 Unlike many English cathedrals of monastic foundation , Wells has an exceptional number of surviving secular buildings associated with its chapter of secular canons , including the Bishop 's Palace and Vicars ' Close , a residential street that has remained intact since the 15th century . The cathedral is a Grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The earliest remains of a building on the site are of a late @-@ Roman mausoleum , identified during excavations in 1980 . An abbey church was built in Wells in 705 by Aldhelm , first bishop of the newly established Diocese of Sherborne during the reign of King Ine of Wessex . It was dedicated to Saint Andrew and stood at the site of the cathedral 's cloisters , where some excavated remains can be seen . The font in the cathedral 's south transept is from this church and is the oldest part of the present building . In 766 Cynewulf , King of Wessex , signed a charter endowing the church with eleven hides of land . In 909 the seat of the diocese was moved from Sherborne to Wells . 
 The first Bishop of Wells was Athelm ( 909 ) , who crowned King Æthelstan . Athelm and his nephew Dunstan both became Archbishops of Canterbury . During this period a choir of boys was established to sing the liturgy . Wells Cathedral School , which was established to educate these choirboys , dates its foundation to this point . There is , however , some controversy over this . Following the Norman Conquest , Bishop John de Villula moved the seat of the bishop from Wells to Bath in 1090 . The church at Wells , no longer a cathedral , had a college of secular clergy . 
 = = = Seat of the bishop = = = 
 The cathedral is thought to have been conceived and commenced in about 1175 by Bishop Reginald Fitz Jocelin , who died in 1191 . Although it is clear from its size that from the outset , the church was planned to be the cathedral of the diocese , the seat of the bishop moved between Wells and the abbeys of Glastonbury and Bath , before settling at Wells . In 1197 Bishop Reginald 's successor , Bishop Savaric FitzGeldewin , with the approval of Pope Celestine III , officially moved his seat to Glastonbury Abbey . The title of Bishop of Bath and Glastonbury was used until the Glastonbury claim was abandoned in 1219 . 
 Bishop Savaric 's successor , Jocelin of Wells , again moved the bishop 's seat to Bath Abbey , with the title Bishop of Bath . Jocelin was a brother of Bishop Hugh II of Lincoln and was present at the signing of the Magna Carta . Bishop Jocelin continued the building campaign begun by Bishop Reginald and was responsible for the Bishop 's Palace , the choristers ' school , a grammar school , a hospital for travellers and a chapel . He also had a manor house built at Wookey , near Wells . Jocelin saw the church dedicated in 1239 but , despite much lobbying of the Pope by Jocelin 's representatives in Rome , did not live to see cathedral status granted . The delay may have been a result of inaction by Pandulf Verraccio , a Roman ecclesiastical politician , papal legate to England and Bishop of Norwich , who was asked by the Pope to investigate the situation but did not respond . Jocelin died at Wells on 19 November 1242 and was buried in the choir of the cathedral ; the memorial brass on his tomb is one of the earliest brasses in England . Following his death the monks of Bath unsuccessfully attempted to regain authority over Wells . 
 In 1245 the ongoing dispute over the title of the bishop was resolved by a ruling of Pope Innocent IV who established the title as the " Bishop of Bath and Wells " , as it has remained until this day , with Wells as the principal seat of the bishop . Since the 11th century the church has had a chapter of secular clergy , like the cathedrals of Chichester , Hereford , Lincoln and York . The chapter was endowed with 22 prebends ( lands from which finance was drawn ) and a provost to manage them . On acquiring cathedral status , in common with other such cathedrals , it had four chief clergy , the dean , precentor , chancellor and sacristan , who were responsible for the spiritual and material care of the cathedral . 
 = = = Building the cathedral = = = 
 The building programme , begun by Bishop Reginald Fitz Jocelin in the 12th century , continued under Jocelin of Wells , who was a canon from 1200 , then bishop from 1206 . Adam Locke was master mason from about 1192 until 1230 . It was designed in the new style with pointed arches , later known as Gothic , which was introduced at about the same time at Canterbury Cathedral . Work was halted between 1209 and 1213 when King John was excommunicated and Bishop Jocelin was in exile , but the main parts of the church were complete by the time of the dedication by Bishop Jocelin in 1239 . 
 By the time the cathedral , including the chapter house , was finished in 1306 , it was already too small for the developing liturgy , and unable to accommodate increasingly grand processions of clergy . Bishop John <unk> initiated another phase of building under master mason Thomas of Whitney , during which the central tower was heightened and an eight @-@ sided Lady chapel was added at the east end by 1326 . Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury followed , continuing the eastward extension of the choir and retrochoir beyond . He oversaw the building of Vicars ' Close and the Vicars ' Hall , to give the men who were employed to sing in the choir a secure place to live and dine , away from the town and its temptations . He had an uneasy relationship with the citizens of Wells , partly because of his imposition of taxes , and he surrounded his palace with crenellated walls , a moat and a drawbridge . 
 Bishop John Harewell raised money for the completion of the west front by William Wynford , who was appointed as master mason in 1365 . One of the foremost architects of his time , Wynford worked for the king at Windsor , Winchester Cathedral and New College , Oxford . At Wells , he designed the western towers of which north @-@ west was not built until the following century . In the 14th century , the central piers of the crossing were found to be sinking under the weight of the crossing tower which had been damaged by an earthquake in the previous century . <unk> arches , sometimes described as scissor arches , were inserted by master mason William Joy to brace and stabilise the piers as a unit . 
 = = = Tudors and Civil War = = = 
 By the reign of Henry VII the cathedral was complete , appearing much as it does today ( though the fittings have changed ) . From 1508 to 1546 , the eminent Italian humanist scholar Polydore Vergil was active as the chapter 's representative in London . He donated a set of hangings for the choir of the cathedral . While Wells survived the Dissolution of the Monasteries better than the cathedrals of monastic foundation , the abolition of chantries in 1547 resulted in a reduction in its income . Medieval brasses were sold , and a pulpit was placed in the nave for the first time . Between 1551 and 1568 , in two periods as dean , William Turner established a herb garden , which was recreated between 2003 and 2010 . 
 Elizabeth I gave the chapter and the Vicars Choral a new charter in 1591 , creating a new governing body , consisting of a dean and eight <unk> canons with control over the church estates and authority over its affairs , but no longer entitled to elect the dean ( that entitlement thenceforward belonged ultimately to the Crown ) . The stability brought by the new charter ended with the onset of the Civil War and the execution of Charles I. Local fighting damaged the cathedral 's stonework , furniture and windows . The dean , Walter Raleigh , a nephew of the explorer Sir Walter Raleigh , was placed under house arrest after the fall of Bridgwater to the Parliamentarians in 1645 , first in the rectory at <unk> and then in the deanery at Wells . His jailer , the shoe maker and city constable , David Barrett , caught him writing a letter to his wife . When he refused to surrender it , Barrett ran him through with a sword and he died six weeks later , on 10 October 1646 . He was buried in an unmarked grave in the choir before the dean 's stall . During the Commonwealth of England under Oliver Cromwell no dean was appointed and the cathedral fell into disrepair . The bishop went into retirement and some of the clerics were reduced to performing menial tasks . 
 = = = 1660 – 1800 = = = 
 In 1661 , after Charles II was restored to the throne , Robert Creighton , the king 's chaplain in exile , was appointed dean and was bishop for two years before his death in 1672 . His brass lectern , given in thanksgiving , can be seen in the cathedral . He donated the nave 's great west window at a cost of £ 140 . Following Creighton 's appointment as bishop , the post of dean went to Ralph Bathurst , who had been chaplain to the king , president of Trinity College , Oxford and fellow of the Royal Society . During Bathurst 's long tenure the cathedral was restored , but in the Monmouth Rebellion of 1685 , Puritan soldiers damaged the west front , tore lead from the roof to make bullets , broke the windows , smashed the organ and furnishings , and for a time stabled their horses in the nave . 
 Restoration began again under Bishop Thomas Ken who was appointed by the Crown in 1685 and served until 1691 . He was one of seven bishops imprisoned for refusing to sign King James II 's " Declaration of Indulgence " , which would have enabled Catholics to resume positions of political power , but popular support led to their acquittal . Ken refused to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary because James II had not abdicated and with others , known as the <unk> , was put out of office . His successor , Bishop Kidder , was killed in the Great Storm of 1703 when two chimney stacks on the palace fell on him and his wife , while they were asleep in bed . 
 = = = Victorian era to present = = = 
 By the middle of the 19th century , a major restoration programme was needed . Under Dean Goodenough , the monuments were moved to the cloisters and the remaining medieval paint and whitewash removed in an operation known as " the great scrape " . Anthony Salvin took charge of the extensive restoration of the choir . Wooden galleries installed in the 16th century were removed and the stalls were given stone canopies and placed further back within the line of the arcade . The medieval stone pulpitum screen was extended in the centre to support a new organ . 
 In 1933 the Friends of Wells Cathedral were formed to support the cathedral 's chapter in the maintenance of the fabric , life and work of the cathedral . 
 The late 20th century saw an extensive restoration programme , particularly of the west front . The stained glass is currently under restoration , with a programme underway to conserve the large 14th @-@ century Jesse Tree window at the eastern terminal of the choir . 
 = = Ministry = = 
 Since the 13th century , Wells Cathedral has been the seat of the Bishop of Bath and Wells . Its governing body , the chapter , is made up of five clerical canons ( the dean , the precentor , the canon chancellor , the canon treasurer , and the archdeacon of Wells ) and four lay members : the administrator ( chief executive ) , Keeper of the Fabric , Overseer of the Estate and the chairman of the cathedral shop and catering boards . The current Bishop of Bath and Wells is Peter Hancock , who was installed in a service in the Cathedral on 7 June 2014 . The present dean is John Clarke . 
 Employed staff include the organist and master of choristers , head <unk> , archivist , librarian and the staff of the shop , café and restaurant . The chapter is advised by specialists such as architects , archaeologists and financial experts . 
 More than a thousand services are held every year . There are daily services of Matins , Holy Communion and Choral Evensong , as well as major celebrations of Christian festivals such as Christmas , Easter , Pentecost and saints ' days . The cathedral is also used for the baptisms , weddings and funerals of those with close connections to it . In July 2009 the cathedral undertook the funeral of Harry Patch , the last British Army veteran of World War I , who died at the age of 111 . 
 Three Sunday services are led by the resident choir ( during the school terms ) and choral services are sung on weekdays . The cathedral hosts visiting choirs and is involved in outreach work with local schools as part of its <unk> Outreach Project . It is also the venue for musical events such as an annual concert by the Somerset Chamber Choir . 
 Each year about 150 @,@ 000 people attend services and another 300 @,@ 000 visit as tourists . Entry is free , but visitors are encouraged to make a donation towards the annual running costs which were around £ 2 million ( approx . US $ 3 @.@ 3 million ) in 2010 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Dates , styles and architects = = = 
 Construction of the cathedral began in about 1175 , to the design of an unknown architect . Wells is the first cathedral in England to be , from its foundation , built in the Gothic style . According to art historian John Harvey , it is the first truly Gothic cathedral in the world , its architects having entirely dispensed with all the features that bound the contemporary east end of Canterbury Cathedral and the earlier buildings of France , such as the east end of the Abbey of Saint Denis , to the Romanesque . Unlike these churches , Wells has clustered piers rather than columns and has a gallery of identical pointed arches rather than the typically Romanesque form of paired openings . The style , with its simple untraceried lancet arches and convoluted mouldings , is known as Early English Gothic . 
 From about 1192 to 1230 , Adam Lock , the earliest architect at Wells for whom a name is known , continued the transept and nave in the same manner as his predecessor . Lock was also the builder of the north porch , to his own design . 
 The Early English west front was commenced around 1230 by Thomas Norreys , with building and sculpture continuing for thirty years . Its south @-@ west tower was begun 100 years later and constructed between 1365 and 1395 , and the north @-@ west tower between 1425 and 1435 , both in the Perpendicular Gothic style to the design of William Wynford , who also filled many of the cathedral 's early English lancet windows with delicate tracery . 
 Between 1275 and 1310 the undercroft and chapter house were built by unknown architects , the undercroft in the Early English and the chapter house in the Geometric style of Decorated Gothic architecture . In about 1310 work commenced on the Lady Chapel , to the design of Thomas Witney , who also built the central tower from 1315 to 1322 in the Decorated Gothic style . The tower was later braced internally with arches by William Joy . Concurrent with this work , in 1329 – 45 Joy made alterations and extensions to the choir , joining it to the Lady Chapel with the retrochoir , the latter in the Flowing Decorated style . 
 Later changes include the Perpendicular vault of the tower and construction of Sugar 's Chapel , 1475 – 90 by William Smyth . Also , Gothic Revival renovations were made to the choir and pulpitum by Benjamin Ferrey and Anthony Salvin , 1842 – 57 . 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 Wells has a total length of 415 feet ( 126 m ) . In common with Canterbury , Lincoln and Salisbury cathedrals , it has the distinctly English arrangement of two transepts , with the body of the church divided into distinct parts : nave , choir , and retro @-@ choir , beyond which extends the Lady Chapel . The façade is wide , with its towers extending beyond the transepts on either side . There is a large projecting porch on the north side of the nave forming an entry into the cathedral . To the north @-@ east is the large octagonal chapter house , entered from the north choir aisle by a passage and staircase . To the south of the nave is a large cloister , unusual in that the northern range , that adjacent the cathedral , was never built . 
 = = = Elevation = = = 
 In section , the cathedral has the usual arrangement of a large church : a central nave with an aisle on each side , separated by two arcades . The elevation is in three stages , arcade , triforium gallery and clerestory . The nave is 67 feet ( 20 m ) in height , very low compared to the Gothic cathedrals of France . It has a markedly horizontal emphasis , caused by the triforium having a unique form , a series of identical narrow openings , lacking the usual definition of the bays . The triforium is separated from the arcade by a single horizontal string course that runs unbroken the length of the nave . There are no vertical lines linking the three stages , as the shafts supporting the vault rise above the triforium . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The exterior of Wells Cathedral presents a relatively tidy and harmonious appearance since the greater part of the building was executed in a single style , Early English Gothic . This is uncommon among English cathedrals where the exterior usually exhibits a plethora of styles . At Wells , later changes in the Perpendicular style were universally applied , such as filling the Early English lancet windows with simple tracery , the construction of a parapet that encircles the roof , and the addition of pinnacles framing each gable , similar to those around the chapter house and on the west front . At the eastern end there is a proliferation of tracery with repeated motifs in the Reticulated style , a stage between Geometric and Flowing Decorated tracery . 
 = = = = West front = = = = 
 The west front is 100 feet ( 30 m ) high and 147 feet ( 45 m ) wide , and built of Inferior Oolite of the Middle Jurassic period , which came from the Doulting Stone Quarry , about 8 miles ( 13 km ) to the east . According to the architectural historian Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor , it is " one of the great sights of England " . 
 West fronts in general take three distinct forms : those that follow the elevation of the nave and aisles , those that have paired towers at the end of each aisle , framing the nave , and those that screen the form of the building . The west front at Wells has the paired @-@ tower form , unusual in that the towers do not indicate the location of the aisles , but extend well beyond them , screening the dimensions and profile of the building . 
 The west front rises in three distinct stages , each clearly defined by a horizontal course . This horizontal emphasis is counteracted by six strongly projecting buttresses defining the cross @-@ sectional divisions of nave , aisles and towers , and are highly decorated , each having canopied niches containing the largest statues on the façade . 
 At the lowest level of the façade is a plain base , contrasting with and stabilising the ornate arcades that rise above it . The base is penetrated by three doors , which are in stark contrast to the often imposing portals of French Gothic cathedrals . The outer two are of domestic proportion and the central door is ornamented only by a central post , quatrefoil and the fine mouldings of the arch . 
 Above the basement rise two storeys , ornamented with quatrefoils and niches originally holding about four hundred statues , with three hundred surviving until the mid @-@ 20th century . Since then , some have been restored or replaced , including the ruined figure of Christ in the gable . 
 The third stages of the flanking towers were both built in the Perpendicular style of the late 14th century , to the design of William Wynford ; that on the north @-@ west was not begun until about 1425 . The design maintains the general proportions , and continues the strong projection of the buttresses . 
 The finished product has been criticised for its lack of pinnacles , and it is probable that the towers were intended to carry spires which were never built . Despite its lack of spires or pinnacles , the architectural historian Banister Fletcher describes it as " the highest development in English Gothic of this type of façade . " 
 = = = = = Iconography of the west front = = = = = 
 The sculptures on the west front at Wells include standing figures , seated figures , half @-@ length angels and narratives in high relief . Many of the figures are life @-@ sized or larger , and together they constitute the finest display of medieval carving in England . The figures and many of the architectural details were painted in bright colours , and the colouring scheme has been deduced from flakes of paint still adhering to some surfaces . The sculptures occupy nine architectural zones stretching horizontally across the entire west front and around the sides and the eastern returns of the towers which extend beyond the aisles . The strongly projecting buttresses have tiers of niches which contain many of the largest figures . Other large figures , including that of Christ , occupy the gable . A single figure stands in one of two later niches high on the northern tower . 
 In 1851 the archaeologist Charles Robert Cockerell published his analysis of the iconography , numbering the nine sculptural divisions from the lowest to the highest . He defined the theme as " a calendar for unlearned men " illustrating the doctrines and history of the Christian faith , its introduction to Britain and its protection by princes and bishops . He likens the arrangement and iconography to the Te Deum . 
 According to Cockerell , the side of the façade that is to the south of the central door is the more sacred and the scheme is divided accordingly . The lowest range of niches each contained a standing figure , of which all but four figures on the west front , two on each side , have been destroyed . More have survived on the northern and eastern sides of the north tower . Cockerell speculates that those to the south of the portal represented prophets and patriarchs of the Old Testament while those to the north represented early missionaries to Britain , of which Augustine of Canterbury , St <unk> , and Benedict Biscop are identifiable by their attributes . In the second zone , above each pair of standing figures , is a quatrefoil containing a half @-@ length angel in relief , some of which have survived . Between the gables of the niches are quatrefoils that contain a series of narratives from the Bible , with the Old Testament stories to the south , above the prophets and patriarchs , and those from the New Testament to the north . A horizontal course runs around the west front dividing the architectural storeys at this point . 
 Above the course , zones four and five , as identified by Cockerell , contain figures which represent the Christian Church in Britain , with the spiritual lords such as bishops , abbots , abbesses and saintly founders of monasteries on the south , while kings , queens and princes occupy the north . Many of the figures survive and many have been identified in the light of their various attributes . There is a hierarchy of size , with the more significant figures larger and enthroned in their niches rather than standing . Immediately beneath the upper course are a series of small niches containing dynamic sculptures of the dead coming forth from their tombs on the Day of Judgement . Although naked , some of the dead are defined as royalty by their crowns and others as bishops by their <unk> . Some emerge from their graves with joy and hope , and others with despair . 
 The niches in the lowest zone of the gable contain nine angels , of which Cockerell identifies Michael , Gabriel , Raphael and Uriel . In the next zone are the taller figures of the twelve apostles , some , such as John , Andrew and Bartholomew , clearly identifiable by the attributes that they carry . The uppermost niches of the gable contained the figure of Christ the Judge at the centre , with the Virgin Mary on his right and John the Baptist on his left . The figures all suffered from iconoclasm . A new statue of Jesus was carved for the central niche , but the two side niches now contain cherubim . Christ and the Virgin Mary are also represented by now headless figures in a Coronation of the Virgin in a niche above the central portal . A damaged figure of the Virgin and Christ Child occupies a quatrefoil in the spandrel of the door . 
 = = = = Crossing tower = = = = 
 The central tower appears to date from the early 13th century . It was substantially reconstructed in the early 14th century during the remodelling of the east end , necessitating the internal bracing of the piers a decade or so later . In the 14th century the tower was given a timber and lead spire which burnt down in 1439 . The exterior was then reworked in the Perpendicular style and given the present parapet and pinnacles . Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor describes it as " outstanding even in Somerset , a county famed for the splendour of its church towers " . 
 = = = = North porch = = = = 
 The north porch is described by art historian Nikolaus Pevsner as " sumptuously decorated " , and intended to be the main entrance . Externally it is simple and rectangular with plain side walls . The entrance is a steeply arched portal framed by rich mouldings of eight shafts with stiff @-@ leaf capitals each encircled by an annular moulding at middle height . Those on the left are figurative , containing images representing the martyrdom of St Edmund the Martyr . The walls are lined with deep niches framed by narrow shafts with capitals and <unk> like those of the portal . 
 = = = = Cloisters = = = = 
 The cloisters were built in the late 13th century and largely rebuilt from 1430 to 1508 and have wide openings divided by mullions and transoms , and tracery in the Perpendicular Gothic style . The vault has lierne ribs that form octagons at the centre of each compartment , the joints of each rib having decorative bosses . The eastern range is of two storeys , of which the upper is the library built in the 15th century . 
 Because Wells Cathedral was secular rather than monastic , cloisters were not a practical necessity . They were omitted from several other secular cathedrals but were built here and at Chichester . Explanations for their construction at these two secular cathedrals range from the processional to the aesthetic . As at Chichester , there is no northern range to the cloisters . In monastic cloisters it was the north range , benefiting most from winter sunlight , that was often used as a scriptorium . 
 = = = = Restoration = = = = 
 In 1969 , when a large chunk of stone fell from a statue near the main door , it became apparent that there was an urgent need for restoration of the west front . Detailed studies of the stonework and of conservation practices were undertaken under the cathedral architect , Alban D. R. Caroe and a restoration committee formed . The methods that were selected for conservation were those devised by Eve and Robert Baker . W. A. ( Bert ) Wheeler , clerk of works to the cathedral 1935 – 1978 , had previously experimented with washing and surface @-@ treatment of architectural carvings on the building and his techniques were among those tried on the statues . 
 The conservation was carried out between 1974 and 1986 , wherever possible using non @-@ invasive procedures such as washing with water and a solution of lime , filling gaps and damaged surfaces with soft mortar to prevent the ingress of water and stabilising statues that were fracturing because of the corrosion of metal dowels . The surfaces were finished by painting with a thin coat of mortar and <unk> to resist further erosion and attack by pollutants . The restoration of the façade revealed much paint adhering to the statues and their niches , indicating that it had once been brightly coloured . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 = = = = Quire , transept and nave = = = = 
 The particular character of this Early English interior is dependent on the proportions of the simple lancet arches . It is also dependent on the refinement of the architectural details , in particular the mouldings . 
 The arcade , which takes the same form in the nave , choir and transepts , is distinguished by the richness of both mouldings and carvings . Each pier of the arcade has a surface enrichment of 24 slender shafts in eight groups of three , rising beyond the capitals to form the deeply undulating mouldings of the arches . The capitals themselves are remarkable for the vitality of the stylised foliage , in a style known as " stiff @-@ leaf " . The liveliness contrasts with the formality of the moulded shafts and the smooth unbroken areas of ashlar masonry in the spandrels . Each capital is different , and some contain small figures illustrating narratives . 
 The vault of the nave rises steeply in a simple quadripartite form , in harmony with the nave arcade . The eastern end of the choir was extended and the whole upper part elaborated in the second quarter of the 14th century by William Joy . The vault has a multiplicity of ribs in a net @-@ like form , which is very different from that of the nave , and is perhaps a recreation in stone of a local type of <unk> wooden roof of which examples remain from the 15th century , including those at St Cuthbert 's Church , Wells . The vaults of the aisles of the choir also have a unique pattern . 
 Until the early 14th century , the interior of the cathedral was in a unified style , but it was to undergo two significant changes , to the tower and to the eastern end . Between 1315 and 1322 the central tower was heightened and topped by a spire , which caused the piers that supported it to show signs of stress . In 1338 the mason William Joy employed an unorthodox solution by inserting low arches topped by inverted arches of similar dimensions , forming scissors @-@ like structures . These arches brace the piers of the crossing on three sides , while the easternmost side is braced by a choir screen . The bracing arches are known as " St Andrew 's Cross arches " , in a reference to the patron saint of the cathedral . They have been described by Wim <unk> – rightly or wrongly – as " brutally massive " and intrusive in an otherwise restrained interior . 
 = = = = Lady Chapel and retrochoir = = = = 
 Wells Cathedral has a square east end to the choir and presbytery as is usual , and like several other cathedrals including Salisbury and Exeter Cathedrals has a lower Lady Chapel projecting at the eastern end , begun by Thomas Witney in about 1310 , possibly before the chapter house was completed . The date is a matter of dispute . 
 The Lady Chapel has a vault of complex and somewhat irregular pattern , as the chapel is not symmetrical about both axes . The main ribs are intersected by additional non @-@ supporting ribs known as " lierne ribs " and which in this case form a star @-@ shaped pattern at the apex of the vault . It is one of the earliest lierne vaults in England . There are five large windows , which are filled with fragments of medieval glass . In the east window the figures are all of the nineteenth century . The tracery of the windows is in the style known as Reticulated , having a pattern of a single repeated shape , in this case a trefoil , giving a " reticulate " or net @-@ like appearance . The openings are also described as fish scales . 
 The retrochoir extends across the east end of the choir and into the east transepts . At its centre the vault is supported by a remarkable structure of angled piers . Two of these are so placed as to complete the octagonal shape of the Lady Chapel , a solution described by Francis Bond as " an intuition of Genius " . The piers have attached shafts of marble , and , with the vaults that they support , create a vista of great complexity from every angle . The windows of the retrochoir are in the Reticulated style like those of the Lady Chapel , but are fully Flowing Decorated in that the tracery mouldings form ogival curves . The plan of this area between the presbytery and the Lady Chapel is unique , and it has been suggested that the failure to procure the canonization of Bishop William of March led to a shortening of the presbytery as space was no longer needed for his shrine . There was then a consequent need to fill in the resulting extra space behind the High Altar . It was done ingeniously and beautifully . A similar situation had arisen at St Albans Abbey , where the old apse had been removed leaving space between the Lady Chapel and the shrine of St Alban . The space there , however , was not treated as imaginatively as it was at Wells . 
 = = = = Chapter house = = = = 
 The chapter house was begun in the late 13th century and built in two stages , completed about 1310 . It is a two @-@ storeyed structure with the main chamber raised on an undercroft . It is entered from a staircase which divides and turns , one branch leading through the upper storey of Chain Gate to Vicars ' Close . The Decorated interior is described by Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor as " architecturally the most beautiful in England " . It is octagonal , with its ribbed vault supported on a central column . The column is surrounded by shafts of Purbeck Marble , rising to a single continuous rippling foliate capital of stylised oak leaves and acorns , quite different in character from the Early English stiff @-@ leaf foliage . Above the moulding spring thirty @-@ two ribs of strong profile , giving an effect generally likened to " a great palm tree " . The windows are large with Geometric Decorated tracery that is beginning to show an elongation of form , and <unk> in the lesser lights that are characteristic of Flowing Decorated tracery . The tracery lights still contain ancient glass . Beneath the windows are 51 stalls , the canopies of which are enlivened by carvings including many heads carved in a light @-@ hearted manner . 
 = = Artworks and treasures = = 
 = = = Stained glass = = = 
 Wells Cathedral contains one of the most substantial collections of medieval stained glass in England , despite damage by Parliamentary troops in 1642 and 1643 . The oldest surviving glass dates from the late 13th century and is in two windows on the west side of the chapter @-@ house staircase . Two windows in the south choir aisle are from 1310 – 20 . 
 The Lady Chapel has five windows , of which four date from 1325 – 30 and include images of a local saint , Dunstan . The east window was restored to a semblance of its original appearance by Thomas <unk> in 1845 . The other windows have complete canopies , but the pictorial sections are fragmented . 
 The east window of the choir is a broad , seven @-@ light window dating from 1340 – 45 . It depicts the Tree of Jesse ( the genealogy of Christ ) and demonstrates the use of silver staining , a new technique that allowed the artist to paint details on the glass in yellow , as well as black . The combination of yellow and green glass and the application of the bright yellow stain gives the window its popular name , the " Golden Window " . It is flanked by two windows each side in the clerestory , with large figures of saints , also dated to 1340 – 45 . In 2010 a major conservation programme was undertaken on the Jesse Tree window . 
 The panels in the chapel of St Katherine are attributed to Arnold of Nijmegen and date from about 1520 . They were acquired from the destroyed church of Saint @-@ Jean , Rouen , with the last panel having been purchased in 1953 . 
 The large triple lancet to the nave west end was glazed at the expense of Dean Creighton at a cost of £ 140 in 1664 . It was repaired in 1813 , and the central light was largely replaced to a design by Archibald Keightley Nicholson between 1925 and 1931 . The main north and south transept end windows by James Powell and Sons were erected in the early 20th century . 
 = = = Carvings = = = 
 The greater part of the stone carving of Wells Cathedral comprises foliate capitals in the stiff @-@ leaf style . They are found ornamenting the piers of the nave , choir and transepts . Stiff @-@ leaf foliage is highly abstract . Though possibly influenced by carvings of acanthus leaves or vine leaves , it cannot be easily identified with any particular plant . Here the carving of the foliage is varied and vigorous , the springing leaves and deep undercuts casting shadows that contrast with the surface of the piers . In the transepts and towards the crossing in the nave the capitals have many small figurative carvings among the leaves . These include a man with toothache and a series of four scenes depicting the " Wages of Sin " in a narrative of fruit stealers who creep into an orchard and are subsequently beaten by the farmer . Another well @-@ known carving is in the north transept aisle : a foliate corbel , on which climbs a lizard , sometimes identified as a salamander , a symbol of eternal life . 
 Carvings in the Decorated Gothic style may be found in the eastern end of the buildings , where there are many carved bosses . In the chapter house , the carvings of the fifty @-@ one stalls include numerous small heads of great variety , many of them smiling or laughing . A well @-@ known figure is the corbel of the dragon @-@ slaying monk in the chapter house stair . The large continuous capital that encircles the central pillar of the chapter house is markedly different in style to the stiff @-@ leaf of the Early English period . In contrast to the bold projections and undercutting of the earlier work , it has a rippling form and is clearly identifiable as grapevine . 
 The 15th @-@ century cloisters have many small bosses ornamenting the vault . Two of these carvings in the west cloister , near the location of the gift shop and café , have been described as <unk> na gigs , i. e. female figures displaying their genitals and variously considered to be associated with depictions of the sin of lust or with ancient fertility cults . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Wells Cathedral has one of the finest sets of misericords in Britain . Its clergy has a long tradition of singing or reciting from the Book of Psalms each day , along with the customary daily reading of the Holy Office . In medieval times the clergy assembled in the church eight times daily for the canonical hours . As the greater part of the services was recited while standing , many monastic or collegiate churches were fitted with stalls in which the seats tipped up to provide a convenient ledge for the monk or cleric to lean against . They were called " misericords " because their installation was an act of mercy . <unk> typically have a carved figurative bracket beneath the ledge framed by two floral motifs known , in the heraldic manner , as " supporters " . 
 The misericords date from 1330 to 1340 . They may have been carved under the direction of master carpenter John Strode , although his name is not recorded before 1341 . He was assisted by Bartholomew Quarter , who is documented from 1343 . They originally numbered ninety , of which sixty @-@ five have survived . Sixty @-@ one are installed in the choir , three are displayed in the cathedral and one is held by the Victoria and Albert Museum . New stalls were ordered when the eastern end of the choir was extended in the early 14th century . The canons complained that they had borne the cost of the rebuilding and ordered that the prebendary clerics should pay for their own stalls . When the newly refurbished choir opened in 1339 many misericords were left unfinished , including one @-@ fifth of the surviving 65 . Many of the clerics had not paid , and were required to contribute a total sum of £ 200 . The misericords survived better than the other sections of the stalls , which , during the Protestant Reformation , had their canopies chopped off and galleries inserted above them . One of the misericords , depicting a boy pulling a thorn from his foot , dates from the 17th century . In 1848 there was a complete rearrangement of the choir furniture , and 61 of the misericords were reused in the restructured stalls . 
 The subject matter of the carvings of the central brackets as misericords is very varied , but with many common themes recurring in different churches . Typically , the themes are less unified and less directly related to the Bible and Christian theology than are the themes of small sculptures seen elsewhere within churches , such as those on bosses . This is much the case at Wells , where none of the misericord carvings is directly based on a Bible story . The subjects , chosen either by the woodcarver , or perhaps by the individual paying for the stall , have no over @-@ riding theme . The sole unifying element is the roundels on each side of the pictorial subject , which are all elaborately carved foliage , in most cases formal and stylised in the later Decorated manner , but with several examples of naturalistic foliage , including roses and <unk> . Many of the subjects carry traditional interpretations . The image of the " Pelican in her Piety " ( believed to feed her young on her own blood ) is a recognised symbol for Christ 's love for the Church . A cat playing with a mouse may represent the Devil snaring a human soul . Other subjects illustrate popular fables or sayings such as " When the fox preaches , look to your geese " . Many of the subjects are depictions of animals , some of which may symbolise a human vice or virtue , or an aspect of faith . 
 Twenty @-@ seven of the carvings depict animals : rabbits , dogs , a puppy biting a cat , a ewe feeding a lamb , monkeys , lions , bats , and the Early Christian motif of two doves drinking from a ewer . Eighteen of the misericords have mythological subjects , including mermaids , dragons and wyverns . Five of the carvings are clearly narrative , such as the Fox and the Geese , and the story of Alexander the Great being raised to Heaven by griffins . There are three heads : a bishop in a mitre , an angel and a woman wearing a veil over her hair arranged in coils over each ear . Eleven carvings are of human figures , among which are several of remarkable design , having been conceived by the artist specifically for their purpose of supporting a shelf . One figure lies beneath the seat , supporting the shelf with his cheek , one hand and one foot . Another sits in a contorted manner supporting the weight on his elbow , while another figure squats with his knees wide apart and a strained look on his face . 
 = = = Fittings and monuments = = = 
 Some of the cathedral 's fittings and monuments are hundreds of years old . The brass lectern in the Lady Chapel dates from 1661 and has a moulded stand and foliate crest . In the north transept chapel is a 17th @-@ century oak screen with columns , formerly used in cow stalls , with artisan Ionic capitals and cornice , set forward over the chest tomb of John <unk> . There is a bound oak chest from the 14th century , which was used to store the chapter seal and key documents . The bishop 's throne dates from 1340 , and has a panelled , canted front and stone doorway , and a deep nodding cusped ogee canopy above it , with three @-@ stepped statue niches and pinnacles . The throne was restored by Anthony Salvin around 1850 . Opposite the throne is a 19th @-@ century octagonal pulpit on a coved base with panelled sides , and steps up from the north aisle . The round font in the south transept is from the former Saxon cathedral and has an arcade of round @-@ headed arches , on a round plinth . The font cover was made in 1635 and is decorated with the heads of putti . The Chapel of St Martin is a memorial to every Somerset man who fell in World War I. 
 The monuments and tombs include : Bishop <unk> , died 1088 ; Bishop <unk> , died 1274 ; Bishop William of March , died 1302 ; John <unk> , died 1329 ; John <unk> , died 1333 ; John Middleton , died c . 1350 ; Ralph of Shrewsbury , died 1363 ; Bishop Harewell , died 1386 ; William <unk> , died c . 1448 ; John Bernard , died 1459 ; Bishop <unk> , died 1464 ; John <unk> , died 1498 ; John Still , died 1607 ; Robert Creighton , died 1672 ; Bishop Kidder , died 1703 ; Bishop Hooper , died 1727 and Bishop Harvey , died 1894 . 
 = = = Clock = = = 
 In the north transept is Wells Cathedral clock , an astronomical clock from about 1325 , believed to be the work of Peter Lightfoot , a monk of Glastonbury . Its mechanism , dated to between 1386 and 1392 , was replaced in the 19th century , and the original mechanism moved to the Science Museum in London , where it continues to operate . It is the second @-@ oldest surviving clock in England , after the Salisbury cathedral clock . 
 The clock has its original medieval face . As well as showing the time on a 24 @-@ hour dial , it reflects the motion of the Sun and Moon , the phases of the Moon , and the time since the last new Moon . The astronomical dial represents a geocentric or pre @-@ Copernican view of the universe , with the Sun and Moon revolving round a central fixed Earth , like that of the clock at Ottery St Mary . The quarters are chimed by a quarter jack in the form of a small automaton known as Jack <unk> , who hits two bells with hammers and two with his heels . At the striking of the clock , jousting knights appear above the clock face . 
 On the outer wall of the transept , opposite Vicars ' Hall , is a second clock face of the same clock , placed there just over seventy years after the interior clock and driven by the same mechanism . The second clock face has two quarter jacks ( which strike on the quarter @-@ hour ) in the form of knights in armour . 
 In 2010 the official clock @-@ winder retired and was replaced by an electric mechanism . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Organ and organists = = = 
 The first record of an organ at this church dates from 1310 . A smaller organ , probably for the Lady Chapel , was installed in 1415 . In 1620 an organ , built by Thomas <unk> , was installed at a cost of £ 398 1s 5d . ( equivalent to about £ 73 @,@ 000 as of 2014 ) . 
 The organ that was installed in 1620 was destroyed by parliamentary soldiers in 1643 . An organ built in 1662 was enlarged in 1786 and again in 1855 . In 1909 – 10 an organ was built by Harrison & Harrison of Durham , with the best parts of the old organ retained . It has been serviced by the same company ever since . 
 The cathedral also has a chamber organ , built by the Scottish organ @-@ builders <unk> , which is normally kept in the choir but which can be moved around , for services and concerts , in other parts of the Cathedral . It is regularly used for authentic accompaniment of Tudor and baroque music . 
 The first recorded organist of Wells Cathedral was Walter <unk> ( or <unk> ) in 1416 , and the post of organist or assistant organist has been held by more than 60 individuals since then . Peter Lyons was Master of the Choristers at Wells Cathedral and Director of Music at Wells Cathedral School from 1954 to 1960 . Choral conductor James William Webb @-@ Jones , the father of Lyons 's wife , Bridget , whom Lyons married in the Cathedral , was Headmaster of Wells Cathedral School from 1955 to 1960 . Between 1996 and 2004 the appointed Organist and Master of the Choristers was Malcolm Archer . Since 2005 the organist has been Matthew Owens . Jonathan Vaughn was appointed assistant organist in 2007 , and the current organ scholars are Bryan Anderson , Alex Henshaw and Blandine Jacquet . 
 = = = Cathedral choir = = = 
 There has been a choir of boy choristers at Wells since 909 . Currently there are 18 boy choristers and 18 girl choristers , aged from eight to fourteen . The Vicars Choral was formed in the 12th century and the sung liturgy was provided by a traditional cathedral choir of men and boys until the formation of an additional choir of girls in 1994 . The boys and girls sing alternately with the Vicars Choral and are educated at Wells Cathedral School . 
 The Vicars Choral currently number twelve men , of whom three are choral scholars . Since 1348 the College of Vicars had its own accommodation in a quadrangle converted in the early 15th century to form Vicar 's Close . The Vicars Choral generally perform with the choristers , except on Wednesdays , when they sing alone , allowing them to present a different repertoire , in particular plainsong . 
 In December 2010 Wells Cathedral Choir was rated by Gramophone magazine as " the highest ranking choir with children in the world " . It continues to provide music for the liturgy at Sunday and weekday services . The choir has made many recordings and toured frequently , including performances in Beijing and Hong Kong in 2012 . Its repertoire ranges from the choral music of the Renaissance to recently commissioned works . 
 = = = Voluntary Choir = = = 
 The Wells Cathedral Voluntary Choir is a mixed adult choir of 30 members , formed in 1986 to sing at the midnight service on Christmas Eve , and invited to sing at several other special services . The choir now sings for about 50 services a year , when the Cathedral Choir is in recess or on tour , and spends one week a year singing as the " choir in residence " at another cathedral . Although primarily liturgical , the choir 's repertoire includes other forms of music , as well as performances at engagements such as weddings and funerals . 
 = = Bells = = 
 The bells at Wells Cathedral are the heaviest ring of ten bells in the world , the tenor bell ( the 10th and largest ) , known as Harewell , weighing 56 @.@ 25 long hundredweight ( 2 @,@ 858 kg ) . They are hung for full @-@ circle ringing in the English style of change ringing . These bells are now hung in the south @-@ west tower , although some were originally hung in the central tower . 
 = = Library = = 
 The library is above the eastern cloister and was built between 1430 and 1508 . Its collection is in three parts : early documents , housed in the Muniment Room ; the collection predating 1800 , housed in the Chained Library ; and the post @-@ 1800 collection , housed in the Reading Room . The chapter 's earlier collection was destroyed during the Reformation , so that the present library consists chiefly of early printed books , rather than medieval manuscripts . The earlier books , in the Chained Library , number 2 @,@ 800 volumes and give an indication of the variety of interests of the members of the cathedral chapter from the Reformation until 1800 . The focus of the collection is predominantly theology but there are volumes on science , medicine , exploration , and languages . Books of particular interest include Pliny 's Natural History printed in 1472 , an Atlas of the World by Abraham Ortelius , printed in 1606 and a set of the works of Aristotle that once belonged to Erasmus . The library is open to the public at appointed times during summer and presents a small exhibition of documents and books . 
 = = = Original records = = = 
 Three early registers of the dean and chapter of Wells – the Liber Albus I ( White Book ; R I ) , Liber Albus II ( R III ) and Liber <unk> ( Red Book ; R II , section i ) – were edited by W. H. B. Bird for the Historical Manuscripts Commissioners and published in 1907 . The books comprise , with some repetition , a cartulary of possessions of the cathedral , with grants of land dating back as early as the 8th century , well before the development of hereditary surnames in England ; they also comprise acts of the Dean and Chapter , and surveys of their estates , mostly in Somerset . 
 = = Precincts = = 
 The cathedral is situated adjacent to a large <unk> area , Cathedral Green , which is approached by three ancient gateways , Brown 's Gatehouse , Penniless Porch and Chain Gate . On the green is the 12th @-@ century Old Deanery , largely rebuilt in the late 15th century by Dean <unk> and remodelled by Dean Bathurst in the late 17th century . No longer the dean 's residence , it is used as offices for the diocese . 
 To the south of the cathedral is the moated Bishop 's Palace , begun around 1210 by Bishop Jocelin of Wells but dating mostly from the 1230s . In the 15th century Bishop Beckington added the north wing , which is now the bishop 's residence . It was restored and extended by Benjamin Ferrey between 1846 and 1854 . 
 To the north of the cathedral and connected to it by the Chain Gate is Vicars ' Close , a street planned in the 14th century and claimed to be the oldest purely residential street in Europe , with all but one of its original buildings surviving intact . Buildings in the close include the Vicars Hall and gateway at the south end , and the Vicars Chapel and Library at the north end . 
 The Liberty of St Andrew was the historic liberty and parish that encompassed the cathedral and the surrounding lands closely associated with it . 
 = = In the arts and popular culture = = 
 The English painter J. M. W. Turner visited Wells in 1795 , making sketches of the precinct and a water colour of the west front , now in the Tate gallery . Other artists whose paintings of the cathedral are in national collections are Albert Goodwin , John <unk> and Ken Howard . 
 The cathedral was used as an inspiration for Ken Follett 's novel The Pillars of the Earth and , with a heavily modified central tower , featured as the completed fictional Kingsbridge Cathedral at the end of the 2010 television adaptation of that novel . The interior of the cathedral was used for the Doctor Who episode , ' The Lazarus Experiment ' , while the exterior shots were filmed at Southwark Cathedral . 
 = Hurricane Fox ( 1952 ) = 
 Hurricane Fox was the strongest and deadliest tropical cyclone of the below average 1952 Atlantic hurricane season . The seventh tropical storm , sixth Atlantic hurricane , and the third major hurricane of the season , Fox was a small and intense Caribbean storm that developed northwest of Cartagena , Colombia , in the southern Caribbean Sea . It moved steadily northwest , intensifying to a tropical storm on October 21 . The next day , it rapidly strengthened into a hurricane and turned north . The cyclone attained peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) as it struck Cayo Guano del Este off the coast of Cienfuegos . Fox made landfall on Cuba at maximum intensity , producing peak gusts of 170 – 180 mph ( 275 – 290 km / h ) . It weakened over land , but it re @-@ strengthened as it turned east over the Bahamas . On October 26 , it weakened and took an erratic path , dissipating west @-@ southwest of Bermuda on October 28 . 
 Hurricane Fox was the second most intense hurricane to strike Cuba until Hurricane Michelle in the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season . It was originally believed to have been the second Category 4 hurricane in Cuba prior to the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis . At the time , the cyclone produced the fourth lowest pressure in a landfalling Cuban hurricane ; only the 1917 , 1924 , and 1932 hurricanes were more intense . Hurricane Fox killed at least 40 people across the island , causing severe crop damages in rural areas . The hurricane also ruined 30 percent of the tomato crops on Eleuthera in the Bahamas . Across the archipelago , Fox produced wind gusts in excess of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Total damages reached $ 10 million in Cuba . Fox was the second hurricane to hit land during the season , after Hurricane Able struck South Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 20 , a tropical depression formed in the Caribbean Sea , 170 miles ( 270 km ) northwest of Cartagena , Colombia . Fox is believed to have developed from a low pressure area in the Intertropical Convergence Zone , though it was not operationally detected until October 21 . The system steadily advanced northwest and it gradually intensified . On October 21 , a reconnaissance mission flew into the system , reporting sustained winds in excess of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . At the time , the system is estimated to have strengthened to Tropical Storm Fox . The cyclone continued to deepen , and it reached the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , 120 miles ( 200 km ) southeast of the Swan Islands , Honduras . The hurricane rapidly intensified and turned north on October 23 , strengthening to attain winds which correspond to a modern @-@ day major hurricane , a storm of Category 3 status or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Late on October 24 , the cyclone struck the small island of Cayo Guano del Estes in the Archipelago de los <unk> , south of Cienfuegos . Maximum sustained winds were near 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , and the island 's weather station recorded a minimum pressure of 934 mbar ( 27 @.@ 59 inHg ) . The cyclone crossed the mainland coast of Cuba west of Cienfuegos , and it weakened as it crossed the island . 
 Early on October 25 , Hurricane Fox entered the Atlantic Ocean . It crossed central Andros and turned east across the Bahamas . On October 26 , the hurricane briefly re @-@ intensified as it crossed Cat Island . The center became ill @-@ defined , and the cyclone quickly weakened . It turned north and then took an erratic northeast turn as it weakened to a tropical storm on October 27 . The system gained extratropical characteristics as it merged with a polar frontal boundary , and it dissipated west @-@ southwest of Bermuda on October 28 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Advisories , along with coordination between the National Observatory at Havana and U.S. Weather Bureau , were credited for the reduced deaths in Cuba . Weather observations were also readily available from Cuban meteorological stations . On October 25 , the cyclone 's hurricane force winds were expected to remain off the Florida east coast , although gale @-@ force winds were anticipated from the Florida Keys to Palm Beach , Florida . Accordingly , storm warnings were issued from Key West , Florida to Vero Beach , Florida . Military aircraft were transported to safer locations , while watercraft were stored in harbors and rivers . Hotels and resorts were boarded up on the barrier islands . The Bahamas received warnings well in advance of the hurricane . The hurricane turned quickly to the east , which reduced the threat to Bimini , Cat Cay , Grand Bahama , and the Abaco Islands . 
 = = Impact = = 
 An aircraft flight into the storm experienced severe turbulence , and wind driven rain reportedly stripped paint from the plane 's surfaces . 
 As a result of the storm , 70 people were injured in Cuba . Severe damage to properties and crops occurred in rural areas . In <unk> , 30 structures were destroyed , while a Japanese freighter was washed ashore on the reefs near Cayo Breton . The crew survived , though another ship was disabled during the storm . The fringes of the storm produced heavy rainfall in Cuba , flooding low areas and causing several rivers to overflow their banks . Strong winds uprooted large trees in Santa Isabel , and winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) were reported in the city of Cienfuegos . In Aguada de <unk> , 600 buildings were demolished , while 36 of 261 sugar mills across the island were damaged by Hurricane Fox . In all , Hurricane Fox killed 40 people in Cuba and caused $ 10 million in damages . 
 The cyclone produced peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) in Nassau , Bahamas , causing no reported damage . Crops were damaged by high winds and heavy precipitation on Eleuthera . About 30 percent of the tomato crops were destroyed during the storm . A man who attempted to secretly seed and weaken the storm was missing and presumed dead after his plane disappeared off Miami , Florida . Multiple searches by the Coast Guard were unsuccessful . 
 In the early 1950s , Atlantic tropical cyclones were named via the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . Hurricane Fox of 1952 was the final Atlantic tropical cyclone to be designated with this naming system , and a female list of tropical cyclone names was utilized in the 1953 Atlantic hurricane season . After the stronger 1917 Pinar del Río hurricane , Hurricane Fox was Cuba 's second most intense landfall until Hurricane Michelle struck the island in 2001 . Originally , the 1917 hurricane was believed to have been a Category 3 hurricane prior to the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis , which made Fox the second Category 4 landfall after the 1932 Cuba Hurricane . At the time , Fox was the fourth most intense hurricane to strike Cuba in terms of atmospheric pressure ; only the 1917 , 1924 , and 1932 storms were stronger at one point in their life spans . 
 = Albert Stanley , 1st Baron Ashfield = 
 Albert Henry Stanley , 1st Baron Ashfield , PC , TD ( 8 August 1874 – 4 November 1948 ) , born Albert Henry <unk> , was a British @-@ American businessman who was managing director , then chairman of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) from 1910 to 1933 and chairman of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) from 1933 to 1947 . 
 Although born in Britain , his early career was in the United States , where at a young age , he held senior positions in the developing tramway systems of Detroit and New Jersey . In 1898 , he served in the United States Navy during the short Spanish – American War . 
 In 1907 , his management skills led to his recruitment by the UERL , which was struggling through a financial crisis that threatened its existence . He quickly integrated the company 's management and used advertising and public relations to improve profits . As managing director of the UERL from 1910 , he led the take @-@ over of competing underground railway companies and bus and tram operations to form an integrated transport operation known as the Combine . 
 He was Member of Parliament for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne from December 1916 to January 1920 and was President of the Board of Trade between December 1916 and May 1919 , reorganising the board and establishing specialist departments for various industries . He returned to the UERL and then chaired it and its successor the LPTB during the organisation 's greatest period of expansion between the two World Wars , making it a world @-@ respected organisation considered an exemplar of the best form of public administration . 
 = = Early life and career in United States = = 
 Stanley was born on 8 August 1874 , in New Normanton , Derbyshire , England , the son of Henry and Elizabeth <unk> ( née Twigg ) . His father worked as a coachbuilder for the Pullman Company . In 1880 , the family emigrated to Detroit in the United States , where he worked at Pullman 's main factory . During the 1890s , the family changed its name to " Stanley " . 
 In 1888 , at the age of 14 , Stanley left school and went to work as an office boy at the Detroit Street Railways Company , which ran a horse @-@ drawn tram system . He continued to study at evening school and worked long hours , often from 7 @.@ 30 am to 10 @.@ 00 pm . His abilities were recognised early and Stanley was given responsibility for scheduling the services and preparing the timetables when he was 17 . Following the expansion and electrification of the tramway , he became General Superintendent of the company in 1894 . 
 Stanley was a naval reservist and , during the brief Spanish – American War of 1898 , he served in the United States Navy as a <unk> in the crew of USS Yosemite alongside many others from Detroit . In 1903 , Stanley moved to New Jersey to become assistant general manager of the street railway department of the Public Service Corporation of New Jersey . The company had been struggling , but Stanley quickly improved its organisation and was promoted to general manager of the department in January 1904 . In January 1907 , he became general manager of the whole corporation , running a network of almost 1 @,@ 000 route miles and 25 @,@ 000 employees . 
 In 1904 , Stanley married Grace Lowrey ( 1878 – 1962 ) of New York . The couple had two daughters : Marian Stanley ( born 1906 ) and Grace Stanley ( born 1907 ) . 
 = = Career in Britain = = 
 = = = Rescue of the Underground Electric Railways Company = = = 
 On 20 February 1907 , Sir George Gibb , managing director of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) , appointed Stanley as its general manager . The UERL was the holding company of four underground railways in central London . Three of these ( the District Railway , the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway and the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ) were already in operation and the fourth ( the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ) was about to open . The UERL had been established by American financier Charles Yerkes and much of the finance and equipment had been brought from the United States , so Stanley 's experience of managing urban transit systems in that country made him an ideal candidate for the position . The cost of constructing three new lines in just a few years had put the company in a precarious monetary position and income was not sufficient to pay the interest on its loans . Stanley 's responsibility was to restore its finances . 
 Only recently promoted to general manager of the New Jersey system , Stanley had been reluctant to take the position in London and took it for one year only , provided he would be free to return to America at the end of the year . He told the company 's senior managers that the company was almost bankrupt and got resignation letters from each of them post @-@ dated by six months . Through better integration of the separate companies within the group and by improving advertising and public relations , he was quickly able to turn the fortunes of the company around , while the company 's chairman , Sir Edgar Speyer , renegotiated the debt repayments . In 1908 , Stanley joined the company 's board and , in 1910 , he became the managing director . 
 With Commercial Manager Frank Pick , Stanley devised a plan to increase passenger numbers : developing the " UNDERGROUND " brand and establishing a joint booking system and co @-@ ordinated fares throughout all of London 's underground railways , including those not controlled by the UERL . In July 1910 , Stanley took the integration of the group further , when he persuaded previously reluctant American investors to approve the merger of the three tube railways into a single company . Further consolidation came with the UERL 's take @-@ over of London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) in 1912 and the Central London Railway and the City and South London Railway on 1 January 1913 . Of London 's underground railways , only the Metropolitan Railway ( and its subsidiaries the Great Northern & City Railway and the East London Railway ) and the Waterloo & City Railway remained outside of the Underground Group 's control . The LGOC was the dominant bus operator in the capital and its high profitability ( it paid dividends of 18 per cent compared with Underground Group companies ' dividends of 1 to 3 per cent ) subsidised the rest of the group . Stanley further expanded the group through shareholdings in London United Tramways and Metropolitan Electric Tramways and the foundation of bus builder AEC . The much enlarged group became known as the Combine . On 29 July 1914 , Stanley was knighted in recognition of his services to transport . 
 Stanley also planned extensions of the existing Underground Group 's lines into new , undeveloped districts beyond the central area to encourage the development of new suburbs and new commuter traffic . The first of the extensions , the Bakerloo line to Queen 's Park and Watford Junction , opened between 1915 and 1917 . The other expansion plans were postponed during World War I. 
 = = = Government = = = 
 In 1915 , Stanley was given a wartime role as Director @-@ General of Mechanical Transport at the Ministry of Munitions . In 1916 , he was selected by Prime Minister David Lloyd George to become President of the Board of Trade . Lloyd George had previously promised this role to Sir Max Aitken ( later Lord Beaverbrook ) , Member of Parliament for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . At that time , a member of parliament taking a cabinet post for the first time had to resign and stand for re @-@ election in a by @-@ election . Aitken had made arrangements to do this before Lloyd George decided to appoint Stanley to the position instead . Aitken , a friend of Stanley , was persuaded to continue with the resignation in exchange for a peerage so that Stanley could take his seat . Stanley became President of the Board of Trade and was made a Privy Counsellor on 13 December 1916 . He was elected to parliament unopposed on 23 December 1916 as a Conservative Unionist . At 42 years old he was the youngest member of Lloyd George 's coalition government . 
 At the 1918 general election , Stanley was opposed by Frederick Lister , the President of the National Federation of Discharged and <unk> Sailors and Soldiers , in a challenge over the government 's policy on war pensions . With the backing of Beaverbrook , who visited his former constituency to speak on his behalf , Stanley won the election . 
 Stanley 's achievements in office were mixed . He established various specialist departments to manage output in numerous industries and reorganised the structure of the Board . However , despite previous successes with unions , his negotiations were ineffective . Writing to Leader of the House of Commons and future Prime Minister Andrew Bonar Law in January 1919 , Lloyd George described Stanley as having " all the <unk> of Runciman and that is apt to take in innocent persons like you and me ... Stanley , to put it quite bluntly , is a funk , and there is no room for <unk> in the modern world . " Stanley left the Board of Trade and the government in May 1919 and returned to the UERL . 
 = = = Return to the Underground = = = 
 Back at the Underground Group , Stanley returned to his role as managing director and also became its chairman , replacing Lord George Hamilton . In the 1920 New Year Honours , he was created Baron Ashfield , of Southwell in the County of Nottingham , ending his term as an MP . He and Pick reactivated their expansion plans , and one of the most significant periods in the organisation 's history began , subsequently considered to be its heyday and sometimes called its " Golden Age " . 
 The Central London Railway was extended to Ealing Broadway in 1920 , and the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway was extended to Hendon in 1923 and to Edgware in 1924 . The City and South London Railway was reconstructed with larger diameter tunnels to take modern trains between 1922 and 1924 and extended to Morden in 1926 . In addition , a programme of modernising many of the Underground 's busiest central London stations was started ; providing them with escalators to replace lifts . New rolling stock was gradually introduced with automatic sliding doors along the length of the carriage instead of manual end gates . By the middle of the 1920s , the organisation had expanded to such an extent that a large , new headquarters building was constructed at 55 Broadway over St. James 's Park station . 
 Starting in the early 1920s , competition from numerous small bus companies , nicknamed " pirates " because they operated irregular routes and plundered the LGOC 's passengers , eroded the profitability of the Combine 's bus operations and had a negative impact on the profitability of the whole group . Ashfield lobbied the government for regulation of transport services in the London area . Starting in 1923 , a series of legislative initiatives were made in this direction , with Ashfield and Labour London County Councillor ( later MP and Minister of Transport ) Herbert Morrison , at the forefront of debates as to the level of regulation and public control under which transport services should be brought . Ashfield aimed for regulation that would give the UERL group protection from competition and allow it to take substantive control of the LCC 's tram system ; Morrison preferred full public ownership . After seven years of false starts , a bill was announced at the end of 1930 for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , a public corporation that would take control of the UERL , the Metropolitan Railway and all bus and tram operators within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area . As Ashfield had done with shareholders in 1910 over the consolidation of the three UERL controlled tube lines , he used his persuasiveness to obtain their agreements to the government buy @-@ out of their stock . 
 I have read this bill carefully , and I beg you to accept that I know what I am talking about . You cannot conceive I would be guilty of such folly as to suggest to you in a matter in which my whole life has been wrapped , that you should transfer your interests to a board subject to political interference , that could play ducks and drakes with your investments . Acts of Parliament are not treated like scraps of paper . They are scrupulously observed by all parties . I have promised the Minister my support . You may fail to support me , but in that event you will have to find somebody else to manage your undertakings . I have pledged my word and I am not going back on it . 
 The Board was a compromise – public ownership but not full nationalisation – and came into existence on 1 July 1933 . Ashfield served as the organisation 's chairman from its establishment in 1933 on an annual salary of £ 12 @,@ 500 ( approximately £ 600 @,@ 000 today ) , with Pick as Chief Executive . 
 The opening of extensions of the Piccadilly line to Uxbridge , Hounslow and Cockfosters followed in 1933 . On the Metropolitan Railway , Ashfield and Pick instigated a rationalisation of services . The barely used and loss @-@ making Brill and Verney Junction branches beyond Aylesbury were closed in 1935 and 1936 . Freight services were reduced and electrification of the remaining steam operated sections of the line was planned . In 1935 , the availability of government @-@ backed loans to stimulate the flagging economy allowed Ashfield and Pick to promote system @-@ wide improvements under the New Works Programme for 1935 – 1940 , including the transfer of the Metropolitan line 's Stanmore services to the Bakerloo line in 1939 , the Northern line 's Northern Heights project and extension of the Central line to Ongar and Denham . 
 Following a reorganisation of public transportation by the Labour government of Clement Attlee , the LPTB was scheduled to be nationalised along with the majority of British railway , bus , road haulage and waterway concerns from 1 January 1948 . In advance of this , Ashfield resigned from the LPTB at the end of October 1947 and joined the board of the new British Transport Commission which was to operate all of the nationalised public transport systems . At nationalisation , the LPTB was to be abolished and replaced by the London Transport Executive . Lord Latham , a member of the LPTB and the incoming chairman of the new organisation , acted as temporary chairman for the last two months of the LPTB 's existence . 
 = = = Other activities = = = 
 In addition to his management of London Underground and brief political career , Ashfield held many directorships in transport undertakings and industry . He helped establish the Institute of Transport in 1919 / 20 and was one of its first presidents . He was a director of the Mexican Railway Company and two railway companies in Cuba and a member of the 1931 Royal Commission on Railways and Transportation in Canada . He was one of two government directors of the British <unk> Corporation , its chairman from 1924 and was involved in the creation of Imperial Chemical Industries in 1926 , of which he was subsequently a non @-@ executive director . Ashfield was a director of the Midland Bank , Amalgamated Anthracite Collieries and chairman of Albany Ward Theatres , Associated Provincial Picture Houses , and Provincial Cinematograph Theatres . 
 During World War I , he was Colonel of the Territorial Force Engineer and Railway Staff Corps and was Honorary Colonel of the Royal Artillery 's 84th Light Anti Aircraft Regiment during World War II . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Biographers of Stanley characterise him as having an " immensely active mind , and a strong sense of public duty " and a " great charm of manner and a sense of humour which concealed an almost ruthless determination " that made him a " formidable negotiator " . His " intuitive understanding of his fellow men " gave him " presence , which allowed him to dominate meetings effortlessly " and " inspired loyalty , devotion even , among his staff " . He was " a dapper ladies ' man , something of a playboy tycoon , who was always smartly turned out and enjoyed moving in high society " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ashfield died on 4 November 1948 at 31 Queen 's Gate , South Kensington . During his near forty @-@ year tenure as managing director and chairman of the Underground Group and the LPTB , Ashfield oversaw the transformation of a collection of unconnected , competing railway , bus and tram companies , some in severe financial difficulties , into a coherent and well managed transport organisation , internationally respected for its technical expertise and design style . Transport historian Christian Wolmar considers it " almost impossible to exaggerate the high regard in which LT was held during its all too brief heyday , attracting official visitors from around the world eager to learn the lessons of its success and apply them in their own countries . " " It represented the apogee of a type of confident public administration ... with a reputation that any state organisation today would envy ... only made possible by the brilliance of its two famous leaders , Ashfield and Pick . " 
 A memorial to Ashfield was erected at 55 Broadway in 1950 and a blue plaque was placed at his home , 43 South Street , Mayfair in 1984 . A large office building at London Underground 's Lillie Bridge Depot is named Ashfield House in his honour . It stands to the south of the District line tracks a short distance to the east of West Kensington station and is also visible from West Cromwell Road ( A4 ) . 
 = Mercury @-@ Atlas 8 = 
 Mercury @-@ Atlas 8 ( MA @-@ 8 ) was the fifth United States manned space mission , part of NASA 's Mercury program . Astronaut Walter M. Schirra , Jr . , orbited the Earth six times in the Sigma 7 spacecraft on October 3 , 1962 , in a nine @-@ hour flight focused mainly on technical evaluation rather than on scientific experimentation . This was the longest U.S. manned orbital flight yet achieved in the Space Race , though well behind the several @-@ day record set by the Soviet Vostok 3 earlier in the year . It confirmed the Mercury spacecraft 's durability ahead of the one @-@ day Mercury @-@ Atlas 9 mission that followed in 1963 . 
 Planning began for the third U.S. orbital mission in February 1962 , aiming for a six @-@ or @-@ seven @-@ orbit flight to build on the previous three @-@ orbit missions . NASA officially announced the mission on June 27 , and the flight plan was finalized in late July . The mission focused on engineering tests rather than on scientific experimentation . The mission finally launched on the morning of October 3 , having been delayed two weeks because of problems with the Atlas booster . A series of minor booster problems during launch and a faulty temperature controller in Schirra 's pressure suit were the only technical problems noted during the flight . The spacecraft orbited in both automated and passive flight modes for prolonged periods while the pilot monitored it and carried out some minor scientific experiments . After six orbits , the capsule landed in the Pacific Ocean half a mile from the recovery carrier , and was hoisted aboard for Schirra to disembark . 
 The scientific results of the mission were mixed . The astronaut returned healthy after nine hours of confinement in a low @-@ gravity environment . Observation of the Earth 's surface proved unproductive , however , because of heavy cloud cover and bad photographic exposures . The public and political reaction was muted compared with that of earlier missions , as the Cuban Missile Crisis soon eclipsed the Space Race in the news . The mission was a technical success : all the engineering objectives were completed without significant malfunctions , and the spacecraft used even less fuel than expected . This confirmed the capabilities of the Mercury spacecraft and allowed NASA to plan with confidence for a day @-@ long flight , MA @-@ 9 , which had been an early goal of the Mercury program . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 = = Mission parameters = = 
 Mass : 1 @,@ 964 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 330 lb ) 
 <unk> : 156 km 
 Apogee : 285 km 
 Inclination : 32 @.@ 5 ° 
 Period : 88 @.@ 91 min 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1962 , both the United States and the Soviet Union had flown two solo spaceflights in the Space Race . There was a widespread perception , however , that the United States was falling behind ; its two missions had been suborbital and had lasted only a few minutes . The Soviet missions had both orbited the Earth , and the second , Vostok 2 , had remained in orbit for a full day . Using the new high @-@ powered Atlas booster , the coming orbital Mercury missions were expected to reduce the gap between the two countries . 
 NASA announced the first two orbital missions at the end of November 1961 , shortly after the Mercury @-@ Atlas 5 ( MA @-@ 5 ) test flight , which had carried a chimpanzee and twice orbited the Earth . MA @-@ 6 was planned as the first orbital flight , with John Glenn as the primary crew and Scott Carpenter as his backup . The follow @-@ up mission , MA @-@ 7 was to be crewed by Deke Slayton , with Wally Schirra as his backup . In February 1962 , the first draft planning began for MA @-@ 8 , the third orbital mission , with a goal of " six or seven " orbits , as an intermediate step towards a day @-@ long 18 @-@ orbit flight . The decision to move to six orbits rather than seven was driven by the mission rules on contingency recovery operations ; a seventh orbit would have required significant additional recovery forces to be able to reach the capsule anywhere on its trajectory within eighteen hours . The six @-@ orbit profile had other effects on the recovery plans ; the optimum recovery point was moved to the Pacific Ocean , rather than the Atlantic . 
 On March 15 , 1962 , NASA announced that Slayton was medically unfit and would be replaced by Scott Carpenter as the prime crew for the MA @-@ 7 mission . The decision to replace him with Carpenter , rather than his official backup Schirra , was justified by the large amount of training Carpenter had managed while preparing for the long @-@ delayed MA @-@ 6 mission . After the success of the MA @-@ 6 and MA @-@ 7 missions , both of three orbits , pressure began to mount to fly an extended mission . On June 27 , 1962 , NASA first announced its plan for the upcoming MA @-@ 8 mission , which would last for " as many as six " orbits . Schirra was named as the prime crew for MA @-@ 8 , with Gordon Cooper as his backup , repeating the backup @-@ one fly @-@ one pattern set by the previous two missions . The pattern would be repeated for MA @-@ 9 , flown by Cooper , and the planned but cancelled MA @-@ 10 , which would have been flown by Cooper 's backup , Alan Shepard . 
 The Soviet Union had not flown any further flights by the time MA @-@ 7 landed , putting both sides of the Space Race even at two orbital flights each . While the Soviets had flown for longer , the Mercury program was gaining momentum , with a six @-@ orbit mission currently planned and press speculation about a one @-@ day mission . However , in mid @-@ August , the Soviet Union launched two orbital missions , Vostok 3 and Vostok 4 , within a day of each other . The two craft were in intersecting orbits , but despite much speculation did not attempt to rendezvous ; they completed missions of 64 and 48 orbits respectively , just under four and three days , landing within a few minutes of each other on August 15 . This was far ahead of anything currently planned for Mercury , and NASA quickly considered the prospect of modifying a capsule to have an active manoeuvring and rendezvous capability , using technology being developed for the Gemini program . However , after examining the time and safety implications of this proposal , it was decided to abandon the idea and continue with the planned six @-@ orbit mission . 
 = = = Mission objectives = = = 
 The original MA @-@ 8 flight plan was issued on July 27 ; although it was revised slightly in August and September , it remained broadly unchanged until launch . This was an improvement on the situation with MA @-@ 7 , which had had frequent and extensive alterations , making it difficult for the pilot to train efficiently . The aim was for the flight to be an engineering @-@ oriented mission , focusing on the operation of the spacecraft rather than on scientific experimentation , to help pave the way for a future long @-@ duration mission . Schirra chose the name Sigma 7 for the capsule in reflection of this <unk> using the mathematical symbol for summation as appropriate for an " engineering evaluation " , and the " 7 " to refer to the seven Mercury astronauts . 
 The mission objectives involved evaluating the performance of the spacecraft over six orbits , as well as the effect of prolonged microgravity on the pilot . The specific spacecraft systems would also be evaluated and tested , and the worldwide tracking and communications network would be tested to see how well it would stand up in an extended mission . The flight control experiments included manually turning the spacecraft around , yaw and pitch manoeuvres to determine how easy it was to control the spacecraft attitude , realignment of the onboard gyroscopes in flight , and leaving the spacecraft to drift on @-@ orbit . 
 Four non @-@ engineering scientific experiments were planned , two requiring the active involvement of the astronaut and two completely passive . The first involved the astronaut watching for four high @-@ powered flares while passing over Woomera , Australia , and for a xenon arc lamp while passing over Durban , South Africa . The second involved two sets of photographs to be taken using a 70mm Hasselblad camera as well as conventional color photographs of the Earth from orbit . Focusing on geological features and cloud patterns , photographs were to be taken through a set of colored filters provided by the U. S. Weather Bureau . The latter were intended to help calibrate the spectral reflectivity of clouds and surface features , which in turn would help improve the cameras on future weather satellites . The passive experimentation packages were two sets of radiation @-@ sensitive photographic films , from the Goddard Space Flight Center and the U. S. Navy School of Aviation Medicine , and a set of eight different experimental ablative materials attached to the outside of the spacecraft to test their performance during re @-@ entry . 
 = = = Spacecraft modifications = = = 
 The spacecraft and booster were almost identical to those used on the two preceding Mercury orbital flights . The spacecraft had heating blankets removed from the <unk> motors , to save weight , and a <unk> bomb was added . This would be ejected at the time the main parachute was deployed , and would help recovery crews find the spacecraft after it landed . A number of modifications were made to the reaction control system , and the communications equipment was upgraded . 
 The Atlas booster had been modified since the previous flight , and now included baffled fuel injectors and a new hypergolic fuel igniter instead of the original pyrotechnic igniter . This would completely eliminate problems with combustion instability and allow the booster to be released immediately upon attaining full thrust instead of being held on the pad for a few moments . 
 = = Mission preparation = = 
 The capsule built for the mission , Mercury Spacecraft No. 16 , had been delivered to Cape Canaveral on January 16 , 1962 . The Atlas LV @-@ 3B booster assigned to the mission , No. 113 @-@ D , was accepted by NASA at the Convair plant on July 27 and delivered on August 8 . In late July , the launch date was set for September 18 , but delays with the Atlas booster 's delivery and a series of technical concerns with the safety of the rocket motors caused it to be pushed back several weeks . Some of this had to do with the modified propulsion system , but also concern over Atlas ICBM tests earlier in the year . There had been no Atlas failures caused by the <unk> for almost three years , but in late 1961 @-@ early 1962 , two static firing tests experienced pump failure and explosion of the engine , followed by an Atlas missile in April 1962 that exploded almost immediately at liftoff due to a failure of the sustainer <unk> . Analysis of these incidents failed to locate any specific cause for the pump explosions , but all of them occurred when running untested hardware modifications and during movement of the sustainer inlet valve to the flight @-@ ready open position . It was thus decided to give MA @-@ 8 's booster a thorough checkout before it could be deemed flight @-@ worthy . On September 6 , the tests were scheduled to continue until September 24 , which allowed for a probable launch on October 3 . A static firing test on the pad would expose the sustainer <unk> to the failure mode in question . This was carried out on September 8 and the booster reported as ready for assembly on September 18 . 
 Concerns had been raised that the radiation belt produced in orbit by the recent Operation Dominic nuclear tests would be dangerous to manned space missions , but an extensive study announced in early September declared that it was safe to fly . While the outside of the capsule was expected to receive a dosage of around 500 <unk> , the study concluded that shielding and the effect of the spacecraft structure would reduce this to around 8 <unk> experienced by the astronaut , well within established tolerance limits . 
 Schirra began training for the mission in early July , logging 29 hours in simulators as well as 31 hours in the spacecraft itself . This included multiple systems tests and three simulated flights , culminating in a six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour simulated flight on September 29 , with the spacecraft and booster fully stacked on the pad . Highlights of the training period included a visit from President John F. Kennedy on September 11 . 
 The mission was reported as ready to go — " except for the weather " — on October 1 . The major concern with the weather was a major tropical storm in the Atlantic , though there were also worries over a series of typhoons in the Pacific which could pose a problem for recovery operations . On the evening of October 2 , the decision was taken to launch the next morning . 
 = = Launch = = 
 Schirra was awakened at 1 : 40 am ET on the morning of October 3 , and after a hearty breakfast — including a bluefish he had speared the day before — and a brief physical he left for the launchpad at around 4 am . He entered the spacecraft at 4 : 41 am ET , where he found a steak sandwich left for him in the ' glove compartment ' , and began the pre @-@ launch checks . The launch countdown proceeded as planned until 6 : 15 , when there was a 15 @-@ minute hold to allow the Canary Islands tracking station to repair a radar set . The countdown resumed at 6 : 30 and proceeded to booster ignition with no further delays . <unk> proceeded smoothly , but there was a momentary clockwise roll transient at liftoff , which reached 7 @.@ 83 ° per second and approached 80 % of the required threshold to trigger the ASIS abort system . This was later identified as being due to a slight misalignment of the main engines and was kept under control by the booster 's vernier thrusters . 
 Around three and a half minutes into the flight , Deke Slayton , the capsule communicator , cut in to ask Schirra " Are you a turtle today ? " Schirra , nonplussed , announced that he was switching to the on @-@ board voice recorder ( rather than the broadcast radio circuit ) to leave his answer ; the mission communications transcript noted this as " [ correct answer recorded ] " . The " turtle club " was a recurrent joke among the astronaut corps ; on being challenged with this question , the correct response was " you bet your sweet ass I am " , with a failure to give the password being punishable by buying a round of drinks . Schirra noted later that he " wasn 't ready for all the world to hear it " , and chose to use the on @-@ board recorder to avoid saying the answer over the air . 
 Because the Atlas was flying on a slightly lofted trajectory , the booster engines cut off 2 seconds earlier than planned , but the sustainer engine burned for about 10 seconds longer than intended , giving an extra 15 feet per second ( 4 @.@ 6 m / s ) of velocity and putting the spacecraft in a slightly higher orbit than planned . Initial analysis of the trajectory confirmed that the capsule could remain in a stable orbit for at least seven orbits , ensuring there would be no need for an early de @-@ orbit . 
 = = Orbital activities = = 
 After separating from the Atlas booster , Schirra stabilized the spacecraft and slowly cartwheeled into the correct attitude ; he deliberately kept the motion slow to conserve fuel , and was able to position the capsule using half a percent of his fuel reserves . He briefly tracked the spent booster , which was rotating slowly past , but made no attempt to move towards it . As the spacecraft moved across the Atlantic , he turned his attention to testing manual control of the spacecraft , which he found sloppy compared to the fly @-@ by @-@ wire system . 
 Crossing over the eastern coast of Africa , he began to feel overheated ; this problem was also apparent to the ground controllers , who were having a debate with the flight surgeon over whether it was safe to continue or if the mission should be ended after the first orbit . The flight director , Christopher Kraft , followed the surgeon 's advice to see if the problem would settle , and gave the go for a second orbit . Schirra eventually stabilized the problem over time , slowly dialing the suit 's control knob to a high cooling setting ; he compared the heat to that of " mowing a lawn in Texas " . 
 Over Australia , Schirra watched for a flare launched from the ground , but it was occluded by clouds ; he , was however , able to see lightning and the lit outline of Brisbane . Through the night pass over the Pacific , he tested the capsule 's on @-@ board periscope , though he found it difficult to use and quickly covered it up as soon as the sun rose . Crossing over Mexico , he reported that he was in " chimp configuration " , with the capsule running entirely on automatic without any input from the pilot , and as he began his second orbit began testing a yaw maneuver using the Earth through the main window as a reference , rather than via the much @-@ maligned periscope . 
 On the second orbit , he confirmed the existence of Glenn 's " fireflies " , the shower of small bright particles first reported on MA @-@ 6 , and during the night section practiced yaw manoeuvres using first the Moon and then known stars as reference points . The second proved difficult to work with , as the small windows of the Mercury capsule gave a very limited field of view , making it hard to identify constellations . Travelling across the Pacific , he again fell back into automatic flight , chatting with Gus Grissom at the Hawaiian tracking station about the qualities of the manual control system . 
 As he began the third orbit , Schirra disconnected the spacecraft 's gyroscopes , turned off part of the electrical power system , and let the capsule drift . He took advantage of this quiet period to test his spatial awareness and motor control , which he found was broadly unaffected by weightlessness , and to eat a light meal . He powered the spacecraft back up over the Indian Ocean , and continued over the Pacific . At Hawaii , he was given clearance for a full six @-@ orbit mission , and as he crossed over towards California shut down the electrical power for a second period of drifting flight , during which he occupied himself taking photographs with the onboard camera . 
 On the fourth orbit , drifting in an inverted spacecraft with the Earth ' above ' him , Schirra continued his photography and attempted — unsuccessfully — to spot the Echo 1 satellite while passing over East Africa . As he approached California , he spoke briefly to John Glenn in a two @-@ minute conversation broadcast live across the United States on radio and television . Problems began to recur with the pressure suit , with water condensing on the faceplate ; Schirra , concerned about the internal temperature , avoided opening the visor to clean it for fear that the suit temperature would misbehave again . 
 By the fifth orbit , Schirra had begun to relax , commenting that it was the first rest he had had since December 1961 . He used a small bungee cord exercise device for " a little bit of stretching " , before dropping into manual attitude control , where he reported a sudden burst of oversteering and high fuel use . Over the Atlantic he returned to observation and photography ; he failed to spot the planned high @-@ power light near Durban , in South Africa , due to cloud cover , but did make out the brightly lit city of Port Elizabeth . Over the Philippines , he reported on his fuel status ; after four and a half of the planned six orbits , he still had eighty percent remaining in both manual and automatic fuel tanks . Passing over Quito , Ecuador , towards the end of his fifth orbit , Schirra was asked by the tracking station if he had any message to pass on " in Spanish to the fellows down here " , and he made some comments on how beautiful the country appeared from orbit , ending with a cheery " Buenos Dias , y 'all ! " Schirra later noted that he was " furious " at this point — he was preparing for re @-@ entry and didn 't want to be distracted with making public statements . 
 The sixth orbit was dominated by preparations for re @-@ entry , though Schirra was able to take a last set of photographs of South America and try another set of spatial @-@ orientation tests . He armed the <unk> passing over the western Pacific , and fired the first one at 8 : 52 mission elapsed time . The automatic control system held the capsule " steady as a rock " during this period , though after the <unk> had stopped firing Schirra noted that the system had burned almost a quarter of its fuel in the process . 
 = = Reentry and recovery = = 
 As the spacecraft continued towards re @-@ entry after the de @-@ orbit burn , Schirra used the high @-@ power thrusters to put the capsule in the correct orientation , noting that the attitude control felt " sloppy " . He then enabled the rate stabilization control system , an automatic control method which used up fuel at a very high rate , to maintain control during re @-@ entry ; this was a specific engineering request , and it dismayed Schirra to see the fuel he had <unk> for six orbits be used so quickly . 
 The local recovery group in the prime target area , in the central Pacific , consisted of an aircraft carrier , USS Kearsarge , in the center of the landing area , with three destroyers strung out along the orbital path . Four search aircraft were also assigned to the area , and three recovery helicopters were based aboard Kearsarge . 
 Kearsarge picked up the capsule on radar while still 200 miles ( 320 km ) from landing ; 90 miles ( 140 km ) further up the landing path , the destroyer USS Renshaw reported a sonic boom as it passed overhead . At 40 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) , Schirra deployed the drogue parachute , and then the main parachute at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . The landing was surprisingly precise , 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) from the target point and 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) from Kearsarge , and Schirra joked that he was on course for the recovery carrier 's " number three elevator " . The capsule hit the water , sank and bobbed to the surface again , righting itself after about 30 seconds . Three pararescue swimmers were dropped by one of the helicopters to help him climb out , but Schirra radioed that he would prefer to be towed to the carrier , and a whaleboat from Kearsarge was sent with a line . 
 Forty minutes after landing , Sigma 7 was hoisted aboard Kearsarge ; five minutes later , Schirra blew the explosive hatch and climbed out to a waiting crowd . After doing this , examinations showed clear bruising on his hand from operating the heavy ejector switch , which he felt provided an important vindication for fellow pilot Gus Grissom 's hatch expulsion accident during the Liberty Bell 7 mission . Grissom had maintained that the hatch blew without his input ; the fact that he had no bruising was seen as evidence that he had not blown the hatch early and sunk his capsule , but that it was a mechanical malfunction . Schirra remained aboard for three days of medical tests and debriefing before disembarking , while the spacecraft was offloaded at Midway Island and transferred to an aircraft for further transport . It was returned to Cape Canaveral for analysis , with the long @-@ term intention of putting it on permanent display . 
 The spent Atlas booster re @-@ entered the atmosphere on October 4 , the day after the launch , and burned up . After display at the U.S. Space & Rocket Center and Johnson Space Center , the capsule is currently displayed at the United States Astronaut Hall of Fame near Titusville , Florida . 
 = = Post @-@ flight = = 
 The post @-@ flight analysis reported no major malfunctions — the only troublesome anomaly being the suit temperature controls — and all the engineering objectives of the mission were deemed successfully completed . The fuel @-@ conservation measures were found to have worked particularly well , with even less fuel than anticipated being consumed ; despite the technical changes , the official report gave full credit for this to the pilot . The medical analysis found no significant physiological effects from nine hours of weightlessness , and noted that Schirra had received no significant radiation exposure . Analysis of the radiation @-@ sensitive plates confirmed that there had been a very low radioactive flux inside the spacecraft , and the six ablative materials tested were all deemed broadly satisfactory despite some difficulty comparing them to each other . 
 Scientifically , the light @-@ observation experiments were unsuccessful , as both target locations were covered by thick cloud cover . However , Schirra was able to view lightning near Woomera , and noted the lights of a city a few hundred miles from Durban . The filtered photography for the Weather Bureau worked as planned , with 15 photographs taken ; the conventional color photography was less successful , with several of the 14 photographs unusable due to overexposure or excess cloud cover . In the end , the conventional photographs were not used for scientific examination due to these problems . Schirra noted that the sheer amount of cloud coverage , worldwide , could provide problems for future activity of this kind ; however , Africa , and the south @-@ western United States , were perfectly clear . <unk> medical examination of Schirra disclosed nothing significant other than a degree of orthostatic hypotension caused by sitting inside the cramped capsule for hours . 
 Schirra 's post @-@ flight report noted the " fireflies " seen on the previous two missions , and emphasized the remarkable visual effect of the thick band of the atmosphere visible around the horizon . However , he was unimpressed with the view of Earth from space ; the amount of detail he could make out compared well with that from high @-@ flying aircraft , and he told <unk> that it was " nothing new " compared to flight at 50 @,@ 000 feet ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . Overall , he concluded that Sigma 7 was on " the top of the list " of aircraft he had flown , displacing the F8F Bearcat , a naval piston @-@ engined fighter , while the mission itself had been " textbook " . 
 Schirra gave a public lecture at Rice University after returning to Houston , where he received a motorcade through the city . However , the Cuban Missile Crisis had been steadily escalating through September , and helped drive discussion of Schirra 's successful flight down the news schedules ; public concern about the relative effectiveness of Soviet and American space launchers was displaced by a more pressing concern over Soviet military rockets . He visited Washington , D.C. , to receive the NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Kennedy on October 16 , the same day Kennedy had first seen U @-@ 2 photographs of missile sites in Cuba ; the meeting was friendly and informal despite the circumstances . Robert Kennedy , Schirra later noted , took him aside and sounded him out about a potential political career , the same way he had sounded out John Glenn a year earlier . Unlike Glenn , however , Schirra politely turned the suggestion down , and chose to remain with NASA . His later career saw him commanding the backup crew for the first Gemini mission , then the prime crew for the 1965 Gemini 6A mission , where he flew the first active rendezvous between two spacecraft - earlier plans for it to conduct the first on @-@ orbit docking had been cancelled - and finally commanding the first Apollo mission , Apollo 7 , in 1968 . He retired from NASA in the summer of 1969 , the only astronaut to fly on Mercury , Gemini , and Apollo . 
 The success of MA @-@ 8 made the preparation for MA @-@ 9 " considerably easier " , though it did cause some observers to suggest the program should be ended abruptly in order to conclude on a clear note of success , rather than risking another — potentially catastrophic — flight . However , this was not a view shared by the NASA planners , who had been pressing for a one @-@ day Mercury mission since mid @-@ 1961 , when it first began to seem technically feasible . To prepare the spacecraft for a long @-@ duration mission involved trimming as much on @-@ board weight as possible to offset the additional consumables required . The changes made to the capsule hardware on MA @-@ 8 were now used to justify the removal of 12 pounds ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) of control equipment and 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) of radio equipment , as well as the 76 pounds ( 34 kg ) periscope which Schirra had found so unhelpful . In total , there were 183 alterations listed between the capsules for the MA @-@ 8 and MA @-@ 9 missions . The spacecraft was to be equipped with several cameras , building on Schirra 's photographic work , though weight and power limitations did restrict the amount of scientific experiments that could be scheduled . 
 = = Spacecraft location = = 
 The spacecraft is on display at the United States Astronaut Hall of Fame , Florida . 
 = Galerina sulciceps = 
 Galerina sulciceps is a dangerously toxic species of fungus in the family Strophariaceae , of the order Agaricales . It is distributed in tropical Indonesia and India , but has reportedly been found fruiting in European greenhouses on occasion . Considered more deadly than the <unk> ( Amanita phalloides ) , G. sulciceps has been shown to contain the toxins known as alpha- ( α- ) , beta- ( β- ) and gamma- ( γ- ) amanitins ; a series of poisonings in Indonesia in the 1930s resulted in 14 deaths from the consumption of this species . It has a typical " little brown mushroom " appearance , with few obvious external characteristics to help distinguish it from many other similar nondescript brown species . The fruit bodies of the fungus are tawny to ochre , deepening to reddish @-@ brown at the base of the stem . The gills are well @-@ separated , and there is no ring present on the stem . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 This species was first described in the literature as Marasmius sulciceps by English Naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley in 1848 , based on a specimen found four years earlier growing on old wood in Ceylon ( modern @-@ day Sri Lanka ) . In 1898 , Otto Kuntze transferred the species to Chamaeceras , a genus that has since been subsumed back into Marasmius . Because of its brown @-@ colored spore print , Dutch mycologist Karel Bernard <unk> transferred the species to the genus Phaeomarasmius 1938 . In 1951 , he redescribed the species and transferred it to its current position in Galerina . Rolf Singer 's comprehensive taxonomical treatment of the Agaricales placed Galerina sulciceps in section Naucoriopsis of the genus Galerina , a subdivision first defined by French mycologist Robert Kühner in 1935 . This section includes small brown @-@ spored fungi what when young have a cap margin that is curved inward , and thin @-@ walled , obtuse , or acute @-@ ended pleurocystidia that are not broadly rounded at the top . All of the poisonous amatoxin @-@ containing Galerina belong to section Naucoriopsis . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially egg @-@ shaped in young specimens , but changes shape as it matures , becoming convex and later more or less flat with a central depression . At the center of the cap is a roughly spherical umbo – a nipple @-@ like protrusion . The cap is hygrophanous , meaning it changes color depending on its state of hydration : the color is tawny in moist specimens , changing to ochre with dark brown edges when dried . The cap diameter is typically 1 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) , with a surface that is smooth , and almost gelatinous in consistency . The edge of the cap is thin and wavy , and is often split open . The gills are broadly adnate ( broadly attached to the stalk slightly above the bottom of the gill , with most of the gill fused to the stem ) to slightly decurrent ( running down the length of the stem ) . Interspersed between the gills are shorter gills , called lamellulae , that start from the cap but do not reach the stem . The gills are broad ( up to 4 mm ) and thick at the base ( 1 mm ) , and when mature can develop veins that run between the gills on the undersurface of the cap . The stem is 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) long , 0 @.@ 15 to 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 06 to 0 @.@ 12 in ) thick , and usually attached centrally to the underside of the cap , although it may sometimes be slightly off @-@ center . Stems are solid , cylindrical , and may be pruinose ( dusted with a very fine layer of powder ) . 
 Berkeley 's original description noted a resemblance to a small Marasmius <unk> , a mushroom today known as Gymnopus <unk> . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are ellipsoid to almond @-@ shaped , with dimensions of 7 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 8 µm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are cylindrical to slightly club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 30 – 45 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 µm . The sterigmata ( projections of the basidia that attach the spores ) are 5 – 6 µm long . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia located in the gill face ) are thin @-@ walled , with long , somewhat cylindrical necks , and may range in color from translucent ( hyaline ) to pale brownish @-@ yellow . They are typically 40 by 10 @.@ 5 µm , although they may occasionally be larger — up to 142 by 18 by 8 µm . Cystidia in the gill edge — the cheilocystidia — are similar in appearance to the pleurocystidia . The hyphae of G. sulciceps have clamp connections — short branches connecting one cell to the previous cell to allow passage of the products of nuclear division . 
 = = Chemistry and toxicology = = 
 Galerina sulciceps is deadly poisonous ; one author opines it to be " perhaps the most toxic mushroom known to man " , while later studies of toxin concentrations in amanitin @-@ containing mushrooms corroborate this view . The symptoms of poisoning attributed to the mushroom have been noted to be relatively unusual : a local <unk> effect , " pins and needles " sensation , and nausea without vomiting . Although these clinical symptoms are inconsistent with those of amatoxin poisoning , the presence of α- , β- and γ- amanitins in this species has been verified with chromatographic analysis . Amatoxins damage the liver and kidney by binding irreversibly to RNA polymerase II . Three separate instances of poisoning in Indonesia involved 18 people , 14 of which died . Based on this set of occurrences , death occurs in 7 – 51 hours " unless the patient survives , which seems to depend on the quantity eaten and the vigor of the individual . " Another death attributed to this mushroom was reported in Germany in the early 1980s . Severe poisonings have been treated with complete blood dialysis or liver transplants . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This species grows on dead wood in tropical locales like Indonesia ( Java and Sumatra ) , and India ( Sri Lanka ) , where it is prolific in some areas . It is not found in North America . In Germany , it has been found growing in greenhouses , and is known in the vernacular as the <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " greenhouse Galerina " . In one instance , the mushroom was discovered fruiting in dense groups in pots of orchids standing on moist conifer sawdust . 
 = Premiership of Gordon Brown = 
 The premiership of Gordon Brown began on 27 June 2007 when Brown accepted the Queen 's invitation to form a government , replacing Tony Blair as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . It ended with his resignation as Prime Minister on 11 May 2010 . While serving as Prime Minister , Brown also served as the First Lord of the Treasury , the Minister for the Civil Service and the Leader of the Labour Party . He was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron 
 Brown 's style of government differed from that of Tony Blair , who had been seen as presidential . Brown rescinded some of the policies which had been introduced or were planned by Blair 's administration . He remained committed to close ties with the United States and to the war in Iraq , although he established an inquiry into the reasons for Britain 's participation in the conflict . He proposed a " government of all the talents " which would involve co @-@ opting leading personalities from industry and professional occupations into government positions . Brown also appointed Jacqui Smith as the UK 's first female Home Secretary , while Brown 's former position as Chancellor of the Exchequer was taken over by Alistair Darling . 
 Brown 's government introduced monetary and fiscal policies to help keep the banks afloat during the financial crisis in 2008 , and as a result the United Kingdom 's national debt increased dramatically . The Government took majority shareholdings in Northern Rock and Royal Bank of Scotland , both of which experienced financial difficulties . Large amounts of money were injected into several other banks , including newly merged HBOS @-@ Lloyds TSB , which received £ 17 billion . Domestic policies focusing on education , employment and health were introduced by the administration . The Labour Party was persuaded to give Gurkhas settlement rights in Britain by the campaign of actress Joanna Lumley and attracted criticism for its handling of the Scottish Government 's release of Abdelbaset al @-@ Megrahi — the only person to have been convicted over the 1988 Lockerbie bombing . Brown was also dogged by allegations of bullying . 
 During the first four months of his premiership , Brown enjoyed a substantial lead in the polls . His popularity amongst the public may have been because his handling of numerous serious events during his first few weeks as Prime Minister , including two attempted terrorist attacks in London and Glasgow at the end of June 2007 . However , between the end of 2007 and September 2008 , his popularity fell significantly ; two contributing factors were believed to be his perceived change of mind over plans to call a general election in October 2007 and his handling of the 10p tax rate cut in 2008 , which led to allegations of weakness and dithering . His unpopularity led eight Labour MPs to call for a leadership contest in September 2008 , less than 15 months into his premiership . The threat of a leadership contest receded due to his perceived strong handling of the global financial crisis in October , but his popularity hit an all @-@ time low and his position became increasingly untenable after the May 2009 expenses scandal and Labour 's poor results in the 2009 Local and European elections . Brown 's cabinet began to rebel ; there were several key resignations in the run up to local elections in June 2009 . However , Brown was backed by his party . He faced a second attempt to launch a leadership challenge by former Cabinet colleagues Geoff Hoon and Patricia Hewitt in January 2010 , but the plot failed to gather momentum and Brown remained as both Labour leader and Prime Minister to lead his party into the 2010 General Election . The election resulted in a hung parliament , with the Conservative Party winning the largest number of seats . Brown remained as Prime Minister while the Liberal Democrats entered separate negotiations with Labour and the Conservatives with a view to forming a coalition government . He announced his intention to resign on 10 May 2010 to help broker a Labour @-@ Liberal Democrat deal . However , this became increasingly unlikely and on 11 May , Brown announced his resignation as Prime Minister and as Leader of the Labour Party . 
 = = Bid for Labour leadership = = 
 On 11 May 2007 , after months of speculation , Gordon Brown formally announced his bid for the Labour leadership and replaced Tony Blair as Prime Minister on 27 June 2007 . On 16 May , Channel 4 News announced that Andrew <unk> had nominated Brown , giving him 308 nominations — enough to avoid a leadership contest . A BBC report states that the decisive nomination was made by Tony Wright with <unk> yet to nominate at that point . 
 Following Blair 's announcement of his resignation and Brown 's bid for leadership , the Labour Party rose in popularity in the polls , gaining three points after months of low polls and trailing behind the opposition Conservative Party — However , Labour subsequently lost this lead . 
 Brown launched his campaign website the same day as formally announcing his bid for leadership , titled " Gordon Brown for Britain " . 
 In 2007 , one year before the Global economic crisis , Brown delivered his final Mansion House speech as Chancellor before moving into Number 10 ; he told financiers , " A new world order has been created " , that everyone needed to follow the City 's " great example " , and " an era that history will record as the beginning of a new Golden Age " . 
 = = Core policies = = 
 Brown was careful not to imply that there would be any reversals in the key areas of Blair 's social policy , or any radical breakaway from New Labour . He did propose a different style of government than that of Blair 's much @-@ criticised ' presidential @-@ style ' government . Brown was unclear on certain parts of his policies , but he said that a Brown @-@ led government would introduce the following ; : 
 Sleaze @-@ busting package : Following the cash for honours scandal , Brown said he would reduce sleaze , which led to the belief that Brown would introduce a new Ministerial Code that would set out clear standards of behaviour for ministers . Brown said that he intended to strip the Prime Minister of some the powers conferred on it by royal prerogative — including the ability to declare war . This would give Parliament more powers and rights to vet and veto appointments to senior public positions , in a bid to eliminate cronyism . 
 Environment : Brown pledged to make Britain a " world leader " in combating climate change ; there would be large cuts in carbon emissions that were bigger than those of most developed nations . 
 Constitutional reform : Brown did not clarify whether he proposed a written constitution — something the UK has never had — or a looser bill of rights . He said when announcing his bid that he wanted a " better constitution " that was " clear about the rights and responsibilities of being a citizen in Britain today " . He planned to set up an all @-@ party convention which would consider new powers for Parliament and the <unk> of powers between Whitehall and local government . Brown also said that he would allow Parliament to decide whether British troops are sent into action . 
 Housing : It was suggested that House Planning restrictions could be relaxed . Brown said that he wanted to release more land and make house ownership easier with shared equity schemes . He backed a proposal to build five eco @-@ towns , each housing between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 people — up to 100 @,@ 000 new homes . 
 Health : Brown said he wanted doctors ' surgeries to open at weekends , and GPs to be on @-@ call in the evenings . Doctors had been given the right to opt out of out @-@ of @-@ hours care two years before under a controversial pay deal signed by then @-@ Health Secretary John Reid , that awarded them a 22 percent pay rise in 2006 . Lord Ara <unk> was appointed to review NHS service delivery , especially in London . Proposed policies included the induction of polyclinics , which would be open to tender and possibly run by private companies . 
 Foreign policy : Brown remained committed to the Iraq War , but said that he would " learn the lessons " from mistakes made in Iraq . He remained supportive of American policies but said that he wanted a " solid but not slavish " relationship with the US . 
 <unk> : Brown intended to repeal sections 132 to 137 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 , thereby enabling protest within the area around Parliament without prior permission from the Metropolitan Police . 
 ID cards : Brown 's campaign manager had said that one of Blair 's unpopular key policies would be reviewed . The cost of the £ 5 @.@ 5 billion identity card scheme was rapidly increasing . However , Brown said on 12 May that he would continue with it . 
 Europe : Brown supported the EU Reform Treaty and repeatedly dismissed calls for a referendum on the issue . 
 = = First acts as Prime Minister = = 
 On his first day in office , Brown rescinded the Order in Council which gave his predecessor 's political advisers Alastair Campbell — who left office in 2003 — and Jonathan Powell , authority to issue instructions to civil servants . Brown 's senior advisers , including Spencer Livermore , Sue Nye , Mike Ellam and Gavin Kelly , continued to exert considerable influence on the government . Brown 's other senior advisers included former Treasury Special Advisers Damian McBride , Jonathan Ashworth and Jo <unk> , and former senior Labour Party official Fiona Gordon . 
 Brown faced a major prime @-@ ministerial challenge two days after entering office , when two unexploded car bombs were discovered in London on 29 June . The following day , a car was driven into the entrance of the main terminal of Glasgow International Airport in a second apparent terrorist attack , causing a fire and considerable damage to the building . Brown was born in Glasgow , leading to speculation that the attacks were motivated against him . As a result of both the London and Glasgow incidents , Brown chaired emergency COBRA meetings to review plans to protect the British public . He also spoke to the First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond regarding the incidents . 
 On 3 July , Brown announced a programme of constitutional reforms , including limits to the powers of the Prime Minister , extensions to the powers of Parliament , a consultation on a bill of rights and a possible lowering of the minimum voting age . On 7 July 2007 , he announced £ 14m in aid for the flood @-@ hit areas in the north of England . On 11 July , Brown announced that housing would be at the top of his political agenda , promising that three million new homes would be built by 2020 . 
 = = Domestic reforms = = 
 The minimum statutory entitlement for paid holidays was increased from 4 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 6 weeks per annum , and Child Benefit was disregarded in calculating income for Housing and Council Tax Benefit as a means of improving work incentives and the incomes of many low @-@ income families . Parents with children up to the age of 16 were given the statutory right to request flexible working arrangements . 
 Extra penalties for employers paying wages below the national minimum were introduced , while the September Guarantee was extended to 17 @-@ year @-@ olds in 2008 . The Mortgage <unk> ( Protection of Tenants Etc . ) Act of 2010 created protection for unauthorised tenants . The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 granted new powers to tackle erosion and " underwrote a path to run round England 's coastland " , while the Community Energy Saving Programme ( 2009 ) obliged energy suppliers and generators to deliver energy efficiency measures in certain low income areas . 
 Compulsory personal , social and health education was introduced in 2009 . The Additional Paternity Leave Regulations 2010 provided parents with the option to split the year 's maternity leave the mother could then take from her employment , allowing parents greater flexibility with childcare arrangements . An extension of 10 – 15 hours free nursery provision for disadvantaged 2 @-@ year olds was also carried out . Between 2008 and 2010 , additional money was put into tax credits for families with children , while child poverty fell during Brown 's last year as Prime Minister . 
 The Education and Skills Act 2008 introduced measures to extend educational opportunities and raised the school @-@ leaving age to 18 , while the <unk> , Skills , Children and Learning Act 2009 introduced a statutory framework for apprenticeships and the right to an apprenticeship for suitably qualified 16- to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds . The Housing and Regeneration Act 2008 created a new Homes and Communities Agency tasked with improving the supply and quality of housing in England . The Concessionary Bus Travel Act 2007 entitled disabled people and those past retirement age to free travel on local buses at off @-@ peak times anywhere in England . The Pensions Act 2007 and the Pensions Act 2008 introduced improvements to pension provisions , while the Employment Act 2008 strengthened existing legislation governing working conditions . 
 Brown promised free prescription cancer medicines , which became available in January 2009 , although concerns were raised in September that year that many patients entitled to such prescriptions were not benefiting from them . A Health in Pregnancy Grant which provided financial assistance to expectant mothers was also introduced . In 2008 , a Local Housing Allowance for people on low incomes or on benefits who were renting from private landlords was introduced . 
 The Autism Act 2009 was passed to improve services and support for adults with autism . The Agency Workers Regulations 2010 was intended to improve the workplace rights of people working for employment agencies . The Equality Act 2010 required equal treatment in access to employment , private and public services . The Child Poverty Act 2010 set targets for governments to eliminate child poverty . 
 = = The Brown ministry = = 
 Brown appointed his first cabinet in the first few days of his premiership . David Miliband was appointed Foreign Secretary while Alistair Darling succeeded Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer . Brown 's team also included Jacqui Smith , who became Britain 's first female Home Secretary . Jack Straw was appointed to the new role of Secretary of State for Justice . Brown advocated a " Government of all the talents " ( <unk> ) in which people who had not previously been members of the Labour Party but had expertise in specific areas would be appointed as ministers . Consequently , five new ministers , including Sir Ara <unk> — a consultant surgeon who became a health minister in the House of Lords , Sir Digby Jones — a former director general of the CBI who became minister of state for trade and investment and Sir Alan West — the former head of the Royal Navy who became a security minister at the Home Office . 
 = = Foreign policy = = 
 Brown 's first overseas trip as Prime Minister was to Berlin , where he spoke with German Chancellor Angela Merkel . 
 In a speech to the Labour Friends of Israel in April 2007 , Brown — whose father was the chairman of the Church of Scotland 's Israel Committee — spoke of his long @-@ standing interest in Israel and the Jewish community . He said that he " had a very clear view from household slides and projectors about the history of Israel , about the trials and tribulations of the Jewish people , about the enormous suffering and loss during the Holocaust , as well as the extraordinary struggle that he described to me of people to create this magnificent homeland " . 
 Brown did not attend the opening ceremony of the 2008 Summer Olympics on 8 August 2008 in Beijing , and instead attended the closing ceremony on 24 August 2008 . Brown had been under intense pressure from human rights campaigners to send a message to China , concerning the 2008 Tibetan unrest . His decision not to attend the opening ceremony was not an act of protest ; the decision was made several weeks in advance of the Games . 
 = = = Diplomatic relationship with the US = = = 
 There was widespread speculation on the nature of the UK 's relationship with the US under Brown 's government . Brown 's close aide Douglas Alexander said in a Washington D.C speech , " In the 21st century , strength should be measured on what we can build together ... we need to demonstrate by our deeds , words and our actions that we are internationalist , not isolationist , <unk> , not unilateralist , active and not passive , and driven by core values , consistently applied , not special interests " . This was widely reported as both a policy shift and a message to the US . 
 However , Downing Street 's spokesman strongly denied the suggestion that Alexander was trying to distance Britain from US foreign policy and show that Britain would not necessarily , in Tony Blair 's words , stand " shoulder to shoulder " with George W. Bush over future military interventions . The spokesman said , " I thought the interpretation that was put on Douglas Alexander 's words was quite extraordinary . To interpret this as saying anything at all about our relationship with the U.S. is nonsense . " 
 Brown personally clarified his position . He said , " We will not allow people to separate us from the United States of America in dealing with the common challenges that we face around the world . I think people have got to remember that the relationship between Britain and America and between a British prime minister and an American president is built on the things that we share , the same enduring values about the importance of liberty , opportunity , the dignity of the individual . I will continue to work , as Tony Blair did , very closely with the American administration . " 
 = = = European Union = = = 
 Brown continued to be dogged by controversy about not holding a referendum on the EU Treaty of Lisbon . On the morning of 13 December 2007 , Foreign Secretary David Miliband stood in for Brown at the official signing ceremony in Lisbon of the EU Reform Treaty , which was attended by all other European heads of government . At the time , Brown was appearing before the Liaison Committee ; he went to Portugal to sign the treaty that afternoon . Brown was criticised by opponents on both sides of the House and in the press . His critics said that neither Brown nor Labour had a mandate to ratify the treaty without public consent . Conservative leader David Cameron pointed to Labour 's 2005 manifesto , which had pledged to give the British public a referendum on the original EU Constitution . Brown said the Treaty differed on significant points from the Constitution and was no longer a constitution but an ordinary treaty , and as such did not require a referendum . He also responded with plans for a lengthy debate on the topic and stated that he believed the document to be too complex to be decided by referendum . 
 = = = Iraq Inquiry = = = 
 Brown remained committed to the Iraq War , but said in June 2007 that he would learn from the mistakes made in Iraq . Brown said in a letter published on 17 March 2008 that the UK would eventually hold an inquiry into the war . The Iraq Inquiry was announced on 15 June 2009 ; Brown said that it would investigate the UK 's role in the Iraq War and would be held in camera , a decision which was subsequently changed . Brown stated , " no British documents and no British witness will be beyond the scope of the inquiry " . The announcement and nature of the inquiry were widely criticised . David Cameron dismissed the inquiry as " an establishment stitch @-@ up " , and the Liberal Democrats threatened a boycott . The open sessions of the inquiry began on 24 November 2009 and were televised from the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre . 
 On 5 March 2010 , Gordon Brown appeared before the inquiry . In a four @-@ hour hearing he told the inquiry that he believed the war had been " right " and that intelligence briefings had convinced him that Iraq was a threat that " had to be dealt with " . He said that his predecessor Tony Blair had kept him informed despite Blair not being aware of some developments and that the main issue which concerned him was that Iraq was in breach of UN resolutions . He feared the " new world order we were trying to create would be put at risk " if the international community did not act together to deal with Iraq . When asked about equipment , Brown said that British troops in Iraq had all the equipment they needed . The BBC 's political editor Nick Robinson said , " Gordon Brown 's aim today appears to be to look and sound different from Tony Blair whilst simultaneously opening up no gap of substance with him and the decisions he took " . 
 = = = Gurkha settlement rights = = = 
 On 24 April 2009 , the Brown government announced a long @-@ awaited decision on Gurkhas ' rights to settle in the UK , leading to criticism of its decision to apply five criteria to any Gurkha soldier applying for British citizenship . On 29 April 2009 , with the support of both opposition parties and Labour rebel MPs a Liberal Democrat motion that all Gurkhas be offered an equal right of residence was passed , allowing Gurkhas who served before 1997 to live in the UK . Following the Government defeat , the Minister for Immigration Phil Woolas announced that a further review would be completed by the middle of July . This was followed by a high profile campaign by actress Joanna Lumley , which included a meeting with Brown at 10 Downing Street and a confrontation with Phil Woolas at the BBC Westminster studios , leading to an impromptu press conference in which she pressured Woolas into further talks over the issue . Finally , after a Commons Home Affairs Committee meeting between campaigners , the Ministry of Defence and the Home Office on 19 May , Brown announced to the House of Commons on 20 May that the Home Secretary Jacqui Smith would make a statement on the issue the following day . Smith subsequently announced that all Gurkha veterans who had served four years or more in the British Army before 1997 would be allowed to settle in Britain . 
 = = = Release of Abdelbaset al @-@ Megrahi = = = 
 In the days following the release and high profile return to Libya of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al @-@ Megrahi in August 2009 , speculation about the possible involvement of the UK Government in the Scottish Government 's decision to release him grew , particularly after Saif Gaddafi , the son of Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi , said that Megrahi 's case had been discussed during business talks with the UK , and after Colonel Gaddafi thanked Brown for " encouraging " the release . This prompted Downing Street to confirm that Brown had discussed a possible release with Gaddafi during the G8 summit in Italy in July 2009 , but that a letter sent by Brown to the Libyan leader had stated , " When we met I stressed that , should the Scottish Government decide that Megrahi can return to Libya , this should be a purely private , family occasion " . 
 On 16 August 2009 , The Financial Times reported that Business Secretary , Peter Mandelson had met with Saif Gaddafi a week before Megrahi 's release , and that a possible release had been discussed . Mandelson confirmed this , but said that he had told Gaddafi that any release was a matter for the Scottish Justice Secretary . Saif Gaddafi told Libyan television the discussion was part of a wider conversation about a trade deal involving Libyan oil and gas , but Mandelson described suggestions that a release had been linked to a trade deal with Libya as " offensive " . 
 = = Financial policy = = 
 = = = Banking crisis = = = 
 On 14 September 2007 , the Northern Rock Bank sought and received a liquidity support facility from the Bank of England , following problems in the credit markets during the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 . The government took Northern Rock into public ownership in February 2008 as a result of its financial problems caused by the subprime mortgage crisis . 
 The global recession grew steadily worse throughout 2008 , and saw large falls in the stock market at the beginning of October when Britain 's leading share index , the <unk> , recorded its largest single @-@ day points fall since 1987 . On 8 October , in response to the crisis , the government announced a bank rescue package of £ 500 billion ; approximately US $ $ 850 billion . The plan aimed to restore market confidence , help stabilise the British banking system and provide for a range of short @-@ term loans and guarantees of interbank lending , and up to £ 50 billion of state investment in the banks themselves . Paul Krugman , the Nobel prize @-@ winning economist , said that Brown " defined the character of the worldwide financial rescue effort " . 
 = = = Recession and fiscal stimulus = = = 
 With the onset of the recession , the UK government lead calls to stimulate aggregate demand . Throughout 2008 , a number of fiscal measures — including a £ 145 tax cut for basic rate ( below £ 34 @,@ 800 pa earnings ) tax payers , a temporary 2 @.@ 5 % cut in Value Added Tax ( VAT ) , £ 3 billion worth of spending brought forward from 2010 and a £ 20 billion Small Enterprise Loan Guarantee Scheme — were introduced . The cost of these measures , most of which were announced in the November 2008 Pre @-@ Budget Report , was about £ 20 billion excluding counting loan guarantees . Further measures worth £ 5 billion — including training for the young unemployed and a car scrappage scheme which offered a £ 2 @,@ 000 subsidy for the purchase of a new car in exchange for the scrapping of a car more than 10 years old — were announced in the 2009 budget . 
 Despite entering the crisis with a low level of public debt — roughly 40 % of GDP — and a moderate deficit compared to many European nations , the UK 's ability to take discretionary fiscal action was limited by the burden of bank bail @-@ outs on public finances . The tax revenue from financial services , which was conservatively estimated at 13 @.@ 9 % of UK tax income in 2007 , fell alarmingly as the crisis affected bank profits . This contributed to a significant rise in the deficit to an estimated £ 175 billion ( 12 @.@ 4 % of GDP ) in 2009 – 10 and a rise in the national debt to above 80 % of GDP at its peak . The UK had significant automatic stabilisers which contributed far more than discretionary action and more than most other countries . 
