 = = = 2009 Pre @-@ Budget report = = = 
 On 9 December , in his final pre @-@ Budget report before the 2010 general election , Chancellor Alastair Darling said that the recession had been deeper than predicted during the Budget in April , and that the government 's programme of quantitative easing had made a " real difference " to families and businesses . He also announced measures to help economic recovery , including a public sector pay freeze , a levy on bank bonuses and a package of measures to help the unemployed . He said the country must choose " between securing the recovery or wrecking it " . Darling also said that the UK 's total net debt would continue to rise until the financial year 2014 – 15 . Borrowing would reach 56 % of GDP in 2009 – 10 and peak at 78 % in 2014 – 15 ; later than previously forecast and in line with other G7 economies . 
 The measures would see tax increases for a large section of the population . Shadow Chancellor George Osborne said that Labour should " never be trusted " with people 's money again , while Labour was also accused of electioneering after Darling announced a 1 @.@ 5 percent rise in Child Benefit and Disability Living Allowance from April 2010 — weeks ahead of an expected election — but made no comment on whether the rise could be sustained after April 2011 . Labour was also criticised because it had delayed vital spending decisions until after the general election . Darling said on Radio 4 's Today programme the following day that he had not carried out a full spending review because of continued economic uncertainty . He said that he had announced he was over @-@ riding the normal requirement to link the rise in benefits to the previous September 's rate of inflation ; the benefits would have effectively been frozen because inflation was negative at that point . Later the same day , Brown also said that the announcement had not been a pre @-@ election stunt . 
 in December 2009 , the Institute for Fiscal Studies ( <unk> ) estimated that there would be a public spending shortfall of £ 36 billion in the three years from 2011 — with £ 15 billion of the cuts needed yet to be identified . The country 's leading economic think tank forecast that with spending on health and education protected , defence , housing , transport and higher education would be the most likely areas to be cut . The <unk> also estimated that the cost to each family of paying back the national debt would be £ 2 @,@ 400 a year for eight years . On 11 December , the BBC reported that the Treasury had wanted a tougher approach to public spending to lend credibility to its plan to cut the deficit , but that Brown had over @-@ ruled it following an aggressive campaign for a real @-@ terms increase in education spending by Schools Minister Ed Balls . Brown said the report was " completely wrong " . 
 = = Military covenant = = 
 In November 2007 , several former Chiefs of Defence — including General Lord Guthrie , Admiral Lord Boyce , Marshal of the Royal Air Force Lord Craig , Field Marshal Lord Bramall and Field Marshal Lord Inge — criticised Brown for departing from the military covenant — a convention within British politics stating that in exchange for risking their lives for the sake of national security , members of the armed forces should be suitably looked after by the government . Brown was accused by senior opposition politicians , including Conservative leader David Cameron , and Nick Clegg of the Liberal Democrats of failing to provide proper support for soldiers and their families . 
 = = 42 @-@ day detention = = 
 Following the rejection of a previous bill under Tony Blair 's government to allow the detention of terror suspects for up to 90 days without charge , Brown championed a new bill extending the pre @-@ charge detention period to 42 days . The bill was opposed on both sides of the House and Brown was facing a growing backbench rebellion . Jenny Percival wrote in The Guardian that Brown 's critics accused him of " vote @-@ buying " to ensure he won the vote on this issue . The bill was passed by nine votes , with Brown relying on the support of Conservative MP Ann Widdecombe and a handful of Democratic Unionist MPs . 
 In a session of Prime Minister 's Questions some weeks later , David Cameron challenged Brown to concede on record that " no deals were done " in ensuring the bill was passed . Brown stood before the House and said , " yes " . Cameron quoted from a letter written by Labour 's Chief Whip Geoff Hoon to Keith Vaz — the Chairman of the Home Affairs Committee — in which Hoon expressed deep thanks for Vaz 's support and closed the letter with the line , " I trust that you will be appropriately rewarded " . Hoon said that this was just a joke between friends but others , such as Conservative leader David Cameron and Shadow Home Secretary David Davis viewed this letter as proof that deals were indeed done behind the scenes and that Brown lied on the record when he said there had been none . The House of Lords defeated the bill , which Lords said was " fatally flawed , ill thought through and unnecessary " , stating that " it seeks to further erode ... fundamental legal and civil rights " . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 = = = The " election that never was " = = = 
 Gordon Brown caused controversy during September and early October 2007 by letting speculation that he would call a snap general election continue . The Labour Party launched an advertising campaign , Not Flash , Just Gordon , which was seen largely as pre @-@ election promotion of Brown as Prime Minister . Following the negative reaction to his visit to British troops in Iraq during the 2007 Conservative Party Conference , an unrehearsed conference speech made by David Cameron and an opinion poll showing Labour 6 % behind the Conservative Party in key marginal seats , Brown announced that there would be no election in the near future . He was subsequently accused by his political opponents as being indecisive . Cameron accused Brown of " bottling " the election because of opinion polls , which Brown denied . 
 = = = Plots against leadership = = = 
 The first signs of internal disquiet towards Brown 's policies surfaced in May 2008 . The 2007 budget — his last as Chancellor — abolished the 10 % income tax rate for the lowest earners ( 5 @.@ 1 million people ) , increasing their rate to the next highest , 20 % . Earners who fell within the 22 % tax rate band had their rate reduced to 20 % , and tax allowances were also made for over @-@ 65s . These measures came into effect in April 2008 . The " 10p tax rate cut " as it was commonly referred to , was sharply criticised by Frank Field and several other backbenchers . Field also said that Brown did not seem to be enjoying his job . Health Secretary Alan Johnson believed that Field was motivated primarily by a personal dislike of Brown , and Field later apologised , saying that he had regretted allowing his campaign to become personal . Chancellor Alistair Darling cut the tax rate for 22 million people and borrowed around £ 2 @.@ 7 billion to reimburse those on lower and middle incomes who had suffered . 
 In mid @-@ 2008 , a large number of senior MPs openly called upon Brown to resign . This event was dubbed the " Lancashire Plot " ; two backbenchers from North West England urged Brown to step down and a third questioned his chances of holding on to the Labour Party leadership . Several MPs said that if Brown did not recover in the polls by early 2009 , he should call for a leadership contest . However , prominent MPs — including Jacqui Smith and Bill Rammell — said that Brown was the right person to lead Britain through its economic crisis . 
 A second assault upon Brown 's premiership was launched in September 2008 when <unk> McDonagh — an MP who had never voted against the government — spoke of the need for discussion over Brown 's position . McDonagh , a junior government whip , was sacked from her role on 12 September . McDonagh did not state that she wanted Brown deposed , but she implored the Labour Party to hold a leadership election . McDonagh spoke of a " huge number " of Labour MPs who wanted a leadership election . In the following days , several Labour MPs — including Field , Joan Ryan ( who applied , as McDonagh had , for leadership nomination papers , and became the second rebel to be fired from her job ) , Jim Dowd , Greg Pope , and others who had previously held positions in government — said they wanted a contest . In an unrelated incident , 12 backbenchers signed a letter criticising Brown that was published in Progress magazine . One of these MPs , Eric Joyce , said that Brown 's future hinged on his performance at the upcoming Labour Party conference . 
 A Downing Street source responded to these incidents by stating , " The <unk> have been talking up the idea of loads of ministers resigning . But the best they can come up with is an assistant government whip " . Tony Lloyd , chairman of the parliamentary Labour Party , called the rebellion a " bit of a sideshow " , and Emily Thornberry MP called Brown the " best qualified " to lead Britain through the economic crisis of 2008 . The Labour Party said that it had received letters from a small number of MPs asking why no nomination papers had been released . David Miliband continued to show his support for Brown in the face of the challenge in September , as did Business Secretary John Hutton , Environment Secretary Hilary Benn , and Chief Whip Geoff Hoon . 
 Despite growing speculation over Brown 's future , most of his ministers wanted him to lead the party . Harriet Harman and Foreign Secretary David Miliband said they were not preparing leadership bids . After Labour lost the Glasgow East by @-@ election in July , Harman — the deputy leader of the party — suppressed rumours regarding her intentions , saying that Brown was the " solution " , not the " problem " ; Home Secretary Jacqui Smith , Justice Secretary Jack Straw , Schools Secretary Ed Balls and Cabinet Office Minister Ed Miliband re @-@ affirmed their support for Brown . The deputy Prime Minister under Blair , John Prescott , also pledged his support . David Miliband was then forced to deny that he was plotting a leadership bid ; in July , an article written by him for The Guardian was interpreted by the media as an attempt to undermine Brown . In the article , Miliband outlined the party 's future but did not mention the Prime Minister . Miliband was forced to quell rumours that he would run against Brown in a leadership election , adding that he was confident Brown could lead Labour to victory in the 2010 General Election , and that his article was actually an attack against the fatalism that had dogged the party since the loss of Glasgow @-@ East . 
 = = = 2009 local and European elections = = = 
 Labour suffered a historic defeat in the local elections and European elections , finishing third place behind the Conservatives and the United Kingdom Independence Party ( UKIP ) . Voter apathy was evident in the historically low turnout of around 33 % . In Scotland , voter turnout was only 28 % . In the local elections , Labour finished third place behind the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats ; Labour lost control of the four councils it had held prior to the election . The vote was widely considered to be a reaction to the expenses scandal ; the share of the votes for all the major parties fell ; Labour was down 1 % , the Conservative share was down 5 % . The minor parties , including the Green party and UKIP , were considered to have benefited from the public backlash against the major parties . Brown said that the results were " a painful defeat for Labour " , and that " too many good people doing so much good for their communities and their constituencies have lost through no fault of their own " . 
 The days leading up to the elections saw the resignations of several high profile cabinet ministers . These included the Europe Minister Caroline Flint , Home Secretary Jacqui Smith , the Minister for Children Beverley Hughes , Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government Hazel Blears , and Work and Pensions Secretary James Purnell , who resigned minutes after the polls for the local and European elections had closed and sent a letter to the Prime Minister calling on him to step aside . 
 The results of the local elections were announced the following day ; the remaining councils under Labour control all became Conservative @-@ controlled . The projected national vote shares predicted that the Conservatives achieved 38 % of the vote , the Liberal Democrats 28 % and Labour 23 % . In the aftermath of these results , Brown reshuffled his cabinet amidst some pressure on his leadership . Further pressure followed the results of the European parliamentary elections , which were announced on 7 June . These showed large declines in the Labour Party 's vote . The far @-@ right British National Party won seats in North West England and Yorkshire and the Humber — its first ever seats won in a national election . 
 All of these events led to mounting speculation about Brown 's future as Prime Minister and a possible leadership challenge . However , Brown faced down his critics and was applauded at a meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party on 8 June 2009 . Brown continued to be unpopular ; in September , Britain 's biggest selling newspaper The Sun announced that after 12 years of supporting Labour , it would withdraw its support in favour of the Conservatives . A challenge to Brown 's leadership was made in January 2010 when Patricia Hewitt and Geoff Hoon wrote to Labour MPs calling for a secret ballot on the issue . Their letter said that the party was " deeply divided " and the issue should be sorted out " once and for all " . However , the plot failed to gather any momentum after several senior cabinet ministers spoke out in support of Brown . 
 = = = Allegations of bullying = = = 
 On 31 January 2010 , the Mail on Sunday reported that a book , " The End of the Party " written by the journalist Andrew Rawnsley , would make allegations that Brown had flown into a series of rages and had physically attacked members of his staff . The claims were fiercely denied by Brown and his colleagues . In an interview with the television presenter Piers Morgan , Brown said , " I have never hit anybody in my life " . 
 In February 2010 Christine Pratt , founder of the National Bullying Helpline said that the helpline had taken calls from Downing Street staff , although she later stated that the calls did not refer to Brown himself . This led to the resignations of three of the charity 's patrons ; Cary Cooper , Ann Widdecombe and Sarah Cawood . The Charity Commission later said that it had received over 160 complaints about the helpline 's handling of the situation . The helpline service was voluntarily suspended ; it resumed two days later . 
 = = 2010 general election = = 
 On 6 April 2010 , Brown visited Buckingham Palace to seek the Queen 's permission to dissolve Parliament on 12 April , initiating a general election on 6 May . He announced the election shortly afterwards and described it as the " least well @-@ kept secret of recent years " , since 6 May had been predicted as the most likely date for an election for some time . Brown unveiled Labour 's election manifesto on 12 April under the party 's election slogan " A future fair for all " , saying that Labour had a " plan for the future " . Key pledges in the manifesto included : 
 No rise in the income tax rate during the next Parliament 
 No extension of VAT to food and children 's clothes 
 A new global banks levy 
 No stamp duty for first time buyers on homes below £ 250 @,@ 000 
 A pledge to raise the National Minimum Wage in line with earnings 
 The right for constituents to recall MPs 
 Referenda on a democratic House of Lords and proposed changes to the voting system 
 Plans to double paternity leave from two weeks to four 
 A pledge not to privatise Royal Mail during the next Parliament . 
 The main opposition parties were critical in their responses to the manifesto . The Conservative Party said that it would " change nothing " , while the Liberal Democrats said that Labour would not reform tax and politics . Conservative leader David Cameron said , " There is nothing new there , there is nothing different there " . Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg asked how Labour could deliver " fairness and new politics " when they had promised the same at previous general elections but had failed to do so . 
 The election campaign saw the UK 's first televised debates between the leaders of the three main parties . While Cameron and Clegg were generally perceived to have performed well in these , Brown was perceived to have done less well . Brown also attracted criticism from the media after privately describing a 65 @-@ year @-@ old pensioner as a " bigoted woman " after she stated that entitled people were not receiving benefits because non @-@ entitled people are receiving them . She also expressed her displeasure at immigration from Eastern Europe . His remarks — said on 28 April whilst in a car with his staff — were picked up by a Sky News microphone he was still wearing following a visit to Rochdale and were widely broadcast . 
 At the election , Labour lost 91 seats in the House of Commons , but the Conservatives failed to achieve an overall majority , resulting in the first hung parliament since 1974 . Under the constitution governing what happens in the event of a hung parliament , Brown remained temporarily as Prime Minister , while the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives entered into talks aimed at forming a coalition government . Talks between the Liberal Democrats and Labour also took place . On 10 May , Brown announced his intention to resign as leader of the Labour Party and instructed the party to initiate the election of a new leader . Brown 's continued presence as Prime Minister was seen an obstacle to the negotiation of a Labour @-@ Liberal Democrat deal . By 11 May , the possibility of a deal was becoming less likely as talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats continued . After a telephone conversation with his predecessor Tony Blair where Blair informed Brown that the election had shown that the British voters had lost faith in both him and the Labour Party and that the United Kingdom would not accept him continuing as Prime Minister . With this he concluded that he would not be able to form a government , Brown announced his resignation as Prime Minister . He also resigned as leader of the Labour Party with immediate effect . Brown was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron , while Harriet Harman became acting leader of the Labour Party . 
 = 1874 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1874 FA Cup final was a football match between Oxford University and Royal Engineers on 14 March 1874 at Kennington Oval in London . It was the third final of the world 's oldest football competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( known in the modern era as the FA Cup ) . Both teams had previously reached the final but been defeated by Wanderers . The Engineers had reached the final with comparative ease , scoring sixteen goals and conceding only one in the four previous rounds . Oxford 's opponents in the earlier rounds had included two @-@ time former winners Wanderers . 
 The final was decided by two goals from Oxford in the first twenty minutes . Their opponents had spent two weeks training for the match , an innovative concept at the time , but were repeatedly thwarted by Charles Nepean , the Oxford goalkeeper . The Engineers were said to have missed their best back , Lieut . Alfred Goodwyn , who had been posted overseas . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Oxford University and the Chatham @-@ based Royal Engineers were among 28 entrants to the competition in the 1873 – 74 season . Both teams were ranked among the strongest in the country at the time , especially the Engineers who played 86 games between 1871 and 1875 and lost only three , scoring a total of 240 goals and conceding only 20 . 
 Both teams progressed through the first round of the competition with little difficulty , Oxford defeating Upton Park 4 – 0 and the Engineers winning 5 – 0 against Brondesbury . In the second round , the University beat Barnes 2 – 0 and the " Sappers " , as the Engineers were nicknamed , beat Uxbridge 2 – 1 . 
 The Engineers comprehensively defeated their quarter @-@ final opponents , Maidenhead , winning 7 – 0 , the first time a team had ever scored as many as seven goals in an FA Cup match . Oxford , on the other hand , were paired with Wanderers , who had won the competition in both its first two seasons and never lost an FA Cup match . They had defeated the Engineers in the 1872 final and Oxford in the 1873 final . The first match finished in a 1 – 1 draw , necessitating a replay which Oxford won 1 – 0 to end Wanderers ' grip on the competition . 
 Both semi @-@ final matches were played at Kennington Oval , the home of Surrey County Cricket Club , as specified by the rules in use at the time . Royal Engineers defeated Swifts in the first match to be played , and Oxford booked their place in the final a month later with a 1 – 0 win over Clapham Rovers . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Oxford were able to call on their first @-@ choice goalkeeper , Charles Nepean , who had been unable to play in the previous year 's final , which Oxford lost . They also selected William Rawson , whose brother Herbert was in the Engineers ' team . The Engineers , who represented the Corps of Royal Engineers regiment of the British army , had undertaken two weeks of special training before the match , an innovative concept in an era when little importance was placed on training , but were unable to field Alfred Goodwyn , considered to be their best back , as he had been posted to India earlier in the year . Oxford 's players were not all students , as the team included Arthur H. Johnson , an ordained clergyman and Fellow of All Souls College . Around 2 @,@ 000 spectators were in attendance , a smaller crowd than had attended the previous final . 
 Oxford won the coin toss and elected to begin the game defending the Harleyford Road end of the stadium . Charles Mackarness gave Oxford the lead after just ten minutes . Following an Oxford corner kick , a melee developed in front of the Engineers ' goal , and the ball fell to Mackarness , who shot it over the crowd of players and past goalkeeper William Merriman . Frederick Patton doubled the lead ten minutes later after some skillful dribbling by captain Cuthbert Ottaway and Robert Vidal , who was nicknamed the " prince of dribblers " for his skill in that aspect of the game . Oxford could have had a third goal when they managed to get the ball through the Engineers ' goalposts , but the players did not appeal for the goal . At the time , as in cricket , the officials were not permitted to award a goal unless the players appealed for it , thus no goal was given . It is not recorded why the Oxford players never appealed . The best effort for the Engineers came when Henry Renny @-@ Tailyour 's shot struck the goalpost . Late in the game the " Sappers " mounted a series of attacks on the Oxford goal but were unable to score , being repeatedly thwarted by Nepean . Oxford thus won 2 – 0 and secured the cup . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 As occurred each year until 1882 , the winning team did not receive the trophy at the stadium on the day of the match , but later in the year at their annual dinner . The secretary of the Royal Engineers club , in his official report , stated that Oxford had thoroughly deserved their victory . Some time after the match , the Engineers discovered that Alfred Goodwyn , their absent star player , had died in India on the day of the final of injuries sustained in a fall from a horse . 
 = Soma Cruz = 
 Soma Cruz , known in Japan as Sōma Kurusu ( <unk> <unk> , Kurusu Sōma ) , is a fictional character and the protagonist of Konami 's action @-@ adventure games Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow and Castlevania : Dawn of Sorrow , part of Konami 's Castlevania video game series . He was designed by Ayami Kojima as part of producer Koji Igarashi 's desire to try a " different route " for the Castlevania series . His return in Dawn of Sorrow was due to Igarashi 's satisfaction with Soma and the storyline in Aria of Sorrow , and he was redesigned with a new anime appearance . 
 In Aria of Sorrow , Soma is an 18 @-@ year @-@ old transfer student studying in Japan ( or simply a Japanese high school student , in the Japanese version ) , where he finds himself in the castle of Dracula , the principal antagonist of the Castlevania series . Soma discovers his " power of dominance , " or his ability to claim the souls and abilities of the monsters he defeats as his own . As the game 's story progresses , Soma learns of Dracula 's demise , and that he is his reincarnation , and destined to become Dracula again ( a position Graham Jones desired for himself before he was killed by Soma ) . The only reason he did not become the next dark lord immediately was due to the efforts of Alucard , using the pseudonym Genya Arikado . Soma eventually defeats the chaos running through the castle , narrowly missing both his own corruption and his possible death at the hands of Julius Belmont . Dawn of Sorrow features Soma fighting the attempts of a cult to slay him and create a new dark lord when one did not surface during the events of Aria of Sorrow . 
 Several video game publications have praised Soma 's character . Although Soma himself was viewed as a stereotypical echo of previous Castlevania protagonists , the new context that the storyline Aria of Sorrow and Dawn of Sorrow provided for him rectified this . The storyline in particular that Soma was situated in was compared to the storyline of the widely acclaimed Castlevania : Symphony of the Night . The switch to an anime character design in Dawn of Sorrow was notably criticized , as many reviewers preferred the designs made by Ayami Kojima . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 Soma debuted in Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow , the third and final installment of the Castlevania series on the Game Boy Advance . He was created as part of the attempt by Koji Igarashi , the producer of several Castlevania games , including the highly acclaimed Castlevania : Symphony of the Night , to try a " different route " for the series by setting it in a futuristic setting . Soma was designed by Ayami Kojima , who had previously worked on the characters in Castlevania games such as Castlevania : Symphony of the Night and Castlevania : Harmony of Dissonance . Kojima 's drawings are made in a dark , gothic style , and borrow heavily from bishōnen @-@ style art . Nevertheless , keeping with Igarashi 's " different route " motif , Soma 's appearance was made noticeably more contemporary , sporting more modern clothing in comparison to the medieval attire of characters in previous Castlevania games . 
 Soma 's inclusion in Dawn of Sorrow , a rare sequel in the Castlevania series , was made by Igarashi , who stated that one of his primary motivations behind making Dawn of Sorrow was to feature Soma Cruz in another game . Ayami Kojima was not included in the production team , as Igarashi wanted her to concentrate on her character designs for Castlevania : Curse of Darkness . Soma , along with the remainder of the characters , were redrawn in an anime style . This was a marketing strategy Igarashi wished to employ , as he felt that the Nintendo DS ' target demographic was significantly younger than those of other consoles Castlevania games had appeared on , and he intended to court them with a more simplistic anime design . Furthermore , Igarashi considered it a litmus test for whether the design would be incorporated into future Castlevania installments . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 In Aria of Sorrow , Soma is depicted as a high school student in Japan , living peacefully with his childhood friend Mina Hakuba . He is drawn into Dracula 's castle , where he learns of his " power of dominance " , enabling him to absorb the souls of the monsters he defeats and use their abilities . As he proceeds through Dracula 's castle , he learns that Dracula , the longtime antagonist of the Castlevania series , had been truly defeated , and that a prophecy had been made dictating that Dracula 's powers would be passed down to his reincarnation . After defeating Graham Jones , who had harbored the notion that he was Dracula 's reincarnation , Soma realizes that he himself is Dracula 's reincarnation . As a result , he is confronted by Julius Belmont , the latest member of the Belmont clan , a group of vampire hunters sworn to hunt Dracula until his demise . Soma defeats Julius , and extracts a promise from him to slay him should he fail to subdue Dracula 's spirit . With the aid of the allies he encountered throughout the castle , he is able to escape his fate by defeating the manifestation of the castle 's chaos . 
 Soma 's second appearance is in Dawn of Sorrow , where he returns into battle to combat Celia Fortner 's cult , which seeks to kill Soma and revive the dark lord . Although Soma believes that his powers have been lost , they awaken , and he proceeds to a replica of Dracula 's castle in order to confront Celia 's cult . In the castle , Soma learns of the " dark lord 's candidates " , who were born on the day of Dracula 's demise and possess supernatural powers as a result . Soma manages to best the first candidate , Dmitrii Blinov , although he inadvertently absorbs Dmitrii 's soul in the process . Soma proceeds to defeat Dario Bossi in two instances , stripping him of his power after the conclusion of their second fight . As a result , Celia slays a doppelgänger of Mina to induce Soma to become the dark lord , but fails due to a talisman Mina gave him earlier in the game . Dmitrii 's soul escapes from Soma 's body into the doppelgänger , and he increases his powers , having copied Soma 's power of dominance . Soma manages to defeat his monstrous form " Menace " , and realizes at the end of the game that his fate is his own to determine . Soma additionally appears in the " Julius Mode " found in Dawn of Sorrow , where the storyline follows the assumption that Soma succumbed to his darker nature and became the new dark lord . He is the final boss of Julius Mode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Soma 's character has received praise and criticism from several video game publications . GameSpy noted that although Soma fell into the stereotypical role of " an effeminate @-@ looking man who does all the slaying " , the original scenario that Aria of Sorrow presented provided a better context for his character . The fact that Soma was not a member of the Belmont clan , the protagonists of most Castlevania games , was lauded by IGN and RPGamer , with the latter commenting on how it contributed to the " depth " of the storyline . The manner in which Soma 's " power of dominance " translated into the Tactical Soul system featured in both games was widely acclaimed ; IGN commented that it contributed " significantly " to the overall feel of Aria of Sorrow , and RPGamer celebrated the " triumphant return " of the Tactical Soul system in Dawn of Sorrow . Reviewers also complimented Soma 's graphical representation . GameSpy noted the " good animation on easily viewable sprites " in Aria of Sorrow , and GameSpot called the graphics in Dawn of Sorrow " intricate and gorgeous " , making note of the character sprites . The change to an anime design in Dawn of Sorrow was criticized . GameSpy deplored the " shallow , lifeless anime images " used for Soma 's in @-@ game representation , and Kojima 's absence from the production . IGN claimed that the images were " down to the level of ' generic Saturday morning Anime ' quality . " Nevertheless , RPGFan felt that the story created around Soma was the best presented in the series since Symphony of the Night . 
 = William Brill ( RAAF officer ) = 
 William Lloyd Brill , DSO , DFC & Bar ( 17 May 1916 – 12 October 1964 ) was a senior officer and bomber pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in the Riverina district of New South Wales , he was a farmer and a member of the Militia before joining the RAAF in 1940 . After training in Australia and Canada , he was posted to Britain in 1941 to take part in the air war over Europe . Brill first saw combat with No. 460 Squadron RAAF , flying Vickers Wellington medium bombers . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) in May 1942 for attacking a target after his plane was badly damaged by anti @-@ aircraft fire . Following assignment as an instructor with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , he returned to the bombing campaign in January 1944 as a flight commander with No. 463 Squadron RAAF , flying Avro Lancaster heavy bombers . 
 Brill 's leadership and determination to complete his missions despite damage to his aircraft — on one occasion inflicted by another Lancaster 's bombs from above — earned him the Distinguished Service Order . Promoted to wing commander in May 1944 , he took over No. 467 Squadron RAAF after the death in combat of its then @-@ commander , Group Captain John Balmer . Brill was awarded a bar to his DFC in July , for his skill in evading three German night fighters . Returning to Australia , he remained in the Air Force after the war and led No. 10 Squadron in 1949 – 50 . He went on to command air bases at Rathmines , Canberra and Townsville during the 1950s and 1960s . Brill served two terms as RAAF Director of Personnel Services , in 1956 – 59 and 1960 – 63 , by which time he had been promoted to group captain . His final posting was at the Department of Air in Canberra . He died of a heart attack in October 1964 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brill was born on 17 May 1916 in the Riverina town of Ganmain , New South Wales . He was the fourth of seven children of farmer Edward Brill and his wife Bertha , who were originally from Victoria . The <unk> owned a property called " Clearview " , and Bill attended the local school . He completed his education at <unk> Agricultural High , gaining his Intermediate Certificate before joining his brothers in wheat farming . <unk> set and physically strong , he was a keen Australian rules footballer , playing for Ganmain , Grong Grong , and <unk> . On 5 January 1939 , Brill enlisted in the 21st Light Horse Regiment , a Militia unit , at Narrandera . He was promoted to corporal in May . The previous month he had been tested as a potential air cadet , the interview panel finding him a " quiet country chap " who was " rather slow " but " intelligent " . 
 On 11 November 1940 , Brill transferred to the RAAF active reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) . He went through the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) , undergoing initial instruction at RAAF Bradfield Park in Sydney . Selected to be a pilot , he received his elementary flying training on De Havilland Tiger Moths at RAAF Station Narrandera . In March 1941 , Brill was posted to Canada for advanced instruction on Avro Ansons at No. 3 Service Flying Training School , Calgary . He was commissioned as a pilot officer on 28 July 1941 , and sailed to Britain the next month . In October he began converting to Vickers Wellington medium bombers at No. 27 Operational Training Unit , Lichfield , and was assigned to No. 460 Squadron RAAF , which formed at RAF Molesworth the following month . 
 = = Air war in Europe = = 
 = = = First tour of operations = = = 
 Raised under the Article XV provisions of EATS , No. 460 Squadron was one of several nominally Australian formations taking part in RAF Bomber Command 's strategic air campaign against Germany . In January 1942 , the unit moved from Molesworth to RAF <unk> , Yorkshire . Brill flew as a co @-@ pilot in No. 460 Squadron 's first operation , against the German port of Emden in March . He was soon in command of his own Wellington , attacking targets in northern France . On 5 April 1942 , he undertook his first sortie against a well @-@ defended city deep in enemy territory , Cologne . He later recorded his apprehension before the raid : 
 How can I get back from this when others who are better than I 'll ever be , have fallen on such targets ? Will I funk if I 'm in a tight spot ? Will I let the rest of the boys down ? Who am I to hold the lives of five other men in my hands ? 
 On the night of 29 / 30 May 1942 , Brill 's was one of 27 aircraft detailed to bomb the Gnome et Rhône , Thomson Houston , and Goodrich factories in the Paris suburb of <unk> . The crews were required to have good visibility of the target area before bombing , to ensure accuracy and reduce civilian casualties . Due to foul weather over the Channel , Brill flew at an altitude of less than 200 feet ( 60 m ) until crossing the French coast . The clouds had begun to clear over Paris and searchlights swept the sky , accompanied by heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . Most of the bombers released their loads from between 4 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 and 2 @,@ 400 m ) , but Brill dropped to 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) before making his attack . With the bomb bay doors open , his Wellington was struck by flak , damaging the hydraulics and rear gun turret , and leaving one of the 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs hanging after the others dropped on target . Returning to England through more bad weather , he spotted an emergency landing ground and brought the crippled Wellington down with the bomb doors still open and one tyre flat ; the plane was later scrapped . Brill 's was the only one of four Wellingtons from No. 460 Squadron to find the target area and successfully attack . For his " splendid courage and determination " in pressing home the assault , he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross on 26 June , the first pilot in his squadron to be decorated . 
 No. 460 Squadron participated in 1 @,@ 000 @-@ bomber raids against Cologne , Essen and Bremen in May and June 1942 . Brill was promoted to acting flight lieutenant in July , and completed his first tour of operations , numbering 31 sorties , on 11 August . He was seconded to the RAF as an instructor in November 1942 , returning to No. 27 Operational Training Unit at Lichfield . He spent the next eleven months there , leading a training flight and gaining promotion to acting squadron leader in April 1943 . In August , he was best man at the wedding of his friend and fellow RAAF pilot , Arthur Doubleday . The press would come to refer to the pair as the " Flying Twins " , as their wartime careers closely paralleled one another — both men came from the Riverina district , joined the Air Force together on Remembrance Day 1940 , arrived in England in August 1941 , flew Wellingtons in No. 460 Squadron , volunteered for second tours in Bomber Command , and received many decorations and promotions in tandem . Doubleday would go on to survive the war and become active in civil aviation . 
 = = = Second tour of operations = = = 
 Having volunteered for his second tour , Brill underwent conversion to Handley Page Halifax and Avro Lancaster heavy bombers in the last months of 1943 . In the new year , he was appointed a flight commander in No. 463 Squadron RAAF , operating Lancasters out of RAF Waddington , Lincolnshire . Waddington was also home to another Australian squadron , No. 467 , and Brill took an active part in the station 's raucous mess life . His younger brother Vic , who had joined the RAAF in 1941 , was in the same squadron . Brill returned to combat in the middle of the Battle of Berlin , flying his first sortie to the " Big City " on 20 January 1944 . The statistical likelihood of surviving an operational tour of 30 missions in Bomber Command was never more than 50 % , but loss rates during the Battle of Berlin were far higher . 
 Brill took off for his second mission to Berlin on 27 January . The Lancaster he flew was said to be jinxed , possessed of an engine that lost power in the air but always tested well on the ground , and suffering oxygen failure that killed its rear gunner on the previous sortie . One of the engines did begin to falter before Brill reached Berlin , forcing him to fly lower than normal . Having released his bombs over target , he felt the plane take several strikes that he assumed were anti @-@ aircraft fire , but were in fact the incendiaries of a Lancaster flying above . His aircraft 's nose , rudder controls , and <unk> were all severely damaged , and the port wing was on fire . Having warned his crew to prepare to bail out , Brill dived the Lancaster and succeeded in putting out the flames . The crew was able to remain on board and , after a nine @-@ hour flight , the plane landed back at Waddington . Brill 's verdict on the mission was , as he later wrote , " not my idea of an evening 's entertainment " . He flew a total of eleven operations during the Battle of Berlin , including Bomber Command 's costliest raid of the war , against Nuremberg in March . On that occasion , one of his engines failed and another was damaged when he had to fly through a cloud of debris from a Lancaster that was blown to pieces directly in his path . 
 By April 1944 , No. 463 Squadron had begun to concentrate on targets in France and Belgium as the Allied air campaign shifted focus from strategic bombing to destroying airfields and disrupting lines of communication prior to the invasion of the continent . On 8 May , Brill was the bombing controller for a raid on an airfield near Brest . The controller was required to arrive ahead of the main Allied force , check that flares marking the target were in place , and warn his fellows if they were bombing inaccurately . By the time Brill had completed this task and gone in himself to attack , the ground defences were fully alert and peppered his Lancaster with 140 bullet holes , but he refused to take evasive action until he had delivered his bombload . Promoted to acting wing commander , Brill assumed control of No. 467 Squadron on 12 May , following the death in combat of its previous commanding officer , Group Captain John Balmer . According to the official history of the RAAF in World War II , Brill " proved a very worthy successor to Balmer both in administration and in the dashing type of leadership which had brought the Waddington squadrons to the fore in No. 5 Group " . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order on 19 May for " leadership , skill and gallantry of the highest order " and " his determination to make every sortie a success " in spite of frequent damage to his aircraft . Early the next month he led No. 467 Squadron in raids on Axis radar stations in northern France . The unit was in action on D @-@ Day over Pointe du Hoc and , later , clearing a corridor for Allied troops advancing up the Cherbourg peninsula . 
 On the night of 4 / 5 July , Nos. 463 and 467 Squadrons bombed supply depots for V @-@ weapons near Saint @-@ Leu @-@ d <unk> . Brill 's Lancaster was attacked by three German night fighters , but he was able to evade them with only a few bullets striking his plane . His " fine leadership and courage " during the action earned him a bar to his DFC ; the award was promulgated in The London Gazette on 16 January 1945 . Brill completed his second tour of operations later in July but stayed on to fly more missions , often mentoring less experienced crews . By now he had earned a reputation for being quite " mad " , as he would often circle back and check over his handiwork after a bombing run , rather than making his escape from the target area as quickly as possible . During non @-@ operational periods , he made a habit of taking a Lancaster on a so @-@ called test flight to the southern border of Northern Ireland , where he and his crew would change into civilian clothes , cross into Ireland and stock up on food and liquor for a party back at Waddington ; he always made a point of inviting the Air Officer Commanding RAAF Overseas Headquarters , Air Vice Marshal Henry Wrigley , to such events , which Wrigley attended without fail . Brill handed over command of No. 467 Squadron on 12 October 1944 , becoming the first man to survive his time as its leader . He had flown a total of 58 missions in Bomber Command when he returned to Australia in the new year . On 29 January 1945 he married <unk> Kitto , a teacher , at Ganmain 's Methodist Church . The couple had been engaged since before the war ; they later had two sons and a daughter . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Brill remained in the Air Force following the end of hostilities . From February 1946 to August 1947 he served as the first and only commanding officer of the RAAF 's newly formed and soon @-@ disbanded Heavy Bomber Crew Conversion Unit at RAAF Station East Sale , Victoria . Little support or direction on its use as a training facility was forthcoming from higher command , and in the summer months its Avro Lincoln bombers were employed in bushfire patrols over East Gippsland , reporting 44 outbreaks in February 1947 alone . Brill transferred from the CAF to the Permanent Air Force in 1948 , and reverted to the rank of squadron leader . In March 1949 he became the inaugural commanding officer of a re @-@ formed No. 10 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron , which had been disbanded in 1945 after service throughout World War II . In its new guise the squadron was established from the staff and facilities of RAAF Station Garbutt in Townsville . Brill 's main tasks were organising to absorb or close surplus wartime facilities in North Queensland , and preparing No. 10 Squadron for search @-@ and @-@ rescue operations . The unit took delivery of its first four Lincoln Mk 30s in September 1949 , and Brill handed over command the following January . 
 Raised to substantive wing commander , Brill served as a director at RAAF Staff College in Point Cook , Victoria , until his appointment as Staff Officer to the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Sir Donald Hardman , in March 1952 . He was posted to command the Officer Training School ( OTS ) at RAAF Base Rathmines , New South Wales , in December 1953 . In this role he was also the commanding officer of the base . His title changed in May 1956 as Rathmines and OTS were reorganised under the newly established RAAF School of Ground Training , with Brill taking charge of the school until July . Considered an empathetic leader , he then became Director of Personnel Services . Promoted to group captain , Brill served throughout 1959 as commanding officer of RAAF Base Canberra before again being appointed Director of Personnel Services . Active in local charities and youth organisations , he became a Freemason and in the early 1960s was assistant commissioner for the Canberra – Monaro Boy Scouts . In January 1964 he assumed command of RAAF Base Townsville , returning to Canberra that October for assignment to the Department of Air . He died of a heart attack at his home in Campbell on 12 October . Survived by his wife and children , Brill was buried in Canberra . He is commemorated by Brill Place , in Gowrie . 
 = Hurricane Able ( 1952 ) = 
 Hurricane Able was the only hurricane to make landfall in the United States in the 1952 season . Forming on August 18 off the west coast of Africa , Able moved generally west- to west @-@ northwestward for much of its duration . It was first observed by the Hurricane Hunters on August 25 to the north of the Lesser Antilles . Two days later , Able attained hurricane status , and on August 30 it turned sharply to the north @-@ northwest in response to a cold front . The hurricane reached peak winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) just prior to moving ashore near Beaufort , South Carolina on August 31 . Although it quickly weakened below hurricane force , Able maintained tropical storm force for almost two days over land , eventually dissipating over Maine on September 2 . 
 The threat of the storm prompted hurricane warnings in the southeastern United States , resulting in the evacuation of tourists on Labor Day Weekend . Able produced heavy rainfall from Florida through New England , which caused widespread flooding . The city struck by the hurricane was heavily damaged and briefly isolated due to downed power and telephone lines . Overall damage in the United States totaled $ 2 @.@ 75 million ( 1952 USD , $ 24 @.@ 5 million 2016 USD ) , mostly from crop damage in South Carolina . Further north , Able produced flooding and gusty winds , which washed out a portion of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical depression developed between the Cape Verde islands and the west coast of Africa on August 18 , although it was not classified as a tropical cyclone for another week . The depression tracked west @-@ southwestward for three days , followed by a turn to the west and later west @-@ northwest . Late on August 24 it intensified into a tropical storm about 700 mi ( 1100 km ) east @-@ northeast of Guadeloupe in the Lesser Antilles . The next day , the Miami Weather Bureau Office initiated advisories on Tropical Storm Able after the Hurricane Hunters confirmed the presence of a poorly defined center . Continuing to the west @-@ northwest , the storm passed north of Puerto Rico and attained hurricane status on August 27 . 
 After reaching hurricane status , Able tracked west @-@ northwest and gradually intensified . The lowest pressure in relation to the storm , 998 mbar , was reported shortly after it attained hurricane status . After reaching a position about 130 mi ( 210 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida on August 30 , Able slowed and turned to the north @-@ northwest due to an approaching cold front . By that time , the Hurricane Hunters reported a well @-@ defined eye , and the next day estimated winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) as they reported concentric eyewalls . Officially , the strongest winds in Able were 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) , attained early on August 31 . At 0300 UTC that day , the hurricane made landfall in a sparsely populated area near Beaufort , South Carolina where the pressure was unofficially reported as 985 mbar . 
 As the hurricane turned north and northeastward over land , the winds quickly weakened to tropical storm force , although Able maintained winds of at least 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) through North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland . Able was able to retain its intensity over land for so long because it remained over the flat terrain east of the Appalachian Mountains in addition to retaining a plume of tropical moisture from its south . After the storm weakened to a tropical depression , it still produced 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) gusts as it crossed Pennsylvania through New England . Late on September 2 , the circulation of Able dissipated near Portland , Maine . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As the hurricane approached the southeastern United States , the U.S. Weather Bureau issued storm warnings from Vero Beach , Florida to Wilmington , North Carolina . Later , the agency issued a hurricane warning from Fernandina , Florida to Georgetown , South Carolina , prompting the threatened areas to enact storm preparations and for ships to return to harbor . Near Jacksonville , Florida , the United States Navy sent 17 planes to the Naval Air Station Olathe in Olathe , Kansas . 
 Before moving ashore in South Carolina , Able produced rainfall in the western portion of its circulation . Fernandina Beach , Florida reported 6 @.@ 20 in ( 157 mm ) , and in neighboring Georgia , precipitation peaked at 2 @.@ 10 in ( 53 mm ) in Mount Vernon . Wind gusts in Savannah , Georgia only reached 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . 
 When Able moved ashore in South Carolina , the western eyewall moved over Beaufort , where winds of up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) were reported . The town received heavy damage from the storm , with houses losing their roofs and downed trees blocking roads due to the winds . For several hours , Beaufort was isolated after the winds downed power and telephone lines . The strongest winds over land were unknown since they crossed over an unpopulated swampy area . Winds in Charleston reached 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) , about 50 mi ( 80 km ) east of where the storm made landfall . There , the hurricane caused two serious injuries and left streets flooded in ankle @-@ deep water . Able also swept a freighter ashore near Charleston . The storm dropped heavy rainfall in the state , peaking at 6 @.@ 53 in ( 166 mm ) in Conway . The combination of the rainfall and winds left heavy damage to the cotton industry , and crop damage in the state totaled $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1952 USD , $ 13 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . Other damage in the state resulted from property and communications , totaling about $ 700 @,@ 000 ( 1952 USD , $ 6 @.@ 24 million 2016 USD ) . The hurricane also caused two indirect deaths in the state , one from touching a downed power line , and the other from driving into a fallen tree during a period of heavy rain . 
 As the storm spread into North Carolina , winds of around 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) were observed , causing light damage . Able spawned a tornado in Stokes County which damaged a few farm buildings . Rainfall in the state peaked at 6 @.@ 11 in ( 155 mm ) in Carthage . The rainfall caused low @-@ flooding , covering a few highways and washing out a few roads . Damage in the state is estimated less than $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 1952 USD ) . 
 In the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , moderate rainfall continued along the storm 's path , including 4 @.@ 97 in ( 126 mm ) at the National Arboretum in Washington , D.C. The peak rainfall in each state was 5 @.@ 60 in ( 142 mm ) in Big Meadows , Virginia , 6 @.@ 09 in ( 155 mm ) in Emmitsburg , Maryland , 4 @.@ 06 in ( 103 mm ) in two locations in West Virginia , and 2 @.@ 55 in ( 65 mm ) in Wilmington , Delaware . The rainfall caused flooding across the region , which washed out the tracks of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad near Baltimore after a stream rose above its banks . In Ellicott City , Maryland , the rains flooded several houses , forcing families to evacuate . In addition , Able maintained stronger winds in the region , producing a gust of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at Washington National Airport . The winds downed trees and power lines , which disrupted power and telephone service . The storm also spawned a damaging F2 tornado in Franconia , Virginia , which was potentially the same as another tornado in Potomac , Maryland . The former tornado destroyed one house and the roofs of two others , and also flung a car 100 ft ( 30 m ) . Damage in the area was estimated at around $ 500 thousand . Further northeast , rainfall reached over 6 in ( 150 mm ) in Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and New York , resulting in localized flooding and damage to the fruit crop . One indirect death was reported in Pennsylvania . Across New England , Able produced 1 – 3 in ( 25 – 75 mm ) of rainfall . 
 = Battle of Lima Site 85 = 
 The Battle of Lima Site 85 , also called Battle of Phou Pha Thi , was fought as part of a military campaign waged during the Vietnam War and Laotian Civil War by the Vietnam People ’ s Army ( VPA ) ( then known as NVA ) and the Pathet Lao , against airmen of the United States Air Force 1st Combat Evaluation Group , elements of the Royal Laos Army , Royal Thai Border Patrol Police , and the Central Intelligence Agency @-@ led Hmong Clandestine Army . The battle was fought on Phou Pha Thi mountain in <unk> Province , Laos , on 10 March 1968 , and derives its name from the mountaintop where it was fought or from the designation of a 700 feet ( 210 m ) landing strip in the valley below , and was the largest single ground combat loss of United States Air Force members during the Vietnam War . 
 During the Vietnam War and the Laotian Civil War , Phou Pha Thi mountain was an important strategic outpost which had served both sides at various stages of the conflict . In 1966 , the United States Ambassador to Laos approved a plan by the United States Air Force ( USAF ) to construct a TACAN site on top of Phou Pha Thi , as at the time they lacked a navigation site with sufficient range to guide U.S. bombers towards their targets in North Vietnam . In 1967 the site was upgraded with the air @-@ transportable all @-@ weather AN / TSQ @-@ 81 radar bombing control system . This enabled American aircraft to bomb North Vietnam and Laos at night and in all types of weather , an operation code @-@ named Commando Club . Despite U.S. efforts to maintain the secrecy of the installation , which included the " sheep @-@ dipping " of the airmen involved , U.S. operations at the facility did not escape the attention of the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces . 
 Towards the end of 1967 , North Vietnamese units increased the tempo of their operations around Phou Pha Thi , and by 1968 several attacks were launched against Lima Site 85 . In the final assault on 10 March 1968 , elements of the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion attacked the facility , with support from the VPA 766th Regiment and one Pathet Lao battalion . The Hmong and Thai forces that were defending the facility were overwhelmed by the combined North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces . 
 = = Background = = 
 See also Lima Site 85 
 Phou Pha Thi is a remote mountain in <unk> Province , northeastern Laos . The mountain , which is about 1 @,@ 700 meters ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) high , is located within the former Royal Lao Army 's Military Region 2 , and about 24 kilometers ( 15 mi ) from the border of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and 48 kilometers ( 30 mi ) away from Sam Neua , the Pathet Lao capital . For the local Hmong and Yeo tribes that lived in the area , Phou Pha Thi was a place of religious significance . They believed it was inhabited by spirits possessing supernatural powers to exercise control over their lives . However , the United States Air Force ( USAF ) saw Phou Pha Thi as an ideal location for installing a radar navigation system to assist U.S. pilots in their bombing campaigns in North Vietnam , and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail inside Laos . 
 Laos was a neutral country according to the International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos signed on 23 July 1962 . Therefore , the United States was prohibited from openly conducting military operations in the kingdom . Activities undertaken by the USAF in Laos had to be approved by the U.S. Ambassador to Laos William H. Sullivan . When the plan to install a navigation system on Phou Pha Thi Mountain was proposed , Sullivan initially opposed it as he thought that Laotian Prime Minister Prince <unk> <unk> would not allow his country to be involved in an aerial offensive against North Vietnam . However , <unk> <unk> did permit the installation , on the condition that it not be manned by U.S. military personnel . 
 In August 1966 , the USAF installed a TACAN System , an autonomous radio transmitter that provided pilots with distance and bearing relative to the station on Phou Pha Thi . In 1967 , under the code name Heavy Green , the facility was upgraded with the TSQ @-@ 81 , which could direct and control attacking jet fighters and bombers to their targets and provide them with precise bomb release points . It began operating in late November 1967 as Operation Commando Club . To operate the equipment within the limitations imposed by the Laotian Prime Minister , USAF personnel assigned to work at the installation had to sign paperwork that temporarily released them from military service , and to work in the guise of civilian technicians from Lockheed Martin — the process is euphemistically called " sheep @-@ dipping " . In reality , they operated as members of the USAF Circuit Rider teams from the 1st Mobile Communications Group based at Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base who rotated to the site every seven days . 
 Personnel working at the TACAN site were supplied by weekly flights of the 20th Special Operations Squadron , based at Udorn RTAFB in northeastern Thailand operating under the code name Operation Pony Express , using Lima Site 85 , the 700 meters ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) airstrip constructed by the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) in the valley below . Hmong General Vang Pao , who spearheaded the allied war effort against North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces in Military Region 2 , was entrusted with the task of guarding the facility using the Hmong Clandestine Army alongside CIA @-@ funded Thai Border Patrol Police forces . Though substantial resources were invested to maintain the facility , the USAF command doubted Vang Pao 's ability to defend the installation . Accordingly , all equipment had explosives attached so that if the site was overrun , it could be quickly destroyed . By late 1967 , Lima Site 85 's radar directed 55 per cent of all bombing operations against North Vietnam . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 As USAF ground controllers were able to guide attacking aircraft against North Vietnamese targets in all types of weather , installation of the TSQ @-@ 81 radar system on Phou Pha Thi was considered to have been extremely successful during the final months of 1967 . Yet a formerly top @-@ secret after @-@ action report credited Commando Club with guiding the following sorties : 
 At the same time , Commando Club was directing missions westward into Operation Barrel Roll 's B Sector , as communist forces bypassed LS 85 in their push deeper into Laos to attack Nam Bac . 
 The trend of LS 85 being forced to use its capabilities toward defending itself instead of flying offensive missions into Vietnam is evident from the tables above . Successes of the system also brought about worries for the personnel on the ground . Major Richard Secord , who was responsible for the security of Lima Site 85 , was concerned about the safety of the unarmed USAF technicians working there dressed as civilians . He requested Green Berets be assigned as on @-@ site security . Ambassador Sullivan turn downed the request . Sullivan repeatedly insisted the " civilian personnel " at Lima Site 85 should not be armed , but Secord decided to equip the technicians with weapons . M @-@ 16 assault rifles , fragmentation grenades , concussion grenades , and other small arms were then brought in . Secord said that given the sites meager defenses , he felt the site could not be held against a serious assault . 
 Secord 's fears were justified , as USAF reconnaissance aircraft regularly flying over northeastern Laos in 1967 revealed that the paved roads constructed by the North Vietnamese were obviously approaching Phou Pha Thi . Road constructing activities were observed along Routes 6 and 19 , which connected Dien Bien Phu in North Vietnam with Phou Pha Thi and Nam Bac in Laos . 
 Realizing the North Vietnamese would try to destroy the installation , Secord advised the U.S Embassy in Vientiane to evacuate all U.S. personnel . However , high @-@ ranking U.S. officials insisted that Lima Site 85 should operate as long as possible , as it helped save the lives of U.S. pilots every day it remained in operation . In December 1967 , a communist military offensive in the region was signalled by a series of skirmishes . On 15 December , CIA @-@ led Hmong reconnaissance patrols detected both North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao battalions moving against Nam Bac , at the time the stronghold of the Royal Lao Army . 
 On 16 December , two Pathet Lao companies overran Phou Den Din , only 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) east of Lima Site 85 . Shortly afterwards , however , Hmong units recaptured the village . Towards the end of 1967 , U.S. controllers at Lima Site 85 directed F @-@ 4 , F @-@ 105 and A @-@ 1 fighter @-@ bombers based in Thailand and South Vietnam in air @-@ strikes against North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao formations that were massing around the U.S. facility at Phou Pha Thi . A @-@ 26 Invaders were called in to make night missions , targeting movements of the enemy ground troops on Route 6 and Route 19 . On 14 January 1968 , the situation in northeastern Laos continued to worsen , as an estimated four North Vietnamese infantry battalions captured the Laotian government 's stronghold at Nam Bac . Despite the growing threat from North Vietnamese forces , the U.S. military was still not permitted to reinforce the installation on Phou Pha Thi Mountain because to political sensitivities . 
 The defense of Lima Site 85 was assigned to two CIA paramilitary officers who led about 1 @,@ 000 Hmong soldiers , with 200 men guarding the ridge line and the remaining 800 in the valley below . They were reinforced by a Thai Border Patrol Police battalion of 300 men . In the first week of 1968 , the combined North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces probed Royal Laos Army positions in the area by launching several artillery attacks . On 10 January , a Pathet Lao patrol was driven from the area by the Hmong soldiers . Fearing the explosives attached to their equipment could be detonated by incoming artillery rounds , U.S. technicians dismantled the charges and threw them over the cliff . 
 On 12 January , CIA spotters reported a four aircraft formation flying in the direction of Lima Site 85 . They were Soviet @-@ made Antonov An @-@ 2 biplanes . Two aircraft continued towards Lima Site 85 , while the others turned away . The Vietnam People 's Air Force , in one of its few air attacks during the conflict , tried to destroy the radar at Lima Site 85 . The An @-@ 2s flew over Phou Pha Thi , and their crewmen dropped 120 mm mortar shells through the aircraft 's floor and then strafed their targets with 57 mm rockets mounted on the wing pods . As they repeatedly attacked the facility , ground fire heavily damaged one AN @-@ 2 , and it crashed into a mountainside . By now , CIA officers and U.S. controllers at Lima Site 85 had managed to contact an Air America helicopter , which was faster than the Soviet @-@ made biplanes . The Huey pilot Captain Ted Moore sighted the remaining An @-@ 2 , and promptly gave chase . As he pulled alongside , flight mechanic Glenn Woods armed with an AK @-@ 47 assault rifle opened fire and caused the biplane to crash into a ridge . 
 The remaining An @-@ 2s had observed the attack from a distance and managed to escape without damage . Four Hmongs , two men and two women , had been killed by the communist attack . Nevertheless , the TSQ @-@ 81 radar and its associated equipment was undamaged . Shortly afterwards , what remained of one of the An @-@ 2 biplanes was put on display in front of the That Luang Monument , Vientiane ’ s most important Buddhist shrine , as proof of North Vietnamese military activities in the kingdom . Despite the attack , the U.S. Embassy in Vientiane and the USAF refused to alter their strategy for defending Lima Site 85 . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Clarence F. Blanton , commander of USAF personnel at the facility , was given no authority to supervise his own perimeter or to order a retreat if they again came under attack . Throughout January and February , intelligence collected by the Hmongs confirmed that a major assault on Lima Site 85 was being prepared , but Sullivan and the U.S. military took no steps to strengthen the defenses . In late February , a Combat Controller , Technical Sergeant James Gary , arrived to augment the defenses by directing air strikes . He was replaced in this duty by Sergeant Roger D. Huffman on about 4 March . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = North Vietnamese plan and preparations = = = 
 On 18 February 1968 , a North Vietnamese artillery survey team was ambushed near Lima Site 85 by Hmong reconnaissance teams , killing a North Vietnamese officer in the process . The dead officer , who was a major , carried a notebook which revealed a plan to attack Phou Pha Thi by using three North Vietnamese battalions and one Pathet Lao battalion . Consequently , U.S. personnel at Lima Site 85 directed 342 air strikes within 30 meters ( 98 ft ) of their own facility to disrupt their opponent 's build @-@ up during 20 – 29 February . Unknown to the USAF , however , the Vietnam People ’ s Army had also drawn up a plan to capture Lima Site 85 by deploying its Special Forces . The task of capturing the U.S. facility was entrusted to a platoon from the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion , led by First Lieutenant Truong Muc . The platoon numbered 33 soldiers , and they were reinforced by a nine @-@ man sapper squad and a communications and cryptography squad . 
 Prior to the mission , Muc 's soldiers had undergone nine months of special training , mainly focused on mountain fighting techniques and jungle operations . They also conducted physical conditioning , to improve their physical fitness and stamina to undertake operations in the most extreme conditions on Laotian territory . On 18 December 1967 , following their intensive training , soldiers of the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion launched the first phase of their operation by conducting terrain reconnaissance and watching activities on Lima Site 85 to learn their opponent 's routines . As part of the second phase , commenced on 22 January 1968 , six North Vietnamese sappers were sent out to climb Phou Pha Thi Mountain , in order to pinpoint opposing positions in and around Lima Site 85 , as well as routes of withdrawal . On 28 February 1968 , the North Vietnamese Special Forces completed their preparations , and they began marching towards their assembly point on 1 March . 
 To maintain the elements of secrecy and surprise , Muc was ordered to avoid contact with local civilians and opposing military forces . In the event they were engaged by opposing forces , the North Vietnamese would deploy a small force to deal with the situation while the main formation would continue moving to their objective on Phou Pha Thi . Once the North Vietnamese formation had arrived at their assembly area , they were to be divided into two assault groups . The first assault group , under Muc 's direct command , was divided into five " cells " to attack key targets at Lima Site 85 . Cells 1 and 2 were given the mission of capturing the communications center , with the latter given the secondary role of supporting Cell 3 , which was given the main mission of seizing the TACAN site and eliminating all U.S. personnel . Cell 4 was to capture the airstrip , and Cell 5 was placed in reserve . Second Lieutenant Nguyen Viet Hung was given responsibility to lead the second assault group with the mission of neutralizing the Thai positions . The attack would commence during the early hours of 9 or 10 March . 
 To capture Lima Site 85 , the North Vietnamese Special Forces were equipped with three Chinese @-@ made K @-@ 54 pistols , 23 AK @-@ 47 assault rifles , four 7.62mm carbines and three RPG @-@ 7 rocket propelled grenade launchers . They carried 200 rounds of ammunition for each AK @-@ 47 rifle , six rounds for each RPG , 400 grams ( 14 oz ) of explosives , and six hand grenades . The weapons load , in addition to 15 days of rations and other personal items , required each North Vietnamese Special Force soldier to pack between 42 kilograms ( 93 lb ) to 45 kilograms ( 99 lb ) . Shortly after the North Vietnamese Special Forces arrived at the assembly point , they moved off to an undisclosed location for two days to test @-@ fire all their weapons , and to ensure their explosives were in good working order . Then , in an attempt to fool Hmong and U.S. intelligence , the North Vietnamese made diversionary movements against Muong Son to cover their main assault . On 9 March , elements of the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion arrived in the vicinity of Phou Pha Thi , where they made final preparations for their assault . 
 = = = Fall of Lima Site 85 = = = 
 By 9 March 1968 , the U.S. facility on top of Phou Pha Thi was surrounded by North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao units . The VPA 766th Regiment and one Pathet Lao battalion totalled more than 3 @,@ 000 men . Despite the gravity of the situation , Sullivan did not issue an order for the evacuation of U.S. personnel from Phou Pha Thi . At around 18 : 00 on 10 March , Lima Site 85 was subjected to a series of artillery barrages . Under the cover of the artillery bombardment , the North Vietnamese Special Forces sent a small team up the mountain to defuse mines and quick @-@ fuse grenades , and to establish their routes of infiltration . Inside the facility , U.S. technicians immediately grabbed their weapons and ran into trenches and bunkers , thereby abandoning the very equipment which could enable them to call for air support . At 19 : 45 the barrage stopped , and the U.S. technicians returned to their positions . 
 The TSQ @-@ 81 antenna only received minor damage during the attack , and the U.S. suffered no casualties . However , the only 105 mm howitzer operated by the Hmongs received a direct hit , and was rendered ineffective . At around 20 : 20 , Sullivan gave the U.S. commander at Lima Site 85 the authority to direct air strikes against targets on the lower slopes of the mountain , on the basis that the situation had become critical . About 20 minutes later , the 33 @-@ man North Vietnamese platoon began climbing up towards the U.S. facility at Lima Site 85 . At 21 : 15 Sullivan considering evacuating all U.S. personnel from the facility at first light . However , officers of the Seventh Air Force contacted the U.S. Embassy in Laos and indicated that evacuation should only occur as the last resort , when the situation on top of Phou Pha Thu was no longer under their control . 
 At 21 : 21 the North Vietnamese resumed their artillery attack on Phou Pha Thi , followed by several infantry assaults by the VPA 766th Regiment , which prompted Sullivan to order the evacuation of six technicians by 08 : 15 the next morning , from a contingent of 19 U.S. personnel . Starting at 01 : 00 on 11 March , the North Vietnamese moved into their assigned positions in order to launch their attack . About 02 : 00 , a U.S. adviser at the airstrip reported to Secord and CIA officers at Udorn that he heard gunfire on top of Phou Pha Thi , and communication with U.S. technicians at Lima Site 85 was completely cut off . Afterwards , Secord briefed U.S. A @-@ 1 Skyraider pilots in Thailand on the situation at Lima Site 85 , to familiarize them with friendly positions around the facility , so they could cover the evacuation of U.S. personnel and support the Hmong counterattack . 
 About 03 : 00 Cell 1 moved to within 150 meters ( 490 ft ) of their objective , with Cell 5 positioned behind them . At the same time , the commander of Cell 4 decided to maneuver his unit to the west side of the airstrip instead of the east side as originally planned , because the terrain on the east side was higher and was covered by buildings . Precisely at 03 : 45 , Cell 1 moved to within 30 meters ( 98 ft ) of the communications center , when they bumped into a Hmong outpost . Both sides exchanged fire , and the outpost was destroyed by a grenade while the Hmong soldier guarding the post retreated . Shortly afterwards , a soldier from Cell 1 fired an RPG @-@ 7 grenade which destroyed the TACAN antenna . Within 15 minutes , Cells 1 and 2 had secured the communications site . <unk> by the explosion of Cell 1 ’ s RPG @-@ 7 round , Cell 3 immediately attacked the TACAN installation by firing one of their own RPG @-@ 7s , which destroyed the electrical generators . 
 Upon hearing the noise of explosions , the on @-@ duty U.S. technicians rushed out the front door of their operations building where they were met by North Vietnamese gunfire . Blanton , the U.S. commander at Lima Site 85 , was killed alongside two other U.S. technicians . Those who were not killed retreated to the west side of the mountain , where they hid on the edge of the cliff . From their hideout , the U.S. technicians fired on the North Vietnamese with their M @-@ 16 rifles and hand grenades . At 04 : 15 , in response to the gunfire from the U.S. technicians , Muc ordered Cell 5 to reinforce Cell 3 , and they captured the TACAN installation at 04 : 30 after 45 minutes of fighting . Meanwhile , Cell 4 had great difficulties in their attempt to seize the airstrip , where they were blocked by a Hmong mortar position . Le Ba Chom , the commander of Cell 4 , was isolated from the other three soldiers of his cell . To avoid being captured alive by the numerically superior Hmong forces , Chom and his soldiers held onto their position and fought till daybreak . 
 Raven Forward Air Controllers at Lima Site 20A , being the nearest available American support , were awakened by a radio call about 04 : 00 . They flew in the dark to Lima Strip 36 at Na Khang to position themselves at the airstrip closest to <unk> . The Ravens took up station over <unk> at dawn . At 05 : 15 Sullivan , from the U.S. Embassy in Vientiane , decided to evacuate Lima Site 85 and he gave a signal to U.S. pilots at Udorn to begin the operation , which was due to start at 07 : 15 . However , Sullivan did not realize that U.S. technicians were no longer in control of their TSQ @-@ 81 equipment . Starting around 06 : 00 , Pao 's Hmong soldiers launched a counterattack against North Vietnamese positions at the communication center , which was guarded by Cells 1 and 2 , but their attacks were repelled and the North Vietnamese held their positions . With the final Hmong counterattack on the communication site was defeated at 06 : 25 , Cell 2 was ordered to support Cells 3 and 5 in their fight at the main TACAN installation . By 06 : 35 , the North Vietnamese fully controlled the TACAN site . At the airstrip , Cell 4 was encircled by an estimated two Hmong platoons , but Chom and his unit were able to fight their way out by taking full advantage of rough terrain which favored them . Later , Cell 4 linked up with other units at the TACAN site . 
 At first light Air America helicopters hovered over Lima Site 85 to start the evacuation , which was covered by USAF A @-@ 1 Skyraiders . Immediately , Hmong soldiers and their CIA commanders rushed the TACAN site and shouted to the U.S. technicians that help was coming . In response , the North Vietnamese Special Forces organized a defense around the TACAN site , and hid their dead and wounded comrades under the large rocks which dotted Phou Pha Thi . While U.S. fighter @-@ bombers strafed the TACAN site , the Air America helicopter landed on the airstrip and they picked up two CIA officers , one forward air @-@ controller , and five technicians who hid during the firefight . Later in the day , Air America was able to recover or account for eight of the dead U.S. personnel on Lima Site 85 , along with a number of wounded Hmong soldiers . By midday , Lima Site 85 was fully controlled by the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion , and they held the facility until 14 March when they withdrew from the area . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Just before midday on 11 March , the USAF turned their attention ( recon ) from looking for their missing personnel to that of destroying the captured radar , along with all the documentation and operation information left behind at Lima Site 85 . Between 12 – 18 March , the USAF conducted a total of 95 strike sorties against the radar site , and on 19 March an A @-@ 1 fighter @-@ bomber destroyed every building at the old facility . In addition to the destruction of their radar equipment , the USAF bombing of Lima Site 85 may also had the effect of obliterating the bodies of U.S. personnel left behind at the site ( 2 remains found in 2013 ) . In the days following the loss of Phou Pha Thi , Sullivan reflected on the disaster at Lima Site 85 and commented that U.S. technicians operating there should have been evacuated on 10 March , when it became amply clear the North Vietnamese were preparing to launch an assault . 
 For the USAF , the loss at Phou Pha Thi was not a result of intelligence failure , because it had been provided with accurate information from the very start . Instead , it was clearly a failure of command and control , as the U.S. personnel and their Hmong allies were not permitted to freely organize their own defense to hold the radar facility . The Battle of Lima Site 85 resulted in the largest ground combat loss of USAF personnel during the Vietnam War . A total of 12 U.S. personnel were missing or killed in the fighting on Phou Pha Thi ; 11 were killed or missing on the ground and one was shot dead during the evacuation . { The single fatality occurring during the evacuation was Air Force Chief Master Sergeant Richard <unk> who was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously in September 2010 for his role in helping four injured airmen into the evacuation helicopter lift sling . } 
 The total casualty figures for North Vietnamese , Pathet Lao , Hmong , and Thai units are unknown . According to official Vietnamese history , the VPA 41st Special Forces Battalion lost one soldier killed and two wounded in their fight for Lima Site 85 . Against those losses , the Vietnamese claimed a total of 42 Hmong and Thai soldiers were killed , and a number of others were wounded . A large number of weapons were captured by the NVA , including one 105 mm howitzer , one 85 mm artillery piece , four recoilless rifles , four heavy mortars , nine heavy machine guns , and vast amounts of ammunition . The North Vietnamese victory proved to be a significant one , as they had succeeded in knocking out a major asset of the USAF , which had inflicted heavy damages to North Vietnam 's limited industrial infrastructures . 
 The fight at Phou Pha Thi , which was part of a larger military campaign waged by the North Vietnamese and their Pathet Lao allies , marked the beginning of the Communist dry @-@ season offensive against Laotian Government forces in northeastern Laos . By September 1968 , the strength of North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces in the Sam Neua area were estimated to have numbered more than 20 battalions . Against such heavy odds , General Vang Pao insisted on recapturing Phou Pha Thi , which the U.S. Embassy believed unnecessary . On 1 November 1968 , Pao launched Operation Pig Fat in attempt to retake Phou Pha Thi , but the operation quickly turned into a rout of the Royal Laos Army and the Hmong guerrillas and Phou Pha Thi was never retaken . 
 Although airpower was to be a major factor in the defense of Lima Site 85 , it could not be applied without limitations and restrictions . The defense of Lima Site 85 was not the sole focus of limited air resources at the time . During this period , the 1968 Tet Offensive was underway in South Vietnam , the Marine outpost at Khe Sanh was under siege , and there existed an unprecedented flow of enemy logistical traffic which had to be interdicted . Lima Site 85 had provided direction to about a quarter of the USAF missions over North Vietnam and Barrel Roll from November 1967 to 11 March 1968 . No other facility existed to provide a similar coverage over these areas . While this loss was a serious blow to the USAF air effort , it was not crippling . 
 Eleven of the twelve USAF personnel lost on the day of the battle were listed first as missing in action ( MIA ) , then later as KIA / body not recovered . Between 1994 and 2004 , 11 investigations were conducted by both Joint POW / MIA Accounting Command ( JPAC ) and unilaterally by Lao and Vietnamese investigators on both sides of the border . In 2002 two of the former VPA soldiers who had taken part in the attack told investigators that they threw the bodies of the Americans off the mountain after the attack as they were unable to bury them on the rocky surface . 
 In March 2003 , JPAC investigators threw dummies over the edge at those points indicated by the VPA soldiers while a photographer in a helicopter videotaped their fall . That pointed the investigators to a ledge , 540 feet ( 160 m ) below . Several mountaineer @-@ qualified JPAC specialists scaled down the cliffs to the ledge where they recovered leather boots in four different sizes , five survival vests , and other fragments of material that indicated the presence of at least four Americans . 
 The remains of two of the missing 11 servicemen were recovered and identified : 
 On 7 December 2005 the Defense Prisoner of War / Missing Personnel Office announced that the remains of Technical Sergeant Patrick L. Shannon had been identified and were being returned to his family . 
 In September 2012 the remains of Colonel Clarence Blanton were identified . 
 Likewise on 14 February 2007 the remains of Captain Donald Westbrook , who had been shot down in 1968 while searching for possible survivors of the battle , were positively identified from remains which had been returned in September 1998 . 
 A memorial to the USAF airmen killed and missing at Lima Site 85 and other Combat <unk> airmen is co @-@ located on Andersen Air Force Base , Guam , with the memorial to Operation Arc Light airmen . 
 = Fred Dunlap = 
 Frederick C. " Sure Shot " Dunlap ( May 21 , 1859 – December 1 , 1902 ) was a second baseman and manager in Major League Baseball from 1880 to 1891 . He was the highest paid player in Major League Baseball from 1884 to 1889 . He has also been rated by some contemporary and modern sources as the greatest overall second baseman of the 19th century . He earned the nickname " Sure Shot " for the strength and accuracy of his throws to first base , and was also sometimes referred to in the 1880s as the " King of Second <unk> . " 
 He played for the Cleveland Blues from 1880 to 1883 , where he secured his reputation as one of the best players in the game . As a rookie in 1880 , he led the National League in doubles and ranked second in extra base hits . While playing for Cleveland , he also compiled batting averages of .325 and .326 in 1881 and 1883 and led the league in assists by a second baseman and range factor . When the Union Association was formed in 1884 , Dunlap was lured to play for the St. Louis Maroons where he became the highest paid player in baseball . His .412 batting average in 1884 was the highest ever recorded to that time in Major League Baseball and 56 points higher than any other player in the major leagues in 1884 due to the lack of talent . 
 After three years in St. Louis , Dunlap was sold to the Detroit Wolverines and helped that team win the 1887 National League pennant . Dunlap 's baseball career ended in 1891 when he broke his leg sliding into a base . He went into the construction business and bet on the horses in the 1890s . By 1902 , Dunlap was penniless and living in a rundown boarding house . He died of " consumption of the bowels " in December 1902 , and his body was unidentified until a policeman at the morgue recognized his body as that of the former baseball star . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Dunlap was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , in 1859 . Both of his parents died when he was age 10 . Dunlap did not attend school after his parents died and spent his youth playing baseball . Lacking formal education , Dunlap remained illiterate throughout his life . 
 Dunlap began playing semi @-@ pro baseball at age 15 in 1874 for the Gloucester Club in Gloucester City , New Jersey . In 1875 , he started the season with the <unk> of Camden , New Jersey , then joined the <unk> Club of Philadelphia . He played for Chester at the start of the 1876 season before joining the Quicksteps of Wilmington , Delaware , as a pitcher . In 1877 , he began playing professional baseball as a second baseman for the <unk> of Auburn , New York . In 1878 , he played for teams in Hornellsville and Albany , New York . He remained with Albany in 1879 . 
 = = Major League Baseball = = 
 = = = Cleveland Blues = = = 
 In May 1880 , Dunlap began a 12 @-@ year career in Major League Baseball with the Cleveland Blues . In his first season , Dunlap immediately established himself as one of the game 's best players . For the 1880 season , Dunlap led the National League in doubles ( 27 ) and ranked second in extra base hits ( 40 ) and times on base ( 132 ) while serving as the team 's leadoff hitter . He also made a strong debut on defense , leading the National League in assists by a second baseman ( 290 ) . Dunlap remained with the Cleveland Blues for four seasons and consistently ranked as one of the leading hitters and defensive second basemen in the National League . In 1881 , he compiled 156 total bases , the second most in the National League , and had a .325 batting average and .444 slugging percentage , ranking fifth in the National League in both categories . In 1882 , he led the National League 's second basemen with 297 assists and a range factor of 6 @.@ 73 . 
 In his final year in Cleveland , Dunlap had a .326 batting average , .361 on @-@ base percentage , and .452 slugging percentage , ranking among the league 's leaders in each of those categories . Defensively , he led the league 's second basemen in putouts ( 304 ) and ranked third in assists ( 290 ) and fielding percentage ( .911 ) . Dunlap was the star of the Cleveland team in the early 1880s . So key was he to the Blues that one writer observed , " The Maroons without Dunlap are like the play of Hamlet without the melancholy Dane . " 
 = = = " Sure Shot " = = = 
 Dunlap was known during his baseball career by the nicknames " Sure Shot " and " King of Second <unk> " . Most accounts indicate that the " Sure Shot " nickname arose from Dunlap 's powerful and accurate throws to first base . King Kelly reportedly gave Dunlap the " Sure Shot " nickname after watching him throw . One account described Dunlap 's throwing prowess as follows : " [ E ] <unk> practice made him adept as a monkey at grabbing a sizzling ground ball in either hand and firing it off from the very spot he seized it . His whistling throws , which seemed to clear the grass by no more than half a foot , never seemed to lose more than an inch or two . " 
 Alfred Henry Spink , who saw Dunlap play , wrote that Dunlap could chase down a ball in the outfield and throw it to home plate " with such fearful speed and accuracy that the ball seemed to sing as it flew . " Dunlap was known for his range in getting to balls that others of his era could not , and he was reportedly able to dive for a ball and throw while lying on the ground with enough velocity to sting the first baseman 's hand . Dunlap was ambidextrous and was able to catch and throw a baseball with the same skill and accuracy with either hand . Moreover , Dunlap reportedly never wore a glove . 
 One source gives an entirely different account of how Dunlap obtained the " Sure Shot " nickname . In his book on the history of the home run , Mark Ribowsky wrote that the nickname dated back to a game against the Chicago White Stockings on July 10 , 1880 . The White Stockings had won 21 straight games until Dunlap hit a walk @-@ off two @-@ run home run in the bottom of the ninth inning . According to Ribowsky , " For this Shot Heard ' Round Cleveland , Dunlap won the nickname ' Sure Shot . ' " 
 = = = St. Louis Maroons = = = 
 In November 1883 , Dunlap signed a contract to play for the St. Louis Maroons in the new Union Association . He was the biggest star lured to the new league . His contract paid Dunlap a salary of $ 3 @,@ 400 ( including $ 1 @,@ 000 paid in advance ) , the highest salary paid to any baseball player at that time . He remained the highest paid baseball player every year from 1884 to 1889 . 
 Dunlap played second base for the St. Louis Maroons from 1884 to 1886 and also served as the team 's manager for portions of those seasons . During the 1884 season , the Maroons and Dunlap dominated the Union Association . The team compiled a record of 94 @-@ 19 , and Dunlap led the new league in most significant offensive and defensive categories . His .412 batting average was 56 points higher than any other player in the Union Association , the National League , or the American Association . He also led the league in on @-@ base percentage ( .448 ) , slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , runs scored ( 160 ) , hits ( 185 ) , total bases ( 279 ) , home runs ( 13 ) , extra base hits ( 60 ) , assists by a second baseman ( 300 ) , putouts by a second baseman ( 341 ) , range factor at second base ( 6 @.@ 41 ) , and fielding percentage at second base ( .926 ) . Dunlap 's .412 batting average in 1884 was the highest ever recorded in any of the major leagues up to that time . His 160 runs scored in 1884 remains one of the highest single @-@ season totals in major league history . 
 Some baseball historians have suggested that Dunlap 's accomplishments during the 1884 season should be discounted due to the lesser talent pool in the Union Association . In 1885 , the Union Association was disbanded after only one year , and the St. Louis Maroons joined the National League . Although his batting average dropped 142 points to .270 in 1885 , Dunlap continued to be one of the best defensive second basemen in the major leagues . He led the National League 's second basemen in 1885 with a .934 fielding percentage and ranked second in assists ( 374 ) , putouts ( 314 ) , and range factor ( 6 @.@ 49 ) . Dunlap spent a third season with the Maroons in 1886 , and hit for the cycle on May 24 . However , the Maroons were in financial distress , and rumors spread that the team might disband . 
 = = = Detroit Wolverines = = = 
 In early August 1886 , Dunlap was sold to the Detroit Wolverines for $ 4 @,@ 700 , the most expensive purchase price at the time . In addition to the sum paid to the Maroons to grant the release , the Detroit team signed a contract to pay Dunlap $ 4 @,@ 500 a season for two seasons , with an advance of $ 1 @,@ 500 on the first day of November 1886 and 1887 , respectively . The mid @-@ season sale led to concerns about the Maroons : " The transfer of Dunlap to Detroit is a small thing in itself , but its bearing on the entire base ball world is so great as to almost revolutionize the present order of things . He was the king pin of the St. Louis Club and his sale makes a certainty of the dissolution of the Maroons . " The Detroit management was praised for their " pluck and enterprise " in making the bold " business stroke . " The Sporting News wrote at the time : 
 " Dunlap has joined the <unk> and now that team will fly the League pennant just as sure as time flies and the world grows . From the day the old St. Louis Union team went out of existence Dunlap has been anything but a favorite in St. Louis . Still there was no one in the world but was willing to concede that he was the greatest second baseman America has ever known . " 
 Dunlap , too , expressed delight at the move , noting that he had " tried for two seasons to get away from the Maroons . " While the reaction to the acquisition was overwhelmingly positive in Detroit , the Detroit Free Press expressed some concern over Dunlap 's reputation as a " <unk> " and " mischief maker . " For the 1886 season , Dunlap led the National League with a career high 393 assists , more than any National League player at any position . In 1887 , Dunlap 's defensive play at second base helped lead the Detroit Wolverines to the National League pennant with a record of 79 @-@ 45 . Dunlap again led the National League 's second basemen in fielding percentage ( <unk> ) while also ranking second in range factor ( 6 @.@ 72 ) . He also played in 11 games of the 1887 World Series against the American Association champions , the St. Louis Browns . Detroit won the series 10 games to 5 . At the end of the 1887 season , Sporting Life praised Dunlap 's contributions to Detroit 's championship team : " Dunlap is the king of second basemen , and a first @-@ class all @-@ round player . His fielding average in 1886 was <unk> , ranking third . This season he ranks first , with <unk> . ... Dunlap is one of the most active men on the field , and is of great value to a team on account of his ability as a kicker and <unk> . " 
 Before the last game of the World Series had been played , rumors spread that Detroit ( which had amassed an all @-@ star lineup with a commensurate payroll ) was in negotiations to unload Dunlap 's high salary by selling him to Pittsburgh . Dunlap announced in November 1887 that he would not consent unless the Detroit club paid him half of the sum it was to receive from Pittsburgh to secure his release . He said at the time , " I am sick and tired of being sold without gaining anything by it , and it is about time that my bank account was benefited by these transfers . " He told a reporter for The New York Times that he was not penniless and would refuse to play unless his demands were met . He told the reporter that the Detroit club had three choices -- " give me half of the money secured for my release , allow me to go where I please , or fulfill the contract made with me last year . " 
 In January 1888 , Dunlap finally consented to the sale and received $ 2 @,@ 000 of the $ 5 @,@ 000 sales price paid to Detroit . His total annual compensation on signing with Pittsburgh was $ 6 @,@ 000 , making him the highest paid player in baseball history to that time . The Detroit Free Press congratulated the " cranks " of Pittsburgh for their team 's acquisition of " no less than the king second baseman of the country . " 
 = = = Pittsburgh Alleghenies = = = 
 Dunlap played for the Pittsburgh Alleghenies from 1888 to 1890 , and served as manager of the Alleghenies for a portion of the 1889 season . During his three years in Pittsburgh , Dunlap 's offensive performance declined . His batting average for the Alleghenies went from .262 in 1888 to .235 in 1889 . At the same time , he remained one of the leading defensive second basemen in the game . In 1888 , Dunlap ranked second among the league 's second basemen in fielding percentage ( <unk> ) and range factor ( 6 @.@ 33 ) , and in 1889 , Dunlap 's last full season in the major leagues , his <unk> fielding percentage led the National League and was a career high for Dunlap . 
 Before the start of the 1890 season , Dunlap engaged in protracted salary negotiations with President <unk> of the Alleghenies . In late March 1890 , the Pittsburg Dispatch reported that the two sides had reached a resolution , " and it now seems certain that Dunlap will play his old position in the Pittsburg league club . " <unk> said at the time : " I had a long talk with Mr. Dunlap , and we agreed to terms for him to play with us this season . Of course the terms were below those of last year , that is , he will play for much less than $ 5 @,@ 000 . He did not sign a contract , for reasons that were quite satisfactory to me ... We know he is a good player and he is quite willing to remain with us . " 
 In the first 17 games of the 1890 season , Dunlap 's batting average fell to .172 , and as a result he was released by the Alleghenies on May 15 . Aside from his batting average , disagreements with Pittsburgh 's manager , Guy Hecker , reportedly contributed to the decision . The Pittsburgh Dispatch quoted manager Hecker as saying , " Dunlap is certainly the worst man to get along with that I ever met . He has had everybody in hot water during our entire western trip . " Others speculated that Dunlap 's release was motivated by his $ 3 @,@ 500 salary and the fact that Pittsburgh 's backup second baseman , Henry Youngman , had signed for a salary of only $ 1 @,@ 050 . 
 = = = Giants and Statesmen = = = 
 Dunlap jumped to the New York Giants of the Players ' League in late May 1890 . At the time , the Washington correspondent for Sporting Life predicted that Dunlap would bring bad luck to his new team . He wrote : " Fred is a great player , but the hoo @-@ doo that seems to shadow him will make itself felt wherever he may go . There are a number of people in this vicinity who have watched his course with more than ordinary interest , and they do not hesitate to declare him a Jonah . " Dunlap appeared in only one game for the Giants and announced in July that he would play no more in 1890 and that he would spend the remainder of the summer at Atlantic City , New Jersey , with plans to return in 1891 " and play the game of his life . " 
 Dunlap concluded his baseball career in 1891 with the Washington Statesmen in the American Association . He appeared in only eight games for the Statesmen before breaking his leg sliding into a base on April 20 , 1891 . In early June 1891 , the Washington management notified him that it would discontinue his salary payments . Dunlap returned the notice and filed a grievance , contending he should have been continued at least on half pay since he was disabled while sliding into a base . Washington refused to pay , and he never played professional baseball again . 
 = = Life after baseball and legacy = = 
 When he retired from baseball , Dunlap was reported to have $ 100 @,@ 000 in savings . He went into the building business in Philadelphia during the 1890s , and owned various properties in the city . The Sporting Life reported that Dunlap " dropped out of the game in 1892 to follow the racing game , at which he lost the respectable fortune he accumulated in base ball . " Another account indicated that Dunlap lost everything on stock market investments . In July 1902 , the Philadelphia Times reported that Dunlap was " clean broke . " 
 In December 1902 , Dunlap died penniless and alone at age 43 . According to the Sporting Life , the " last two years of his life were spent in abject poverty and mental gloom " in a Philadelphia boarding house . According to several accounts , a policeman at the morgue saw the body and believed it to be Dunlap . Lave Cross was called to the morgue and confirmed that the body was Dunlap . His funeral was poorly attended by his former baseball colleagues , and one former player who did attend observed , " There were not enough friends of Dunlap at his funeral to bury him and we had to call on the hack drivers to make up the list of active pall @-@ bearers . " Following Dunlap 's death , William A. <unk> , Jr . , editor of Sporting Life wrote : 
 " So Fred Dunlap has passed into the great beyond , and the man whose salary figure marked the high @-@ water limit of the long ago is gone ! ... What a ball player this Dunlap was and what an artist in getting the fat salaries ! ... Dunlap was a real infielder of the type so popular ten years ago -- one of the solid , bulky style through whom no grounder seemed able to pass , but who could nevertheless wave the hot ones goodbye with graceful ease when occasion demanded . With the gloves now in use to aid , <unk> would have been even a bigger wonder now than then . " 
 Dunlap has been rated by some contemporary and modern sources as the greatest overall second baseman of the 19th century . In his 1910 book on the history of baseball , Alfred Henry Spink , the founder of The Sporting News , was unequivocal : " I have seen all the great second basemen ... I am free to say that Dunlap was far and away the greatest second baseman that ever lived . " Stanley Robinson , who owned and managed major league teams in St. Louis and Cleveland , went even further : " He was not only the greatest second baseman , but take him in all the departments of the game , he was perhaps the greatest player that ever lived . " Another of Dunlap 's contemporaries , Sam Crane , also picked Dunlap as the greatest second baseman in a newspaper column published in 1912 . Crane wrote : " Fred Dunlap was acknowledged to be the best second baseman of his day , and was excellent from every angle . I think he excelled Fred Pfeffer . " In 1910 , John Montgomery Ward , a Hall of Fame inductee who played from 1878 to 1894 , published an article about the greatest infielders in baseball history . While picking Fred Pfeffer as a shade better than Dunlap " , Ward observed : " Fred Dunlap was the king . Dunlap had the record average of .953 in 64 games with the Detroit club in 1887 , and was the personification of ease and grace . He was something of a grandstand player , because of his tendency to make one @-@ handed catches and stops but he got there just the same and was a big favorite wherever he showed . " 
 In a 2008 book using modern sabermetric methods , author William F. McNeil concluded that Dunlap was the best offensive second baseman , the second best defensive second baseman , and the best overall second baseman of the 19th century . Dunlap 's career range factor of 6 @.@ 31 at second base still ranks as the fifth highest in the history of Major League Baseball . However , Bill James , in his 2001 book The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , ranked Dunlap as the 89th greatest second baseman of all time ( and the 8th best of those who played the majority of their careers in the 19th century ) . James wrote that Dunlap was " never a legitimate star in a legitimate major league , but a good second baseman and a .275 hitter . " 
 = 2 / 48th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 48th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army which served during the Second World War . Raised in Adelaide in South Australia in August 1940 , the battalion formed part of the 26th Brigade and was initially assigned to the 7th Division , although it was later transferred to the 9th Division in 1941 when it was deployed to the Middle East . While there , it saw action during the siege of Tobruk and the First and Second Battles of El Alamein before being returned to Australia to take part in the fighting in New Guinea following Japan 's entry into the war . 
 During the campaign in New Guinea , the battalion took part in the advance on Lae during the Salamaua – Lae campaign and the fighting around Finschhafen and Sattelberg , during the Huon Peninsula campaign . Following this it was withdrawn to Australia , where it remained for over a year . In mid @-@ 1945 , the 2 / 48th Battalion took part in the landing on Tarakan , which was its final involvement in the war . It was disbanded in October 1945 and is considered to be Australia 's most highly decorated unit of the war , with four members receiving the Victoria Cross , the nation 's highest decoration for gallantry , while over 90 other decorations were also made to its members . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 2 / 48th Battalion was raised on 9 August 1940 at the Wayville Showgrounds , in Adelaide , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Victor Windeyer , a former Militia officer who had previously commanded the Sydney University Regiment . A unit of the all @-@ volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , the 2 / 48th Battalion was formed specifically for service overseas and recruited mainly from the state of South Australia . The battalion 's headquarters staff began arriving early in the month , with many of the key personnel having served previously in South Australian Militia units , including the 27th Battalion ( South Australian Scottish Regiment ) . At the end of August , a large draft of recruits arrived from the 2nd Infantry Training Depot , and rudimentary individual training was undertaken in the nearby park lands . The colours initially chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 48th Battalion , a unit which had served during the First World War before being raised as a Militia formation in 1921 . These colours were white over dark blue , in a circle shape , although a diamond @-@ shaped border of gray was added to the UCP to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart ; this was later changed , though , following the unit 's involvement in the fighting at Tobruk , when it adopted a ' T ' -shaped UCP . 
 With an authorised strength of around 900 personnel , like other Australian infantry battalions of the time , the battalion was formed around a nucleus of four rifle companies — designated ' A ' through to ' D ' — each consisting of three platoons . These companies were supported by a battalion headquarters and a headquarters company with six specialist platoons : signals , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administrative and mortars . Forming part of the 26th Brigade along with the 2 / 23rd and 2 / 24th Battalions , it was assigned to the 7th Division during its initial training period but was later transferred with the rest of the 26th Brigade to the 9th Division . After pre @-@ embarkation leave , the battalion undertook three weeks of collective training at Woodside , in October . The following month , the battalion marched through the city of Adelaide prior to its deployment overseas , and shortly afterwards embarked for North Africa . <unk> at Oakbank , after undertaking a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) route march in full equipment , the battalion embarked upon the troopship Stratheden on 17 November 1940 ; the large transport set sail the following day . 
 = = = Actions in North Africa = = = 
 Sailing via Colombo where the troops were given a brief shore leave , the Stratheden entered the Suez Canal in mid @-@ December 1940 . Upon arrival in the Middle East , the battalion briefly occupied a camp at El Kantara , before moving to Dimra , in Palestine . At Dimra , the battalion joined the rest of the 26th Brigade for the first time , and undertook further training until March 1941 . At this time , it moved to Cyrenica , along with the rest of the 9th Division , to undertake further training in the desert and to relieve the 6th Division which was deploying to Greece . Shortly after this , the Germans landed forces in Africa to reinforce the Italians and as the Axis went on the offensive , the British and Commonwealth forces in Libya were forced to retreat from Benghazi to the strategically important port town of Tobruk . In early April , the 2 / 48th fell back as part of the general retreat , setting up a blocking position around Tmimi during the withdrawal to prevent a German force cutting the division 's route along the coast road . After eight days of constant movement through the desert , the battalion reached the port . They subsequently took part in the defence of Tobruk , where the battalion saw its first action of the North African Campaign for which it would receive one of its many battle honours . 
 The 2 / 48th first entered Tobruk 's defences on 9 April 1941 with the rest of the 9th Division commanded by Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead . Instructed to hold the fortress for eight weeks by General Archibald Wavell , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of British Middle East Command , the 9th Division ended up defending the fortress for over eight months before being gradually withdrawn . The defensive system at Tobruk consisted of several lines : the outer position consisted of scattered perimeter posts and reserve company positions and was dubbed the " Red Line " , while the secondary defence system , which was about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) behind the " Red Line " , was dubbed the " Blue Line " . During this time the battalion alternated between occupying part of the main defence line , working in the rear areas , and conducting patrols . In mid @-@ April , while the battalion was stationed in the western sector , these patrols resulted in the battalion capturing virtually the entire 1st Battalion of the Italian 62nd Regiment , Trento Division , totalling nearly 800 officers and men . Later that month , the 2 / 48th took part in a daylight raid on a hill opposite their perimeter , behind which the Italians were massing artillery , tanks and infantry . Supported by British tanks from the 7th Royal Tank Regiment , the raid caught the defenders by surprise , resulting in the capture of over 360 more Italians , as well as large quantities of weapons and vehicles for only light casualties . In late May , a 2 / 48th patrol snuck out from the perimeter overnight , and evading German patrols , pushed 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south , where they set up an ambush and laid a series of land mines along a bypass track that was being used by German supply lorries , two of which were subsequently destroyed . In July , the battalion moved to the Bardia road sector , opposite the Italians . By October , the majority of the 9th Division , including the 2 / 48th Battalion , was withdrawn by sea as the British 70th Division arrived to take over the garrison . Overall , the 2 / 48th suffered 160 casualties at Tobruk , including 38 men killed and another 18 who died of their wounds . 
 After Tobruk , the 9th Division was sent to Palestine and Syria in order to train and rest , and to undertake garrison duties as part of the Allied occupation force that had been established their following the Syria – Lebanon campaign . Under their new commander , Lieutenant Colonel Heathcote Hammer — who had assumed command after Windeyer took over the 20th Brigade — the 2 / 48th proceeded to train in high terrain and temperatures . 
 In late June 1942 , Axis forces commanded by General Erwin Rommel , crossed the Egyptian frontier as part of an offensive aimed at capturing Alexandria . After making a brief stand around Mersa Matruh , the British Eighth Army was forced to withdraw towards the Alamein line . In response , the 9th Division was transported south from Syria , and hurriedly committed to First Battle of El Alamein . On 1 July , Rommel 's forces launched a determined assault on the Alamein line , and on 7 July the 9th Division was ordered to launch a counter @-@ attack . As part of this plan , the 2 / 48th was ordered to traverse the coastline and capture the Trig 33 ridge north of the " Tel el Eisa " station , commencing their attack shortly before dawn on 10 July . After an initial artillery bombardment that disrupted the Italian troops , the main objective of the attack ( Trig 33 ) was captured and 400 Italians were taken prisoner . The 2 / 48th then advanced south and captured Tel el Eisa station , which was successfully defended against a number of Axis counter @-@ attacks . On 22 July , the battalion was ordered to capture West Point 24 on the Tel El Eisa ridge which was held by heavily entrenched Axis forces . However , after initial success , the 2 / 48th came under heavy artillery and mortar fire and was forced to withdraw , having suffered over 100 casualties . For actions during this attack , Private Stan Gurney was awarded the battalion 's first Victoria Cross ( VC ) after he captured a machine @-@ gun post and bayoneted the gun crew that was firing on his company , and then went on to capture a second post before being killed while taking a third . In total , the 2 / 48th suffered 215 casualties in the period 7 July to 23 October 1942 , with 64 men killed , six dying of their wounds and 125 wounded . 
 In August , Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery took over command of the British Eighth Army and he succeeded in preventing the Axis advance during the Battle of Alam el Halfa . Montgomery then began preparing for an Allied offensive against the Axis forces that were now entrenching themselves . The Second Battle of El Alamein started on 23 October and finished on 7 November with Axis forces withdrawing westwards towards Fuka to avoid encirclement . The 2 / 48th Battalion was engaged around Tel el Eisa , on the right of the Allied line near the coast , during this period , as the 20th and 26th Brigades pushed westwards and then endured numerous counterattacks as the Germans sought to regain control of the strategically important coast road . By the end of the month , the battalion had been heavily depleted . Having started with nearly 700 men in the line , after a week of fighting , the battalion could field only 41 fit men . As a result , the 26th Brigade was rotated out of the line just before the final German counterattack was repulsed , allowing the Allies to launch the final breakout phase of the operation . 
 For their actions during this offensive two members of the 2 / 48th were awarded Victoria Crosses . The battalion 's second VC was awarded to Sergeant Bill Kibby for actions across a one @-@ week period . Kibby had charged several Axis positions and was subsequently killed attacking an enemy position with grenades on 31 October . Private Percy <unk> earned the battalion 's third VC on 25 October in the same area as Kibby . His platoon had been reduced to seven men by enemy fire so <unk> charged the nearest enemy position of his own volition . He killed the occupants , destroyed the post with grenades and was proceeding to neutralise another position when he too was killed . Overall , the 2 / 48th suffered a further 344 casualties in the period 23 October to 5 November 1942 with 85 men killed , 13 dying of their wounds and 243 wounded . These losses resulted in the battalion being withdrawn from the line just as the battle reached its climax in early November . As the Allies went on the advance , the battalion moved back to Tel el Eisa , during which time it was slowly rebuilt as men who had been wounded were returned to unit , or replaced by reinforcements ; this process would continue into the new year . 
 After helping to secure victory at El Alamein the 9th Division moved to Gaza in Palestine on 3 December . Since the previous October , the Australian government had sought to bring the division back to Australia in order to use it against the Japanese in the Pacific , along with the 6th and 7th Divisions which had been withdrawn the year before , and on 15 December the British prime minister , Winston Churchill , had finally agreed to provide the necessary shipping . Following a divisional parade at Gaza , the 2 / 48th Battalion embarked upon the troopship Nieuw Amsterdam on 24 January 1943 . 
 = = = Fighting in New Guinea = = = 
 The convoy carrying the battalion put into Fremantle in mid @-@ February , where the small number of Western Australian personnel disembarked to begin their home leave . The rest of the battalion continued on to Port Melbourne , before moving to Adelaide by rail . In late March , after the South Australian personnel had completed their leave , the battalion was re @-@ constituted . At that time , a series of parades were held in every Australian capital city to welcome home the 9th Division ; the 2 / 48th marched through Adelaide . After this , the 2 / 48th were transported to the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland , where they established a camp on the Barron River , near Kairi . In April 1943 , the battalion was re @-@ organised and re @-@ trained for jungle operations in the South @-@ West Pacific theatre in order to prepare it for the conditions in New Guinea . Undertaking training on the Tablelands , the battalion was converted to the tropical establishment . Warfare in the Pacific posed unique problems and differed greatly to that which the 2 / 48th had experienced in North Africa . In the jungles of New Guinea logistics and transport were significant challenges and in order to meet them , the battalion 's size was reduced by over 100 men , to around 800 , as its anti @-@ aircraft and Bren carrier platoons were disbanded , while each of the battalion 's four rifle companies lost most of their organic motor transport ; the mobility issue would be solved by marching on foot as vehicles were relatively useless in dense jungle , while supplies would be brought up using native carriers as well as by air . In July 1943 , the battalion moved to Cairns where they undertook amphibious training with the American 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment around Trinity Beach as part of their final preparations before being committed to the fighting in New Guinea . 
 Sailing aboard the Henry T. Allen , after arriving in New Guinea in early August , the 2 / 48th established a camp around Milne Bay where they undertook further amphibious training , before taking part in the landing around Lae on 4 September 1943 , as part of the final phase of the Salamaua – Lae campaign . This was the first large @-@ scale amphibious landing conducted by the Australian forces since the landings at Gallipoli in 1915 , and the battalion , along with the rest of the 26th Brigade , landed on Red Beach , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) north @-@ west of Lae . They subsequently advanced westwards , and on 14 September captured Malahang airstrip . Following the fall of Lae to the 7th Division — which had advanced from Nadzab as part of the two @-@ pronged assault — on 16 September , the Allies hurriedly launched a follow up campaign on the Huon Peninsula . Initially , only one brigade was committed to the operation , and so the 2 / 48th Battalion remained around Lae until the 26th Brigade was transported by sea to Finschhafen in late October in order to reinforce the 20th Brigade , which had landed the month previous in an effort to follow up troops withdrawing from Lae , before coming under heavy Japanese counterattack . During this time the battalion took part in repelling an attempted landing at Scarlet Beach , as the Japanese launched a counteroffensive against the Australian lodgement . 
 After the Japanese counteroffensive was defeated in late October 1943 , Australian attention turned to <unk> , the site of an abandoned Lutheran mission . The newly arrived 26th Brigade was chosen to lead the assault as it was fresher than the division 's other brigades . The main advance began on 17 November , although the battalion took part in a preliminary attack on Green Ridge the previous day in order to secure the start line for the advance . Pushing north @-@ west from Jivevaneng in company with Matilda tanks from the 1st Tank Battalion , the 2 / 48th began the drive towards <unk> . In difficult terrain and against stubborn Japanese defence , the advance made slow progress , nevertheless by 22 November Steeple Tree Hill was captured and the battalion reached the southern slopes of the Sattelberg feature , about 600 yards ( 550 m ) from its summit . 
 On 24 November , the 2 / 48th 's ' C ' Company carried out a surprise attack on the position from the south @-@ east . Crossing Siki Creek , the company stepped off shortly before 17 : 30 hours and reached the base of a steep cliff , from where they began their assault on the summit . Held up by machine gun fire and grenades that were lobbed from the Japanese position above , and finding it almost impossible to move up the hill which had a gradient of between 45 and 60 degrees , the attack appeared in danger of failure as light began to fade and ammunition ran low . However , the actions of one of the company 's platoon commanders , Sergeant Tom Derrick , reinvigorated the attack . Laying his sections down to provide covering fire , he went forward alone armed with a rifle and a quantity of grenades , attacking the Japanese positions as he went . In the end he accounted for 10 such posts , before the attack was halted 100 yards ( 91 m ) from the summit . 
 During the night , the company clung to the edge of the plateau upon which the Sattelberg mission was situated , as fresh supplies were brought up from the rear . The attack was resumed at 08 : 35 hours the next day , supported by heavy artillery and mortar fire , however , as the 2 / 48th crested the ridge they found the position unoccupied , with the Japanese having abandoned it the previous night . For his actions the previous day , Derrick was given the honour of raising the Australian flag over the mission and was later awarded a Victoria Cross — the battalion 's fourth — to go with the Distinguished Conduct Medal he had received for actions during the fighting around El Alamein . Later , Derrick was sent to an Officer Training Unit , after which he was commissioned and , returned to the battalion as a lieutenant ; this was a departure from usual Army policy and was the result of intensive lobbying on Derrick 's behalf . 
 Following the capture of Sattelberg , the 2 / 48th continued the advance north along with the rest of the 26th Brigade , pushing on over difficult terrain to Wareo , where they arrived on 8 December . Following this , the Japanese began to fall back to Sio in retreat and the battalion 's involvement in combat operations on the peninsula came to an end as troops from the 5th Division arrived to relieve them . In January , the battalion camped around the Dallman River before being withdrawn back to Finschhafen , camping around the Song River . In February 1944 , the 2 / 48th was withdrawn back to Australia along with the 9th Division . Sailing aboard an American Liberty ship , the battalion landed in Brisbane on 20 February , and made camp at Kalinga before personnel marched out for a long period of home leave . During its time in New Guinea , the battalion had suffered 125 casualties , of which 36 were killed , three died of wounds , eight died of illness and 77 were wounded . 
 = = = Landing on Tarakan = = = 
 The battalion began reforming near Ravenshoe , on the Atherton Tablelands in April 1944 . During this time the composition of the units of the 9th Division underwent significant changes as many men were discharged due to medical reasons or transferred to other units and young replacements were brought in ; many of the battalion 's original members had been struck down by sickness during the fighting in New Guinea . A long period of training followed during which the battalion undertook a number of exercises , including amphibious operations with British Royal Marines on the Glenearn and Empire Spearhead . Finally , following more than a year training in Australia the battalion was committed to its final deployment of the war , moving to Morotai Island in April 1945 in order to take part in the landing on Tarakan as part of Operation Oboe . Embarking from Cairns , the battalion was transported in two ships , the Sea Cat and the Van <unk> , the battalion arrived on Morotai later in the month , where the battalion undertook a series of manoeuvres , exercising with armour and at night , to prepare them for the coming campaign . On 22 April , the battalion embarked upon the HMAS Manoora , practicing beach landings for a week before setting sail for their objective . 
 The entire 26th Brigade group was assigned the task of capturing Tarakan Island and destroying the Japanese garrison and the assault began on 1 May 1945 . Embarking on Manoora , the 2 / 48th was in the first wave of the attack , leading the brigade in at 07 : 15 hours , landing on Red Beach , on the left flank of the lodgement , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Tarakan town on the western side of the island , with the 2 / 23rd on their right . The preliminary bombardment had been successful , and as the battalion came ashore they were largely unopposed , allowing the landing craft to get in close to the shore . Pushing inland , the 2 / 48th had secured its primary objectives by 08 : 38 hours . The right forward company took sporadic fire as it secured the oil tanks , while the battalion 's left hand company was able to capture the bridge over the <unk> River and the high feature overlooking the landing beach without meeting any resistance . 
 Advancing inland , the Japanese pillboxes that had fired on the right forward company were secured after they were abandoned by the defenders . A company was then sent along the Anzac Highway to secure Collins Highway ridge . By 13 : 40 hours the western end of the ridge had been secured , however , the battalion began taking fire from the east . Forward momentum was maintained , although the 2 / 48th suffered a number of casualties , and by the end of the day a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) by 2 @,@ 800 @-@ yard ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) beachhead had been established , and the battalion had companies on Collins Highway ridge , one on the " Parks " feature and another at " Finch " . 
 Over the course of the next couple of days , Japanese resistance to the Australian advance increased . After the Australians secured the island 's airfield and the low ground along the west coast , throughout May and into June significant engagements took place in the hills surrounding Tarakan town . On 2 May , the 2 / 48th captured Lyons Ridge , before pressing on towards Tarakan Hill , where they assaulted the " Sykes " feature supported by Matilda tanks from the 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment . Here they experienced their heaviest losses of the campaign , losing six killed and 26 wounded during the three assaults up the steep slopes of the feature . Their next major engagement came in late May when the 2 / 48th took part in fighting around Freda Ridge as part of the drive on the main Japanese position around <unk> . A company @-@ level attack was put in and after stiff resistance the ridge was captured . The following morning , as the battalion waited for a Japanese counterattack , Tom Derrick , who had played a key role in capturing the position the previous day , was mortally wounded . He subsequently died on 24 May 1945 . 
 In June , major combat operations on the island ceased and the Australians began the mopping up phase of the campaign as the Australians sought to clear isolated pockets of Japanese troops that had evaded capture . These operations continued into July . During this time , the 2 / 48th was assigned a sector near the <unk> River on the eastern coast , as well as Tarakan town and the centre of the island . The battalion 's involvement in the Borneo campaign resulted in 174 casualties , including 37 killed and nine died of wounds or from accident . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of hostilities in August , the battalion remained on Tarakan to undertake garrison duties . During this time it undertook patrol operations to bring in the various pockets of Japanese troops who had not learned of the surrender ; these were dangerous operations and in an effort to reduce casualties , the patrols went out with several Japanese prisoners to help talk their former comrades into surrendering . As the demobilisation process began , its numbers dwindled as long @-@ serving men were repatriated back to Australia , while others with only limited service were transferred to other units for further service . Finally , on 25 October 1945 , while still on Tarakan , the battalion was disbanded . The occasion was marked by a small ceremony at Tarakan involving the unit 's remaining members . During the course of the war a total of 2 @,@ 838 men served with the 2 / 48th Battalion , of whom 343 men were killed in action or died on active service , 675 were wounded , and 20 captured . 
 According to the Australian War Memorial the 2 / 48th Battalion was " Australia 's highest decorated unit of the Second World War " . Four members of the battalion received the Victoria Cross , three of them posthumously . Other decorations awarded to members of the 2 / 48th included : four Distinguished Service Orders , 12 Military Crosses , 10 Distinguished Conduct Medals , 24 Military Medals and 36 Mentions in Despatches . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 2 / 48th Battalion during the war : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Victor Windeyer ( 9 August 1940 – 6 January 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Heathcote Hammer ( 8 January 1942 – 18 June 1943 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Ainslie ( 22 July 1943 – 12 August 1945 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 48th Battalion was awarded the 14 battle honours for its service during the war : 
 North Africa 1941 – 42 , Defence of Tobruk , El Adem Road , The Salient 1941 , Defence of Alamein Line , Tell el Eisa , El Alamein , South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Lae – Nadzab , Finschhafen , Defence of Scarlet Beach , Sattelberg , Borneo , Tarakan . 
 = Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom ( 1988 video game ) = 
 This entry is for the Nintendo Entertainment System version . For the earlier arcade version , see Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom ( 1985 video game ) . 
 Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is an action game released in 1988 for the Nintendo Entertainment System . The game is based on the arcade game and film of the same name . The resulting product differed from the arcade version in several aspects , but kept the same underlying premise and style . 
 By December 1988 , there were two versions of the game available , distributed by Tengen and Mindscape , although the software itself was identical . After a lawsuit , Tengen 's unlicensed version was pulled from the shelves and Mindscape 's became the standard . Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom gives the player control of Indiana Jones as he makes his way through the temple in a series of 12 levels or " waves . " In the final wave , the player must defeat the villain of the film , Mola Ram , on a rope bridge that recreates the final scene in the movie . Reception of the game was generally negative . 
 = = Version history = = 
 The film version of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom was released in 1984 and starred Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones . A year later , in 1985 , Atari Games capitalized on the franchise by releasing the initial version of the game on arcade machine . This version was a platform and fighting game and featured theme music and sound clips from the actual film . The game takes place over three zones that are based on the movie 's plot , where the objective is to free the slave children and recover the Sankara stones . This version was also the first translated from any of the movies in the Indiana Jones series into an arcade game , although Raiders of the Lost Ark for the Atari 2600 and Indiana Jones and the Lost Kingdom for the Commodore 64 had come out in 1982 and 1984 respectively . 
 Nintendo of America 's Nintendo Entertainment System was the best selling console system and almost all video game developers and publishers wanted to contribute the video game library . The NES , at its peak , controlled 90 % of the 8 @-@ bit market in the United States . Companies such as Konami , Capcom and Acclaim Entertainment derived many of their gaming ideas from two sources to better capitalize on the growing industry . The first strategy was to take games that were already popular on arcade , such as Contra , and port them to home console versions . Their second idea was to produce game versions of popular movies and television . 
 Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom satisfied both of these categories . Aside from the original arcade version , the Commodore 64 , Amstrad CPC , and ZX Spectrum system had released ports of the arcade game in 1987 . By December 1988 , the Nintendo Entertainment System had already seen two separate editions of the Temple of Doom game . The first version , distributed by Tengen , came in a black cartridge that was different from Nintendo 's traditional grey colour format . By this point , however , Tengen had split from Nintendo and was producing unlicensed games that attempted to circumvent the need for a <unk> lockout chip . Nintendo filed suit and Tengen lost , forcing it to remove its NES games from the market . The officially licensed version was released by Mindscape in the form of a standard Nintendo cartridge . Aside from the differences in cover art and cartridge form , however , the actual software of the two games is identical . After the NES version , the game was subsequently released for Atari ST and MSX in 1987 , and Amiga , DOS , and Apple in 1989 . 
 There are several differences between the arcade game and its console adaptation . In the original arcade version , the Sankara Stones were not all found in one location at the end of a wave . Instead , Jones had to travel through a temple every two rounds . In addition , the entire style of play is different and bestows upon the player more weapons and items for Jones to collect from the slave children he frees . Jones was also unable to jump in previous incarnations of the game . 
 = = Plot and gameplay = = 
 The plot of the NES version follows the storyline of the original movie . At the onset of the game , Jones has just reached the Pankot Palace featured in the movie and is preparing to free the slave children , recover the missing Sankara Stones and defeat Mola Ram and his Thuggee entourage . The game differs from the original arcade version in many respects , including the layout and the manner in which one progresses through the game , but the plot remains unchanged in both versions . 
 The player advances through 12 levels ( called " waves " ) , the first nine of which require Jones to travel through the palace and recover the Sankara Stones . In these stages , the player may restart the game with all items intact in the last area reached . Afterwards , if the player dies , they must return to the Chamber of Kali ( Wave 9 ) and finish the game from that point . Each level also has a timer that goes from 99 to zero . If time runs out , the player is confronted by Mola Ram and loses one life and all of their items . All levels also contain mine cart rooms , where Jones can ride the rails through the levels across hazards and past enemies . 
 Wave 9 requires the player to cross a river of lava by stunning the monsters that live there . Once across , Jones must grab the Sankara Stones to progress to the Map Room where he can use the map pieces he has collected to figure out where the secret door exit is in Wave 10 . Alternatively , there is a secret idol in Wave 8 that will reveal the hidden exit . To pass requires the use of both TNT and the Sankara Stones . Wave 11 leads to the exit and Wave 12 recreates the scene with the rope bridge and the final battle with Mola Ram . 
 The game contains a variety of elements that both aid and hinder the player 's progress through the waves . At his disposal , Jones has TNT , guns , swords , hats for extra lives , jewels for extra time and his classic whip . Opposing him are bats , rats , snakes , spiders and an endless supply of <unk> servants . In addition , if Jones lands in any of the lava pits , crashes a mine cart or hits a boulder or spike trap , he loses one life . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although hyped up in Nintendo Power 's " Video Shorts " section as an upcoming release , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom met with generally negative reception . Aside from the difficulty level of the game , the official reviewer for the Indiana Jones fan community <unk> noted that Jones ' new jumping ability is glitchy , causing him to leap downwards no matter which direction he is facing , unless the player is holding down the button for the particular direction in which they want to jump . Also cited as flaws are poor controls , unappealing graphics , the amount of enemies , and the text @-@ only ending screen . The reviewer admitted , however , that the game 's " respectable attempt to preserve John Williams ' musical score " was one of its only highlights . The original arcade version was the first Atari System 1 game to talk to the players using speech capability , a feature lacking in the console version due to the limitations of the hardware . The arcade game , like the console adaptation , obtained its theme music ( as well as sound effects that were absent on the NES version ) from the film itself . 
 Skyler Miller , a reviewer at Allgame who compared the console adaptation to the original game , admitted that the graphics are " recognizable , " but claims that the version is " missing much of the original 's detail and character . " Miller 's final judgment is to call it " a passable effort " and to compare unfavourably to the arcade version . Edward J. Semrad , a contemporary technical writer and computer specialist with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel included the game in his list of games that were " watered @-@ down versions of what we see in the arcades " and praised the PC version for its superiority . 
 = Ancient Trader = 
 Ancient Trader is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed by the Slovakian studio 4Kids Games . It was released in 2010 for Microsoft Windows , Xbox Live on Xbox 360 , and iOS . The player controls a ship , allowing them to explore the world and engage in trading while seeking three artifacts that will help to defeat the game 's main antagonist , a sea creature called the Ancient Guardian . 
 The game design was influenced by board games and the video games Elite and Advance Wars . The game was developed using Microsoft XNA , and took one year to complete with a team of six people . Lead designer Peter Levius worked with the artist Petr Vcelka on the game 's graphic design , and with Milan Malik on the game 's score . Ancient Trader received a positive response from critics , who praised the art design and overall gameplay . A sequel , Fortune Winds : Ancient Trader , was developed by <unk> Entertainment and released in 2012 for Microsoft Windows . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ancient Trader is a turn @-@ based strategy video game played from a two @-@ dimensional perspective . The player controls a ship and seeks out three artifacts to defeat the game 's final boss , a sea creature called the Ancient Guardian . The player explores the map to gather items , including tea , spices , and fruit , all of which can be found in wrecks . These can be exchanged for gold , which can be used to buy upgrades for the ship . The commodities are stored in the cargo hold , the capacity of which can be upgraded with gold . 
 At the beginning of the game , the entire map is obscured until explored by the player . The map consists of a landlocked sea with several islands , wreckage , sea creatures , enemy ships , ports , and whirlpools . The player can sometimes encounter message bottles that clear away fog of war on the map to reveal hidden <unk> creatures and enemy ships appear randomly and challenge the player for gold or commodities in a card minigame . Ports are trading and safe zones where the player can sell commodities , buy upgrades for the ship , and take on sidequests . <unk> teleport the player 's ship to a random location on the map . 
 The ship can be moved horizontally and vertically , but not diagonally . The player makes a set number of steps each turn , after which the artificial intelligence does the same for non @-@ playable characters ( NPCs ) . If the player 's ship is not docked at a port at the end of a turn , the player can be attacked by an enemy ship or a sea creature . If they are attacked , a card minigame is triggered to decide if the player loses gold to a rival ship or cargo to a sea creature . The player and NPC draw coloured and numbered cards ; the highest @-@ numbered card wins each turn , unless presented against a powerful color . The strongest hue receives an attack bonus . The player 's following turn starts after the minigame is completed . 
 After sufficiently upgrading the ship and exploring the map , the player is allowed to buy the three powerful artifacts , which then spawn at random ports . Defeating the Ancient Guardian in a card minigame awards the player additional loot and previously unavailable upgrades . Ancient Trader does not include a saving feature , which means that all progress is lost if the game is closed . An online multiplayer mode allows for several players to simultaneously play the same map , chase the artifacts , and defeat the Guardian . The prices of the artifacts increase as other players buy them . The players can check the wealth and artifacts gained by other players . The game also includes several alternative game modes , which focus on reaching a set total wealth or cash tally before other players . The multiplayer does not include an online scoreboard . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ancient Trader is the first video game developed by the Slovakian studio 4Kids Games . The development team consisted of the lead designer Peter Levius , the artist Petr Vcelka , the game designer Miroslav <unk> , and the programmer Andrej <unk> . The score was composed by Milan Malik , while Jan <unk> designed and animated the graphics . The game was developed using Microsoft XNA , a set of game development tools . According to Levius , Ancient Trader took around one year to finish ; " most of our team members [ ... ] were working hard on other higher priority projects at the same time " . The game was submitted for XNA approval on 2 June 2010 . 
 Ancient Trader 's design was influenced by that of board games and of the video games Elite and Advance Wars . Levius and his girlfriend dedicated around two months to test and balance the game 's mechanics , gathering groups of friends to play the game " without explaining anything to see if they can understand the rules and controls " . He worked with Vcelka to design Ancient Trader 's appearance , including paper textures and clouds . He revealed that some of the maps ' features came from a scan of an old military map of present @-@ day Slovakia . According to Chris Schilling from Eurogamer , Vcelka took inspiration from sixteenth and seventeenth @-@ century cartography , as well as from Abraham Ortelius and his Theatrum Orbis Terrarum , to create " exceptionally detailed art " . 
 For the Xbox 360 version , the team introduced a feature to reduce the colour saturation in the game and allow players to decide how much colour they wanted to have . Levius acknowledged that this feature " is a big thing for me and Petr as we always wanted to also have a black and white version of the game in style of Jules Verne 's illustrations " . He also commented that several other features , such as more animations and leaderboards , were left out due to a lack of time , but he kept them in mind for a possible sequel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ancient Trader received positive responses from several video game journalists upon its release . Most critics praised the game 's art design and gameplay , but criticized the lack of key elements such as a saving feature and scoreboards . The British magazine Edge included Ancient Trader in its 2010 list of the Best 20 Indie Games available in the Xbox Live Marketplace . They acknowledged that the game was " ambitious , devious and surprisingly hard to fault " . IGN staff called it " a simple , easy entry strategy game suitable for all ages " . 
 Tom Chick from <unk> compared Ancient Trader to video games such as The Seven Cities of Gold and Sid Meier 's Pirates ! , as well as to other indie games such as " the sci @-@ fi space operettas Strange Adventures in Infinite Space and Flotilla , but wind @-@ powered and sepia @-@ toned " . Like most reviewers , Chick highly praised the artistic design , as well as the game 's atmospheric music and vividness of the environment : " It 's all ink and vellum and cursive script and layers of lovingly drawn facades drawn on plywood and stacked up for a 19th Century stage production . " 
 Eurogamer 's Chris Schilling commented that although Ancient Trader was not as comprehensive and expansive as other Xbox Live titles such as Risk : Factions , it deserved " the opportunity to do business with the big boys rather than risk getting washed away with the <unk> tide " . Schilling expressed concern that " a game so elegant and accomplished should have to be dredged up from the depths of Indie Games " . Lorenzo <unk> from Eurogamer Italy awarded Ancient Trader the same score as Schilling , and explained that " the final result is a quite simple title , which will last long enough to make you feel happy of having invested your money in this indie title " . 
 Gus Mastrapa from Wired commented that Ancient Trader was well worth its price " for its art alone " . He praised the game 's overall style , " borrowed from centuries @-@ old maps ... more handsome than any other game you 'll find in the Xbox Live indie category " . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel , Fortune Winds : Ancient Trader , was developed by Swedish studio <unk> Entertainment and released in July 2012 for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X. Fortune Winds includes improved AI , new player avatars and a save feature . GamesMaster was unimpressed with the sequel . The magazine awarded it 69 out of 100 and commented that it deviated too much from the original indie game . 
 = Eye of Ra = 
 The Eye of Ra or Eye of Re is a being in ancient Egyptian mythology that functions as a feminine counterpart to the sun god Ra and a violent force that subdues his enemies . The Eye is an extension of Ra 's power , equated with the disk of the sun , but it also behaves as an independent entity , which can be personified by a wide variety of Egyptian goddesses , including Hathor , Sekhmet , Bastet , Wadjet , and Mut . The Eye goddess acts as mother , sibling , consort , and daughter of the sun god . She is his partner in the creative cycle in which he begets the renewed form of himself that is born at dawn . The Eye 's violent aspect defends Ra against the agents of disorder that threaten his rule . This dangerous aspect of the Eye goddess is often represented by a lioness or by the uraeus , or cobra , a symbol of protection and royal authority . The Eye of Ra is similar to the Eye of Horus , which belongs to a different god , Horus , but represents many of the same concepts . The disastrous effects when the Eye goddess rampages out of control and the efforts of the gods to return her to a benign state are a prominent motif in Egyptian mythology . 
 The Eye of Ra was involved in many areas of ancient Egyptian religion , including in the cults of the many goddesses who are equated with it . Its life @-@ giving power was celebrated in temple rituals , and its dangerous aspect was invoked in the protection of the pharaoh , of sacred places , and of ordinary people and their homes . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = = Solar = = = 
 The Egyptians often referred to the sun and the moon as the " eye " s of particular gods . The right eye of the god Horus , for instance , was equated with the sun , and his left eye equated with the moon . At times the Egyptians called the lunar eye the " Eye of Horus " , a concept with its own complex mythology and symbolism , and called the solar eye the " Eye of Ra " — Ra being the preeminent sun god in ancient Egyptian religion . However , in Egyptian belief , many terms and concepts are fluid , so the sun could also be called the " Eye of Horus " . 
 The yellow or red disk @-@ like sun emblem in Egyptian art represents the Eye of Ra . Because of the great importance of the sun in Egyptian religion , this emblem is among the most common religious symbols in all of Egyptian art . Although Egyptologists usually call this emblem the " sun disk " , its convex shape in Egyptian relief sculpture suggests that the Egyptians may have envisioned it as a sphere . The emblem often appears atop the heads of solar @-@ associated deities , including Ra himself , to indicate their links with the sun . The disk could even be regarded as Ra 's physical form . At other times , the sun god , in various forms , is depicted inside the disk shape as if enclosed within it . The Egyptians often described the sun 's movement across the sky as the movement of a barque carrying Ra and his entourage of other gods , and the sun disk can either be equated with this solar barque or depicted containing the barque inside it . The disk is often called Ra 's " daughter " in Egyptian texts . 
 As the sun , the Eye of Ra is a source of heat and light , and it is associated with fire and flames . It is also equated with the red light that appears before sunrise , and with the morning star that precedes and signals the sun 's arrival . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The eyes of Egyptian deities , although they are aspects of the power of the gods who own them , sometimes take active roles in mythology , possibly because the word for " eye " in Egyptian , <unk> , resembles another word meaning " do " or " act " . The presence of the feminine suffix -t in <unk> may explain why these independent eyes were thought of as female . The Eye of Ra , in particular , is deeply involved in the sun god 's creative actions . 
 In Egyptian mythology , the sun 's emergence from the horizon each morning is likened to Ra 's birth , an event that revitalizes him and the order of the cosmos . Ra emerges from the body of a goddess who represents the sky — usually Nut . Depictions of the rising sun often show Ra as a child contained within the solar disk . In this context , the Egyptologist Lana Troy suggests , the disk may represent the womb from which he is born or the placenta that emerges with him . The Eye of Ra can also take the form of a goddess , which according to Troy is both the mother who brings Ra forth from her womb and a sister who is born alongside him like a placenta . Ra was sometimes said to enter the body of the sky goddess at sunset , impregnating her and setting the stage for his rebirth at sunrise . Consequently , the Eye , as womb and mother of the child form of Ra , is also the consort of the adult Ra . The adult Ra , likewise , is the father of the Eye who is born at sunrise . The Eye is thus a feminine counterpart to Ra 's masculine creative power , part of a broader Egyptian tendency to express creation and renewal through the metaphor of sexual reproduction . Ra gives rise to his daughter , the Eye , who in turn gives rise to him , her son , in a cycle of constant regeneration . 
 Ra is not unique in this relationship with the Eye . Other solar gods may interact in a similar way with the numerous goddesses associated with the Eye . Hathor , a goddess of the sky , the sun , and fertility , is often called the Eye of Ra , and she also has a relationship with Horus , who also has solar connections , that is similar to the relationship between Ra and his Eye . Hathor can even be called " the Eye of Horus " — one of several ways in which the distinctions between the two eyes are blurred . The Eye can also act as an extension of and companion to Atum , a creator god closely associated with Ra . Sometimes this eye is called the Eye of Atum , although at other times the Eye of Ra and the Eye of Atum are distinct , with Ra 's Eye the sun and Atum 's Eye the moon . 
 A myth about the Eye , known from allusions in the Coffin Texts from the Middle Kingdom ( c . 2055 – 1650 BC ) and a more complete account in the Bremner @-@ Rhind Papyrus from the Late Period ( 664 – 332 BC ) , demonstrates the Eye 's close connection with Ra and Atum and her ability to act independently . The myth takes place before the creation of the world , when the solar creator — either Ra or Atum — is alone . Shu and Tefnut , the children of this creator god , have drifted away from him in the waters of Nu , the chaos that exists before creation in Egyptian belief , so he sends out his Eye to find them . The Eye returns with Shu and Tefnut but is infuriated to see that the creator has developed a new eye , which has taken her place . The creator god <unk> her by giving her an exalted position on his forehead in the form of the uraeus , the emblematic cobra that appears frequently in Egyptian art , particularly on royal crowns . The equation of the Eye with the uraeus and the crown underlines the Eye 's role as a companion to Ra and to the pharaoh , with whom Ra is linked . Upon the return of Shu and Tefnut , the creator god is said to have shed tears , although whether they are prompted by happiness at his children 's return or distress at the Eye 's anger is unclear . These tears give rise to the first humans . In a variant of the story , it is the Eye that weeps instead , so the Eye is the progenitor of humankind . 
 The tears of the Eye of Ra are part of a more general connection between the Eye and moisture . In addition to representing the morning star , the Eye can also be equated with the star Sothis ( Sirius ) . Every summer , at the start of the Egyptian year , Sothis ' heliacal rising , in which the star rose above the horizon just before the sun itself , heralded the start of the Nile inundation , which watered and fertilized Egypt 's farmland . Therefore , the Eye of Ra precedes and represents the floodwaters that restore fertility to all of Egypt . 
 = = = Aggressive and protective = = = 
 The Eye of Ra also represents the destructive aspect of Ra 's power : the heat of the sun , which in Egypt can be so harsh that the Egyptians sometimes likened it to arrows shot by a god to destroy evildoers . The uraeus is a logical symbol for this dangerous power . In art , the sun disk image often incorporates one or two uraei coiled around it . The solar uraeus represents the Eye as a dangerous force that encircles the sun god and guards against his enemies , spitting flames like venom . Four uraei are sometimes said to surround Ra 's barque . Collectively called " Hathor of the Four Faces " , they represent the Eye 's vigilance in all directions . 
 Ra 's enemies are the forces of chaos , which threaten maat , the cosmic order that he creates . They include both humans who spread disorder and cosmic powers like Apep , the embodiment of chaos , whom Ra and the gods who accompany him in his barque are said to combat every night . The malevolent gaze of Apep 's own Eye is a potent weapon against Ra , and Ra 's Eye is one of the few powers that can counteract it . Some unclear passages in the Coffin Texts suggest that Apep was thought capable of injuring or stealing the Eye of Ra from its master during the combat . In other texts , the Eye 's fiery breath assists in Apep 's destruction . This apotropaic function of the Eye of Ra is another point of overlap with the Eye of Horus , which was similarly believed to ward off evil . 
 The Eye 's aggression may even extend to deities who , unlike Apep , are not regarded as evil . Evidence in early funerary texts suggests that at dawn , Ra was believed to swallow the multitude of other gods , who in this instance are equated with the stars , which vanish at sunrise and reappear at sunset . In doing so , he absorbs the gods ' power , thereby renewing his own vitality , before spitting them out again at nightfall . The solar Eye is said to assist in this effort , slaughtering the gods for Ra to eat . The red light of dawn therefore signifies the blood produced by this slaughter . 
 In the myth called the Destruction of Mankind , related in the Book of the Heavenly Cow from the New Kingdom ( c . 1550 – 1070 BC ) , Ra uses the Eye as a weapon against humans who have rebelled against his authority . He sends the Eye — Hathor , in her aggressive manifestation as the lioness goddess Sekhmet — to massacre them . She does so , but after the first day of her rampage , Ra decides to prevent her from killing all humanity . He orders that beer be dyed red and poured out over the land . The Eye goddess drinks the beer , mistaking it for blood , and in her inebriated state returns to Ra without noticing her intended victims . Through her drunkenness she has been returned to a harmless form . Nadine <unk> suggests that the Eye 's rampage alludes to the heat and widespread disease of the Egyptian summer , and in particular to the <unk> days before the new year , which were regarded as unlucky . The red beer might then refer to the red silt that accompanied the subsequent Nile flood , which was believed to end the period of misfortune . 
 The solar Eye 's volatile nature can make her difficult even for her master to control . In the myth of the " Distant Goddess " , a motif with several variants , the Eye goddess becomes upset with Ra and runs away from him . In some versions the provocation for her anger seems to be her replacement with a new eye after the search for Shu and Tefnut , but in others her rebellion seems to take place after the world is fully formed . Dimitri Meeks and Christine <unk> @-@ Meeks interpret these events as the Eye 's reaction to being deceived by Ra after her slaughter of humanity , whereas Carolyn Graves @-@ Brown sees it as a later elaboration of the myth related in the Book of the Heavenly Cow . With the solar Eye gone , Ra is vulnerable to his enemies and bereft of a large part of his power . The Eye 's absence and Ra 's weakened state may be a mythological reference to solar eclipses . Moreover , it may be part of a larger motif in Egyptian myth in which a god 's Eye is lost and then restored with the help of another deity . This motif also applies to the Eye of Horus , which in the Osiris myth is torn out and must be returned or healed so that Horus may regain his strength . 
 Meanwhile , the Eye wanders in a distant land — Nubia , Libya , or Punt . She takes the form of a wild feline , as dangerous and uncontrolled as the forces of chaos that she is meant to subdue . To restore order , one of the gods goes out to retrieve her . In one version , known from scattered allusions , the warrior god Anhur searches for the Eye , which takes the form of the goddess Mehit , using his skills as a hunter . In other accounts , it is Shu who searches for Tefnut , who in this case represents the Eye rather than an independent deity . Thoth , who often serves as a messenger and conciliator in the Egyptian pantheon , can also seek the wandering goddess . His role in retrieving the Eye of Ra parallels his role in the Osiris myth , in which he heals or returns Horus ' lost Eye . In a Late Period papyrus dubbed " The Myth of the Eye of the Sun " , Thoth persuades the Eye of Ra to return through a combination of lectures , enticement , and entertaining stories . His efforts are not uniformly successful ; at one point , the goddess is so enraged by Thoth 's words that she transforms from a relatively benign cat into a fire @-@ breathing lioness , making Thoth jump . 
 When the goddess is at last placated , the retrieving god escorts her back to Egypt . Her return marks the beginning of the inundation and the new year . The pacified Eye deity is once more a procreative consort for the sun god , or , in some versions of the story , for the god who brings her back . Mehit becomes the consort of Anhur , Tefnut is paired with Shu , and Thoth 's spouse is sometimes <unk> , a minor goddess associated with this pacified form of the Eye . In many cases , the Eye goddess and her consort then produce a divine child who becomes the new sun god . The goddess ' transformation from hostile to peaceful is a key step in the renewal of the sun god and the kingship that he represents . 
 The dual nature of the Eye goddess shows , as Graves @-@ Brown puts it , that " the Egyptians saw a double nature to the feminine , which encompassed both extreme passions of fury and love . " This same view of femininity is found in texts describing human women , such as the Instruction of <unk> , which says a man 's wife is like a cat when he can keep her happy and like a lioness when he cannot . 
 = = Manifestations = = 
 The characteristics of the Eye of Ra were an important part of the Egyptian conception of female divinity in general , and the Eye was equated with many goddesses , ranging from very prominent deities like Hathor to obscure ones like <unk> , a lion goddess who appears in only one known inscription . 
 The Egyptians associated many gods who took felid form with the sun , and many lioness deities , like Sekhmet , <unk> , and Tefnut , were equated with the Eye . Bastet was depicted as both a domestic cat and a lioness , and with these two forms she could represent both the peaceful and violent aspects of the Eye . Yet another goddess of the solar Eye was Mut , the consort of the god Amun , who was associated with Ra . Mut was first called the Eye of Ra in the late New Kingdom , and the aspects of her character that were related to the Eye grew increasingly prominent over time . Mut , too , could appear in both leonine and cat form . 
 Likewise , cobra goddesses often represented the Eye . Among them was Wadjet , a tutelary deity of Lower Egypt who was closely associated with royal crowns and the protection of the king . Other Eye @-@ associated cobra goddesses include the fertility deity Renenutet , the magician goddess <unk> @-@ <unk> , and <unk> , the divine protector of the burial grounds near the city of Thebes . 
 The deities associated with the Eye were not restricted to feline and serpent forms . Hathor 's usual animal form is a cow , as is that of the closely linked Eye goddess <unk> @-@ <unk> . Nekhbet , a vulture goddess , was closely connected with Wadjet , the Eye , and the crowns of Egypt . Many Eye goddesses appear mainly in human form , including Neith , a sometimes warlike deity sometimes said to be the mother of the sun god , and Satet and <unk> , who were linked with the Nile cataracts and the inundation . Other such goddesses include Sothis , the deified form of the star of the same name , and Maat , the personification of cosmic order , who was connected with the Eye because she was said to be the daughter of Ra . Even Isis , who is usually the companion of Osiris rather than Ra , or Astarte , a deity of fertility and warfare who was imported from Canaan rather than native to Egypt , could be equated with the solar Eye . 
 Frequently , two Eye @-@ related goddesses appear together , representing different aspects of the Eye . The juxtaposed deities often stand for the procreative and aggressive sides of the Eye 's character , as Hathor and Sekhmet sometimes do . Wadjet and Nekhbet can stand for Lower and Upper Egypt , respectively , along with the Red Crown and White Crown that represent the two lands . Similarly , Mut , whose main cult center was in Thebes , sometimes served as an Upper Egyptian counterpart of Sekhmet , who was worshipped in Memphis in Lower Egypt . 
 These goddesses and their iconographies frequently mingled . Many combinations such as Hathor @-@ Tefnut , Mut @-@ Sekhmet , and Bastet @-@ Sothis appear in Egyptian texts . Wadjet could sometimes be depicted with a lion head rather than that of a cobra , Nekhbet could take on cobra form as a counterpart of Wadjet , and a great many of these goddesses wore the sun disk on their heads , sometimes with the addition of a uraeus or the cow horns from Hathor 's typical headdress . Beginning in the Middle Kingdom , the hieroglyph for a uraeus could be used as a logogram or determinative for the word " goddess " in any context , because virtually any goddess could be linked with the Eye 's complex set of attributes . 
 = = Worship = = 
 The Eye of Ra was invoked in many areas of Egyptian religion , and its mythology was incorporated into the worship of many of the goddesses identified with it . 
 The Eye 's flight from and return to Egypt was a common feature of temple ritual in the Ptolemaic and Roman periods ( 305 BC – AD 390 ) , when the new year and the Nile flood that came along with it were celebrated as the return of the Eye after her wanderings in foreign lands . The Egyptians built shrines along the river containing images of animals and dwarfs rejoicing at the goddess ' arrival . Scholars do not know how well developed the myth and the corresponding rituals were in earlier times . One of the oldest examples is Mut 's return to her home temple in Thebes , which was celebrated there annually as early as the New Kingdom . At the temple of Montu at <unk> , in a festival that may date back to the late Middle Kingdom , it was Montu 's consort <unk> who was equated with Hathor and the Eye of Ra . The return of this Eye goddess , in fertile , moisture @-@ bearing form , set the stage for her subsequent marriage to Montu and the birth of their mythological child , a form of Horus . The temple 's new year festival celebrated her homecoming with drinking and dancing , paralleling the goddess ' inebriated state after her pacification . In other cities , two goddesses were worshipped as the belligerent and peaceful forms of the Eye , as with <unk> and <unk> at Herakleopolis or Satet and <unk> at Aswan . 
 In another temple ritual , the pharaoh played a ceremonial game in honor of the Eye goddesses Hathor , Sekhmet , or Tefnut , in which he struck a ball symbolizing the Eye of Apep with a club made from a type of wood that was said to have sprung from the Eye of Ra . The ritual represents , in a playful form , the battle of Ra 's Eye with its greatest foe . 
 The concept of the solar Eye as mother , consort , and daughter of a god was incorporated into royal ideology . Pharaohs took on the role of Ra , and their consorts were associated with the Eye and the goddesses equated with it . The sun disks and uraei that were incorporated into queens ' headdresses during the New Kingdom reflect this mythological tie . The priestesses who acted as ceremonial " wives " of particular gods during the Third Intermediate Period ( c . 1059 – 653 BC ) , such as the God 's Wife of Amun , had a similar relationship with the gods they served . Amenhotep III even dedicated a temple at <unk> in Nubia to his wife , <unk> , as a manifestation of the Eye of Ra , paralleling the temple to Amenhotep himself at nearby <unk> . 
 The violent form of the Eye was also invoked in religious ritual and symbolism as an agent of protection . The uraeus on royal and divine headdresses alludes to the role of the Eye goddesses as protectors of gods and kings . For similar reasons , uraei appear in rows atop shrines and other structures , surrounding and symbolically guarding them against hostile powers . Many temple rituals called upon Eye goddesses to defend the temple precinct or the resident deity . Often , the texts of such rituals specifically mention a set of four defensive uraei . These uraei are sometimes identified with various combinations of goddesses associated with the Eye , but they can also be seen as manifestations of " Hathor of the Four Faces " , whose protection of the solar barque is extended in these rituals to specific places on earth . 
 The Eye of Ra could also be invoked to defend ordinary people . Some apotropaic amulets in the shape of the Eye of Horus bear the figure of a goddess on one side . These amulets are most likely an allusion to the connection between the Eye of Horus and the Eye of Ra , invoking their power for personal protection . In addition , certain magical spells from the New Kingdom involve the placement of clay model uraei around a house or a room , invoking the protection of the solar uraeus as in the temple rituals . These uraei are intended to ward off evil spirits and the nightmares that they were believed to cause , or other enemies of the house 's occupant . The spell says the models have " fire in their mouths " . Models like those in the spells have been found in the remains of ancient Egyptian towns , and they include bowls in front of their mouths where fuel could be burnt , although the known examples do not show signs of burning . Whether literal or metaphorical , the fire in the cobras ' mouths , like the flames spat by the Eye of Ra , was meant to dispel the nocturnal darkness and burn the dangerous beings that move within it . 
 The Eye 's importance extends to the afterlife as well . Egyptian funerary texts associate deceased souls with Ra in his nightly travels through the Duat , the realm of the dead , and with his rebirth at dawn . In these texts the Eye and its various manifestations often appear , protecting and giving birth to the deceased as they do for Ra . A spell in the Coffin Texts states that Bastet , as the Eye , illuminates the Duat like a torch , allowing the deceased to pass safely through its depths . 
 = Makemake = 
 Makemake ( minor @-@ planet designation 136472 Makemake ) is a dwarf planet and perhaps the largest Kuiper belt object ( KBO ) in the classical population , with a diameter approximately two thirds that of Pluto . Makemake has one known satellite , S / 2015 ( 136472 ) 1 . Makemake ’ s extremely low average temperature , about 30 K ( − 243 @.@ 2 ° C ) , means its surface is covered with methane , ethane , and possibly nitrogen ices . 
 Makemake was discovered on March 31 , 2005 , by a team led by Michael E. Brown , and announced on July 29 , 2005 . Initially , it was known as 2005 FY9 and later given the minor @-@ planet number 136472 . Makemake was recognized as a dwarf planet by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) in July 2008 . Its name derives from Makemake in the mythology of the Rapa Nui people of Easter Island . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Makemake was discovered on March 31 , 2005 , by a team at the Palomar Observatory , led by Michael E. Brown , and was announced to the public on July 29 , 2005 . The team had planned to delay announcing their discoveries of the bright objects Makemake and Eris until further observations and calculations were complete , but announced them both on July 29 when the discovery of another large object they had been tracking , Haumea , was controversially announced on July 27 by a different team in Spain . 
 Despite its relative brightness ( it is about a fifth as bright as Pluto ) , Makemake was not discovered until well after many much fainter Kuiper belt objects . Most searches for minor planets are conducted relatively close to the ecliptic ( the region of the sky that the Sun , Moon and planets appear to lie in , as seen from Earth ) , due to the greater likelihood of finding objects there . It probably escaped detection during the earlier surveys due to its relatively high orbital inclination , and the fact that it was at its farthest distance from the ecliptic at the time of its discovery , in the northern constellation of Coma Berenices . 
 Besides Pluto , Makemake is the only other dwarf planet that was bright enough for Clyde Tombaugh to have possibly detected during his search for trans @-@ Neptunian planets around 1930 . At the time of Tombaugh 's survey , Makemake was only a few degrees from the ecliptic , near the border of Taurus and Auriga , at an apparent magnitude of 16 @.@ 0 . This position , however , was also very near the Milky Way , and Makemake would have been almost impossible to find against the dense background of stars . Tombaugh continued searching for some years after the discovery of Pluto , but he did not find Makemake or any other trans @-@ Neptunian objects . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The provisional designation 2005 FY9 was given to Makemake when the discovery was made public . Before that , the discovery team used the codename " <unk> " for the object , because of its discovery shortly after Easter . 
 In July 2008 , in accordance with IAU rules for classical Kuiper belt objects , 2005 FY9 was given the name of a creator deity . The name of Makemake , the creator of humanity and god of fertility in the mythos of the Rapa Nui , the native people of Easter Island , was chosen in part to preserve the object 's connection with Easter . 
 = = Orbit and classification = = 
 As of December 2015 , Makemake is 52 @.@ 4 AU ( 7 @.@ 84 × 109 km ) from the Sun , almost as far from the Sun as it ever reaches on its orbit . Makemake follows an orbit very similar to that of Haumea : highly inclined at 29 ° and a moderate eccentricity of about 0 @.@ 16 . Nevertheless , Makemake 's orbit is slightly farther from the Sun in terms of both the semi @-@ major axis and perihelion . Its orbital period is nearly 310 years , more than Pluto 's 248 years and Haumea 's 283 years . Both Makemake and Haumea are currently far from the ecliptic — the angular distance is almost 29 ° . Makemake is approaching its 2033 aphelion , whereas Haumea passed its aphelion in early 1992 . 
 Makemake is a classical Kuiper belt object , which means its orbit lies far enough from Neptune to remain stable over the age of the Solar System . Unlike plutinos , which can cross Neptune 's orbit due to their 2 : 3 resonance with the planet , the classical objects have perihelia further from the Sun , free from Neptune 's perturbation . Such objects have relatively low eccentricities ( e below 0 @.@ 2 ) and orbit the Sun in much the same way the planets do . Makemake , however , is a member of the " dynamically hot " class of classical KBOs , meaning that it has a high inclination compared to others in its population . Makemake is , probably coincidentally , near the 11 : 6 resonance with Neptune . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 = = = Brightness , size , and rotation = = = 
 Makemake is currently visually the second @-@ brightest Kuiper belt object after Pluto , having a March opposition apparent magnitude of 17 @.@ 0 in the constellation Coma Berenices . This is bright enough to be visible using a high @-@ end amateur telescope . 
 Combining the detection in infrared by the Spitzer Space Telescope and Herschel Space Telescope with the similarities of spectrum with Pluto yielded an estimated diameter from 1 @,@ 360 to 1 @,@ 480 km . From the 2011 stellar occultation by Makemake , its dimensions have been initially measured to be ( 1502 ± 45 ) × ( 1430 ± 9 ) km . However , this analysis of the occultation data was later reanalyzed , which led to the dimension estimate of ( 1434 + 48 
 − 18 ) × ( 1420 + 18 
 − 24 km ) without a pole @-@ orientation constraint . This means that Makemake is slightly larger than that of Haumea , making it likely the fourth @-@ largest known trans @-@ Neptunian object after Pluto , Eris , and 2007 OR10 , though the error bars with the latter overlap . Makemake was the fourth dwarf planet recognized , because it has a bright V @-@ band absolute magnitude of − 0 @.@ 44 . Makemake has a high geometrical albedo of 0 @.@ 81 + 0 @.@ 01 
 − 0 @.@ 02 . 
 The rotation period of Makemake is estimated at 7 @.@ 77 hours . Its lightcurve amplitude is small , only 0 @.@ 03 mag . This was thought to be due to Makemake currently being viewed pole on from Earth ; however , S / 2015 ( 136472 ) 1 's orbital plane ( which is probably orbiting with little inclination relative to Makemake 's equator due to tides resulting from its rapid rotation ) is edge @-@ on from Earth , implying that Makemake is really being viewed equator @-@ on . 
 = = = Spectra and surface = = = 
 Like Pluto , Makemake appears red in the visible spectrum , and significantly redder than the surface of Eris ( see colour comparison of TNOs ) . The near @-@ infrared spectrum is marked by the presence of the broad methane ( CH4 ) absorption bands . Methane is observed also on Pluto and Eris , but its spectral signature is much weaker . 
 Spectral analysis of Makemake 's surface revealed that methane must be present in the form of large grains at least one centimetre in size . In addition to methane , large amounts of ethane and tholins as well as smaller amounts of ethylene , acetylene and high @-@ mass alkanes ( like propane ) may be present , most likely created by photolysis of methane by solar radiation . The tholins are probably responsible for the red color of the visible spectrum . Although evidence exists for the presence of nitrogen ice on its surface , at least mixed with other ices , there is nowhere near the same level of nitrogen as on Pluto and Triton , where it composes more than 98 percent of the crust . The relative lack of nitrogen ice suggests that its supply of nitrogen has somehow been depleted over the age of the Solar System . 
 The far @-@ infrared ( 24 – 70 μm ) and submillimeter ( 70 – 500 μm ) photometry performed by Spitzer and Herschel telescopes revealed that the surface of Makemake is not homogeneous . Although the majority of it is covered by nitrogen and methane ices , where the albedo ranges from 78 to 90 % , there are small patches of dark terrain whose albedo is only 2 to 12 % , and that make up 3 – 7 % of the surface . These studies were made before S / 2015 ( 136472 ) 1 was discovered ; thus , these small dark patches may actually have been the dark surface of the satellite rather than any actual surface features on Makemake . 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 Makemake was expected to have an atmosphere similar to that of Pluto but with a lower surface pressure . However , on 23 April 2011 Makemake passed in front of an 18th @-@ magnitude star and abruptly blocked its light . The results showed that Makemake presently lacks a substantial atmosphere and placed an upper limit of 4 – 12 <unk> on the pressure at its surface . 
 The presence of methane and possibly nitrogen suggests that Makemake could have a transient atmosphere similar to that of Pluto near its perihelion . Nitrogen , if present , will be the dominant component of it . The existence of an atmosphere also provides a natural explanation for the nitrogen depletion : because the gravity of Makemake is weaker than that of Pluto , Eris and Triton , a large amount of nitrogen was probably lost via atmospheric escape ; methane is lighter than nitrogen , but has significantly lower vapor pressure at temperatures prevalent at the surface of Makemake ( 32 – 36 K ) , which hinders its escape ; the result of this process is a higher relative abundance of methane . However , studies of Pluto 's atmosphere by New Horizons suggest that methane , not nitrogen , is the dominant escaping gas , suggesting that Makemake 's absence of nitrogen may be more complicated . 
 = = Satellites = = 
 On 26 April 2016 , astronomers using observations from the Hubble Space Telescope taken in April 2015 announced the discovery of a moon with a diameter of ~ 175 km ( for an assumed albedo of 4 % ) orbiting Makemake at a distance of ≥ 21 @,@ 000 km with a period of ≥ 12 days ( the minimum values are those for a circular orbit ; the actual orbital eccentricity is unknown ) . It was given the provisional name S / 2015 ( 136472 ) 1 . 
 Most other large trans @-@ Neptunian objects have at least one satellite : Eris has one , Haumea has two and Pluto has five , though 2007 OR10 has no known satellites . 10 % to 20 % of all trans @-@ Neptunian objects are expected to have one or more satellites . Because satellites offer a simple method to measure an object 's mass , Makemake 's satellite should lead to better estimates of its mass . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 It was calculated that a flyby mission to Makemake could take just over 16 years using a Jupiter gravity assist , based on a launch date of 21 August 2024 or 24 August 2036 . Makemake would be approximately 52 AU from the Sun when the spacecraft arrives . 
 = Frankie Rayder = 
 Francesca " Frankie " Rayder ( born Heidi Rayder ; January 26 , 1975 ) is an American model who appeared in the annual Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show four times and in the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue twice . She has an extensive portfolio of covergirl appearances for numerous high fashion magazines and was once a VH1 / Vogue Fashion Awards for Model of the Year nominee . She has performed in many runway shows and has been featured in numerous print ad campaigns . At the peak of her fame , she was an it girl according to The New York Times and GQ once named her the Sexiest Woman in the World . 
 She is well known for her print work for Sports Illustrated Swimsuit issues ( including the 40th Anniversary ) , The Gap holiday ads ( along with her sisters ) , a Godiva Chocolatier ad campaign and the 50th anniversary Ann Taylor ad campaign . She has appeared on the cover of US Vogue , Vogue Paris , Vogue Italia , British Vogue , German Vogue and Vogue España . 
 Rayder was engaged to Red Hot Chili Peppers bass player , Flea , with whom she has one child . After giving birth in 2005 , she took a hiatus from modeling until 2008 . At first , she only returned to print work , but she has also returned to runway modeling in 2009 . In her comeback , she achieved a Vogue España cover in February 2009 . She has a younger sister , Missy Rayder , who is also a fashion model . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Rayder was born in River Falls , Wisconsin , where she was known as Heidi Rayder . As a teenager , she moved to Minneapolis , Minnesota , a large city close to her home town , where she was first approached by a model scout who spurred her interest in the industry . Her first major success came in 1992 , when she met photographer Steven Meisel . Meisel booked her for a photo session , which became the first of many . Rayder 's first session were soon featured in the magazine Italian Glamour . She is a graduate of River Falls High School , where she played for the basketball team , and she began her modeling career with Caryn Modeling & Talent Agency in Minneapolis . She worked at a golf clubhouse in her youth . She was given the stage name Francesca to seem more exotic . 
 = = Career highlights = = 
 Rayder made her Paris runway debut on the 1997 fall runway for designers like Chanel , Christian Lacroix , and Dries van <unk> . In 1998 , she was in high demand and her booking prices were sometimes bid up to $ 25 @,@ 000 by clients hoping to pay her enough to cancel other appearances . In 1999 , she became the face of Givenchy and Meisel photographed her for Dolce & Gabbana and Versace ad campaigns . In the fall of 2000 , The New York Times referred to her and her sister collectively as the famous Rayder Sisters . At the same time , it also described Frankie as an it girl . 
 In 1999 , she became the face of Givenchy . During Fashion Week 1999 in New York City , Rayder was booked solid for four or five shows a day for designers such as Marc Jacobs , Badgley Mischka , Daryl K , Tommy Hilfiger and John Bartlett in typical day . In 2000 , she was one of the top @-@ priced models . That season she modelled in the Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show . Later that year she was a nominee at the 2000 VH1 / Vogue Fashion Awards for Model of the year along with Gisele Bündchen , Carmen Kass , Angela Lindvall , and Maggie <unk> , but Kass was the winner after defending @-@ winner <unk> withdrew to host the show . 
 In 2003 she became the face of Chanel . Rayder worked New York Fashion Week for top designers for several years . During the <unk> Anniversary Swimsuit Issue shooting , Stewart Shining photographed Rayder . Rayder is , along with Cheryl Tiegs and Melissa Keller , one of several models associated with Minnesota who have made a name in the Swimsuit Issue . She has also appeared in 1999 , 2000 , 2002 , and 2003 Victoria 's Secret fashion shows and a cameo role in the 2001 movie Zoolander . In the early 2000s , GQ named her the Sexiest Woman in the World . 
 In 2004 , she was one of the featured models ( along with Linda Evangelista , Patti Hansen and her daughters Alexandra and Theodora Richards , Twiggy , and Beverly Johnson ) in the 50 @-@ model 50th Anniversary Ann Taylor ad campaign photographed by Annie Leibovitz . Rayder was also mentioned in the press for several months for an ad campaign for Godiva Chocolatier . In 2005 , she appeared in ads , which also included models such as Sophie Dahl , and <unk> <unk> , where the models posed lovingly with chocolate goods for Valentine 's Day in Vogue , Harper 's Bazaar , and Elle . The promotion was for chocolate products that came with a " lottery " ticket that potentially could give the buyer 52 pairs of Manolo Blahnik shoes , including one custom @-@ designed by Blahnik himself . The ads began receiving publicity in the fall of 2004 . 
 Between 2004 and 2009 , Rayder took a hiatus from runway modeling . She returned to the stage in New York in February 2009 for the Fall 2009 show . She had previously made a return to print work in fall 2008 advertisement campaigns for both Stella McCartney and Roberto Cavalli and for the 2008 Gap holiday campaign . Rayder also became part of The Gap 's United States and Japan 2009 spring / summer campaigns . As part of her comeback , Rayder performed covergirl work for the February 2009 Vogue España and one of fourteen alternative covers for the September 2008 V magazine . 
 = = Notable affiliations and appearances = = 
 Following her success , Rayder traveled to Miami Beach , New York , Paris , London , and Milan , working for a number of agencies such as Company , Women Model Management , Page 305 , City Models , Take Two , Storm , and Why Not . Her advertisement portfolio includes Givenchy , Valentino , Lagerfeld , Chanel , Gucci , Dolce & Gabbana , Versace , DKNY , Gap , and Tommy Hilfiger . Rayder has also worked for designers such as Anne Klein , Matthew Williamson , Zac Posen , Marc Jacobs , Donna Karan , Carolina Herrera , and Michael Kors , and appeared in a number of magazines , including Elle , Vogue , The Face , Photo , Harper 's Bazaar , Allure , Rebel , and Marie Claire . Her magazine cover credits include : US Vogue ( November 2000 ) , Vogue Paris ( April 1999 ) , Vogue Italia ( January 1999 ) , British Vogue ( April 1999 , July 1999 , November 1999 , January 2001 ) , German Vogue ( September 1997 , May 2000 ) , Vogue España ( July 2000 , January 2004 , February 2009 ) , Vogue South Korea ( December 2000 ) , Vogue Brazil ( September 2000 ) , Elle France ( August 2000 ) , Elle United States ( August 2000 ) , and Elle Germany ( September 1992 ) . She was also featured in the 2004 ( 40th Anniversary ) and 2005 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue . She appeared in the video for Phoenix 's " Funky <unk> , " which was directed by her then @-@ boyfriend Roman Coppola . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2002 Rayder was falsely linked to Nicolas Cage after his relationship with Lisa Marie Presley ended and when she was dating his cousin Roman Coppola . Her relationship with Coppola was widely chronicled and serious ; that year , she was close to marrying the son of Francis Ford Coppola by some accounts . Early in her career Frankie and her sister Missy lived across the street from each other . They were featured together on the May 2000 cover of Harper 's Bazaar . The Rayder sisters ( along with a third sister named Molly ) appeared in holiday advertisements for Gap as siblings in 2003 to the tune of " Put a Little Love in Your Heart " . In later years , Missy and Frankie appeared in Gap holiday advertisements as a pair . 
 In 2004 , Rayder started dating Red Hot Chili Peppers ' bass player , Michael " Flea " Balzary . In January 2005 the couple publicly announced their engagement . On October 26 , 2005 Rayder gave birth to her first child , a daughter named Sunny Bebop Balzary . Flea 's former bandmate , John Frusciante , is Sunny 's godfather . The song , " Hard to Concentrate " from the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' 2006 album , Stadium Arcadium was written by Anthony Kiedis as a wedding proposal for Flea and Rayder . 
 There are a total of four Rayder sisters and they have one brother and her father continued to live in River Falls in 2004 . Rayder and Balzary live together in Malibu , California . Some sources state that the couple have married , but no official confirmation is available . 
 In the September 2010 issue of C magazine , Frankie is featured with a group of women friends known as " The L.A. Ladies Choir " which meets at her and Flea 's house in Los Feliz . The article goes on to mention that Flea is her husband and that he joins the women 's group playing bass . The choir 's group is coming out with their first album in September named " <unk> . " 
 Rayder is a knowledgeable Boston Red Sox fan , and she is also a Green Bay Packers fan . Rayder has volunteered her time for programs for youth in the arts . Rayder has a tattoo on her back . 
 = Estate of Jack Slee v. Werner Erhard = 
 Slee v. Erhard is a legal case that was filed in 1984 against Werner Erhard , his company Werner Erhard and Associates ( WE & A ) , and an instructor for Erhard Seminars Training ( est ) , by the executor of the estate of Jack Slee . The jury ruled against the plaintiff and found that the defendants did not cause Slee 's death . Slee was a graduate of the University of Connecticut who worked as a bank manager when he registered for the est training in 1983 . On his registration form for the est training Slee wrote that he wanted to work on nervousness interacting with strangers in a group setting . He attended the seminar at the Park Plaza Hotel in New Haven , Connecticut , on August 14 , 1983 . After participating in a 16 @-@ hour session of the est training , Slee collapsed during a portion of the seminar known as " the danger process " . He was transported by emergency workers to Yale @-@ New Haven Hospital , where he was declared dead by physicians due to " undetermined causes " . 
 An autopsy was performed on August 16 , 1983 , but was unable to determine cause of death . New Haven police investigated the death , but were unable to find evidence of foul play . In November 1983 , the office of the Connecticut state medical examiner issued a report stating that Slee 's death may have been related to stress . The police investigation into the matter was closed the same month . 
 In September 1984 , Jack Slee 's mother filed a US $ 5 million wrongful death lawsuit against Erhard and his company . The suit asserted that mental stress from the est training , including mind control techniques , psychological and group pressures resulted in the death of her son . On September 21 , 1984 , representatives of Erhard denied that the est training was involved in Slee 's death . The case was held in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut , and was presided over by Judge José A. Cabranes . In October 1992 , a jury ruled that Erhard and his company had been negligent , and were responsible for severe emotional distress suffered by Slee . However , the jury found that the defendants " did not proximately cause " Slee 's death . Slee 's estate did not receive any monetary award . The plaintiffs appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , where the decision of the lower court was affirmed . 
 = = Background = = 
 Werner Erhard ( born John Paul Rosenberg ) , a California @-@ based former salesman , training manager and executive in the encyclopedia business , created the Erhard Seminars Training ( est ) course in 1971 @.@ est was a form of Large Group Awareness Training , and was part of the Human Potential Movement. est was a four @-@ day , 60 @-@ hour self @-@ help program given to groups of 250 people at a time . The program was very intensive : each day would contain 15 – 20 hours of instruction . During the training , est personnel utilized jargon to convey key concepts , and participants had to agree to certain rules that remained in effect for the duration of the course . Participants were taught that they were responsible for their life outcomes , and were promised a dramatic change in their self @-@ <unk> est was controversial . While some critics characterized the training methods as brainwashing , proponents and participants asserted that it had a profoundly positive impact on people 's lives . By 1984 nearly half a million people had completed the est training , including public figures and mental health professionals . 
 = = Erhard Seminars Training incident = = 
 At the time of his est seminar in 1984 , Jack Slee was a 26 @-@ year @-@ old a resident of Montville , Connecticut . He graduated from the University of Connecticut in 1978 . He was accepted to the University of Vermont 's law school but instead chose to focus on job opportunities within the financial sector . After getting experience at a loan company , he gained employment at the Farmers and Mechanics Savings Bank of Middletown , Connecticut . Shortly thereafter he was promoted to the position of manager of a new local branch of the bank . 
 In Spring 1983 , two of Slee 's friends introduced him to the est training . After attending a " guest seminar " in May 1983 in New Haven , Connecticut , Slee paid a US $ 50 deposit fee to reserve a spot in the est training . One of his stated goals on his registration form was to " Relieve current difficulty in interacting with unknown people in a group setting , whether social or business meeting . " Members of Slee 's family later told the media that he was attempting to work on increasing his self @-@ confidence . 
 Slee attended the August 14 , 1983 , est training at the Park Plaza Hotel in New Haven . 
 Slee collapsed during the est training seminar after participating in a 16 @-@ hour session . He fell backwards while standing on stage with other est participants , during a part of the training known as " the danger process " or " fear confront " , which had started at approximately 11 : 30 P.M. that night . During this process , Slee was supposed to confront his fear of standing in front of a group of individuals . An est graduate whose role was called a " body catcher " or " people catcher " broke Slee 's fall and then went to get help . Assistants in the est training discovered that Slee was not breathing , and attempted to resuscitate him . While individuals were attempting to revive Slee , est trainer David Norris asked the est assistants to help keep the participants in their seats to remain calm . 
 Responders and paramedics from a local New Haven fire department arrived at the hotel , and paramedic Daniel Dolphin stated that a woman met him and his crewmember outside the hotel and escorted them inside . " People were laughing . They were crying . My first impression was that it was a comedy show and the guy who was lying on the stage was faking it , " said Dolphin in a statement to the New Haven Journal @-@ Courier . Dolphin 's ambulance partner , Tony <unk> of the New Haven Ambulance Company , said to the Boston Phoenix that he witnessed odd behavior while responding to Slee : " They were all in seats , just sitting there and facing the stage , like an audience . Most were quiet ; a few you could hear crying , a few laughing . " 
 Paramedics removed Slee from the ballroom prior to midnight , and transported him to Yale @-@ New Haven Hospital . Meanwhile in the est training , instructor David Norris requested that participants " share " their thoughts on what had just transpired . At 1 : 03 A.M. , Slee was declared dead by physicians at Yale @-@ New Haven Hospital due to " undetermined causes " . 
 = = = Police investigation = = = 
 A preliminary autopsy was carried out on Slee 's body the night of his death – no medical cause of death was found . The pathologist reported Slee 's death to the police as " suspicious " . A formal autopsy was performed on Slee on August 16 , 1983 , but the results were inconclusive and did not determine his cause of death . 
 New Haven police detective Donald Maher told the Norwich Bulletin on August 19 , 1983 , that police were investigating Slee 's death , as was customary . Maher stated that police did not suspect criminal activity was involved in Slee 's death . On August 19 , 1983 , UPI reported that New Haven detective Daniel Onofrio believed further investigation would be needed in order to determine why Slee died , and said " At this point we don 't know of anything criminal , but the death has the medical examiners stumped . " Police were unable to find evidence of foul play involved in Slee 's death . 
 In November 1983 , the office of the Connecticut state medical examiner issued a report stating that Slee 's death may have been related to stress . The report stated : " This 26 @-@ year @-@ old male reportedly collapsed during a group meeting described as a self @-@ improvement seminar . A complete autopsy determined no anatomic cause of death . ... Available history indicates that Mr. Slee collapsed in a situation in which high emotional stress could be expected . Such emotional stress may have neural and hormonal effects that are deleterious to cardiac rhythm . " The New Haven Register reported that Chief Medical Examiner Catherine Galvin said that " arrhythmia , an electrical malfunction of the heart , is believed to have been the cause of Slee 's death , but it couldn 't be verified " . Galvin said that stressful situations can cause such an arrhythmia : " In a stress situation you 've got adrenalin pumping into the circulation . That can trigger it . " According to the Boston Phoenix , the pathologist that had examined Slee 's body stated : " I don ’ t like the word ' fright ' , but there are recognized entities of sudden death " , though it may not be possible to determine the cause , " where emotions come into play " such as an instance where an individual believes that a curse will harm them . On November 19 , 1983 , the New Haven Register reported that police were " no longer actively investigating the case " , and went on to note that therefore " any connection between Slee 's death and his experiences at the seminar " were not likely to be confirmed . 
 = = = Response from est officials = = = 
 A representative of WE & A named Nancy Foushee denied reports that paramedics were delayed from giving care to <unk> and Slee . Foushee stated that attendants of the est training are permitted to take breaks every four @-@ hours , during the 16 @-@ hour session . Foushee described the est training course , which consisted of four sessions each of 16 hours in duration , as a " philosophical inquiry into what it is to be human " . She asserted that the est training was " no more stressful than taking a philosophy course at a university " . In a statement published in the Boston Phoenix , Foushee said : " We do not run a company that 's dangerous to people . The est training does not cause people to faint . There has never been a death attributed to est . Never . Ever . Are you clear ? " 
 Days after Slee 's death , an official from the est organization released a statement that est was not involved in Slee 's death . Jack <unk> , a medical doctor who served as director of research for est , stated : " In any large group of people , medical emergencies do arise from time to time and this appears to be one of those . According to our reports , it was responded to quickly by trained professionals . Paramedics were notified within seconds of the collapse and were by [ Slee 's ] side in minutes . Although medical authorities have not yet determined what caused Mr. Slee 's death , it is evident that the est training could not have had anything to do with it . " 
 = = Wrongful death lawsuit = = 
 = = = Suit filed = = = 
 In September 1984 , Jack Slee 's mother <unk> Slee filed a wrongful death lawsuit in federal court for $ 5 million against Erhard and WE & A. Causes of action brought in the complaint included negligence , intentional infliction of emotional distress , implied warranty , express warranty , fraud , strict liability and unfair trade practices . The suit asserted that mental stress from the est training resulted in the death of her son . Erhard 's company ( WE & A ) , as well as est trainer Steve <unk> were named in the suit . The suit stated that Slee had been " subjected to psychological pressures , group pressures ... mind control techniques which caused him to lose his ordinary psychological defenses , emotional confrontations which caused him to become emotionally distraught and which led to physical reactions resulting in his death " . 
 According to the lawyer representing Slee 's estate , Gerald Ragland , Slee had " dropped dead from the stress associated with the program " . Ragland , a specialist in lawsuits dealing with claims related to psychological trauma from encounter groups , noted that though autopsies cannot specifically test for death caused by stress , circumstantial evidence in the case would show this occurred with regard to Slee . Ragland further stated that Slee was pressured into taking the course , that he endured mind control that reduced his capacity for mental defense , and that est trainers prevented medical professionals from quickly gaining access to his body . 
 On September 21 , 1984 , representatives of Werner Erhard told the Associated Press that they were not yet in possession of a copy of the lawsuit . However , they denied that the est training was involved in the death of Slee . 
 = = = Case , jury ruling and appeal = = = 
 Judge José A. Cabranes presided over the case in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut . In order to defeat a defense motion to dismiss the case in 1987 , the <unk> called a number of expert witnesses including psychologist Margaret Singer , author of Cults in Our Midst , and psychiatrist and neurologist James <unk> . Both Singer and <unk> submitted affidavits asserting that Slee 's death was related to the est training . After the defendants refused to respond to discovery requests , on January 18 , 1990 , the plaintiff filed a motion for default judgment , for failure of the defendants to comply with discovery , which was denied . In 1991 , before the case came to trial , defendant Erhard left the country . In 1992 , a jury heard the wrongful death lawsuit . During the trial , the defendants called a number of expert witnesses , including medical experts . 
 A jury decision was reached in the case on October 9 , 1992 . The jury found Werner Erhard and his company Werner Erhard and Associates negligent . They ruled that the defendants were responsible for causing severe emotional distress to Slee . However , the jury also ruled that the defendants " did not proximately cause " Slee 's death , and no monetary damages were awarded to Slee 's estate . On January 25 , 1993 , the trial court issued an order denying Slee ’ s motion for judgment notwithstanding the jury verdict or a new trial . The plaintiff appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , where Judges Jon O. Newman , Roger Miner , and Joseph M. McLaughlin ruled to affirm the decision of the lower court . The Court of Appeals ruling was issued on September 8 , 1993 . 
 = Carrow Road = 
 Carrow Road is an association football stadium located in Norwich , Norfolk , England , and is the home of Norwich City Football Club . The stadium is located toward the east of the city , not far from Norwich railway station and the River Wensum . 
 The club originally played at Newmarket Road before moving to The Nest . When The Nest was deemed inadequate for the size of crowds it was attracting , the Carrow Road ground , named after the road on which it is located , was purpose @-@ built by Norwich City in just 82 days and opened on 31 August 1935 . 
 The stadium has been altered and upgraded several times during its history , notably following a fire that destroyed the old City Stand in 1984 . Having once accommodated standing supporters , the ground has been all @-@ seater since 1992 . The ground 's current capacity is 27 @,@ 244 , the most recent works being the addition of approximately 1 @,@ 000 seats in the summer of 2010 . The stadium 's record attendance since becoming an all @-@ seater ground is 27 @,@ 137 , set during a Premier League match versus Newcastle United on 2 April 2016 . In the days when fans could stand on terraces , Carrow Road saw a crowd of 43 @,@ 984 when hosting Leicester City for an FA Cup match in 1963 . 
 Carrow Road has also hosted under @-@ 21 international football and a number of concerts , including performances by Elton John and George Michael . The Carrow Road site includes catering facilities and a Holiday Inn hotel offering rooms with views of the pitch . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Norwich City F.C. played at Newmarket Road from 1902 to 1908 , with a record attendance of 10 @,@ 366 in 1908 . Following a dispute over the conditions of renting Newmarket Road , the club moved to a new home in 1908 , a converted disused chalk pit in Rosary Road , Norwich . The new ground became known as The Nest , named for Norwich City 's nickname , " The Canaries " . 
 By the 1930s , the ground capacity was proving insufficient for the growing crowds : The Nest 's largest crowd was 25 @,@ 037 in the 1934 – 35 FA Cup . The physical limitations of the site of The Nest meant that expansion was not possible , and there were safety problems with the existing structures . The club began looking for alternative accommodation in 1926 , their hand forced finally when one corner of the pitch subsided up to 30 feet after old chalk workings collapsed . An attempt to patch up the problem with railway sleepers and soil failed to impress The Football Association ( FA ) , who wrote to the club on 15 May 1935 , saying The Nest " was no longer suitable for large crowds and measures must be taken " . 
 The club 's dilemma was acute : the FA no longer approved of large crowds at The Nest , but the new season was just weeks away . About half a mile south of The Nest , they found a new site , the Boulton Paul Sports Ground in Carrow Road , which belonged to J. & J. Colman . 
 = = = Stadium 's name and initial construction history = = = 
 The new stadium took its name from the street which encloses the ground on three sides , the fourth boundary being the River Wensum . The name " Carrow " originally refers to the former Carrow Abbey that once stood on the riverside , its name in turn having possible Norse origins . In 1800 , John Ridges , owner of the Carrow Abbey Estate and the land opposite on the banks of the Wensum in Thorpe Hamlet , " granted permission for a proposed road access across his grounds to Carrow " . By 1811 , Philip M. Martineau , a surgeon , owned the building , lands and manor of Carrow , including the adjacent Thorpe land . Carrow Hill Road was created on his Carrow Abbey Estate , to provide work for the poor in the community . The road linked Martineau 's <unk> Estate to Carrow Toll Bridge , installed in 1810 . Norwich Railway Co. had acquired the land in Thorpe around Carrow Road by the 1840s , and by 1860 the Thorpe site of the future stadium belonged to the firm of J. & J. Colman . The stadium 's Thorpe Corner acknowledges this historical link . In 1935 , Colman 's offered the 20 @-@ year leasehold to Norwich City and construction of the new stadium began swiftly on the site : tenders were issued on the day the site was purchased and ten days later , on 11 June , work began . 
 Initial materials were sourced by demolishing the former " Chicken Run " section of The Nest , with the rubble dumped as a bank at the river end of the new ground . Thereafter , work proceeded quickly , with most of the stands and terraces built by 17 August . A practice match was held on 26 August with work " still in progress " , and , after just 82 days , on 31 August , the ground was opened for a Second Division fixture featuring West Ham United . The stadium had an initial capacity of 35 @,@ 000 , including 5 @,@ 000 seats under cover . Norwich won the game 4 – 3 ; the attendance was 29 @,@ 779 , which set a new club record crowd for a home game . The first competitive goal at the ground was scored by Norwich 's Duggie Lochhead . 
 The new stadium was described by club officials as " the largest construction job in the city since the building of Norwich Castle " , " miraculously built in just 82 days " and " the eighth wonder of the world " . An aerial photograph from August 1935 shows three sides of open terracing , and a covered stand with a Colman 's Mustard advertisement painted on its roof , visible only from the air . The club 's association with Colman 's has continued into the modern era ; in 1997 the club signed a shirt sponsorship deal with the company . The mustard manufacturer 's original factory was located adjacent to the stadium in Carrow Road , and the ground was opened by Russell Colman , the President of the club . The author Simon Inglis describes the early Carrow Road as comprising " a Main Stand , a covered end terrace and two large open banks " . The covered terrace was paid for by Captain Evelyn Barclay , the vice @-@ president of Norwich City ; it was constructed in time for the opening of the 1937 – 38 season , and while the original construction is long gone , the end retains the name of its benefactor . 
 At this time , the ground 's capacity was 38 @,@ 000 , with space for 10 @,@ 000 of " the more vociferous of the home and away supporters " , in the new Barclay end . The new ground received a royal seal of approval : on 29 October 1938 , King George VI watched twenty minutes of the home game versus Millwall , the first time a ruling monarch had watched a Second Division match . 
 = = = Ground developments = = = 
 Floodlights were erected at the ground in 1956 and the £ 9 @,@ 000 cost nearly sent the club into bankruptcy . However , Norwich 's success in the 1958 – 59 FA Cup ( where as a Third Division club they reached the semi @-@ final , losing to First Division Luton Town after a replay ) secured the financial status of the club and provided sufficient funds for a cover to be built over the South Stand . In 1963 , the record was set for attendance at Carrow Road : a crowd of 43 @,@ 984 watched a sixth round FA Cup match against Leicester City , and the South Stand ( now the Jarrold ) was covered shortly afterwards . 
 In the wake of the Ibrox stadium disaster in 1971 , a government enquiry brought more stringent safety requirements , which , when applied to Carrow Road , resulted in the capacity being drastically reduced to around 20 @,@ 000 . With focus on the dangers of standing , seats began to replace terracing : by 1979 , the stadium had a capacity of 28 @,@ 392 , with seats for 12 @,@ 675 . A fire in 1984 partially destroyed one of the stands which eventually led to its complete demolition and replacement by 1987 with a new City Stand . When it opened , then chairman Robert Chase compared the experience of visiting the new stand to " going to the theatre – the only difference being that our stage is covered with grass " . 
 After the Hillsborough disaster in 1989 and the subsequent outcome of the Taylor Report in 1990 , the stadium was converted to all @-@ seater . In 2003 the South Stand was replaced by the new , 8 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Jarrold Stand . In the summer of 2010 , work was undertaken to increase the ground 's capacity from 26 @,@ 018 to 27 @,@ 000 . This was achieved by finding additional capacity for seats within the existing stands . 
 = = = Pitch = = = 
 In 2004 , £ 700 @,@ 000 was invested in improving the pitch . The former all @-@ grass surface was replaced with a sand @-@ based Desso GrassMaster one , the mix of artificial and real grass which , according to the then groundsman Gary Kemp " guarantee [ d ] that the pitch would be looking good enough for every match to be broadcast on TV " . The under @-@ soil heating system " can clear snow and ice within eight hours of being turned on " . 
 = = = Eightieth anniversary = = = 
 In anticipation of the ground 's 80th anniversary on 31 August 2015 , a rematch of the original fixture versus West Ham was played on 28 July . As part of the celebrations , the club offered season ticket holders the opportunity to mark their seats with their name or a message . Fans were also offered the chance to buy tickets for a celebratory dinner with the first @-@ team squad , the menu provided by the club 's joint majority shareholder , the celebrity chef Delia Smith . 
 = = Stands = = 
 The current stadium consists of four stands ; the Norwich & Peterborough Stand , the Barclay , the Geoffrey Watling City Stand and the most recent addition , the rebuilt South Stand . 
 = = = Norwich & Peterborough Stand = = = 
 This end of the ground , closest to the River Wensum , was originally known as the " River End " , a name that still persists among fans . An old stand was demolished in April 1979 and a two @-@ tiered replacement was completed in December 1979 . The stand was officially named the Norwich & Peterborough Stand in the 1990s , after a sponsorship deal with the Norwich & Peterborough Building Society . An extra 160 seats were installed in the summer of 2010 . 
 = = = The Barclay = = = 
 The Barclay is named after Captain Evelyn Barclay , a former vice @-@ president of the club , who donated the cost of roofing the original stand . This was built in 1937 , but demolished in 1992 , when a new two @-@ tier structure , modelled on the River End ( now the Norwich & Peterborough Stand ) was built in accordance with the recommendations of the Taylor Report . 
 The betting company Coral were announced as the stand 's sponsors in August 2015 . 
 = = = Geoffrey Watling City Stand = = = 
 The single @-@ tiered Geoffrey Watling City Stand was built following a severe fire in its ageing predecessor on 25 October 1984 . The fire was apparently caused by an employee of the club leaving a three @-@ bar electric fire switched on overnight . 
 The City Stand ( as it was named at the time ) cost £ 1 @.@ 7 million to build and was used for the first time on 30 August 1986 when City hosted Southampton . It was formally opened by the Duchess of Kent on 14 February 1987 . The stand was renamed in honour of Norwich City president Geoffrey Watling , who died in 2004 , aged 91 . The stand has the lowest capacity of the four ; it also houses the directors ' box , the press area and hospitality suites . Where The Barclay extends around to meet the Geoffrey Watling City Stand is the Thorpe corner infill , known to supporters as ' The Snakepit ' . 
 = = = The South Stand = = = 
 The South Stand is on the site of the former South Stand , which was named in honour of Sir Arthur South . The new stand was partially opened for the game against Sheffield United on 31 January 2004 , and fully opened for the next home match , a game versus West Ham . It was opened by Ken Brown , a former manager of both clubs . 
 From 2004 until May 2016 the stand was sponsored by <unk> , a local department store . It is a single @-@ tiered stand of cantilever construction with a capacity of 8 @,@ 212 . The corner infill between the Jarrold and Norwich & Peterborough stands is called the Aviva Community Stand . It was built in 2005 and named after sponsors Aviva . It seats up to 1 @,@ 700 fans , and also provides extensive facilities for disabled supporters . 
 On 15 June 2016 it was announced that following the termination of Jarrold as the stand 's sponsor , the stand would revert back to its historical name of the South Stand . Irish coffee company The Galway Roast were announced as the stand 's new sponsors , which would be officially called The South Stand sponsored by The Galway Roast . 
 = = = = Visiting supporter accommodation = = = = 
 Accommodation for visiting supporters is provided in the end of the Jarrold Stand closest to The Barclay . The Essential Football Fan describes the away end as follows : 
 " As you would expect from a new stand , the facilities and view of the playing action are good . The normal allocation in this area is 2 @,@ 500 fans although this can be increased further for cup games . If you are located at the very back of the stand then you can enjoy some fine views of the city . " 
 = = Other facilities and services = = 
 The corner between The Barclay and the Jarrold Stand contains a Holiday Inn hotel , which opened in 2007 . The hotel , with six floors and 180 beds , has pitch @-@ facing rooms where customers can watch matches . The club gave Holiday Inn a 150 @-@ year lease , receiving in return a 30 % stake in the hotel and £ 1 @.@ 1 million . 
 Catering at Carrow Road is provided by Delia 's Canary Catering , which is part of Norwich City Football Club PLC . Smith took control of the catering at the club in 1999 . 
 Catering facilities include : " <unk> American Bar & Grill " , an American @-@ style diner located in the Norwich & Peterborough Stand ; and " Delia 's Restaurant and Bar " , located in the Norwich & Peterborough Stand . " The Gunn Club " is a catering facility behind The Barclay , named after former player and manager Bryan Gunn . There are a number of other conference facilities around the ground , many named after former players and club officials such as Darren Huckerby and Sir Arthur South , as well as former club sponsors Lotus Cars . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Carrow Road is approximately ten minutes walking distance from Norwich railway station , which is on the Great Eastern Main Line to Liverpool Street station via Ipswich . Although resident parking scheme is in force in the roads surrounding the stadium , a park @-@ and @-@ ride facility operates around the city centre enabling visitors to the ground to arrive by bus . 
 = = Future plans for construction = = 
 Norwich City have a capped season ticket allocation of 22 @,@ 000 , with a waiting list . The club regularly sells out its home allocation of tickets and , in 2013 – 14 , the ground had an occupancy rate of 99 @.@ 95 % , one of the highest in the Premier League . 
 In this context , the club has often stated that it plans to increase the capacity of the stadium in the future , The Geoffrey Watling City Stand has foundations designed to support a second tier , and the roof could be removed and replaced after a second tier is added . In January 2011 , chairman Alan Bowkett announced an interest in expanding the ground by about 8 @,@ 000 seats , because Carrow Road was routinely close to capacity . Bowkett said : 
 The trade off is between capacity and price . I 've had some conversations with people saying ' it 's getting a bit expensive Alan ' and I know it is . I think the obvious route is the Geoffrey Watling stand , whether you put another layer on it or take it down and re @-@ build , I don 't know . Probably the sensible thing to do is bite the bullet , take it down and build a new stand , but it means 18 to 24 months without revenue and the people in that stand tend to be the people who have been the supporters for many generations . 
 In 2012 , the club commissioned the University of East Anglia to undertake a study of the costs of significantly increasing the ground 's capacity . The study 's report cited a cost of £ 20 million to expand the ground by 7 @,@ 000 seats . In response , chief executive David McNally announced that the club would therefore only expand the stadium at such a time that Norwich City has become a fixture in the Premier League . At the club 's 2015 AGM , it was reiterated that expansion of the ground was not a priority , although developing the training facilities at Colney , was . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 = = = International football = = = 
 Carrow Road has never hosted a match involving the England national team , but the England under @-@ 21 team has played at the stadium on five occasions . The first was in 1983 in a European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualifying match against Denmark , which England won 4 – 1 . The team played another qualifying match in the same tournament at the stadium in 1997 , beating Greece 4 – 2 . The Slovakia team featured in a friendly match at the ground in June 2007 , England winning 5 – 0 in front of a crowd of 20 @,@ 193 people . In 2010 , the ground played host to a play @-@ off against Romania , a game the home side won 2 – 1 in front of a then record all @-@ seated attendance for the stadium of 25 @,@ 749 . Most recently , in October 2012 , the England U21s defeated their Serbian counterparts 1 – 0 at Carrow Road . 
 Games involving the England under @-@ 19 team and the full England women 's team have also been played at the stadium . The women 's team have played there on two occasions ; the first a 1 – 0 defeat to Nigeria in July 2002 , in front of over 8 @,@ 000 fans , and the second a 1 – 0 victory over Iceland in March 2006 , before a 9 @,@ 616 crowd . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The stadium has occasionally hosted music concerts . Status Quo played a concert there in 1997 . Elton John , supported by Lulu , appeared at the venue in 2005 . George Michael gave a performance there on 12 June 2007 , supported by Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor , and Rod Stewart performed a concert at the stadium in June 2011 . 
 The Elton John and George Michael concerts both attracted crowds of over 20 @,@ 000 people . Andrew Cullen , the director of sales and marketing for the Carrow Road ground , told BBC Radio Norfolk prior to the George Michael performance that he hoped such concerts would become an annual summer event for the venue , if big enough star names could be attracted . 
 = = Summary of ground records = = 
 Highest attendance : 43 @,@ 984 , Norwich City 0 – 2 Leicester City , 1962 – 63 FA Cup sixth round , 30 March 1963 . 
 Highest attendance ( all @-@ seater ) : 27 @,@ 137 , Norwich City 3 – 2 Newcastle United , 2015 – 16 Premier League , 2 April 2016 . 
 Biggest margin of victory : 8 , Norwich City 8 – 0 Walsall , Football League Third Division South , 29 December 1951 , Norwich City 8 – 0 Sutton United , 1988 – 89 FA Cup fourth round , 28 January 1989 . 
 Biggest margin of defeat : 6 , Norwich City 1 – 7 Colchester United , Football League One , 8 August 2009 . 
 Goals in a game : 9 ( several occurrences ) . Most recently ; Norwich City 4 – 5 Liverpool , 2015 – 16 Premier League , 23 January 2016 . 
 = Megitza = 
 Małgorzata <unk> , professionally known as Megitza , ( born November 27 , 1984 in Zakopane ) is a Polish singer , double bass player , and composer . She combines Polish and Eastern European folk music , Romani music and gypsy jazz with world music , Latin music , pop , worldbeat , Americana and reggae . 
 In 2001 , Megitza emigrated to Chicago , where she appeared in charity concerts and events such as Great Orchestra of Christmas Charity and where she promoted Polish culture . She began her professional career in 2008 , when she formed the Megitza Quartet and released her debut album , Boleritza . She has since performed at the Milwaukee Avenue Arts Festival at the Jay Pritzker Pavilion , the 13th All Souls Jazz festival at the Chopin Theatre , the Chicago World Music Festival , and the Old Town School of Folk Music in Chicago . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times has noted the quartet 's " energetic " performances . According to the Chicago Tribune she and the group are primarily influenced by Eastern European folk , gypsy , Polish , and Greek music . Songs include " Boleritza " , " Mamo te Mera " , " <unk> " , " 17 _ 14 " , and " What I Desire " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Megitza was born on November 27 , 1984 in Zakopane , Poland . In 2001 , she migrated to Chicago , where she has continued the cultivation of her Polish heritage , but also experimented with world music and gypsy music of Eastern Europe and Latin music . In 2003 , Megitza was appointed the queen of the Polish Highlanders Alliance of North America . She organized a charity event , and proceeds were donated to orphanages in Poland . As a musician , Megitza has participated in charity concerts and events such as Great Orchestra of Christmas Charity . In 2004 , Megitza received the highest score ( 126 ) at the Polish National intelligence quotient ( IQ ) contest in Chicago . She promotes the culture of Poland and Podhale in Chicago and the United States . 
 Megitza is a self @-@ taught vocalist and bass player . She began her career in 2008 , when she formed the Megitza Quartet . The band is currently composed of Megitza on vocals and upright bass , Andreas <unk> on acoustic guitar , Marek <unk> on <unk> ( accordion ) , and Jamie Gallagher on drums and percussion . The Megitza Quartet is known for its high energy stage presence , and the quartet has been compared to artists such as Gypsy Kings , Ewa <unk> , Goran <unk> , <unk> and Lura . In 2008 , Megitza released her debut album , Boleritza . The album includes traditional and original compositions . Roby Lakatos is a guest violinist on Boleritza , on two tracks : " Mamo <unk> " and " 17 _ 14 " . 
 Her original compositions are primarily influenced by folk music of Polish highlanders ( gorals of Podhale ) , Romani music , Balkan folk and World music . The Chicago Tribune notes Eastern European folk and " gypsy , Greek , and Polish influences " . Notable songs include " Boleritza " , " Mamo te Mera " , " <unk> " and " 17 _ 14 " . 
 = = Performances and reception = = 
 Megitza is regarded as an influential artist representing Poles abroad . She has made hundreds of concerts and appearances at major festivals in America , especially in Chicago , including the Old Town School of Folk Music in August 2009 , the Lotus World Music and Arts Festival in September 2009 , the Milwaukee Avenue Arts Festival at the Jay Pritzker Pavilion in March 2010 , at the lakefront in Dawes Park in July 2010 , the Chicago World Music Festival ( an event presented by the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events ( <unk> ) , in partnership with the Chicago Office of Tourism and Culture ( <unk> ) ) , in September 2011 , the Chicago Folk and Roots Festival in July 2011 , the Chicago Summer Dance Festival , and Taste of Chicago , all in her adopted city . They also performed at the All Souls Jazz festival held at the Chopin Theatre of Chicago in November 2010 , an event which Howard Reich of the Chicago Tribune said " Chicago 's All Souls fest looks , feels and sounds like no other jazz soiree in this city " . In July 2009 they performed the Slovak Roma wedding song " <unk> Moja " live on ABC7 's " <unk> " with Bill Campbell . Time Out Chicago described her as a " fiery " singer and the band 's music as " energetic Roma folk " when they performed at " Women 's Global Voices " with the likes of <unk> and The Afro Soul Ensemble in March 2012 , a concert presented by Sound Culture honoring Women 's History Month . " The Chicago Sun @-@ Times has also noted the " energetic " performances of the quartet . 
 The Sound Culture Center for Global Arts described Megitza as " a true concert revelation – an unusual voice , charisma and beauty " , describing her music as " dynamic , vibrant , full of energy , uniting listeners of all ages . " Jazz Chicago said of the 2008 album , " Throughout , <unk> 's strong vocals engage the senses , while <unk> 's romantic accordion is a treat as well . The blend of traditional folk music and originals are played and sung very well and make for an intriguing visit to the Old World . " Although Megitza mainly performs in the United States , in July 2012 she performed at the Jazz Fest Wien in Vienna , Austria , and the Montreux Jazz Festival in Montreux , Switzerland , before performing extensively in Poland . 
 In Poland , the Megitza Quartet reached the finals of the fifth edition of Must Be the Music , and in 2015 the Megitza Trio entered the eighth season of Mam talent ! , the Polish version of Got Talent , earning a " golden key " to advance directly to the semifinals . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = A. P. J. Abdul Kalam = 
 <unk> <unk> Jainulabdeen " A. P. J. " Abdul Kalam ( / <unk> <unk> / ; 15 October 1931 – 27 July 2015 ) was the 11th President of India from 2002 to 2007 . A career scientist turned politician , Kalam was born and raised in Rameswaram , Tamil Nadu , and studied physics and aerospace engineering . He spent the next four decades as a scientist and science administrator , mainly at the Defence Research and Development Organisation ( DRDO ) and Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) and was intimately involved in India 's civilian space program and military missile development efforts . He thus came to be known as the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile and launch vehicle technology . He also played a pivotal organizational , technical , and political role in India 's Pokhran @-@ II nuclear tests in 1998 , the first since the original nuclear test by India in 1974 . 
 Kalam was elected as the 11th President of India in 2002 with the support of both the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and the then @-@ opposition Indian National Congress . Widely referred to as the " People 's President , " he returned to his civilian life of education , writing and public service after a single term . He was a recipient of several prestigious awards , including the Bharat Ratna , India 's highest civilian honour . 
 While delivering a lecture at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong , Kalam collapsed and died from an apparent cardiac arrest on 27 July 2015 , aged 83 . Thousands including national @-@ level dignitaries attended the funeral ceremony held in his hometown of Rameshwaram , where he was buried with full state honours . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 <unk> <unk> Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam was born on 15 October 1931 to a Tamil Muslim family in the pilgrimage centre of Rameswaram on Pamban Island , then in the Madras Presidency and now in the State of Tamil Nadu . His father <unk> was a boat owner and imam of a local mosque ; his mother <unk> was a housewife . His father owned a ferry that took Hindu pilgrims back and forth between Rameswaram and the now uninhabited Dhanushkodi . Kalam was the youngest of four brothers and one sister in his family . His ancestors had been wealthy traders and landowners , with numerous properties and large tracts of land . Their business had involved trading groceries between the mainland and the island and to and from Sri Lanka , as well as ferrying pilgrims between the mainland and Pamban . As a result , the family acquired the title of " Mara Kalam <unk> " ( wooden boat <unk> ) , which over the years became shortened to " <unk> . " With the opening of the Pamban Bridge to the mainland in 1914 , however , the businesses failed and the family fortune and properties were lost over time , apart from the ancestral home . By his early childhood , Kalam 's family had become poor ; at an early age , he sold newspapers to supplement his family 's income . 
 In his school years , Kalam had average grades but was described as a bright and hardworking student who had a strong desire to learn . He spent hours on his studies , especially mathematics . After completing his education at the Schwartz Higher Secondary School , Ramanathapuram , Kalam went on to attend Saint Joseph 's College , Tiruchirappalli , then affiliated with the University of Madras , from where he graduated in physics in 1954 . He moved to Madras in 1955 to study aerospace engineering in Madras Institute of Technology . While Kalam was working on a senior class project , the Dean was dissatisfied with his lack of progress and threatened to revoke his scholarship unless the project was finished within the next three days . Kalam met the deadline , impressing the Dean , who later said to him , " I was putting you under stress and asking you to meet a difficult deadline " . He narrowly missed achieving his dream of becoming a fighter pilot , as he placed ninth in qualifiers , and only eight positions were available in the IAF . 
 = = Career as a scientist = = 
 After graduating from the Madras Institute of Technology in 1960 , Kalam joined the Aeronautical Development Establishment of the Defence Research and Development Organisation ( DRDO ) as a scientist . He started his career by designing a small hovercraft , but remained unconvinced by his choice of a job at DRDO . Kalam was also part of the <unk> committee working under Vikram Sarabhai , the renowned space scientist . In 1969 , Kalam was transferred to the Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) where he was the project director of India 's first Satellite Launch Vehicle ( SLV @-@ III ) which successfully deployed the Rohini satellite in near @-@ earth orbit in July 1980 ; Kalam had first started work on an expandable rocket project independently at DRDO in 1965 . In 1969 , Kalam received the government 's approval and expanded the programme to include more engineers . 
 In 1963 – 64 , he visited NASA 's Langley Research Center in Hampton , Virginia ; Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt , Maryland ; and Wallops Flight Facility . Between the 1970s and 1990s , Kalam made an effort to develop the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle ( <unk> ) and SLV @-@ III projects , both of which proved to be successful . 
 Kalam was invited by Raja Ramanna to witness the country 's first nuclear test Smiling Buddha as the representative of <unk> , even though he had not participated in its development . In the 1970s , Kalam also directed two projects , Project Devil and Project Valiant , which sought to develop ballistic missiles from the technology of the successful SLV programme . Despite the disapproval of the Union Cabinet , Prime Minister Indira Gandhi allotted secret funds for these aerospace projects through her discretionary powers under Kalam 's directorship . Kalam played an integral role convincing the Union Cabinet to conceal the true nature of these classified aerospace projects . His research and educational leadership brought him great laurels and prestige in the 1980s , which prompted the government to initiate an advanced missile programme under his directorship . Kalam and Dr V S Arunachalam , metallurgist and scientific adviser to the Defence Minister , worked on the suggestion by the then Defence Minister , R. Venkataraman on a proposal for simultaneous development of a quiver of missiles instead of taking planned missiles one after another . R Venkatraman was instrumental in getting the cabinet approval for allocating ₹ 388 crores for the mission , named Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme ( <unk> ) and appointed Kalam as the chief executive . Kalam played a major part in developing many missiles under the mission including Agni , an intermediate range ballistic missile and Prithvi , the tactical surface @-@ to @-@ surface missile , although the projects have been criticised for mismanagement and cost and time overruns . 
 Kalam served as the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister and the Secretary of the Defence Research and Development Organisation from July 1992 to December 1999 . The Pokhran @-@ II nuclear tests were conducted during this period in which he played an intensive political and technological role . Kalam served as the Chief Project Coordinator , along with <unk> Chidambaram , during the testing phase . Media coverage of Kalam during this period made him the country 's best known nuclear scientist . However , the director of the site test , K Santhanam , said that the thermonuclear bomb had been a " fizzle " and <unk> Kalam for issuing an incorrect report . Both Kalam and Chidambaram dismissed the claims . 
 In 1998 , along with cardiologist Soma Raju , Kalam developed a low cost coronary stent , named the " Kalam @-@ Raju Stent " . In 2012 , the duo designed a rugged tablet computer for health care in rural areas , which was named the " Kalam @-@ Raju Tablet " . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 Kalam served as the 11th President of India , succeeding K. R. Narayanan . He won the 2002 presidential election with an electoral vote of 922 @,@ 884 , surpassing the 107 @,@ 366 votes won by Lakshmi Sahgal . His term lasted from 25 July 2002 to 25 July 2007 . 
 On 10 June 2002 , the National Democratic Alliance ( NDA ) which was in power at the time , expressed that they would nominate Kalam for the post of President , and both the Samajwadi Party and the Nationalist Congress Party backed his candidacy . After the Samajwadi Party announced its support for Kalam , Narayanan chose not to seek a second term in office , leaving the field clear . Kalam said of the announcement of his candidature : 
 I am really overwhelmed . Everywhere both in Internet and in other media , I have been asked for a message . I was thinking what message I can give to the people of the country at this juncture . 
 On 18 June , Kalam filed his nomination papers in the Indian Parliament , accompanied by Vajpayee and his senior Cabinet colleagues . 
 The polling for the presidential election began on 15 July 2002 in Parliament and the state assemblies , with the media claiming that the election was a one @-@ sided affair and Kalam 's victory was a foregone conclusion ; the count was held on 18 July . Kalam became the 11th president of the Republic of India in an easy victory , and moved into the Rashtrapati Bhavan after he was sworn in on 25 July . Kalam was the third President of India to have been honoured with a Bharat Ratna , India 's highest civilian honour , before becoming the President . Dr Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan ( 1954 ) and Dr Zakir Hussain ( 1963 ) were the earlier recipients of Bharat Ratna who later became the President of India . He was also the first scientist and the first bachelor to occupy Rashtrapati Bhawan . 
 During his term as president , he was affectionately known as the People 's President , saying that signing the Office of Profit Bill was the toughest decision he had taken during his tenure . Kalam was criticised for his inaction in deciding the fate of 20 out of the 21 mercy petitions submitted to him during his tenure . Article 72 of the Constitution of India empowers the President of India to grant pardons , and suspend or commute the death sentence of convicts on death row . Kalam acted on only one mercy plea in his five @-@ year tenure as president , rejecting the plea of rapist <unk> Chatterjee , who was later hanged . Perhaps the most notable plea was from Afzal Guru , a Kashmiri terrorist who was convicted of conspiracy in the December 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament and was sentenced to death by the Supreme Court of India in 2004 . While the sentence was scheduled to be carried out on 20 October 2006 , the pending action on his mercy plea resulted in him remaining on death row . He also took the controversial decision to impose President 's Rule in Bihar in 2005 . 
 In September 2003 , in an interactive session in PGI Chandigarh , Kalam supported the need of Uniform Civil Code in India , keeping in view the population of the country . 
 At the end of his term , on 20 June 2007 , Kalam expressed his willingness to consider a second term in office provided there was certainty about his victory in the 2007 presidential election . However , two days later , he decided not to contest the Presidential election again stating that he wanted to avoid involving Rashtrapati Bhavan from any political processes . He did not have the support of the left parties , Shiv Sena and UPA constituents , to receive a renewed mandate . 
 Nearing the expiry of the term of the 12th President Pratibha Patil on 24 July 2012 , media reports in April claimed that Kalam was likely to be nominated for his second term . After the reports , social networking sites witnessed a number of people supporting his candidature . The BJP potentially backed his nomination , saying that the party would lend their support if the Trinamool Congress , Samajwadi Party and Indian National Congress proposed him for the 2012 presidential election . A month ahead of the election , Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mamata Banerjee also expressed their support for Kalam . Days afterwards , Mulayam Singh Yadav backed out , leaving Mamata Banerjee as the solitary supporter . On 18 June 2012 , Kalam declined to contest the 2012 presidential poll . He said of his decision not to do so : 
 Many , many citizens have also expressed the same wish . It only reflects their love and affection for me and the aspiration of the people . I am really overwhelmed by this support . This being their wish , I respect it . I want to thank them for the trust they have in me . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 After leaving office , Kalam became a visiting professor at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong , the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad , and the Indian Institute of Management Indore ; an honorary fellow of Indian Institute of Science , Bangalore ; chancellor of the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Thiruvananthapuram ; professor of Aerospace Engineering at Anna University ; and an adjunct at many other academic and research institutions across India . He taught information technology at the International Institute of Information Technology , Hyderabad , and technology at Banaras Hindu University and Anna University . 
 In May 2012 , Kalam launched a programme for the youth of India called the What Can I Give Movement , with a central theme of defeating corruption . 
 In 2011 , Kalam was criticised by civil groups over his stand on the <unk> Nuclear Power Plant ; he supported the establishment of the nuclear power plant and was accused of not speaking with the local people . The protesters were hostile to his visit as they perceived to him to be a pro @-@ nuclear scientist and were unimpressed by the assurances provided by him regarding the safety features of the plant . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 27 July 2015 , Kalam travelled to Shillong to deliver a lecture on " Creating a Livable Planet Earth " at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong . While climbing a flight of stairs , he experienced some discomfort , but was able to enter the auditorium after a brief rest . At around 6 : 35 p.m. IST , only five minutes into his lecture , he collapsed . He was rushed to the nearby Bethany Hospital in a critical condition ; upon arrival , he lacked a pulse or any other signs of life . Despite being placed in the intensive care unit , Kalam was confirmed dead of a sudden cardiac arrest at 7 : 45 p.m IST . His last words , to his aide Srijan Pal Singh , were reportedly : " Funny guy ! Are you doing well ? " 
 Following his death , Kalam 's body was airlifted in an Indian Air Force helicopter from Shillong to Guwahati , from where it was flown to New Delhi on the morning of 28 July in an air force C @-@ 130J Hercules . The flight landed at Palam Air Base that afternoon and was received by the President , the Prime Minister , Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal , and the three service chiefs of the Indian Armed Forces , who laid wreaths on Kalam 's body . His body was then placed on a gun carriage draped with the Indian flag and taken to his Delhi residence at 10 Rajaji Marg ; there , the public and numerous dignitaries paid homage , including former prime minister Manmohan Singh , Congress President Sonia Gandhi and Vice @-@ President Rahul Gandhi , and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav . 
 On the morning of 29 July , Kalam 's body , wrapped in the Indian flag , was taken to Palam Air Base and flown to Madurai in an air force C @-@ 130J aircraft , arriving at Madurai Airport that afternoon . His body was received at the airport by the three service chiefs and national and state dignitaries , including cabinet ministers Manohar <unk> , <unk> Naidu , Pon Radhakrishnan and the governors of Tamil Nadu and Meghalaya , K <unk> and V. <unk> . After a brief ceremony , Kalam 's body was flown by air force helicopter to the town of Mandapam , from where it was taken in an army truck to his hometown of Rameswaram . Upon arriving at Rameswaram , his body was displayed in an open area in front of the local bus station to allow the public to pay their final respects until 8 p.m. that evening . 
 On 30 July 2015 , the former President was laid to rest at Rameswaram 's Pei <unk> Ground with full state honours . Over 350 @,@ 000 people attended the last rites , including the Prime Minister , the governor of Tamil Nadu and the chief ministers of Karnataka , Kerala and Andhra Pradesh . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 India reacted to Kalam 's death with an outpouring of grief ; numerous tributes were paid to the former President across the nation and on social media . The Government of India declared a seven @-@ day state mourning period as a mark of respect . President Pranab Mukherjee , Vice @-@ President Hamid Ansari , Home Minister Rajnath Singh , and other leaders condoled the former President 's demise . Prime Minister Narendra Modi said " [ Dr. Kalam 's ] death is a great loss to the scientific community . He took India to great heights . He showed the way . " Former Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh , who had served as prime minister under Kalam , said , " our country has lost a great human being who made phenomenal contributions to the promotion of self reliance in defence technologies . I worked very closely with Dr. Kalam as prime minister and I greatly benefited from his advice as president of our country . His life and work will be remembered for generations to come . " ISRO chairman A. S. Kiran Kumar called his former colleague " a great personality and a gentleman " , while former chairman G. Madhavan Nair described Kalam as " a global leader " for whom " the downtrodden and poor people were his priority . He always had a passion to convey what is in his mind to the young generation " , adding that his death left a vacuum which none could fill . 
 South Asian leaders expressed condolences and lauded the late statesman . The Bhutanese government ordered the country 's flags to fly at half @-@ staff to mourn Kalam 's death , and lit 1000 butter lamps in homage . Bhutanese Prime Minister <unk> <unk> expressed deep sadness , saying Kalam " was a leader greatly admired by all people , especially the youth of India who have referred to him as the people 's President " . Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina described Kalam as " a rare combination of a great statesman , acclaimed scientist , and a source of inspiration to the young generation of South Asia " and termed his death an " irreparable loss to India and beyond " . Bangladesh Nationalist Party chief Khaleda Zia said " as a nuclear scientist , he engaged himself in the welfare of the people " . Ashraf Ghani , the President of Afghanistan , called Kalam " an inspirational figure to millions of people , " noting that " we have a lot to learn from his life " . Nepalese Prime Minister Sushil Koirala recalled Kalam 's scientific contributions to India : " Nepal has lost a good friend and I have lost an honoured and ideal personality . " The President of Pakistan , <unk> Hussain , and Prime Minister of Pakistan Nawaz Sharif also expressed their grief and condolences on his death . The President of Sri Lanka , <unk> <unk> , also expressed his condolences . " Dr. Kalam was a man of firm conviction and indomitable spirit , and I saw him as an outstanding statesman of the world . His death is an irreparable loss not only to India but to the entire world . " <unk> President Abdulla <unk> and Vice @-@ President Ahmed <unk> condoled Kalam 's death , with <unk> naming him as a close friend of the Maldives who would continue to be an inspiration to Indians and generations of South Asians . Former president <unk> Abdul <unk> , who had made an official visit to India during Kalam 's presidency , termed his demise as a great loss to all of humankind . The Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Myanmar Armed Forces , Senior General Min Aung <unk> , expressed condolences on behalf of the Myanmar government . The Dalai Lama expressed his sadness and offered condolences and prayers , calling Kalam 's death " an irreparable loss " . 
 Kathleen Wynne , the Premier of Ontario , which Kalam had visited on numerous occasions , expressed " deepest condolences ... as a respected scientist , he played a critical role in the development of the Indian space program . As a committed educator , he inspired millions of young people to achieve their very best . And as a devoted leader , he gained support both at home and abroad , becoming known as ' the people 's President ' . I join our Indo – Canadian families , friends , and neighbours in mourning the passing of this respected leader . " United States President Barack Obama extended " deepest condolences to the people of India on the passing of former Indian President Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam " , and highlighted his achievements as a scientist and as a statesman , notably his role in strengthening US – India relations and increasing space co @-@ operation between the two nations . " Suitably named ' the People 's President ' , Dr. Kalam 's humility and dedication to public service served as an inspiration to millions of Indians and admirers around the world . " Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed sincere condolences and conveyed his sympathy and support " to the near and dear ones of the deceased leader , to the government , and entire people of India " . He remarked on Kalam 's outstanding " personal contribution to the social , economic , scientific , and technical progress of India and in ensuring its national security , " adding that Dr. Kalam would be remembered as a " consistent exponent of closer friendly relations between our nations , who has done a lot for cementing mutually beneficial Russian – Indian cooperation . " Other international leaders — including former Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono , Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak , Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong , President of the United Arab Emirates Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan , and Vice @-@ President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates and emir of Dubai Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum — also paid tribute to Kalam . In a special gesture , Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Ban Ki @-@ moon visited the Permanent Mission of India to the UN and signed a condolence book . " The outpouring of grief around the world is a testament of the respect and inspiration he has garnered during and after his presidency . The UN joins the people of India in sending our deepest condolences for this great statesman . May he rest in peace and eternity " , Ban wrote in his message . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kalam was the youngest of five siblings , the eldest of whom was a sister , Asim <unk> ( d . 1997 ) , followed by three elder brothers : Mohammed Muthu Meera <unk> <unk> ( b . 1916 ; aged 99 ) , Mustafa Kamal ( d . 1999 ) and Kasim Mohammed ( d . 1995 ) . He was extremely close to his elder siblings and their extended families throughout his life , and would regularly send small sums of money to his older relations , himself remaining a lifelong bachelor . 
 Kalam was noted for his integrity and his simple lifestyle . He never owned a television , and was in the habit of rising at 6 : 30 or 7 a.m and sleeping by 2 a.m. His few personal possessions included his books , his veena , some articles of clothing , a CD player and a laptop ; at his death , he left no will , and his possessions went to his eldest brother , who survived him . 
 In the 2011 Hindi film I Am Kalam , Kalam is portrayed as a positive influence on a poor but bright Rajasthani boy named <unk> , who renames himself Kalam in honour of his idol . 
 = = Religious and spiritual views = = 
 Religion and spirituality were very important to Kalam throughout his life . In fact , he made his own spiritual journey the subject of his final book , Transcendence : My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji . 
 = = = Islam = = = 
 A proud and practising Muslim , daily <unk> and fasting during Ramadan were integral to Kalam 's life . His father , the imam of a mosque in his hometown of Rameswaram , had strictly instilled these Islamic customs in his children . His father had also impressed upon the young Kalam the value of interfaith respect and dialogue . As Kalam recalled : " Every evening , my father A.P. Jainulabdeen , an imam , <unk> Lakshmana Sastry , the head priest of the Ramanathaswamy Hindu temple , and a church priest used to sit with hot tea and discuss the issues concerning the island . " Such early exposure convinced Kalam that the answers to India 's multitudinous issues lay in " dialogue and cooperation " among the country 's religious , social , and political leaders . Moreover , since Kalam believed that " respect for other faiths " was one of the key cornerstones of Islam , he was fond of saying : " For great men , religion is a way of making friends ; small people make religion a fighting tool . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 One component of Kalam 's widespread popularity among diverse groups in India , and an enduring aspect of his legacy , is the syncretism he embodied in appreciating various elements of the many spiritual and cultural traditions of India . In addition to his faith in the Koran and Islamic practice , Kalam was well @-@ versed in Hindu traditions ; he learnt Sanskrit , read the Bhagavad Gita and he was a vegetarian . Kalam also enjoyed writing Tamil poetry , playing the veena ( a South Indian string instrument ) , and listening to Carnatic devotional music every day . In 2002 , in one of his early speeches to Parliament after becoming President , he reiterated his desire for a more united India , stating that " [ d ] uring the last one year I met a number of spiritual leaders of all religions ... [ and ] I would like to endeavour to work for bringing about unity of minds among the divergent traditions of our country " . Describing Kalam as a unifier of diverse traditions , Congress leader Shashi Tharoor stated , " Kalam was a complete Indian , an embodiment of the eclecticism of India 's heritage of diversity " . BJP leader L. K. Advani concurred that Kalam was " the best exemplar of the Idea of India , one who embodied the best of all the cultural and spiritual traditions that signify India 's unity in immense diversity . This was most strikingly evident in the second @-@ to @-@ last book he published , presciently titled Transcendence : My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swami . 
 = = = Pramukh Swami as Guru = = = 
 Kalam 's desire to meet spiritual leaders to help create a more prosperous , spiritual , and unified India was what initially led him to meet Pramukh Swami , the Hindu guru of the BAPS Swaminarayan Sampradaya , who Kalam would come to consider his ultimate spiritual teacher and guru . The first of eight meetings between Kalam and Pramukh Swami over a fourteen @-@ year period took place on 30 June 2001 in New Delhi , during which Kalam described being immediately drawn to Pramukh Swami 's simplicity and spiritual purity . Kalam stated that he was inspired by Pramukh Swami throughout their numerous interactions . One such incident occurred the day following the terrorist attack on BAPS ' Akshardham , Gandhinagar complex in September 2002 ; Pramukh Swami prayed for , and sprinkled holy water upon , the sites of all of the deceased , including the terrorists , demonstrating the view that all human life is sacred . Kalam recalled being moved by Pramukh Swami 's equanimity and compassion , citing this incident as one of his motivations for writing Transcendence : My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji . Summarizing the effect that Pramukh Swami had on him , Kalam stated that " [ Pramukh Swami ] has indeed transformed me . He is the ultimate stage of the spiritual ascent in my life ... Pramukh Swamiji has put me in a God @-@ synchronous orbit . No manoeuvres are required any more , as I am placed in my final position in eternity . " Following Kalam 's death a month after his final book was released , co @-@ author Arun Tiwari pointed to this passage as potentially prophetic and premonitory of Kalam 's death . 
 = = Writings = = 
 In his book India 2020 , Kalam strongly advocated an action plan to develop India into a " knowledge superpower " and a developed nation by the year 2020 . He regarded his work on India 's nuclear weapons programme as a way to assert India 's place as a future superpower . 
 I have identified five areas where India has a core competence for integrated action : ( 1 ) agriculture and food processing ; ( 2 ) education and healthcare ; ( 3 ) information and communication technology ; ( 4 ) infrastructure , reliable and quality electric power , surface transport and infrastructure for all parts of the country ; and ( 5 ) self @-@ reliance in critical technologies . These five areas are closely inter @-@ related and if advanced in a coordinated way , will lead to food , economic and national security . 
 Kalam describes a " transformative moment " in his life when he asked Pramukh Swami , the guru of the BAPS Swaminarayan Sampradaya , how India might realise this five @-@ pronged vision of development . Pramukh Swami 's answer — to add a sixth area developing faith in God and spirituality to overcome the current climate of crime and corruption — became the spiritual vision for the next 15 years Kalam 's life , which he describes in his final book , Transcendence : My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji , published just a month before his death . 
 It was reported that there was considerable demand in South Korea for translated versions of books authored by him . 
 Kalam took an active interest in other developments in the field of science and technology , including a research programme for developing biomedical implants . He also supported open source technology over proprietary software , predicting that the use of free software on a large scale would bring the benefits of information technology to more people . 
 Kalam set a target of interacting with 100 @,@ 000 students during the two years after his resignation from the post of scientific adviser in 1999 . He explained , " I feel comfortable in the company of young people , particularly high school students . Henceforth , I intend to share with them experiences , helping them to ignite their imagination and preparing them to work for a developed India for which the road map is already available . " His dream is to let every student to light up the sky with victory using their latent fire in the heart . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Kalam received 7 honorary doctorates from 40 universities . The Government of India honoured him with the Padma Bhushan in 1981 and the Padma Vibhushan in 1990 for his work with ISRO and DRDO and his role as a scientific advisor to the Government . In 1997 , Kalam received India 's highest civilian honour , the Bharat Ratna , for his contribution to the scientific research and modernisation of defence technology in India . In 2013 , he was the recipient of the Von Braun Award from the National Space Society " to recognize excellence in the management and leadership of a space @-@ related project " . 
 Following his death , Kalam received numerous tributes . The Tamil Nadu state government announced that his birthday , 15 October , would be observed across the state as " Youth Renaissance Day ; " the state government further instituted the " Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Award , " constituting an 8 @-@ gram gold medal , a certificate and ₹ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 7 @,@ 400 ) . The award will be awarded annually on Independence Day , beginning in 2015 , to residents of the state with achievements in promoting scientific growth , the humanities or the welfare of students . 
 On occasion of his birth day ( 2015 ) , CBSE has given the topics on his name in the CBSE expression series . 
 The Prime Minister , Mr. Narendra Modi released the commemorative postal stamps on the former President of India , Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam , on his 84th birth anniversary celebrations , at DRDO Bhawan , in New Delhi on October 15 , 2015 . 
 = = = Educational and scientific institutions = = = 
 Several educational and scientific institutions and other locations were renamed or named in honour of Kalam following his death . 
 An agricultural college at <unk> , Bihar , was renamed the " Dr. Kalam Agricultural College , <unk> " by the Bihar state government on the day of Kalam 's funeral . The state government also announced it would name a proposed science city after Kalam . 
 Uttar Pradesh Technical University ( <unk> ) was renamed " A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Technical University " by the Uttar Pradesh state government . 
 A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Memorial Travancore Institute of Digestive Diseases , a new research institute in Kollam city , Kerala attached to the Travancore Medical College Hospital . 
 A new academic complex at Mahatma Gandhi University in Kerala . 
 A new science centre and planetarium in <unk> , Puducherry . 
 India and the US have launched the Fulbright @-@ Kalam Climate Fellowship In September 2014 . The first call for applicants was announced on Friday March 12 , 2016 , for the fellowship which will enable up to 6 Indian PhD students and post @-@ doctoral researchers to work with US host institutions for a period of 6 – 12 months . The fellowship will be operated by the binational US @-@ India Educational Foundation ( <unk> ) under the Fulbright programme . 
 Kerala Technological University , headquartered at Thiruvananthapuram where Kalam lived for years , was renamed to A P J Abdul Kalam Technological University after his death . 
 = = = Island = = = 
 Wheeler Island , a national missile test site in Odisha , was renamed Abdul Kalam Island in September 2015 . 
 = = = Other awards and honours = = = 
 = = Books and documentaries = = 
 Kalam 's writings 
 Developments in Fluid Mechanics and Space Technology by A P J Abdul Kalam and Roddam Narasimha ; Indian Academy of Sciences , 1988 
 India 2020 : A Vision for the New Millennium by A P J Abdul Kalam , Y. S. Rajan ; New York , 1998 . 
 Wings of Fire : An Autobiography by A P J Abdul Kalam , Arun Tiwari ; Universities Press , 1999 . 
 <unk> Minds : Unleashing the Power Within India by A P J Abdul Kalam ; Viking , 2002 . 
 The Luminous Sparks by A P J Abdul Kalam , by ; Punya Publishing Pvt Ltd . , 2004 . 
 Mission India by A P J Abdul Kalam , Paintings by <unk> Gupta ; Penguin Books , 2005 
 Inspiring Thoughts by A P J Abdul Kalam ; Rajpal & Sons , 2007 
 Indomitable Spirit by A P J Abdul Kalam ; Rajpal and Sons Publishing 
 Envisioning an Empowered Nation by A P J Abdul Kalam with A <unk> Pillai ; Tata McGraw @-@ Hill , New Delhi 
 You Are Born To Blossom : Take My Journey Beyond by A P J Abdul Kalam and Arun Tiwari ; Ocean Books , 2011 . 
 Turning Points : A journey through challenges by A P J Abdul Kalam ; Harper Collins India , 2012 . 
 Target 3 Billion by A P J Abdul Kalam and Srijan Pal Singh ; December 2011 | Publisher Penguin Books . 
 My Journey : ( titled <unk> <unk> ் - Tamil ) Transforming Dreams into Actions by A P J Abdul Kalam ; August 2013 by the Rupa Publication . 
 A Manifesto for Change : A Sequel to India 2020 by A P J Abdul Kalam and V <unk> ; July 2014 by Harper Collins . 
 Forge your Future : Candid , Forthright , Inspiring by A P J Abdul Kalam ; by Rajpal and Sons , 29 October 2014 . 
 <unk> : Scientific Pathways to a Brighter Future by A P J Abdul Kalam and Srijan Pal Singh ; by Penguin India , 14 May 2015 . 
 Transcendence : My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji by A P J Abdul Kalam with Arun Tiwari ; HarperCollins Publishers , June 2015 
 Advantage India : From Challenge to Opportunity by A P J Abdul Kalam and Srijan Pal Singh ; HarperCollins Publishers , 15 Oct 2015 . 
 Biographies 
 Eternal Quest : Life and Times of Dr Kalam by S Chandra ; Pentagon Publishers , 2002 . 
 President A P J Abdul Kalam by R K <unk> ; Anmol Publications , 2002 . 
 A P J Abdul Kalam : The Visionary of India by K Bhushan , G Katyal ; A P H Pub Corp , 2002 . 
 A Little Dream ( documentary film ) by P. Dhanapal ; <unk> Media Works Private Limited , 2008 . 
 The Kalam Effect : My Years with the President by P M Nair ; Harper Collins , 2008 . 
 My Days With Mahatma Abdul Kalam by Fr A K George ; Novel Corporation , 2009 . 
 = Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) = 
 Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) is the seventh studio album by English rock band the Kinks , released in October 1969 . Kinks frontman Ray Davies constructed the concept album as the soundtrack to a Granada Television play and developed the storyline with novelist Julian Mitchell ; however , the television programme was cancelled and never produced . The rough plot revolved around Arthur Morgan , a carpet @-@ layer , who was based on Ray Davies ' brother @-@ in @-@ law Arthur Anning . A mono version was released in the UK , but not in the US . It is now available on the 2011 deluxe @-@ edition re @-@ issue . 
 Arthur was met with nearly unanimous acclaim upon release . It received generous coverage in the US rock press , with articles running in underground magazines such as Fusion and The Village Voice . It garnered back @-@ to @-@ back reviews by Mike Daly and Greil Marcus in Rolling Stone magazine 's lead section ; Daly rated it " the Kinks ' finest hour " , and Marcus ranked it " the best British album of 1969 " . Reviews in the UK were also positive . Although Arthur received a mixed review in New Musical Express , Disc & Music Echo praised the album 's musical integrity , and Melody Maker called it " Ray Davies ' finest hour ... beautifully British to the core " . 
 The album , although not very successful commercially , was a return to the charts in the US for the band . Their previous effort , The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society , received acclaim from critics but failed to chart in any country upon its 1968 release , with total US sales estimated at under 25 @,@ 000 copies . The Kinks returned to the Billboard charts in 1969 after a two @-@ year absence , with the lead single from the record , " Victoria " , peaking at number 62 . The album itself reached number 50 on the Record World charts , and number 105 on Billboard , their highest position since 1965 . It failed to chart in Britain . Arthur paved the way for the further success of their 1970 comeback album Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One and its accompanying US Top 10 and UK Top 5 hit " Lola " . 
 = = Background = = 
 British production company Granada TV approached Ray Davies in early January 1969 , expressing interest in developing a movie or play for television . Davies was to collaborate with writer Julian Mitchell on the " experimental " programme , with a soundtrack by the Kinks to be released on an accompanying LP . Agreements were finalised on 8 January , but the project was not revealed until a press release on 10 March . Separately , the Kinks began work on the programme 's companion record , entitled Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) . Development of Arthur occurred during a rough period for the band , due to the commercial failure of their previous album The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society and the subsequent single , " Plastic Man " , as well as the departure of founding member and bassist Pete Quaife . In early 1969 , Quaife had told the band he was quitting , though the other members did not take the remark seriously . When an article in the New Musical Express mentioned Maple Oak , the band that he had formed without the rest of the Kinks ' knowledge , Davies unsuccessfully asked Quaife to return for the upcoming sessions of Arthur . As a replacement , Davies called up bassist John Dalton , who had previously filled in for Quaife . 
 Davies travelled to United Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California on 11 April 1969 , to produce American pop band The Turtles ' LP Turtle Soup with engineer Chuck Britz . While in Los Angeles , Davies helped negotiate an end to the concert ban placed on the Kinks by the American Federation of Musicians in 1965 . Although neither the Kinks nor the union gave a specific reason for the ban , at the time it was widely attributed to their rowdy on @-@ stage behaviour . After negotiations with Davies , the Federation relented , opening up an opportunity for the group to return to touring in America . Once the main sessions for the Turtles LP were completed , Davies returned to England . While Davies was abroad , the other members of the band had been rehearsing and practising for the upcoming album , as well as lead guitarist Dave Davies ' solo album , nicknamed A Hole in the Sock of . When Ray returned , the Kinks regrouped at his house in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire , to rehearse the upcoming album Arthur . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The group turned to the recording proper on 1 May 1969 . The first tracks worked on were " Drivin ' " , intended as their next single release , and " Mindless Child Of Motherhood " , written by Dave Davies ( the latter would eventually be used as the B @-@ side to " Drivin ' " , and was not included on the LP ) . The Kinks began a two @-@ week series of focused sessions on 5 May , laying down an early version of the entire Arthur album . Recording was interrupted when the Kinks travelled to Beirut , Lebanon on 17 May to play three dates at the <unk> Hotel ; sessions for Arthur resumed the day after their return , and most of the recording for the album was finished by the end of the month . Mixing and dubbing began in early June , with arranger Lew Warburton handling string overdubs . The Kinks played a few small gigs in England throughout the remainder of the month , but devoted most of their time to finishing Dave Davies ' solo album . 
 Writing for the TV play progressed through May and June , and on 15 June mixing for Dave Davies ' solo LP was completed ( tapes for this record were eventually delivered to Pye and Reprise Records , although it never saw official release ) . A press release announced that the Arthur LP was scheduled for a late July release . As Davies and Mitchell completed their script , the Arthur TV play began to crystallise , and British filmmaker Leslie Woodhead was assigned the role of director . By early September production was scheduled to begin , with a planned broadcast of late September , but these plans were continually delayed . As problems with the TV play got progressively worse — and , consequently , distracted the Kinks from completing the post @-@ production of the album — the release dates for both projects were pushed further and further back . In early October Ray Davies moved from Boreham Wood back to his old family home on Fortis Green , in Muswell Hill , and travelled to Los Angeles , where he deposited the tapes at Reprise for Arthur 's American release . The album 's release date was finally set for 10 October , and the Kinks began gearing up for an upcoming US tour to support the album , for which they would depart on 17 October . Shooting for the TV play was eventually set for 1 December . Roy Stonehouse was hired as a designer , and the casting was completed ; however , the show was cancelled at the last minute when the producer was unable to secure financial backing . Davies and Mitchell were frustrated at an entire year 's work wasted — Doug Hinman stated that Davies witnessed " his grand artistic visions once again dashed by bureaucracy and internal politics " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) was released in the US and UK on 10 October 1969 , in both mono and stereo versions . The album set the stage for the Kinks ' return to touring the United States in late 1969 , and paved the way for even greater commercial success with the hit song " Lola " in 1970 . 
 = = = Singles and chart performance = = = 
 While the sessions for Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) were nearing completion in June 1969 , the track " Drivin ' " was released as a single in the UK , backed with " Mindless Child of Motherhood " . For the first time since their breakthrough in 1964 , a Kinks single failed to make an impression on the UK charts — Johnny Rogan notes that " This was the first of two pilot singles for ... Arthur and its failure did not augur well . " The group followed with another single in September , " Shangri @-@ La " , which again failed to chart in the UK . As with Village Green , the album itself failed to chart when released in October . 
 In the US , " Victoria " was chosen as the lead single , backed with the album track " Brainwashed " , and was released the same week as the LP . The single proved to be relatively successful , and reached number 62 on the Billboard Hot 100 — their highest position since their Top 20 hit " Sunny Afternoon " in 1966 . The success of the single led to its release in the UK ; backed with " Mr. Churchill Says " , it reached a peak of number 30 . Arthur itself was a moderate commercial success in the US , where it peaked at number 105 ( the highest for a Kinks album since 1965 ) and remained on the charts for 20 weeks . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Reprise Records , the Kinks ' US label , devised an elaborate , multi @-@ levelled promotional campaign for Arthur in early 1969 . The most famous branch of the programme involved a promo package entitled God Save The Kinks . The set featured various items , including a consumer 's guide to the band 's albums , a bag of " grass " from the " <unk> village green " , and an LP entitled Then , Now and Inbetween . The set was accompanied by a positive letter from Hal <unk> of creative services at Warner / Reprise , part of which read , " ... [ We are led ] to believe that The Kinks may not have had it at all .... The Kinks are to be supported , encouraged , cheered . And saved . " The campaign was officially launched on 3 July , at a meeting between Ray Davies and Reprise executives in Burbank , California . Reprise considered seeding false stories in the press to create an " outlaw " image for the group as part of the campaign , including pieces about marijuana possession and income tax evasion . Ray called the idea " mad " , and the programme was dropped . Several pieces , however , were used in the press kit for Arthur 's release , with titles including " English Pop Group Arrested on Rape Rap " . 
 = = = Packaging and liner notes = = = 
 Artwork for Arthur was created by Bob Lawrie . The album was packaged in a gatefold sleeve , and included a shaped insert depicting Queen Victoria ( holding a house containing Arthur Morgan ) , with lyrics on the reverse . Liner notes in the UK were written by Geoffrey Cannon and Julian Mitchell ; in the US , notes by rock critic John Mendelsohn replaced Cannon 's . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The album was critically acclaimed at the time of release , especially in the US rock press . It was favourably compared to contemporary works , namely Tommy by The Who , released earlier in the year . In Rolling Stone magazine , Arthur was spotlighted in its lead section , with back @-@ to @-@ back reviews by Mike Daly and Greil Marcus . Daly called it " an album that is a masterpiece on every level : Ray Davies ' finest hour , the Kinks ' supreme achievement " . Rolling Stone reviewer J.R. Young also praised the record , and said : " Less ambitious than Tommy , and far more musical ... Arthur is by all odds the best British album of 1969 . It shows that Pete Townshend still has worlds to conquer and that The Beatles have a lot of catching up to do . " A review by Sal Imam ran in Boston 's Fusion magazine read that " If Tommy was the greatest rock opera , then Arthur most surely is the greatest rock musical . " Writing in his Consumer Guide column of The Village Voice , Robert Christgau gave the record a positive review , saying , although Ray Davies ' lyrics could get " preachy at times " , that the album featured " excellent music and production " . 
 Reception in the UK was not as warm , although reviews were still generally positive . Disc & Music Echo commented that " Arthur works as a complete score because it is basic and simple and pleasing to the ear , and powerfully conjures up pictures in the eye . " Melody Maker seconded Mike Daly 's comments in Rolling Stone , again calling it " Ray Davies ' finest hour " , and adding that it was " beautifully British to the core " . Doug Hinman would later comment on the album 's reception in Britain : " In the British music press there [ was ] less celebration , and coverage [ was ] relatively routine , though everyone saw the rock opera angle . " 
 = = = Recent reception = = = 
 Today the album receives generally positive reviews . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic stated that Arthur was " one of the most effective concept albums in rock history , as well as one of the best and most influential British pop records of its era " , and in 2003 Matt Golden of Stylus called it " the best rock opera ever " . Switch magazine included Arthur on their " 100 Best Albums of the 20th Century " in 1999 , and in 2003 Mojo featured the album on their list of the " Top 50 Most Eccentric Albums " . 
 = = Story and theme = = 
 The story is partially inspired by the Davies brothers ' older sister Rose , who emigrated to Australia in 1964 with her husband Arthur Anning . Her departure devastated Ray Davies , and it inspired him to write the song " Rosie Won 't You Please Come Home " , included on the 1966 album Face to Face . The lead character in the album , the fictional Arthur Morgan — modeled after Arthur Anning — is a carpet layer whose family 's plight in the opportunity @-@ poor setting of post @-@ war England is depicted . Writer Julian Mitchell detailed the story line and characters in depth , explaining in the liner notes for the album 's LP release : 
 Arthur Morgan ... lives in a London suburb in a house called Shangri @-@ La , with a garden and a car and a wife called Rose and a son called Derek who 's married to Liz , and they have these two very nice kids , Terry and Marilyn . Derek and Liz and Terry and Marilyn are emigrating to Australia . Arthur did have another son , called Eddie . He was named for Arthur 's brother , who was killed in the battle of the Somme . Arthur 's Eddie was killed , too — in Korea . 
 Davies would later comment in his autobiography , X @-@ Ray , that Arthur Anning later " told me that he ... knew it [ Arthur ] had been partly inspired by him ... [ it ] reminded him of home ... I told Arthur that I felt guilty for using him as a subject for a song , but he shrugged off my apology , saying that he was flattered . " With an underlying theme of nostalgia , the songs describe the England that Arthur once knew ( " Victoria " , " Young and Innocent Days " ) , the promise of life in Australia for one of his sons ( " Australia " ) , the emptiness of his superficially comfortable life in his home ( " Shangri @-@ La " ) , the resolve of the British people during the Second World War ( " Mr. Churchill Says " ) , the privations that marked the austerity period after the war ( " She 's Bought a Hat Like Princess Marina " ) , and the death of his brother in World War I ( " Yes Sir , No Sir " , " Some Mother 's Son " ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Ray Davies , except when noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Kinks 
 Mick Avory – drums , percussion 
 John Dalton – bass guitar , background vocals 
 Dave Davies – lead guitar , background vocals , co @-@ lead vocal on " Australia " and " Arthur " , lead vocals on his own tracks 
 Ray Davies – lead and background vocals , rhythm guitar , keyboards ( harpsichord and piano ) , production 
 Pete Quaife – bass guitar , background vocals on bonus tracks : " Plastic Man " , " King Kong " , " This Man He Weeps Tonight " , " Lincoln County " , " Hold My Hand " and " Creeping Jean " 
 Production 
 Lew Warburton – horn and string arrangements 
 Andrew <unk> – engineering 
 Brian Humphries – engineering on " Drivin ' " 
 Bob Lawrie – album art 
 Austin <unk> – credited as " album ' tester ' " 
 = = Chart tables = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = 2010 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships = 
 The 2010 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships was held in Nanning , China on 16 October 2010 . The competition took place on the city streets , beginning and ending at Wuxiang Square , with a total prize purse of US $ 245 @,@ 000 at stake . 
 The Kenyan athletes emerged with both the individual and team titles in the men 's and women 's races . Despite limited experience in top level half marathon races , Wilson Kiprop and Florence Kiplagat won their respective races . Kiprop broke Zersenay Tadese 's winning streak which dated back to 2006 , out @-@ sprinting the defending champion in the final stages . Sammy Kitwara won the men 's bronze medal and helped Kenya to the men 's team title . Led by Zersenay , the Eritrean men beat Ethiopia to the team silver medal spot . 
 Kiplagat , who was ever present at the front of the women 's race , outdid Ethiopian Dire Tune in the last kilometre to win her second gold medal on the global stage . Mirroring Kitwara , Kenya 's women 's bronze medallist <unk> <unk> Arusei secured the team 's victory over Ethiopia . Representing the hosts , Zhu Xiaolin was the only non @-@ African to reach the top eight at the championships . The joint effort of the Japanese women aided them to a sixth consecutive team bronze medal – making them the only <unk> country outside of the typically strong African triumvirate of Kenya , Ethiopia and Eritrea . 
 A total of thirty countries were represented at the 19th edition of the competition and 123 runners altogether were entered into the men 's and women 's races . The event was the final edition to be held on an annual schedule , as the competition switched to a biennial format for the 2012 championships . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The city of Nanning was announced as the host venue for the 2010 World Half Marathon Championship at the IAAF Council Meeting in Monaco in November 2008 . The winning bid was a continuation of a series of major international athletics events in the People 's Republic of China , which included the 2006 World Junior Championships and a highly successful athletics competition at the 2008 Beijing Olympics . It was the first time that China hosted the competition , becoming the second Asian country to do so after India , which held the 2004 edition in New Delhi . 
 The Local Organizing Committee was headed by the Nanning Sports Bureau and worked in conjunction with the Chinese Athletics Association and the IAAF . The event gained a high profile title sponsor in Sinopec , the major Chinese state @-@ owned petroleum corporation . The competition featured an original event mascot – an anthropomorphic ox , called " Ah Niu " , which was dressed in the traditional costume of the Zhuang people . 
 In addition to the primary events of the day , the competition was held in conjunction with Nanning 's 28th Liberation Day celebrations and mass races over 10 km and 4 km were also held . The Chinese state broadcaster CCTV showed live television coverage of the event via helicopter . 
 = = Format = = 
 Continuing in the tradition of previous editions , the championships comprised separate half marathon road races for men and women , with each race having an individual and international team aspect . Each nation could enter a maximum of five athletes per race and the team scores were calculated by combining the finishing times of each team 's top three runners . Nations with less than three runners were disregarded for the team event and their runners competed for the individual prizes only . 
 Athletes typically gained selection for their country in one of two ways : through recent performances on the international road running circuit , or via a performance at a specially designated half marathon national championships . 
 A total prize money pot of US $ 245 @,@ 000 was available to athletes at the championships , with awards being given those placing from first to sixth in both the individual and team sections . The amounts on offer for each competition were equal across the sexes . The top prize for the individual race winners was $ 30 @,@ 000 , while the three athletes in the winning teams earned a share of $ 15 @,@ 000 . A further $ 50 @,@ 000 was provided as in incentive for runners who improved upon the half marathon world record mark , but ultimately this award was not claimed at the 2010 championships . All athletes receiving prize money needed to submit to – and pass – a doping test in order to claim their award . 
 = = Course = = 
 The half marathon course was designed in a double @-@ looped , or figure eight , format which had Wuxiang Square as the central start and finish point for the race , situated just off Nanning 's Minzu Avenue . The route left the square in a westerly direction along Minzu Avenue , before turning north on <unk> Road . It turned left onto <unk> Road and followed <unk> Road up to the Guangxi People 's Hall , which was around the 8 km mark . Turning back eastwards via <unk> Road and <unk> Road , the route ran along the straightway of Minzu Avenue , passing the halfway marker at this point . 
 The racers then headed right to go south along <unk> Road and <unk> Road , passing the <unk> Flyover on their way . Going northwards along <unk> Avenue , the race came up to the Nanning International Convention and Exhibition Center and headed east on Minzu Road before doubling back via <unk> Road . Tracing a path alongside The Admiral City Shopping Mall , the route went east to return the starting point of Wuxiang Square . There was little elevation on the generally flat course , which ranged between eight and twelve metres wide along the route . 
 The championships were held on 16 October 2010 . The women 's race began at 8 : 30am local time ( GMT + 8 ) and the men 's competition began half an hour after this . In addition to the elite races , a complementary mass fun run event of 10 km and 4 km was held for the people of Nanning ( beginning at 9 : 15am ) . The competitions took place in the morning in order to avoid the heat of the day in what is one of PR China 's most southerly cities . 
 <unk> Park was the designated training area for the athletes in attendance . 
 = = Medallists = = 
 = = Men 's race = = 
 The favourite for the men 's race was Eritrean runner Zersenay Tadese ( the defending champion with four straight wins ) , who had broken the world record earlier that year with a run of 58 : 23 minutes at the Lisbon Half Marathon . Newly minted African Champion Wilson Kiprop was the most prominent of the Kenyan contingent , which was the clear favourite for the team title through its hoard of sub @-@ 60 minute runners including Sammy Kitwara , Silas Kipruto and Moses <unk> . Other contenders were Ethiopian <unk> <unk> and Eritrean Samuel Tsegay . Kenya was the defending champion in the team race . 
 The hot and humid conditions in Nanning slowed the runners ' pace and twelve of them remained within the main pack by the 10 km point . The following five kilometres was decisive for the race , as Samuel Tsegay , Titus Masai and <unk> were all left trailing . The leading four runners were soon reduced to three , as Kipruto fell away to leave Zersenay Tadese , Wilson Kiprop and Sammy Kitwara to battle for the medal positions . Zersenay and Kiprop were neck and neck in the lead from the last kilometre and it was Kiprop who pulled away in the final 100 metres to break the Eritrean 's four @-@ year undefeated streak . Zersenay faded badly at the end and appeared injured after taking second place . Kitwara and Kipruto were third and fourth , sealing the Kenyan team victory , while Samuel Tsegay 's fifth place helped Eritrea to the team silver . 
 The win continued Kiprop 's meteoric rise of 2010 – a year in which he had gone from a low @-@ profile circuit runner to the 10 @,@ 000 metres Kenyan and African champion , with a sub @-@ 60 minute half marathon best after wins in Paris and Lille . Silver medallist Zersenay received some consolation as he was given the <unk> / Citizen World 's Fastest Time Award days after the competition in respect of his position as world record holder , becoming only the second half marathon athlete to be selected for the accolade after <unk> Kiplagat . There were no surprise breakthroughs in the men 's race as all the top performers were those predicted to make an impact before the race . However , there were some other achievements of note including : Kitwara 's first individual medal for Kenya , personal bests for <unk> Bekele and Tomoya Onishi in eighth and ninth place respectively , and ( much further back in the field ) a national record for Bhutanese racer <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Men 's results = = = 
 Totals : 68 starters , 68 finishers , 26 nations represented , 11 national teams ranked . 
 = = Women 's race = = 
 The provisional favourite for the women 's race was Kenyan runner Florence Kiplagat , who was the fastest entrant in the field through her win at the Lille Half Marathon in September ( also her debut for the distance ) . Her compatriots <unk> Arusei and Sarah <unk> – second and third in Lille – completed the strongest three of the Kenyan women 's team , which was considered the team to beat for the title . The Ethiopians , led by Boston Marathon winner Dire Tune , were their main opposition for the team race , although the nation had sent relatively inexperienced runners to the championships on this occasion . China 's leading athlete was Zhu Xiaolin , who despite being an established marathon runner had less experience over the half distance . Although Japan lacked a leading figure individually , their overall consistency ( which had brought them team medals in the last five editions ) demonstrated their team pedigree . Kenya entered the tournament as the reigning team champions . 
 The beginning to the race highlighted the dominance of the Kenyan and Ethiopian runners as they set a high tempo from the outset . By the time the first 5 km marker was passed , Australia 's Nikki Chapple was the only athlete left in the leading pack to come from outside of the two historically strong nations . A few kilometres later , she dropped back from the pack and at the 10 km mark five Ethiopians and four Kenyans had a fifteen @-@ second advantage on the rest of the field . As the race reached the midway point , the temperature began to increase and the heat and humidity reduced the pace of the runners . The conditions took their toll on some of the leaders in this section of the race . <unk> slowed considerably while Meseret Mengistu , Joyce Chepkirui and Fate Tola were the next to gradually lose contact with the front runners . Kiplagat , Dire , Arusei and Feyse Tadese were the sole contenders remaining as the race headed towards the final stages , but Kiplagat and Dire soon left the other two trailing a few minutes later . 
 Despite Dire 's greater experience over long distances , it was Kiplagat who forged ahead in the last kilometre and she won the race with ten seconds to spare over her Ethiopian rival . Arusei was the third across the line half a minute later , while Feyse Tadese , Joyce Chepkirui , Meseret Mengistu and Fate Tola took places 4 – 7 around one minute behind the winner . It was Arusei 's clear third place which proved the difference between the top African teams , as Kenya won the team gold by a margin of 34 seconds over Ethiopia . A strong final phase saw Zhu Xiaolin take eighth place for the hosts , which was the best non @-@ African individual performance that year . Japan 's Yoshimi Ozaki and Ryoko <unk> were immediately behind her , failing to get a top eight finish but yet again leading the country to the team bronze with a buffer of over six minutes between them and Australia . 
 Kiplagat collected her first international road running title in only her second effort over the half marathon distance – her second world title after the senior crown at the 2009 IAAF World Cross Country Championships . She said her next priority would be taking a medal on the track " That is my goal for next year ( World Championships in Daegu ) and at the next Olympics " . For Dire and Arusei – both prolific road runners – this was their first individual medal on the world stage . The younger Ethiopians ( Feyse Tadese , Meseret Mengistu and Fate Tola ) missed out on the medals but still set personal bests for the half marathon , as did Kenyan Joyce Chepkirui . 
 = = = Women 's results = = = 
 Totals : 55 starters , 51 finishers , 22 nations represented , 10 teams ranked . 
 = = Participation = = 
 A total of thirty nations were represented at the championships , with a combined total of 123 male and female athletes in attendance . Five countries entered the maximum of five athletes per race : Ethiopia , Japan , Kenya , South Africa , and the United States . British runner Andrew Lemoncello was scheduled to be his country 's sole representative in the men 's race , but he was refused entry into the country without explanation , causing a dispute between UK Athletics and the Chinese Athletic Association . 
 Number of athletes in parentheses 
 = Maria Limanskaya = 
 Maria Limanskaya ( also mistakenly referred to as Anna Pavlova ) was a female soldier of the Red Army for three years during World War II . She became known as the Russian woman who directed traffic at the Brandenburg Gate in 1945 after the Battle of Berlin . She has since become a symbol of the Allied victory over Nazi Germany . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and military service = = = 
 Born in 1924 as Maria Limanskaya , she joined the Red Army in 1942 , at the height of World War II . She was 18 . At that time the Soviet Stavka ( " high command " ) increasingly lacked trained reserves to reinforce the entire 2 @,@ 000 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) front , and as a result began to conscript underage men and women . Almost 800 @,@ 000 women would eventually serve in the Red Army throughout the war . Little is known about Limanskaya 's military career other than several occasions where she was nearly killed . At one point , she left a building a few seconds before it was leveled by a bomb attack . She also contracted malaria . 
 = = = Brandenburg Gate and victory icon = = = 
 After the Battle of Berlin ended in early May 1945 , Limanskaya was assigned to direct traffic at the Brandenburg Gate during the Potsdam Conference in late July . While conducting her duties , she was photographed , filmed , and also interviewed by <unk> <unk> , a journalist employed by <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union " ; TASS ) , a state news agency . Her picture was widely published in newspapers and magazines worldwide and she quickly became an iconic image of the victory over Nazi Germany . She furthermore had a brief conversation with the British leader Winston Churchill as his entourage was passing by the gate on their way to Potsdam . Limanskaya later said about her meeting Churchill , " [ he ] looked precisely the way I imagined him , puffing on a cigar " . 
 = = = Later life and marriage = = = 
