 Sir Humphrey de Trafford had retained 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 530 ha ) of land on the western side of the ship canal after his 1897 sale of Trafford Park . <unk> in as it was between the canals and " an increasingly urbanised Stretford to the east " , as the industrialisation of the park neared its completion the Estates Company started to acquire parcels of the remaining de Trafford land , then in the control of family trustees , as did the Canal Company . In 1924 the Estates Company bought a half share in Dumplington Estates Ltd . , a company set up to administer 38 acres ( 15 ha ) of land bought from the de Trafford Trustees on which it was intended to build a garden village . In 1929 the Ship Canal Company acquired Dumplington Estates , and in return gave the Estates Company land to the south of Barton , the Trafford Park Extension . The Canal Company recognised the potential for a new dock on the land , giving the area its name of Barton Dock Estate , although no dock was ever built . The Barton Docks area was developed during and after the Second World War , but the land belonging to Dumplington Estates remained largely undeveloped until the construction of the Trafford Centre , which opened in 1998 . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Trafford Park was largely turned over to the production of war materiel during the Second World War , such as the Avro Manchester and Avro Lancaster heavy bombers , and the Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin engines used to power the Spitfire , Hurricane , Mosquito and the Lancaster . The engines were made by Ford , under licence . The 17 @,@ 316 workers employed in Ford 's purpose @-@ built factory had produced 34 @,@ 000 engines by the war 's end . The facility was designed in two separate sections to minimise the impact of bomb damage on production . The wood @-@ working factory of F. Hills & Sons built more than 800 Percival Proctor aircraft for the RAF between 1940 and 1945 , which were flight tested at the nearby Barton Aerodrome . Other companies produced gun bearings , steel tracks for Churchill tanks , munitions , Bailey Bridges , and much else . ICI built and operated the first facility in the UK able to produce penicillin in quantity . 
 As an important industrial area , the park suffered from extensive bombing , particularly during the Manchester Blitz of December 1940 . On the night of 23 December 1940 , the Metropolitan @-@ Vickers aircraft factory in Mosley Road was badly damaged , with the loss of the first 13 MV @-@ built Avro Manchester bombers in final assembly . The new Ford factory producing aircraft engines was bombed only a few days after its opening in May 1941 . Trafford Hall was severely damaged by bombing , and was demolished shortly after the war ended . At the outbreak of war in 1939 there were an estimated 50 @,@ 000 workers employed in the park . By the end of the war in 1945 that number had risen to 75 @,@ 000 , probably the peak size of the park 's workforce ; Metropolitan @-@ Vickers alone employed 26 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Decline and regeneration = = = 
 In the 1960s employment in the park began to decline as companies closed their premises in favour of newer , more efficient plants elsewhere . Ellesmere Port and Runcorn at the western end of the Manchester Ship Canal were in the ascendency industrially and they overtook Trafford Park in economic importance . In 1967 , employment had fallen to 50 @,@ 000 and there was a further decline in the 1970s . In 1971 , Stretford Council responded by setting up the Trafford Park Industrial Council ( <unk> ) , membership of which was open to any firm in Trafford Park . One of <unk> 's early initiatives was to encourage businesses in the park to address the general air of decay , by improving their own areas through landscaping and other environmental improvements . The park 's decline was exacerbated by the decreasing use of the Manchester Ship Canal during the 1970s , which was unable to accommodate the newer , larger container ships then entering service . By 1976 , the workforce had fallen to 15 @,@ 000 , and by the 1980s industry had virtually disappeared . 
 On 12 August 1981 , 483 acres ( 1 @.@ 95 km2 ) of Trafford Park – along with Salford Quays – were declared an Enterprise Zone by the UK government , in an attempt to encourage new development within the estate . The new status did little to reverse the park 's fortunes however ; during a 1984 House of Commons debate , Member of Parliament for Stretford , Tony Lloyd , described the area 's decline as " spectacular and disastrous " . The target had been to create 7 @,@ 000 new jobs over 10 years , but by 1986 only 2 @,@ 557 had been created , not even enough to compensate for the ongoing job losses caused by closures within the park . On 10 February 1987 the Trafford Park Development Corporation was formed to assume responsibility for a 3 @,@ 130 acres ( 12 @.@ 7 km2 ) Urban Development Area that included not only Trafford Park but also parts of Stretford , Salford Quays , and the former steelworks at Irlam , now known as Northbank . Of the four redevelopment schemes undertaken by the corporation one , Wharfside , included 200 acres ( 81 ha ) of the eastern end of the park as well as part of the ship canal docks and the area around Manchester United F.C. ' s Old Trafford football ground to the east of the Bridgewater Canal . The intention was to build " a flagship site " containing prestigious accommodation for offices , shops , and " hi @-@ tech " industries , capitalising on the area 's proximity to Manchester city centre and mirroring the earlier success of the redevelopment at nearby Salford Quays . 
 Between 1987 and 1998 , the development corporation attracted 1 @,@ 000 companies , generating 28 @,@ 299 new jobs and £ 1 @.@ 759 billion of private sector investment . The setting up of the corporation was intended to be only a temporary measure , terminating on 31 March 1997 , but it was extended for a further year until March 1998 when responsibility for Trafford Park 's development passed to Trafford Council . The park is once again a major centre of employment in Trafford , and its regeneration has led to a high start @-@ up rate for businesses and low rates of unemployment in the area . As of 2008 , there were 1 @,@ 400 companies within the park employing an estimated 35 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Civic history = = = 
 The eastern area of the park , where the first developments took place at the end of the 19th century , was then under the local government control of Stretford Urban District ; the west was controlled by the urban district of Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell . Tensions soon began to emerge between the Estates Company and Stretford Council over the provision of local services and infrastructure . In 1902 , W. T. Glover & Co , a cable manufacturing company that had moved to the park from nearby Salford , built a power station next to their works to supply electricity to the rest of the park ; the Estates Company had previously approached Manchester Corporation , but Stretford would not allow another local authority to supply electricity within its area . 
 In 1901 Manchester Corporation formally proposed a merger with Stretford UDC , on the basis that Stretford 's growth was due in large part to Trafford Park , the growth of which in turn was largely due to the Manchester Ship Canal . Manchester Corporation had provided one @-@ third of the capital needed to build the ship canal , for which it had doubled its municipal debt , despite having also increased rates by 26 per cent between 1892 and 1895 . Stretford and Lancashire County Council opposed the merger , which was rejected following a government inquiry . In 1969 Pevsner wrote : " That [ neighbouring ] Stretford and Salford are not administratively one with Manchester is one of the most curious anomalies of England . " 
 The tensions between Stretford and the Estates Company began to come to a head in 1906 , when in response to complaints in the press about the state of one particular road in the park , Trafford Park Road , Stretford issued formal notices demanding that all premises with frontage onto the road pay for its improvement . Further disputes over the standard of roads in the park followed until , in 1907 , the Estates Company presented a petition to Lancashire County Council demanding that Trafford Park should be an urban district in its own right , independent of Stretford . The county council dismissed the petition , but later that year , following a petition organised by the Trafford Park Ratepayers Association , a new local government ward , Park Ward , was created within Stretford , The new ward did not include the western part of the park however , which remained under the control of Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell . 
 As a consequence of the Local Government Act 1972 , the borough of Stretford was abolished and Trafford Park has , since 1 April 1974 , formed part of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford . As of 2010 , the park is in the Trafford ward of Gorse Hill . 
 = = = Political representation = = = 
 Since 1997 , Trafford Park has been in the constituency of Stretford and Urmston . Kate Green , a member of the Labour Party , became the MP at the 2010 General Election , with a majority of <unk> , representing 48 @.@ 6 per cent of the vote . The Conservatives took 28 @.@ 7 per cent of the vote , the Liberal Democrats 16 @.@ 9 per cent , the United Kingdom Independence Party 3 @.@ 4 per cent , the Green Party 2 @.@ 0 per cent , and the Christian Party 0 @.@ 4 per cent . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The topography of Trafford Park is either flat or gently undulating , about 144 feet ( 44 m ) above sea level at its highest point . The local bedrock is Triassic Bunter Sandstone , overlaid by sand and gravel deposited during the last ice age , around 10 @,@ 000 years ago . There are some areas of peat bog in the west of the park , in the area formerly known as Trafford Moss . In 1793 , William Roscoe began work on reclaiming the bog , and by 1798 that work was sufficiently advanced for him to turn his attention to the task of reclaiming the much larger Chat Moss in nearby Salford , also owned by the Trafford family . 
 The park occupies an area of 4 @.@ 7 square miles ( 12 km2 ) , and is almost entirely surrounded by water . The Bridgewater Canal forms its southeastern and southwestern boundaries , and the Manchester Ship Canal forms its northeastern and northwestern boundaries . Trafford Park is the most northerly area of Trafford , and faces Salford across the Manchester Ship Canal . Stretford lies to the south and east , and Urmston to the west . 
 = = Trafford Park Village = = 
 In 1898 , a large plot of land was sold to Edmund Nuttall & Co. for the construction of 1 @,@ 200 houses . The houses were never built , but the land later became the site of Trafford Park Village , known locally as The Village . The announced arrival of the Westinghouse factory acted a spur to development , and in 1899 , Trafford Park Dwellings Ltd was formed , with the aim of providing housing for the anticipated influx of new workers . Nuttall 's land was acquired , and by 1903 more than 500 houses had been built , rising to over 700 when the development was completed in 1904 . In 1907 it was estimated that the population of the Village was 3 @,@ 060 . The development was laid out in a grid pattern , with the roads numbered instead of being named . Avenues numbered 1 to 4 run north – south , streets numbered 1 to 12 run east – west . 
 The Village was almost completely self @-@ contained , with its own shops , public hall , post office , police station , school , social club , and sports facilities . Three corrugated iron churches were built : a Methodist chapel in 1901 , St <unk> ( Church of England ) in 1902 , and the Roman Catholic St Antony 's in 1904 . St Cuthbert 's was subsequently replaced by a brick building , but closed in 1982 . Only St Antony 's remains open ; it contains the altar and a stained glass window from the chapel at Trafford Hall , donated by Lady Annette de Trafford . The Village 's design attracted criticism from the start ; the streets were narrow , with few gardens , and the whole development was close to the pollution of the neighbouring industries . In that respect it resembled the terraced properties in the surrounding areas , many of which were condemned as slums in later years . By the 1970s The Village was also considered by Stretford Council to be a slum area , and unsuitable for residential housing . In the first phase of clearance , during the mid @-@ 1970s , 298 houses were demolished . A further 325 houses were demolished in the early 1980s , leaving only the largest 84 & houses remaining . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The Imperial War Museum North , opened on 5 July 2002 , is in Trafford Wharf , on the southern edge of the ship canal looking over towards Salford Quays . An example of <unk> architecture , it was the first building in the United Kingdom to be designed by Daniel Libeskind . The structure consists of three interlocking sections : the air shard , the earth shard , and the water shard , representing a world torn apart by conflict . Entrance to the museum is via the air shard , which is 180 feet ( 55 m ) in height , and is open to the elements . It has a viewing platform about 95 feet ( 29 m ) high , offering views across Salford and the Quays towards Manchester city centre . The museum houses two extensive exhibition spaces . The largest is dedicated to the permanent exhibition covering conflicts from 1900 to the present day , and the other space is used for special exhibitions . 
 Trafford Ecology Park 
 The 11 @-@ acre ( 45 @,@ 000 m2 ) Trafford Ecology Park is what remains of Trafford Park 's ornamental boating lake . Boating continued on the lake until the 1930s , but by then its water had become polluted by asbestos and oil seepage from the neighbouring Anglo American Oil depot . During the Second World War the site was used as a tip for foundry waste . Esso bought the land in 1974 , and levelled and partly seeded it , to improve the frontage to its own site . Trafford council bought the land from Esso in 1983 , for £ 50 @,@ 000 ( £ 152 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . Government spending restrictions delayed the park 's restoration and conversion , and it was not fully opened to the public until 1990 . 
 The present lake is about one @-@ third of its original size , but although now relatively small it supports a wide variety of wildlife , including foxes , weasels , rabbits , hedgehogs , lapwings , kestrels , herons , coot , Canada Geese , and several varieties of newt . In 2007 the park was designated a Local Nature Reserve , one of only two in Trafford . 
 The site was originally part of the de Trafford family estate , but was enveloped by encroaching industry in the early 1900s . In the following years the area was used as a tipping site by industry and partly filled with construction rubble and slag from steel works . Now owned and managed by Groundwork Manchester , Salford , Stockport , Tameside & Trafford , the park is used as a training centre for horticulture training and as a volunteering hub . 
 = = Transport = = 
 At the end of the 19th century there were no public transport routes in , and few running close to , Trafford Park . Its size meant that the Estates Company was obliged to provide some means of travelling around the park , and therefore a gas @-@ powered tramway was commissioned , intended to carry both people and freight . The first tram ran on 23 July 1897 , but after a few days of operation there was an accident in which a tramcar was derailed , and the service was suspended until the following year . The tram 's maximum speed was 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) , and their distinctive exhaust smell quickly earned them the nickname " Lamp Oil Express " . The service was operated by the British Gas Traction Company , which paid a share of its takings to the Estates Company , but by 1899 the company was in serious financial difficulty , and entered voluntary liquidation . Salford Corporation then refused to provide any more gas for the trams , and the service was once again suspended until the Estates Company bought the entire operation for £ 2 @,@ 000 in 1900 . A separate electric tramway was installed in 1903 , and was taken over and operated by Manchester and Salford Corporations in 1905 . The takeover did not affect the gas trams however , which continued to run until 1908 , when they were replaced by steam locomotives . Between 1904 and 1907 the Estates Company also operated a horse @-@ drawn bus for the use of gentlemen staying at Trafford Hall , then a hotel . The service , available 24 @-@ hours a day , was replaced by a motor car in 1907 . 
 Under an 1898 agreement between the Estates Company and the Ship Canal Company , the latter committed to carry freight on their dock railway between the docks and the park and to the construction of a permanent connection between the two railway networks . The West Manchester Light Railway Company was set up the following year to take over the operations of the tramway and to lay additional track . In 1904 responsibility for all of the parks roads and railways passed to the Trafford Park Company , as a result of the Trafford Park Act of that year . The railway network could subsequently be extended as required , without the need to seek additional permissions from Parliament . The network was also connected to the Manchester , South Junction and Altrincham Railway near Cornbrook . At its peak , the estate 's railway network covered 26 route miles ( 42 km ) , handling about 2 @.@ 5 million tons of cargo in 1940 . Like the rest of the park , it fell into decline during the 1960s , exacerbated by the increasing use of road transport , and it was closed in 1998 . 
 Trafford Park Aerodrome was Manchester 's first purpose @-@ built airfield , laid out on a site between Trafford Park Road , Mosley Road , and Ashburton Road . The first aircraft landed there on 7 July 1911 , flown from Liverpool by Henry G. Melly . The aerodrome was in use until the early years of the First World War , and possibly until 1918 , when it was replaced by the newly completed Alexandra Park Aerodrome . 
 = = = Current and future transport = = = 
 The Trafford Park Euroterminal rail freight terminal , which has the capacity to deal with 100 @,@ 000 containers a year , was opened in 1993 , at a cost of £ 11 million . 
 Today , Trafford Park is served by a number of bus routes including the Stagecoach Manchester <unk> and 250 which run between Manchester city centre and the Trafford Centre . Trafford Park railway station is to the east of the area and is served by trains between Liverpool Lime Street and Manchester Oxford Road . 
 There is also an advanced proposal for an extension of the Manchester Metrolink from Pomona to the Trafford Centre with indicative stops at Wharfside , Imperial War Museum North , the Village , Parkway Circle , <unk> and the Trafford Centre . 
 = The Hole ( Scientology ) = 
 The Hole is the unofficial nickname of a facility operated by the Church of Scientology on Gold Base , its compound near the town of Hemet in Riverside County , California . Dozens of its senior executives have reportedly been confined within the building for months or years . It consists of a set of double @-@ wide trailers within a Scientology compound , joined together to form a suite of offices which were formerly used by the Church 's international management team . According to former members of the Church of Scientology and media reports , from 2004 the Church 's leader David Miscavige sent dozens of senior Scientology executives to the Hole . The Tampa Bay Times described it in a January 2013 article as : 
 a place of confinement and humiliation where Scientology 's management culture — always demanding — grew extreme . Inside , a who 's who of Scientology leadership went at each other with brutal tongue lashings , and even hands and fists . They intimidated each other into crawling on their knees and standing in trash cans and confessing to things they hadn 't done . They lived in degrading conditions , eating and sleeping in cramped spaces designed for office use . 
 The executives confined at the Hole are reported to have numbered up to 100 of the most senior figures in Scientology 's management , including the Church of Scientology International 's President , Heber Jentzsch . Individuals are said to have spent months or even years there . After a few managed to escape the Hole and Scientology , they gave accounts of their experiences to the media , the courts and the FBI , leading to widespread publicity about the harsh conditions that they had allegedly endured . The Church of Scientology has denied those accounts . It says that " the Hole does not exist and never has " and states that nobody had been held against their will . However , it acknowledges that its members are subjected to " religious discipline , a program of ethics and correction entered into voluntarily as part of their religious observances . " It has been described by ex @-@ members comparable to that of a North Korean death camp . 
 = = Background = = 
 The facility known as the Hole is located on the Church of Scientology 's Gold Base , built on the site of a resort called Gilman Hot Springs in the California town of San Jacinto . The base covers 520 acres ( 210 ha ) bisected by a public highway , Gilman Springs Road , just off California State Route 79 . It was secretly acquired by the Church of Scientology in 1978 under the alias of the " Scottish Highland <unk> Club " . The Church established a secret base there which was staffed by members of the Sea Org , an inner core of Scientologists which is said to number some five to seven thousand people . There are now two Sea Org bases in the compound : Gold , which houses the Church 's in @-@ house film studio Golden Era Productions , and Int , the Church 's international headquarters , though in practice the whole site is usually called Gold Base . 
 Members of the Sea Org are subject to a rigid code of discipline known as " Scientology Ethics " which is enforced by Ethics Officers . Scientologists are encouraged to look out for any fellow members violating Ethics and to submit " Knowledge Reports " on any violations they spot . If Ethics are violated , a " trial " by a Committee of Evidence can lead to punishments administered by a body called the Rehabilitation Project Force ( RPF ) . Such punishments , which can last for months or years , typically consist of a regime of physical labor and lengthy daily confessions of " evil purposes " . Such assignments can also be received for performing work poorly , showing negative personality indicators ( doubts , hostility etc . ) or causing trouble . Individuals assigned in this way are kept isolated and prohibited from having contact with other members of the Church of Scientology and the public . 
 According to Marc and Claire Headley , two Scientologists who left the Church in 2005 , residents at the base are not permitted to leave without the permission of a supervisor and have to work at least 16 hours a day , from 8 am to past midnight , with shorter hours on Sundays and little time for socialising . Communications with the outside world are effectively cut off ; cellphones and Internet access are generally banned , mail is censored and passports are kept in a locked filing cabinet . The perimeter of the base is closely guarded around the clock . It is ringed with high fences that are topped with spikes and razor wire and monitored by inward @-@ facing motion sensors to detect anyone trying to climb out of the compound . The Tampa Bay Times reported that dozens of workers tried to escape from the base – some of them repeatedly – but were caught and returned by Sea Org " pursuit teams " . The escapees are said to have been subjected to isolation , interrogation and punishment on their return to the compound . 
 = = Origin of the Hole = = 
 <unk> from the Church say that from around 2002 , Scientology leader David Miscavige began to publicly slap , kick , punch or shove executives at the base who had angered him . John Brousseau , the estate manager at Gold Base and a veteran Sea Org member , said that Miscavige repeatedly faulted his subordinates ' work , " constantly berating them , nitpicking everything they 're doing , pointing out inadequacies , ineffectiveness , lack of results , blaming it all on them and their inability to do anything right , and on the other hand saying how he 's got to do everything himself – he 's the only one who can do anything right . " High @-@ level meetings became tense affairs punctuated by " profane , belittling rants " . According to emails said to have come from Miscavige 's " Communicator " – the personal assistant responsible for passing on transcribed messages from the leader – he routinely berated subordinates with terms such as " <unk> " ( meaning " Cock @-@ sucking motherfucker " ) and " <unk> " ( meaning " You suck cock on Hollywood Boulevard " ) . 
 A practice called " overboarding " was reintroduced as a further method of enforcing discipline on the base . It had been devised during the 1960s when Scientology 's founder L. Ron Hubbard was living aboard a former Irish Sea cattle ferry Royal Scotman [ sic ] ( later Apollo ) , in which he roamed the Mediterranean at the head of a small fleet of ships crewed by Sea Org members . In response to perceived violations , Scientologists were thrown over the side of the ship ; sometimes they were bound and blindfolded before being tossed overboard . Scientology spokesmen describe the practice as " a Sea Org ritual akin to traditions in other religious orders " and " part of ecclesiastical justice . " 
 Some Scientology churches ( or " <unk> " ) adopted a land @-@ based version of overboarding by making staff members stand against a wall while other Scientologists threw buckets of water at them , but the practice was largely abandoned in the 1970s . According to author Janet Reitman , Miscavige reintroduced it in the 2000s and ordered dozens of senior executives to go out of doors in the middle of the night and assemble at the base 's swimming pool or its muddy lake . They would then jump or be pushed into the water , often in freezing conditions , while fully clothed and with Miscavige watching . The Church acknowledges that overboarding took place but characterises it as part of its " ecclesiastical justice " system for dealing with poor performance . 
 According to Janet Reitman , in the late fall of 2004 Miscavige called together 70 senior Church executives in a pair of double @-@ wide trailers normally used as the international management team 's offices . They were ordered to play a game of musical chairs in the management conference room . Those who failed to get a chair when the music stopped would be " offloaded " from the base to be sent away from their spouses and children to languish in the most remote and unpleasant locations in Scientology 's empire . As Queen 's Greatest Hits was played , the competition for seats became increasingly fierce : " By the time the number had dwindled to twenty , people were throwing one another against the walls , ripping seats from one another 's hands , wrestling one another to the floor . " At the end of the contest , Miscavige ordered that all the executives were to stay in the conference room and sleep under the tables until further notice . They stayed there for the next few days , with occasional deliveries of food , before being released . The Church 's then chief spokesman , Tommy Davis , has acknowledged that the " musical chairs " incident occurred and says that it was " intended to demonstrate how disruptive wholesale changes could be on an organization " but dismisses the accounts of threats and violence . 
 Later in 2004 , according to Reitman , a purge was carried out of staff at the base . Hundreds were sent to the RPF while dozens of others were offloaded and expelled from the Sea Org with huge " freeloader bills " presented to them for the Church services they had received over the years . Dozens of senior executives were accused of being " suppressive persons " . They were said to have been confined in the management team offices and ordered to carry out the " A to E steps " , a set of penances intended to demonstrate that they had repented of their " crimes " and reformed . In particular , they were to confess and identify which of them were " defying [ Miscavige ] and sabotaging Scientology with their incompetence " . The management offices , which had formerly been referred to as " the CMO Int trailer " , became known as the " A to E Room , " the " SP Hole , " and ultimately simply " the Hole . " 
 = = Life in the Hole = = 
 Over the next three years , the number of people confined in the Hole increased from 40 to up to 100 . They slept in cots or sleeping bags , squeezed into every available floor space or on desktops . Men would sleep around the conference table while women slept in cubicles and small offices around the main conference room . They were so crowded that there was barely any room to move , according to one of those present : " Everyone sleeping with only about six inches on either side . Above you . Below you . Getting up in the middle of the night , you 'd disturb everyone . " They were only allowed to leave to attend Church events or to be taken to a shower in a nearby maintenance garage , to which they were taken two at a time under guard . Food was brought to them on golf carts from the Gold Base mess hall , as the executives were not allowed to eat with the rest of the staff , and they were only given ten to fifteen minutes to eat . According to one of the executives , the food was " like leftovers , slop , bits of meat , soupy kind of leftovers thrown into a pot and cooked and barely edible . " The building was said to be infested with ants and on several occasions the electricity was turned off , causing the temperature inside to reach 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) due to the lack of air conditioning . 
 John Brousseau commented that when he visited the Hole occasionally , " you could smell that people live here , people sleep here . " He saw the executives being marched elsewhere on the base to take showers ; his impression was that " they looked like they were being marched to the gallows – they just looked lifeless , with no purpose . Very hang @-@ dog , droopy shoulders , slouchy , very sad , inward @-@ looking creatures . " He said that they were only allowed out " at certain times of day that would be adjudicated to be the least likely time when DM [ Miscavige ] would run into them if he was on the property . They would march out to Old Gilman House to take a shower and come back because they had no shower facilities inside the Hole . Later that got upgraded to let them go down to the garage . " Sometimes executives were allowed out for a short time to attend Church events , but many ended up spending months or even years in the Hole . 
 The individuals who were later named by the media as being held in the Hole represented a who 's who of Scientology 's top management . They included Debbie Cook , the head of the Church of Scientology Flag Service Organization ; Heber Jentzsch , the President of the Church of Scientology International ; Guillaume <unk> , the Executive Director International and the church 's top management official ; Mark Rathbun , the Inspector General of the Religious Technology Center ; Wendell Reynolds , the International Finance Director ; Mike Rinder , the Commanding Officer of the Office of Special Affairs ; Norman Starkey , the former captain of Hubbard 's ship , the Apollo ; and Marc Yager , the Commanding Officer of the Commodore 's Messenger Organization . 
 Executives who eventually escaped from the Hole have said that its occupants were forced to practice group confessions in which they would confess supposed transgressions against Miscavige , bad thoughts that they had had about Scientology and disclose their sexual fantasies . Debbie Cook , who spent seven weeks in the Hole in 2007 , said that " most of the time the activities [ in the Hole ] were either you confessing your own sins or bad things that you 'd done , or getting other people to confess theirs . " Mike Rinder commented on the bizarre personal dynamics of the Hole : " These were your friends , people you had traveled with . But then , you get in the Hole ? You can 't trust anybody . " 
 Rinder told the Tampa Bay Times that interrogations " would be carried out by whoever happened to be there – 20 people , 30 people , 50 people , all standing up and screaming at you , and ultimately it sort of devolved into physical violence , torture , to extricate these ' confessions ' out of people . " According to Rinder , the confessions were sometimes dictated by Miscavige , but more usually the inmates of the Hole would force each other to confess : " The 50 people there are all screaming at me , telling me I 've got to confess – I 've done that , why don 't I just admit it ? I stole money , I had affairs – people would just literally dream up bullshit and start screaming it out , and then the mob goes crazy : ' Oh yeah , it must have been that ! ' " Tom De Vocht , who was also in the Hole , recalled that " everybody in that damned room — people are wild and out of control , I punched somebody . Everybody was punched . And screaming and yelling . It just got like , ' What the hell is going on here ? ' " De Vocht rationalized his own involvement on the grounds of self @-@ defense : " If I don 't attack I 'm going to be attacked . It 's a survival instinct in a weird situation that no one should be in . " 
 The pressure evidently worked , as Rinder wrote an " Apology and Announcement " on June 4 , 2005 in which he told Miscavige , " I recognise very clearly how <unk> I have been towards you and Scientology . " He subsequently commented that such written confessions " read like North Korean POW <unk> , " alluding to the way that Korean War POWs detained in North Korea were forced to go through brainwashing to renounce their " reactionary imperialist " mindset . He explained to the Tampa Bay Times why people did not simply walk out of the Hole : " If you leave you are going to lose contact with your family and any friends who are Scientologists . You have it pounded into you the whole time that the only reason someone leaves a group like that is because they are bad , that you have done something that force you to have to leave . " He noted people had invested a great deal of themselves in Scientology , that Sea Org members have " made a commitment beyond even a single lifetime " and that the prevailing attitude was that " ' I 've lived through many lifetimes and there are lots of experiences that I 've had that are far worse than this , so I can put up with this and I can stand it ' . " 
 What was happening in the Hole took place out of view of the other staff members at Gold Base , but it was clear that it would not be a good thing to be sent there . According to Lawrence Wright , " the entire base became paralyzed with anxiety about being thrown into the Hole . People were desperately trying to police their thoughts , but it was difficult to keep secrets when staff members were constantly being security @-@ checked with E @-@ Meters . " Wright reports that David Miscavige 's statements were transcribed for the executives in the Hole , who would then have to repeatedly read them out loud to each other . 
 Former Church members have said that conditions in the Hole worsened in 2006 after several executives had escaped . Security was tightened to prevent the confined executives from " blowing " . John Brousseau says that he was ordered to fasten steel bars across the doors of the building and the windows were modified so that they could only be opened a few inches . Another staff member objected , pointing out that any outsider could see the bars . They were removed after a few weeks , but the building was guarded around the clock to prevent further escapes . The Church of Scientology denies that bars were ever installed , saying , " Any allegation of bars being installed to hold people against their will is false and malicious and is denied . " 
 From 2006 , according to Rinder , executives undergoing " group confessions " were made to stand in big trash cans in the middle of the floor with signs around their necks on which various derogatory statements were written . Rinder described how it became " relatively routine " for people to be " slapped , punched , kicked , pushed , shoved , thrown up against the wall " in order to make them confess . He told the Tampa Bay Times that he and other people were made to continuously crawl around a conference room table with their trouser legs rolled up , getting kicked from behind if they stopped , which resulted in them suffering severely contused and abraded knees after days of such treatment . There was an escalation in the level of confessions demanded , such that they became " more and more dramatic and over the top in order to be acceptable . " He described how one executive was made to sit under an air vent with the cooling system turned up high , while cold water was poured over his head . After an hour or so , he was " shaking so uncontrollably and his lips were so completely blue that he was incapable of talking " . ( The executive in question denied to the Tampa Bay Times that this incident had ever happened ) . 
 Debbie Cook testified in a San Antonio court in 2012 that she had been on the phone to Miscavige when two Scientologists crawled in through her office window and seized her , conveying her to the Hole . She said that she had subsequently been " put in a trash can , [ had ] cold water poured over [ her ] , [ and ] slapped . " According to Mark Rathbun , who was also in the Hole at the time , for twelve hours " Debbie was made to stand in a large garbage can and face one hundred people screaming at her demanding a confession as to her " homosexual tendencies " . While this was going on , water was poured over her head . Signs were put around Debbie 's neck , one marked in magic marker " <unk> " while this torture proceeded . Debbie was repeatedly slapped across the face by other women in the room during the interrogation . Debbie never did break . " 
 Cook told the court that another Scientology executive , who had not been sent to the Hole , had objected to what he had seen there on a visit . According to Cook , the executive was given a two @-@ hour beating and ordered to lick a bathroom floor for at least 30 minutes . She testified that Marc Yager and Guillaume <unk> , two of Scientology 's most senior executives , were pressured to state that they had had a homosexual affair and were beaten until they " confessed " . According to another executive , Tom De Vocht , Miscavige pushed Yager to the ground and told a black executive , " By the way , [ Yager ] thinks black people are niggers , and he doesn 't want Scientology to help blacks . Go kick him . ' So [ Yager ] is down on the ground and she 's kicking him . " Both Yager and the other executive have denied this account . 
 = = Leaving the Hole = = 
 Mark Rathbun spent only four days in the Hole in 2004 but says that he left after seeing his old friend Tom De Vocht being physically beaten by Miscavige . According to Rathbun , one night the incarcerated executives were ordered to jog to a building 400 yards away and back . As they were herded back to their office @-@ prison , he broke away and hid in bushes until the group had disappeared from sight . He retrieved his motorcycle , hid in the brush and drove out through the Gold Base gates when they were opened to let a car in . He subsequently rented a car and spent a month touring the South before settling in southern Texas . 
 De Vocht left Scientology in May 2005 after he was allegedly attacked by Miscavige . According to De Vocht , he told his wife – a Miscavige aide – that he would fight back if it happened again . He was subsequently declared to be a " Suppressive Person " and announced his intention to leave . The compound 's guard refused to open the gate , so he climbed the fence and walked to Hemet , six miles away . He was later sent a $ 98 @,@ 000 " Freeloader Bill " by the Church . 
 Mike Rinder spent almost two years in the Hole between 2004 and 2007 , leaving it occasionally to deal with public relations matters such as dealing with the BBC journalist John Sweeney 's 2007 documentary Scientology and Me . Rinder says that Miscavige was furious with the way that Sweeney had been handled and ordered him to go to Sussex to dig ditches on a Church property there . He defected instead , eventually settling in Denver . 
 Debbie Cook left the Hole in May 2007 after spending seven weeks there , when she was sent back to Clearwater , Florida to organize a major public event involving Miscavige . According to Cook , she was driven to downtown Clearwater by another staff member , along with her husband , to eat at the Church 's dining hall . The couple took the opportunity to escape Scientology when the staff member went inside to get breakfast ; Cook jumped into the driver 's seat , drove with her husband to the nearest car rental outlet and hired a car to drive up to her father 's house in North Carolina . Before they got there , they were intercepted by Church officials and ordered to return to Clearwater . She spent three weeks under guard , at one point writing in a letter to her mother that if she was not released she " would take whatever steps necessary , like slitting my wrists " , before finally signing a severance agreement . She later said that by that point , " I would have signed that I stabbed babies over and over again and loved it " . 
 John Brousseau was not sent to the Hole , but what he saw of it made him decide to leave Scientology in 2010 after 33 years in the Church . He was struck by how " dozens of these people [ in the Hole ] , they were just so alive , but I looked at them now and they were just husks . They wouldn 't say or originate anything , they seemed to have no purpose , they were just like sheep . There 's no way 100 people could be evil horrid [ Suppressive Persons ] and DM 's the only [ ethical ] one . No way . " He had known and been friends with some of those in the Hole for decades and could not bear what he was seeing . As he put it , " I can 't stop it , but I can at least stop supporting it . So I left . " He left a note in his room for his colleagues to find : " By now you 've noticed I 'm gone . I couldn 't stand to see my Sea Org friends so mistreated . I won 't support it anymore . Goodbye . " 
 = = Media exposure and legal inquiries = = 
 From 2009 , several former church executives began to speak out about the Hole , both to the media and to the FBI . Rathbun wrote in the New York Daily News in July 2012 that he had " decided that [ he ] had to speak out before someone was killed in the Hole " . In June 2009 , the Tampa Bay Times published a series of articles on the internal workings of the Church of Scientology titled " The Truth Rundown " , detailing accounts of beatings and other episodes of violence between Miscavige and other top Scientology executives . The Times followed up in January 2013 with a detailed account of the Hole , supplemented by interviews with defectors from Scientology , while The Village Voice sought to compile a list of the executives said to have been incarcerated there . ABC News also reported on Debbie Cook 's account of the Hole . 
 According to John Brousseau , the bad publicity led to reforms of the Hole . Its inmates were allowed to sleep in proper beds in the " Berthing " quarters elsewhere in the compound . Brousseau describes their new seven @-@ days @-@ a @-@ week routine starting when " they got up , showered , then went to the dining hall at 9 : 30 . They had 30 minutes for breakfast . Then they walked up to the Hole . They sat down at desks . I have no clue what work they did . They worked until 12 : 30 or 1 pm . Then they were marched back to the dining hall and had 30 minutes for lunch . Then they were marched back to the Hole and were there until 6 pm . " After a 30 @-@ minute dinner , they were taken to the study hall and stayed there " for two and a half hours , until about 9 : 30 . Then they went to the Hole again to wrap up their day . At 11 or midnight , they 'd get marched back to Berthing . " Some of the restrictions on contacting people outside the Hole were also said to have been eased . However , other Church staff were still encouraged to avoid contact with the inmates : " You didn 't talk to them , you looked the other way , you 'd leave the area if you saw them , it 's like the black plague . " Brousseau commented : " You stayed away from these people . They 're considered the worst of the worst . " 
 Attempts by law enforcement to investigate conditions at Gold Base have been blocked by legal difficulties and the unwillingness of those on the base to talk to the police . According to Lawrence Wright , who wrote an account of the Hole in his 2013 book Going Clear : Scientology , Hollywood , and the Prison of Belief , the Riverside County sheriff 's office has never received a complaint from someone at the base about their treatment there , despite the many accounts of mistreatment . Wright attributes this to the fear that many Scientologists have of bringing shame upon Scientology and of being forced to break off contact with their families and friends . 
 In 2009 , the FBI opened an investigation into potential human trafficking offences by the Church of Scientology , after the accounts of defectors from Gold Base were published . The Tampa Bay Times reported that FBI aerial surveillance of the property showed columns of executives being escorted to and from the Hole . However , no action was taken against the Church . The investigation ground to a halt after a ruling by a U.S. District Court judge in a case concerning Marc and Claire Headley 's complaints against the Church over their treatment at Gold Base . 
 = = = Headley et al. v. Church of Scientology International et al . = = = 
 In 2009 , Marc and Claire Headley sued the Church under the federal Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 . In response , Church lawyers argued that the First Amendment prohibited the courts from considering " a forced labor claim premised upon ... social and psychological factors " , because they concern " the beliefs , the religious upbringing , the religious training , the religious practices , the religious lifestyle restraints of a religious order . " 
 The Church acknowledged that the rules under which the Headleys lived included a ban on having children , censored mail , monitored phone calls , needing permission to have Internet access and being disciplined through manual labor . The U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals noted in a ruling given in July 2012 that Marc Headley had been made to clean human excrement by hand from an aeration pond on the compound with no protective equipment , while Claire Headley was banned from the dining hall for up to eight months in 2002 . She lost 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) as a result of subsisting on protein bars and water . In addition , she was coerced into having two abortions to comply with the Sea Org 's no @-@ children policy . The Headleys also experienced physical violence from Scientology executives and saw others being treated violently . 
 However , the court found that the church enjoyed the protection of the free exercise of religion clause in the First Amendment , and that it could use the " ministerial exemptions " in employment law to deflect litigation over its treatment of its members . The judge ruled that the First Amendment disallowed the courts from " examining church operations rooted in religious scripture " . Bringing the Church to account for how it disciplined its members was " precisely the type of entanglement that the religion clauses prohibit . " However , the 9th Circuit did suggest that other types of claims would withstand appellate review , such as assault , battery or " any of a number of other theories that might have better fit the evidence . " The ruling has effectively meant that it is impossible to bring charges against the Church based on claims of ' trafficking in persons . ' As one attorney has put it , " Here is a court saying , albeit in a civil situation ... that there is nothing improper with this type of conduct and no ill motive can be imbued to the church . " Former US federal prosecutor Michael Seigel says that the ruling " doesn 't seem to leave much room for hope of success on a criminal prosecution " . The FBI investigation was dropped some time in 2011 . 
 = = = Church of Scientology International v. Debbie Cook = = = 
 In January , 2012 , the Church of Scientology brought a lawsuit against Debbie Cook for defamation after she sent an e @-@ mail to 3 @,@ 000 church members criticizing its fund @-@ raising methods . The lawsuit against her was quickly settled without payment by any side on April 23 , 2012 after Cook was permitted to testify for three hours regarding her description of conditions at the Hole . 
 = Ride a White Horse = 
 " Ride a White Horse " is a song performed by English electronic music duo Goldfrapp . The song was written by Alison Goldfrapp , Will Gregory and Nick Batt for Goldfrapp 's third album Supernature ( 2005 ) . The song was inspired by the disco era nightclub Studio 54 . 
 The song was released as the album 's third single in February 2006 to positive reviews from music critics . It was a commercial success , reaching the top forty on the majority of the charts it entered . The song has been remixed a number of times and was featured in the American television program The L Word . 
 " Ride a White Horse " was also featured in Need for Speed : Carbon and The Sims 3 . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " Ride a White Horse " is an electronic – dance song that was inspired by the disco era . Alison Goldfrapp had grown up listening to T.Rex and Polish disco music , and many assumed that she based the song 's lyrics around Bianca Jagger 's infamous entrance into Studio 54 on a white horse . The song was composed as a collaborative effort between Goldfrapp and Will Gregory in late 2004 in a rented cottage in the countryside of Bath , England . The song was written and recorded while Goldfrapp and Gregory were " jamming in the recording studio , bouncing song ideas off each other " . 
 " Ride a White Horse " is written in the common verse @-@ chorus form and features instrumentation from synthesizers and a bass guitar . The US maxi CD single featured a cover version of " Boys Will Be Boys " as its B @-@ side . The song was originally performed by British rock group The Ordinary Boys . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Ride a White Horse " was directed by Diane Martel and filmed in London , England in December 2005 . The video features Alison Goldfrapp , dressed in a white dress , in multiple disturbing situations . The video begins with Goldfrapp , her back to the camera , trailing toilet paper from one of her spike heels , singing into a microphone made of a cardboard roll and aluminium foil . As she sings , footage of rotting food is displayed behind her . She is then shown eating a slice of pizza covered in cigarette butts and <unk> . The next scenes feature Goldfrapp pulling a large plastic dog ; singing in front of a man bandaged in toilet paper eating from a garbage can ; and dancing with dirty men that came out of a <unk> dressed in their underwear . The video concludes with Goldfrapp forcing the leg of the bandaged man into a toilet . 
 In 2006 , the video was nominated at the Festival International des Arts du Clip in the " Off Competition " category for its audacity and off beat sense of humour . The complete version of " Ride a White Horse " featured in the music video has been released commercially through CD singles and digital downloads , and some include remixes by Serge <unk> and Ewan Pearson . An alternate music video was also filmed live at the Brixton Academy in London , England on 6 October 2005 . The video was directed by Matthew Amos and released on the song 's DVD single . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Ride a White Horse " received positive reviews from music critics . MusicOMH.com 's Michael Hubbard called the song " one of the most glamorous and erotic tracks " on Supernature , and Stylus Magazine described the it as " memorable " because of its " combination of a decently danceable groove and some nicely arch vocals " . In a review for PopMatters , Adrien Begrand wrote that " Ride a White Horse " was " destined for club hit status " , comparing Alison Goldfrapp 's " cold , husky croon " to Kate Bush . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 In March 2007 , " Ride a White Horse " was featured on an episode of the American television program The L Word . The episode titled " Literary License to Kill " featured the group performing the song at The Planet while the characters celebrated a birthday . A radio edit of the song was also featured on the program 's soundtrack released in January 2007 . 
 " Ride a White Horse " was released as a various formats throughout the world . While most territories received a CD single and digital download release , the single was released as a limited edition 12 @-@ inch single in February 2006 in the UK . A DVD single was also issued and included behind the scenes footage of Goldfrapp on tour and a live music video for " Ride a White Horse " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Ride a White Horse " entered the UK Singles Chart on 25 February 2006 at number fifteen , remaining on the chart for three weeks . The song proved popular on UK radio , charting at number twenty @-@ three on the airplay chart . In Ireland , the song reached number thirty @-@ six on the singles chart before exiting the following week . 
 In the United States , " Ride a White Horse " was released as the album 's final single in February 2007 . The song did not perform as well as its predecessors on the Billboard Dance Chart , reaching only number twenty @-@ nine . The song , however , did peak at number three on the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to Ride a White Horse : 
 Alison Goldfrapp - lead vocals , backing vocals , synthesizer 
 Nick Batt - synthesizer , programming 
 Will Gregory - synthesizer 
 Daniel Miller - synthesizer 
 Charlie Jones - bass 
 Ewan Pearson - programming 
 Mark " Spike " Stent - mixing 
 Ted Jensen - mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hugh Grant = 
 Hugh John Mungo Grant ( born 9 September 1960 ) is an English actor and a film producer . 
 Grant has received a Golden Globe , a BAFTA , and an Honorary César . Grant 's films have earned more than US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion from 25 theatrical releases worldwide . Grant achieved international success after appearing in the Richard Curtis @-@ scripted Four Weddings and a Funeral ( 1994 ) . Grant used this breakthrough role as a frequent cinematic personal during the 1990s , delivering comic performances in mainstream films such as Mickey Blue Eyes ( 1999 ) and Notting Hill ( 1999 ) . 
 By the turn of the 21st century , Grant had established himself as a leading man , skilled with a satirical comic talent . Grant has expanded his oeuvre with critically acclaimed turns as a cad in Bridget Jones 's Diary ( 2001 ) , About a Boy ( 2002 ) , and American Dreamz ( 2006 ) . Grant later played against type with multiple cameo roles in the epic sci @-@ fi drama film , Cloud Atlas ( 2012 ) . 
 Within the film industry , Grant is cited as an anti @-@ star who approaches his roles like a character actor , and attempts to make his acting appear spontaneous . Hallmarks of his comic skills include a nonchalant touch of irony / sarcasm and studied physical mannerisms , as well as his precisely @-@ timed dialogue delivery and facial expressions . The entertainment media 's coverage of Grant 's life off the big screen has often overshadowed his work as an actor . Grant has been outspoken about his disrespect for the profession of acting , and in his disdain towards the culture of celebrity and hostility towards the media . In a career spanning 30 years , Grant has repeatedly claimed that acting is not a true calling , rather it is just a job he fell into . 
 = = Early life and ancestry = = 
 Grant was born at Charing Cross Hospital in Hammersmith , London , the second son of <unk> Susan MacLean ( b . Wickham , Hampshire , 11 October 1933 ; d . Hounslow , London , July 2001 ) and Captain James Murray Grant ( b . 1929 ) . Grant 's grandfather , Colonel James Murray Grant , DSO was decorated for bravery and leadership at Saint @-@ Valery @-@ en @-@ Caux during World War II . Genealogist Antony Adolph has described Grant 's family history as " a colourful Anglo @-@ Scottish tapestry of warriors , empire @-@ builders and aristocracy . " A few of his notable ancestors include William Drummond , 4th Viscount Strathallan , Dr. James Stewart , John Murray , 1st Marquess of Atholl , Heneage Finch , 1st Earl of Nottingham , Sir Evan Nepean , and a sister of former Prime Minister Spencer Perceval . 
 Grant 's father was trained at Sandhurst and served with the Seaforth Highlanders for eight years in Malaya , Germany and Scotland . He ran a carpet firm , pursued hobbies such as golf and painting watercolours , and raised his family in Chiswick , west London , where the Grants lived next to Arlington Park Mansions on Sutton Lane . In September 2006 , a collection of Capt. Grant 's paintings was hosted by the John Martin Gallery in a charity exhibition , organised by his famous son , called " James Grant : 30 Years of Watercolours . " His mother worked as a schoolteacher and taught Latin , French and music for more than 30 years in the state schools of west London . She died at the age of 65 , 18 months after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer . 
 Grant 's accent is an inheritance from his mother ; and , on Inside the Actors Studio in 2002 , he credited her with " any acting genes that [ he ] might have . " Both his parents were children of military families , but , despite his parents ' backgrounds , Grant has stated that his family was not always affluent while he was growing up . Grant spent his childhood summers shooting and hunting with his grandfather in Scotland . Grant has an older brother , James , living in Portugal . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Grant started his education at Hogarth Primary School in Chiswick but then moved to St Peter 's Primary School in Hammersmith , Grant was then educated at an independent prep school Wetherby School . From 1969 to 1978 , he attended the independent Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith on a scholarship and played 1st XV rugby , cricket and football for the school . He also represented Latymer on the popular quiz show , Top of the Form , an academic competition between two teams of four secondary school students each . 
 In 1979 , Grant won the Galsworthy scholarship to New College , Oxford , where he starred in his first film , Privileged , produced by the Oxford University Film Foundation . He studied English literature and graduated with 2 : 1 honours . Actress Anna Chancellor , who met Grant while she was still at school , has recalled , " I first met Hugh at a party at Oxford . There was something magical about him . He was a star even then , without having done anything . Grant joined the exclusive Piers Gaveston Society at Oxford , a group with a reputation for debauchery and decadence . " 
 Grant received an offer from the Courtauld Institute of Art , University of London to pursue a PhD in the history of art , but decided not to take the offer because he failed to secure a grant . Viewing acting as nothing more than a creative outlet , he joined the Oxford University Dramatic Society and starred in a successful touring production of Twelfth Night . 
 = = = Young earner = = = 
 After making his debut as Hughie Grant in the Oxford @-@ financed Privileged ( 1982 ) , Grant dabbled in a variety of jobs : he wrote book reviews , worked as assistant groundsman at Fulham Football Club , tried his hand at tutoring , wrote comedy sketches for TV shows , and was hired by <unk> Productions to write and produce radio commercials for products such as Mighty White bread and Red Stripe lager . To obtain his Equity card , he joined the Nottingham Playhouse , a regional theatre , and lived for a year at Park Terrace in The Park Estate , Nottingham . Bored with small acting parts , he created his own comedy revue called The Jockeys of Norfolk with friends Chris Lang and Andy Taylor . The group toured London 's pub comedy circuit with stops at The George IV in Chiswick , Canal Cafe Theatre in Little Venice and The King 's Head in Islington . Starting on a low note , The Jockeys of Norfolk eventually proved a hit at the Edinburgh Festival after their sketch on the Nativity , told as an Ealing comedy , gained them a spot on the BBC2 TV show called Edinburgh Nights . During this time , Grant also appeared in theatre productions of plays such as An Inspector Calls , Lady Windermere 's Fan , and Coriolanus . 
 = = Career = = 
 Grant 's first leading film role came in Merchant @-@ Ivory 's Edwardian drama , Maurice ( 1987 ) , adapted from E. M. Forster 's novel . He and co @-@ star James Wilby shared the Volpi Cup for best actor at the Venice Film Festival for their portrayals of lovers Clive Durham and Maurice Hall , respectively . During the late 1980s and early 1990s , Grant balanced small roles on television with rare film work , which included a supporting role in The Dawning ( 1988 ) , opposite Anthony Hopkins and Jean Simmons and a turn as Lord Byron in a Goya Award @-@ winning Spanish production called <unk> al viento ( 1988 ) . He also portrayed some other real life figures during his early career such as Charles <unk> in Champagne Charlie and as Hugh Cholmondeley in BAFTA Award @-@ nominated White Mischief . 
 In 1990 , he made a cameo appearance in the sport / crime drama The Big Man , opposite Liam Neeson , and in which Grant assumed a Scottish accent . The film explores the life of a Scottish miner ( Neeson ) who becomes unemployed during a union strike . In 1991 , he played Julie Andrews ' gay son in the ABC made @-@ for @-@ television film Our Sons . 
 In 1992 , he appeared in Roman Polanski 's film Bitter Moon , portraying a fastidious and proper British tourist who is married , but finds himself enticed by the sexual hedonism of a seductive French woman and her embittered , paraplegic American husband . The film was called an " anti @-@ romantic opus of sexual obsession and cruelty " by the Washington Post . His other work in period pieces such as Ken Russell 's horror film , The Lair of the White Worm ( 1988 ) , award @-@ winning Merchant @-@ Ivory drama The Remains of the Day ( 1993 ) and ( as Frédéric Chopin in ) Impromptu ( 1991 ) went largely unnoticed . He later called this phase of his career " hilarious , " referring to his early films as " <unk> , where you would have a French script , a Spanish director , and English actors . The script would usually be written by a foreigner , badly translated into English . And then they 'd get English actors in , because they thought that was the way to sell it to America . " 
 At 32 , Grant claimed to be on the brink of giving up the acting profession but was surprised by the script of Four Weddings and a Funeral ( <unk> ) . " If you read as many bad scripts as I did , you 'd know how grateful you are when you come across one where the guy actually is funny , " he later recalled . Released in 1994 , <unk> became the highest @-@ grossing British film to date with a worldwide box office in excess of $ 244 million , making Grant an overnight international star . The film was nominated for two Academy Awards , and among numerous awards won by its cast and crew , it earned Grant his first and only Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role . It also temporarily typecast him as the lead character , Charles , a bohemian and debonair bachelor . Grant and Curtis saw it as an inside joke that the star , due to the parts he played , was assumed to have the personality of the screenwriter , who is known for writing about himself and his own life . Grant later expressed : 
 In July 1994 , Grant signed a two @-@ year production deal with Castle Rock Entertainment and by October , he became founder and director of the UK @-@ based Simian Films Limited . He appointed his then @-@ girlfriend , Elizabeth Hurley , as the head of development to look for prospective projects . Simian Films produced two Grant vehicles in the 1990s and lost a bid to produce About a Boy to Robert De Niro 's TriBeCa Productions . The company closed its US office in 2002 and Grant resigned as director in December 2005 . Grant was one of the choices to play James Bond in 1995 's GoldenEye , but eventually lost out to Pierce Brosnan . 
 Grant 's first studio @-@ financed Hollywood project was Chris Columbus 's comedy Nine Months . Though a hit at the box office , it was almost universally panned by critics . The Washington Post called it a " grotesquely pandering caper " and singled out Grant 's performance , as a child psychiatrist reacting unfavourably to his girlfriend 's unexpected pregnancy , for his " insufferable muggings . " The same year , he played leading roles as Emma Thompson 's suitor in Ang Lee ’ s Academy Award @-@ winning adaptation of Jane Austen 's Sense and Sensibility and as a cartographer in 1917 Wales in The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain . In the same year he performed in the Academy Award @-@ winning Restoration . 
 Before the release of Four Weddings and a Funeral , Grant reunited with its director , Mike Newell , for the tragicomedy An Awfully Big Adventure that was labelled a " determinedly off @-@ beat film " by The New York Times . Grant portrayed a bitchy , supercilious director of a repertory company in post @-@ World War II Liverpool . Critic Roger Ebert wrote , " It shows that he has range as an actor , " but the San Francisco Chronicle disapproved on grounds that the film " plays like a vanity production for Grant . " Janet Maslin , praising Grant as " superb " and " a dashing cad under any circumstances , " commented , " For him this film represents the road not taken . Made before Four Weddings and a Funeral was released , it captures Mr. Grant as the clever , versatile character actor he was then becoming , rather than the international dreamboat he is today . " Grant made his debut as a film producer with the 1996 thriller Extreme Measures , a commercial and critical failure , though Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel each gave the film three out of four stars with Siskel writing " Hugh Grant 's work in ' Extreme Measures ' is a refreshing standout . " 
 After a three @-@ year hiatus , in 1999 he paired with Julia Roberts in Notting Hill , which was brought to theatres by much of the same team that was responsible for Four Weddings and a Funeral . This new Working Title production displaced Four Weddings and a Funeral as the biggest British hit in the history of cinema , with earnings equalling $ 363 million worldwide . As it became exemplary of modern romantic comedies in mainstream culture , the film was also received well by critics . CNN reviewer Paul Clinton said , " Notting Hill stands alone as another funny and heartwarming story about love against all odds . " Reactions to Grant 's Golden Globe @-@ nominated performance were varied , with Salon.com 's Stephanie Zacharek criticising that , " Grant 's performance stands as an emblem of what 's wrong with Notting Hill . What 's maddening about Grant is that he just never cuts the crap . He 's become one of those actors who 's all shambling self @-@ caricature , from his twinkly crow 's feet to the time @-@ lapsed half century it takes him to actually get one of his lines out . " The film provided both its stars a chance to satirise the woes of international notoriety , most noted of which was Grant 's turn as a faux @-@ journalist who sits through a dull press junket with , what the New York Times called , " a delightfully funny deadpan . " Grant also released his second production output , a fish @-@ out @-@ of @-@ water mob comedy Mickey Blue Eyes , that year . It was dismissed by critics , performed modestly at the box office , and garnered its actor @-@ producer mixed reviews for his starring role . Roger Ebert thought , " Hugh Grant is wrong for the role [ and ] strikes one wrong note and then another , " whereas Kenneth Turan , writing in the Los Angeles Times , said , " If he 'd been on the Titanic , fewer lives would have been lost . If he 'd accompanied Robert Scott to the South Pole , the explorer would have lived to be 100 . That 's how good Hugh Grant is at rescuing doomed ventures . " 
 While promoting Woody Allen 's Small Time Crooks on NBC 's The Today Show in 2000 , Grant told host Matt Lauer , " It 's my millennium of bastards " . In 2000 , Grant also joined the Supervisory Board of IM <unk> AG , the powerful Munich @-@ based film and media company . 
 Small Time Crooks starred Grant , in the words of film critic Andrew Sarris , as " a petty , petulant , faux @-@ Pygmalion art dealer , David , [ who ] is one of the sleaziest and most unsympathetic characters Mr. Allen has ever created . " In a role devoid of his comic attributes , the New York Times wrote : " Mr. Grant deftly imbues his character with exactly a perfect blend of charm and nasty calculation . " A year later , his turn as a charming but womanising book publisher Daniel Cleaver in Bridget Jones 's Diary ( 2001 ) was proclaimed by Variety to be " as sly an overthrow of a star 's polished posh – and nice – poster image as any comic turn in memory " . The film , adapted from Helen Fielding 's novel of the same name , was an international hit , earning $ 281 million worldwide . Grant was , according to the Washington Post , fitting as " a cruel , manipulative cad , hiding behind the male god 's countenance that he knows all too well " . 
 Grant 's " immaculate comic performance " ( BBC ) as the trust @-@ funded womaniser , Will Freeman , in the film adaptation of Nick Hornby 's best @-@ selling novel About a Boy received raves from critics . Almost universally praised , with an Academy Award @-@ nominated screenplay , About a Boy ( 2002 ) was determined by the Washington Post to be " that rare romantic comedy that dares to choose messiness over closure , prickly independence over fetishised <unk> , and honesty over typical Hollywood endings . " Rolling Stone wrote , " The acid comedy of Grant 's performance carries the film [ and he ] gives this pleasing heartbreaker the touch of gravity it needs , " while Roger Ebert observed that " the Cary Grant department is understaffed , and Hugh Grant shows here that he is more than a star , he is a resource . " Released a day after the blockbuster Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones , About a Boy was a more modest box office grosser than other successful Grant films , making all of $ 129 million globally . The film earned Grant his third Golden @-@ Globe nomination , while the London Film Critics Circle named Grant its Best British Actor and GQ honoured him as one of the magazine 's men of the year 2006 . " His performance can only be described as revelatory , " wrote critic Ann Hornaday , adding that " Grant lends the shoals layer upon layer of desire , terror , ambivalence and self @-@ awareness . " The New York Observer concluded : " [ The film ] gets most of its laughs from the evolved expertise of Hugh Grant in playing characters that audiences enjoy seeing taken down a peg or two as a punishment for philandering and womanising and simply being too handsome for words @-@ and with an English accent besides . In the end , the film comes over as a messy delight , thanks to the skill , generosity and good @-@ sport , punching @-@ bag panache of Mr. Grant 's performance . " About a Boy also marked a notable change in Grant 's boyish look . Now 41 , he had lost weight and also abandoned his trademark floppy hair . Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman took note of Grant 's maturation in his review , saying he looked noticeably older and that it " looked good on him . " He added that Grant 's " pillowy cheeks are flatter and a bit drawn , and the eyes that used to peer with ' love me ' cuteness now betray a shark 's casual cunning . Everything about him is leaner and spikier ( including his hair , which has been shorn and <unk> into a <unk> bed @-@ head mess ) , but it 's not just his surface that 's more virile ; the nervousness is gone , too . Hugh Grant has grown up , holding on to his lightness and witty cynicism but losing the stuttering sherry @-@ club mannerisms that were once his signature . In doing so , he has blossomed into the rare actor who can play a silver @-@ tongued sleaze with a hidden inner decency . " 
 Grant was also paired with Sandra Bullock in Warner Bros. ' s Two Weeks Notice , which made $ 199 million internationally but received poor reviews . The Village Voice concluded that Grant 's creation of a spoiled billionaire fronting a real estate business was " little more than a <unk> machine . " 
 Two Weeks Notice was followed by the 2003 ensemble comedy , Love Actually , headlined by Grant as the British Prime Minister . A Christmas release by Working Title Films , the film was promoted as " the ultimate romantic comedy " and accumulated $ 246 million at the international box office . It marked the directorial debut of Richard Curtis , who told the New York Times that Grant adamantly tempered the characterisation of the role to make his character more authoritative and less <unk> charming than earlier Curtis incarnations . Roger Ebert claimed that " Grant has flowered into an absolutely splendid romantic comedian " and has " so much self @-@ confidence that he plays the British prime minister as if he took the role to be a good sport . " Film critic Rex Reed , on the contrary , called Grant 's performance " an oversexed bachelor spin on Tony Blair " as the star " flirted with himself in the paroxysm of self @-@ love that has become his acting style . " 
 In a 2005 speech , British Prime Minister Tony Blair referred to Grant 's character in a speech , saying : " I know there 's a bit of us that would like me to do a Hugh Grant in Love Actually and tell America where to get off . But the difference between a good film and real life is that in real life there 's the next day , the next year , the next lifetime to contemplate the ruinous consequences of easy applause . " 
 In 2004 , Grant reprised his role as Daniel Cleaver for a small part in Bridget Jones : The Edge of Reason , which , like its predecessor , made more than $ 262 million commercially . Gone from the screen for two years , Grant next reteamed with Paul Weitz ( About a Boy ) for the black comedy American Dreamz ( 2006 ) . Grant starred as the acerbic host of an American Idol @-@ like reality show where , according to Caryn James of the New York Times , " nothing is real ... except the black hole at the centre of the host 's heart , as Mr. Grant takes Mr. Cowell 's villainous act to its limit . " American Dreamz failed financially but Grant was generously praised . He played his self @-@ aggrandising character , an amalgam of Simon Cowell and Ryan Seacrest , with smarmy self @-@ loathing . The Boston Globe proposed that this " just may be the great comic role that has always eluded Hugh Grant , " and critic Carina Chocano said , " He is twice as enjoyable as the preening bad guy as he was as the bumbling good guy . " 
 In 2007 , Grant starred opposite Drew Barrymore in a parody of pop culture and the music industry called Music and Lyrics . The Associated Press described it as " a weird little hybrid of a romantic comedy that 's simultaneously too fluffy and not whimsical enough . " Though he neither listens to music nor owns any CDs , Grant learned to sing , play the piano , dance ( a few mannered steps ) and studied the mannerisms of prominent musicians to prepare for his role as a has @-@ been pop singer , based loosely on Andrew Ridgeley , the lesser @-@ known member of 1980s pop duo Wham ! . The Star @-@ Ledger dismissed the performance , writing that " paper dolls have more depth . " The film , with its revenues totalling $ 145 million , allowed Grant to mock disposable pop stardom and fleeting celebrity through its washed @-@ up lead character . According to the San Francisco Chronicle , " Grant strikes precisely the right note with regard to Alex 's career : He 's too intelligent not to be a little embarrassed , but he 's far too brazen to feel anything like shame . " In 2009 , Grant starred opposite Sarah Jessica Parker in the Marc Lawrence 's romantic comedy Did You Hear About the Morgans ? , which was a critical failure but was a box office success . He reunited with Lawrence again for a dramedy film The Rewrite , starring opposite Marisa Tomei . The film received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews , while Grant 's performance was praised by many critics . In 2015 , he had a supporting role as Alexander Waverly in Guy Ritchie 's The Man from U.N.C.L.E. Entertainment Weekly described his performance as " the only bit of fun " in the film . Glenn Kenny of <unk> gave film a mixed review but stated that " while it can ’ t be said that Hugh Grant saves the movie , his return to prominence in the last half @-@ hour , after a plot @-@ seeding @-@ walk @-@ on earlier in the movie , <unk> things up considerably . " In 2015 , he filmed Florence Foster Jenkins , a film directed by Stephen Frears , alongside Meryl Streep . Grant is playing St Clair Bayfield . 
 = = Screen roles = = 
 Grant has predominantly been a comedy ( especially a romantic comedy ) actor for almost all of his mainstream film career . He also never ventures to play characters who are not British . While some film critics , such as Roger Ebert , have defended the limited variety of his performances , others have dismissed him as a one @-@ trick pony . Eric Fellner , co @-@ owner of Working Title Films and a long @-@ time collaborator of Grant , said , " His range hasn 't been fully tested , but each performance is unique . " A majority of Grant 's popular films in the 1990s followed a similar plot that captured an optimistic bachelor experiencing a series of embarrassing incidents to find true love , often with an American woman . In earlier films , Grant was adept at plugging into the stereotype of a repressed Englishman for humorous effects , allowing him to gently satirise his characters as he summed them up and played against the type simultaneously . These performances were sometimes deemed overbearing , in the words of Washington Post 's Rita Kempley , due to his " comic <unk> — the mugging , the stuttering , the fluttering eyelids . " She added : " He 's got more tics than Benny Hill . " Grant 's penchant for conveying his characters ' feelings with mannerisms , rather than direct emotions , has been one of the foremost objections raised against his acting style . Stephen Hunter of the Washington Post once stated that , to be effective as a comic performer , he must get " his <unk> and shucking under control . " Film historian David Thomson wrote in The New Biographical Dictionary of Film about how it is merely " itchy mannerisms " that Grant equates with screen acting . On his choice of roles , Grant has said : 
 Grant 's screen persona of later films , in the new millennium , gradually developed into a cynical , self @-@ loathing cad . Claudia Puig of USA Today celebrated this transformation with the observation that finally " gone [ were ] the self @-@ conscious ' Aren 't I adorable ' mannerisms that seemed endearing at the start of [ Grant 's ] film career but have grown cloying in more recent movies . " Using his facial contortions and an affected stammer for varied comic purposes , According to Carina Chocano , amongst film critics , the two tropes most commonly associated with Grant are that he reinvented his screen persona in Bridget Jones 's Diary and About a Boy and dreads the possibility of becoming a parody of himself . 
 Nonetheless , Grant has occasionally acted in dramas . He played a sleazy , snide community theatre director with a penchant for adolescent boys in the drama film An Awfully Big Adventure , which received critical praise , and for " a very quiet , dignified " performance as Frédéric Chopin in James Lapine 's biopic film Impromptu . In 2012 , Grant played six cameo roles of " incredibly evil " characters in the epic drama film Cloud Atlas , an experience he has spoken about positively . Grant said : 
 = = Personality = = 
 Grant has expressed boredom with playing the celebrity in the press and is known in popular media for his guarded privacy . On probing of his personal life , he has remained steadfast in " offering a dead bat to any question he feels is not general enough . " Grant has described himself as a reluctant actor , has called being a successful actor a mistake and has repeatedly talked of his hope that film stardom would just be " a phase " in his life , lasting no more than ten years . 
 A 2007 Vogue profile of Grant referred to him as a man with a " professionally misanthropic mystique " . Grant has expressed distaste for focus groups , market research , and emphasis on opening weekend box @-@ office numbers , saying : " It 's so destructive to the filmmaking process . What was wrong with the way they used to release films , more slowly , let them build ? " The director Mike Newell has said : " There is at least as much of Hugh that is charismatic , intellectual , and whose tongue is maybe too clever for its own good as there is of him that 's gorgeous and kind of woolly and <unk> . " Filmmaker Paul Weitz said that Grant is funny and that " he perceives flaws in himself and other people , and then he cares about their humanity nonetheless . " British newspapers regularly refer to him as grumpy . 
 Grant is a self @-@ confessed " committed and passionate " perfectionist on a film set . The American film critic Dave Kehr has written that Grant " is known in the film industry as a meticulous performer who takes his time to prepare a role – someone who works hard to make it look easy – though that isn 't a trait he admires in himself . " Grant is noted by co @-@ workers for demanding endless takes until he achieves the desired shot according to his own standard . 
 Grant dropped his agent in 2006 , ending a 10 @-@ year relationship with CAA . Grant has proclaimed in interviews that he does not listen to external views on his career : " They 've known for years that I have total control . I 've never taken any advice on anything . " 
 = = In the media = = 
 = = = Libel lawsuits = = = 
 In 1996 , Grant won substantial damages from News ( UK ) Ltd over what his lawyers called a " highly defamatory " article published in January 1995 . The company 's now @-@ defunct newspaper , Today , had falsely claimed that Grant verbally abused a young extra with a " foul @-@ mouthed tongue lashing " on the set of The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain . 
 On 27 April 2007 , Grant accepted undisclosed damages from the Associated Newspapers over claims made about his relationships with his former girlfriends in three separate tabloid articles , which were published in the Daily Mail and The Mail on Sunday on 18 , 21 and 24 February . His lawyer stated that all of the articles ' " allegations and factual assertions are false . " Grant said , in a written statement , that he took the action because : " I was tired of the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday papers publishing almost entirely fictional articles about my private life for their own financial gain . " He went on to take the opportunity to stress , " I 'm also hoping that this statement in court might remind people that the so @-@ called ' close friends ' or ' close sources ' on which these stories claim to be based almost never exist . " 
 = = = Legal troubles = = = 
 On 27 June 1995 , Grant was arrested in Los Angeles , California , police vice operation not far from Sunset Boulevard for engaging in oral sex in a public place with Hollywood prostitute Divine Brown . He pleaded no contest and was fined $ 1 @,@ 180 , placed on two years ' summary probation , and was ordered to complete an AIDS education program by Robert J. Sandoval . 
 The arrest occurred about two weeks before the release of Grant 's first major studio film , Nine Months , which he was scheduled to promote on several American television shows . The Tonight Show with Jay Leno had him booked for the same week . In the much @-@ watched interview , Grant was noted for not making excuses for the incident after Leno asked him , " What the hell were you thinking ? " Grant answered , " I think you know in life what 's a good thing to do and what 's a bad thing , and I did a bad thing . And there you have it . " 
 On Larry King Live , Grant declined host Larry King 's repeated invitations to probe his psyche , saying that psychoanalysis was " more of an American syndrome " and he himself was " a bit old fashioned . " He told the host : " I don 't have excuses . " Grant was appreciated for " his refreshing honesty " as he " faced the music and handled it with tongue [ in ] cheek . " 
 In April 2007 , Grant was arrested on allegations of assault made by paparazzo Ian Whittaker . Grant made no official statement and did not comment on the incident . Charges were dropped on 1 June by the Crown Prosecution Service on the grounds of " insufficient evidence . " 
 = = = Phone hacking exposé = = = 
 In April 2011 Grant published an article in the New Statesman entitled " The Bugger , <unk> " about a conversation ( following an earlier encounter ) with Paul McMullan , a former journalist and paparazzo for News of the World . In unguarded comments which were secretly taped by Grant , McMullan alleged that editors at the Daily Mail and News of the World , particularly Andy Coulson , had ordered journalists to engage in illegal phone tapping and had done so with the full knowledge of senior British politicians . McMullan also said that every British Prime Minister from Margaret Thatcher onwards had cultivated a close relationship with Rupert Murdoch and his senior executives . He stressed the friendship between David Cameron and Rebekah Brooks ( née Wade ) , agreeing when asked that both of them must have been aware of illegal phone tapping , and asserting that Cameron 's inaction could be explained by self @-@ interest : " Cameron is very much in debt to Rebekah Wade for helping him not quite win the election ... So that was my submission to parliament – that Cameron 's either a liar or an idiot . " 
 When asked by Grant whether Cameron had encouraged the Metropolitan Police to " drag their feet " on investigating illegal phone tapping by Murdoch 's journalists , McMullan agreed this had happened , and stated that police themselves had taken bribes from tabloid journalists : " 20 per cent of the Met has taken <unk> from tabloid hacks . So why would they want to open up that can of worms ? ... And what 's wrong with that , anyway ? It doesn 't hurt anyone particularly . " 
 Grant 's article attracted considerable interest , due to both the revelatory content of the taped conversation , and the novelty of Grant himself " turning the tables " on a tabloid journalist . 
 Whilst the allegations regarding the News of the World continued to receive coverage in the broadsheets and similar media ( Grant appeared , for example , on BBC Radio 4 ) it was only with the revelation that the voicemail of the by then murdered Millie Dowler had been hacked , and evidence for her murder enquiry had been deleted , that the coverage turned from media interest to widespread public ( and eventually political ) outrage . Grant became something of a spokesman against Murdoch 's News Corporation , culminating in a performance on BBC television 's Question Time in July 2011 . 
 Grant said , " It 's been fascinating to have a little excursion into another world . I really needed that and also to be dealing with real life instead of creating synthetic life , which is what I 've been doing for the last 25 years . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 In 1987 , while playing Lord Byron in the Spanish production <unk> Al Viento ( 1988 ) , Grant met actress Elizabeth Hurley , who was cast in a supporting role as Byron 's former lover Claire Clairmont . Grant began dating Hurley during filming and their relationship was subsequently the subject of much media attention . After 13 years together , they separated amicably in May 2000 . He is godfather to her son Damian , born in 2002 . Grant subsequently began dating heiress Jemima Khan under the intense scrutiny of British tabloids . Three years later , in February 2007 , Grant and Khan separated amicably . 
 In September 2011 , Grant had a daughter , Tabitha , with <unk> Hong , a receptionist at a Chinese restaurant in London . His daughter 's Chinese name is Xiao Xi , meaning " happy surprise " . Grant and Hong had a " fleeting affair " , according to his publicist . Grant has said that Hong has been " badly treated " by the media ; the press intrusion prevented him from attending the birth of his daughter , with Hong obtaining an injunction to allow him to visit them in peace . In September , 2012 Grant had a second child , John Mungo Grant , with Swedish television producer Anna Eberstein . He subsequently reunited with Hong , with whom he had his third child , Felix Grant , in 2013 . Grant and Eberstein then had a second child , Grant 's fourth , in December 2015 . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 In 2011 , Grant appeared at the Liberal Democrats ' conference on the News International phone @-@ hacking scandal , where he briefly met then @-@ party leader Nick Clegg . Grant said that he was attending the Conservative and Labour conferences as well , but told Lib Dem activists that " You , more than any of the other parties , have a good bill of health . You have never been in bed with these scumbags . " 
 In the 2015 election , Grant expressed support for prominent Liberal Democrat figure Danny Alexander and later hosted a dinner for the Liberal Democrats , in which he met the winner of a draw of donors to the Liberal Democrats . In an email sent by former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown , Grant wrote : " I am not a Lib Dem , a Tory , a <unk> or anything in particular but I recognise political guts . " 
 In the 2015 election , Grant also endorsed two Labour candidates : Tom Watson ( saying " I wish he could be our next Prime Minister to be honest " ) , and his former agent , Michael Foster . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 As a young boy , he played rugby union on his school 's first XV team at centre and played football as an avid fan of Fulham F.C .. He continued to play in a Sunday @-@ morning football league in south @-@ west London after college and remains an " impassioned Fulham supporter . " Grant 's other interests include tennis and snooker . 
 In 2011 , the BBC apologised after Grant made an offhand joke about homosexuality and rugby when he was invited into the commentary box during coverage of an England V Scotland game at Twickenham Stadium . Talking about playing rugby during his school days , Grant said : " I discovered it hurt less if you tackled hard than if you tackled like a queen . " 
 = = Charity work = = 
 Grant is a patron of the <unk> Charity , which operates the website <unk> . Grant is also patron of the <unk> Foundation , named after his late mother ; the foundation supports the Lady Dane Farmhouse , a home in Faversham for adults with learning disabilities . 
 Since the death of his mother in 2001 , Grant has worked as a fundraiser and ambassador for Marie Curie Cancer Care , promoting the charity 's annual Great Daffodil Appeal on several occasions . Grant is also a patron of Pancreatic Cancer Action . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = WinFS = 
 WinFS ( short for Windows Future Storage ) is the code name for a canceled data storage and management system project based on relational databases , developed by Microsoft and first demonstrated in 2003 as an advanced storage subsystem for the Microsoft Windows operating system , designed for persistence and management of structured , semi @-@ structured as well as unstructured data . 
 WinFS includes a relational database for storage of information , and allows any type of information to be stored in it , provided there is a well defined schema for the type . Individual data items could then be related together by relationships , which are either inferred by the system based on certain attributes or explicitly stated by the user . As the data has a well defined schema , any application can reuse the data ; and using the relationships , related data can be effectively organized as well as retrieved . Because the system knows the structure and intent of the information , it can be used to make complex queries that enable advanced searching through the data and aggregating various data items by exploiting the relationships between them . 
 While WinFS and its shared type schema make it possible for an application to recognize the different data types , the application still has to be coded to render the different data types . Consequently , it would not allow development of a single application that can view or edit all data types ; rather what WinFS enables applications to understand is the structure of all data and extract the information that it can use further . When WinFS was introduced at the 2003 Professional Developers Conference , Microsoft also released a video presentation , named <unk> , showing mockup interfaces that showed how applications would expose interfaces that take advantage of a unified type system . The concepts shown in the video ranged from applications using the relationships of items to dynamically offer filtering options to applications grouping multiple related data types and rendering them in a unified presentation . 
 WinFS was billed as one of the pillars of the " Longhorn " wave of technologies , and would ship as part of the next version of Windows . It was subsequently decided that WinFS would ship after the release of Windows Vista , but those plans were shelved in June 2006 , with some of its component technologies being integrated into upcoming releases of ADO.NET and Microsoft SQL Server . While it was then assumed by observers that WinFS was finished as a project , in November 2006 Steve Ballmer announced that WinFS was still in development , though it was not clear how the technology was to be delivered . Several components of the last Integrated Storage Initiative project , Microsoft Semantic Engine , presented at Microsoft PDC 2009 , have been integrated back into the SQL Server " Denali " . At the 2010 SQL Server PASS Community Summit , the forthcoming version of SQL Server ( " Denali " ) was shown , which seems to incorporate many of the WinFS ideas . 
 = = Motivation = = 
 Many filesystems found on common operating systems , including the NTFS filesystem which is used in modern versions of Microsoft Windows , store files and other objects only as a stream of bytes , and have little or no information about the data stored in the files . Such file systems also provide only a single way of organizing the files , namely via directories and file names . 
 Because a file system has no knowledge about the data it stores , applications tend to use their own , often proprietary , file formats . This hampers sharing of data between multiple applications . It becomes difficult to create an application which processes information from multiple file types , because the programmers have to understand the structure and semantics of all the files . Using common file formats is a workaround to this problem but not a universal solution ; there is no guarantee that all applications will use the format . Data with standardized schema , such as XML documents and relational data fare better , as they have a standardized structure and run @-@ time requirements . 
 Also , a traditional file system can retrieve and search data based only on the filename , because the only knowledge it has about the data is the name of the files that store the data . A better solution is to tag files with attributes that describe them . Attributes are metadata about the files such as the type of file ( such as document , picture , music , creator , etc . ) . This allows files to be searched for by their attributes , in ways not possible using a folder hierarchy , such as finding " pictures which have person X " . The attributes can be recognizable by either the file system natively , or via some extension . Desktop search applications take this concept a step further . They extract data , including attributes , from files and index it . To extract the data , they use a filter for each file format . This allows for searching based on both the file 's attributes and the data in it . 
 However , this still does not help in managing related data , as disparate items do not have any relationships defined . For example , it is impossible to search for " the phone numbers of all persons who live in Acapulco and each have more than 100 appearances in my photo collection and with whom I have had e @-@ mail within last month " . Such a search could not be done unless it is based on a data model which has both the semantics as well as relationships of data defined . WinFS aims to provide such a data model and the runtime infrastructure that can be used to store the data , as well as the relationships between data items according to the data model , doing so at a satisfactory level of performance . 
 = = Overview = = 
 WinFS natively recognizes different types of data , such as picture , e @-@ mail , document , audio , video , calendar , contact , rather than just leaving them as raw <unk> <unk> ( as most file systems do ) . Data stored and managed by the system are instances of the data type recognized by the WinFS runtime . The data are structured by means of properties . For example , an instance of a résumé type will surface the data by exposing properties , such as Name , Educational Qualification , Experience . Each property may be a simple type ( strings , integers , dates ) or complex types ( contacts ) . Different data types expose different properties . Besides that , WinFS also allows different data instances to be related together ; such as a document and a contact can be related by an Authored By relationship . Relationships are also exposed as properties ; for example if a document is related to a contact by a Created By relationship , then the document will have a Created By property . When it is accessed , the relationship is traversed and the related data returned . By following the relations , all related data can be reached . WinFS promotes sharing of data between applications by making the data types accessible to all applications , along with their schemas . When an application wants to use a WinFS type , it can use the schema to find the data structure and can use the information . So , an application has access to all data on the system even though the developer did not have to write parsers to recognize the different data formats . It can also use relationships and related data to create dynamic filters to present the information the application deals with . The WinFS API further abstracts the task of accessing data . All WinFS types are exposed as .NET objects with the properties of the object directly mapping to the properties of the data type . Also , by letting different applications which deal with the same data share the same WinFS data instance rather than storing the same data in different files , the hassles of synchronizing the different stores when the data change are removed . Thus WinFS can reduce redundancies . 
 Access to all the data in the system allows complex searches for data across all the data items managed by WinFS . In the example used above ( " the phone numbers of all persons who live in Acapulco and each have more than 100 appearances in my photo collection and with whom I have had e @-@ mail within last month " ) , WinFS can traverse the subject relationship of all the photos to find the contact items . Similarly , it can filter all emails in last month and access the communicated with relation to reach the contacts . The common contacts can then be figured out from the two sets of results and their phone number retrieved by accessing the suitable property of the contact items . 
 In addition to fully <unk> data ( like XML and relational data ) , WinFS supports semi @-@ structured data ( such as images , which have an unstructured bitstream plus structured metadata ) as well as unstructured data ( such as files ) as well . It stores the unstructured components as files while storing the structured metadata in the structured store . Internally , WinFS uses a relational database to manage data . It does not limit the data to belonging to any particular data model . The WinFS runtime maps the schema to a relational modality , by defining the tables it will store the types in and the primary keys and foreign keys that would be required to represent the relationships . WinFS includes mappings for object and XML schemas by default . <unk> for other schemas must be specified . Object schemas are specified in XML ; WinFS generates code to surface the schemas as .NET classes . ADO.NET can be used to directly specify the relational schema , though a mapping to the object schema must be provided to surface it as classes . Relationship <unk> are performed as joins on these tables . WinFS also automatically creates indexes on these tables , to enable fast access to the information . Indexing speeds up joins significantly , and traversing relationships to retrieve related data is performed very fast . Indexes are also used during information search ; searching and querying use the indexes to quickly complete the operations , much like desktop search systems . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development of WinFS is an extension to a feature which was initially planned in the early 1990s . Dubbed Object File System , it was supposed to be included as part of Cairo . OFS was supposed to have powerful data aggregation features , but the Cairo project was shelved , and with it OFS . However , later during the development of COM , a storage system , called Storage + , based on then @-@ upcoming SQL Server 8 @.@ 0 , was planned , which was slated to offer similar aggregation features . This , too , never materialized , and a similar technology , Relational File System ( RFS ) , was conceived to be launched with SQL Server 2000 . However , SQL Server 2000 ended up being a minor upgrade to SQL Server 7 @.@ 0 and RFS was not implemented . 
 But the concept was not scrapped . It just morphed into WinFS . WinFS was initially planned for inclusion in Windows Vista , and build 4051 of Windows Vista , then called by its codename " Longhorn " , given to developers at the Microsoft Professional Developers Conference in 2003 , included WinFS , but it suffered from significant performance issues . In August 2004 , Microsoft announced that WinFS would not ship with Windows Vista ; it would instead be available as a downloadable update after Vista 's release . 
 On August 29 , 2005 , Microsoft quietly made Beta 1 of WinFS available to <unk> subscribers . It worked on Windows XP , and required the .NET Framework to run . The WinFS API was included in the <unk> namespace . The beta was refreshed on December 1 , 2005 to be compatible with version 2 @.@ 0 of the .NET Framework . WinFS Beta 2 was planned for some time later in 2006 , and was supposed to include integration with Windows Desktop Search , so that search results include results from both regular files and WinFS stores , as well as allow access of WinFS data using <unk> 
 However , on June 23 , 2006 , the WinFS team at Microsoft announced that WinFS would no longer be delivered as a separate product , and some components would be brought under the umbrella of other technologies - like the object @-@ relational mapping components into ADO.NET Entity Framework ; support for unstructured data , <unk> mode of operation , support for file system objects via the <unk> data type , and hierarchical data in SQL Server 2008 , then codenamed Katmai , as well as integration with Win32 APIs and Windows Shell and support for traversal of hierarchies by traversing relationships into later releases of Microsoft SQL Server ; and the synchronization components into Microsoft Sync Framework . However , having a shared @-@ schema storage system built into a future iteration of Microsoft Windows has not yet been ruled out . 
 With that announcement , most analysts assumed that the WinFS project was being killed off . But in November 2006 , Steve Ballmer said in an interview that WinFS is being actively developed but integration into the Windows codebase will come only after the technology has fully incubated . It was subsequently confirmed in an interview with Bill Gates and that Microsoft plans to migrate applications like Windows Media Player , Windows Photo Gallery , Microsoft Office Outlook etc. to use WinFS as the data storage back @-@ end . 
 In 2013 Bill Gates cited WinFS as his greatest disappointment at Microsoft and that the idea of WinFS was ahead of its time , which will re @-@ emerge . 
 = = Data storage = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 WinFS uses a relational engine , which is derived from SQL Server 2005 , to provide the data relations mechanism . WinFS stores are simply SQL Server database ( <unk> ) files with the <unk> attribute set . These files are stored in access @-@ restricted folder named " System Volume Information " placed into the volume root , in folders under the folder " WinFS " with names of <unk> of these stores . 
 At the bottom of the WinFS stack lies WinFS Core which interacts with the filesystem and provides file access and addressing capabilities . The relational engine leverages the WinFS core services to present a structured store and other services such as locking which the WinFS runtime uses to implement the functionality . The WinFS runtime expose Services such as Synchronization and Rules which can be used to synchronize WinFS stores or perform certain actions on the occurrence of certain events . 
 WinFS runs as a service which runs three processes - <unk> , which hosts relational <unk> , <unk> , which hosts the indexing and querying engine , and <unk> ( WinFS File Promotion Manager ) , which interfaces with the underlying file system . It allows programmatic access to its features , via a set of .NET Framework APIs , that enables applications to define custom made data types , define relationships among data , store and retrieve information , and allow advanced searches . The applications can then aggregate the data and present the aggregated data to the user . 
 = = = = Data store = = = = 
 WinFS stores data in relational stores , which are exposed as virtual locations called stores . A WinFS store is a common repository where any application can store data along with its metadata , relationships and schema . WinFS runtime can apply certain relationships itself ; for example , if the values of the subject property of a picture and the name property of a contact are same , then WinFS can relate the contact with the picture . Relations can also be specified by other applications or the user . 
 WinFS provides a unified storage , but stops short of defining the format that is to be stored in the data stores . Instead it supports data to be written in application specific formats . But applications must provide a schema that defines how the file format should be interpreted . For example , a schema could be added to allow WinFS to understand how to read and thus be able to search and analyze , say , a PDF file . By using the schema , any application can read data from any other application , and also allows different applications to write in each other ’ s format by sharing the schema . 
 Multiple WinFS stores can be created on a single machine . This allows different classes of data to be kept segregated ; for example , official documents and personal documents can be kept in different stores . WinFS , by default , provides only one store , named " <unk> " . WinFS stores are exposed as shell objects , akin to Virtual folders , which dynamically generates a list of all items present in the store and presents them in a folder view . The shell object also allows searching information in the <unk> . 
 A data unit that has to be stored in a WinFS store is called a WinFS Item . A WinFS item , along with the core data item , also contains information on how the data item is related to other data . This Relationship is stored in terms of logical links . Links specify which other data items the current item is related with . Put in other words , links specify the relationship of the data with other data items . Links are physically stored using a link identifier , which specifies the name and intent of the relationship , such as type of or consists of . The link identifier is stored as an attribute of the data item . All the objects which have the same link id are considered to be related . An XML schema , defining the structure of the data items that will be stored in WinFS , must be supplied to the WinFS runtime beforehand . In Beta 1 of WinFS , the schema assembly had to be added to the GAC before it could be used . 
 = = = Data model = = = 
 WinFS models data using the data items , along with their relationships , extensions and rules governing its usage . WinFS needs to understand the type and structure of the data items , so that the information stored in the data item can be made available to any application that requests it . This is done by the use of schemas . For every type of data item that is to be stored in WinFS , a corresponding schema needs to be provided to define the type , structure and associations of the data . These schemas are defined using XML . 
 <unk> WinFS schemas include schemas for documents , e @-@ mail , appointments , tasks , media , audio , video , and also includes system schemas that include configuration , programs , and other system @-@ related data . Custom schemas can be defined on a per @-@ application basis , in situations where an application wants to store its data in WinFS , but not share the structure of that data with other applications , or they can be made available across the system . 
 = = = = Type system = = = = 
 The most important difference between a file system and WinFS is that WinFS knows the type of each data item that it stores . And the type specifies the properties of the data item . The WinFS type system is closely associated with the .NET framework ’ s concept of classes and inheritance . A new type can be created by extending and nesting any predefined types . 
 WinFS provides four predefined base types – Items , Relationships , ScalarTypes and <unk> . An Item is the fundamental data object which can be stored , and a Relationship is the relation or link between two data items . Since all WinFS items must have a type , the type of item stored defines its properties . The properties of an Item may be a ScalarType , which defines the smallest unit of information a property can have , or a NestedType , which is a collection of more than one ScalarTypes and / or <unk> . All WinFS types are made available as .NET CLR classes . 
 Any object represented as a data unit , such as contact , image , video , document etc . , can be stored in a WinFS store as a specialization of the Item type . By default , WinFS provides Item types for Files , Contact , Documents , Pictures , Audio , Video , Calendar , and Messages . The File Item can store any generic data , which is stored in file systems as files . But unless an advanced schema is provided for the file , by defining it to be a specialized Item , WinFS will not be able to access its data . Such a file Item can only support being related to other Items . 
 A developer can extend any of these types , or the base type Item , to provide a type for his custom data . The data contained in an Item is defined in terms of properties , or fields which hold the actual data . For example , an Item Contact may have a field Name which is a ScalarType , and one field Address , a NestedType , which is further composed of two ScalarTypes . To define this type , the base class Item is extended and the necessary fields are added to the class . A NestedType field can be defined as another class which contains the two ScalarType fields . Once the type is defined , a schema has to be defined , which denotes the primitive type of each field , for example , the Name field is a String , the Address field is a custom defined Address class , both the fields of which are Strings . Other primitive types that WinFS supports are Integer , Byte , Decimal , Float , Double , Boolean and <unk> , among others . The schema will also define which fields are mandatory and which are optional . The Contact Item defined in this way will be used to store information regarding the Contact , by populating the properties field and storing it . Only those fields marked as mandatory needs to be filled up during initial save . Other fields may be populated later by the user , or not populated at all . If more properties fields , such as last conversed date , need to be added , this type can be extended to accommodate them . Item types for other data can be defined similarly . 
 WinFS creates tables for all defined Items . All the fields defined for the Item form the columns of the table and all instances of the Item are stored as rows in the table for the respective Items . Whenever some field in the table refers to data in some other table , it is considered a relationship . The schema of the relationship specifies which tables are involved and what the kind and name of the relationship is . The WinFS runtime manages the relationship schemas . All Items are exposed as .NET CLR objects , with a uniform interface providing access to the data stored in the fields . Thus any application can retrieve object of any Item type and can use the data in the object , without being aware of the physical structure the data was stored in . 
 WinFS types are exposed as .NET classes , which can be instantiated as .NET objects . Data are stored in these type instances by setting their properties . Once done , they are persisted into the WinFS store . A WinFS store is accessed using an ItemContext class ( see Data retrieval section for details ) . ItemContext allows transactional access to the WinFS store ; i.e. all the operations since binding an ItemContext object to a store till it is closed either all succeed or are all rolled back . As changes are made to the data , they are not written to the disc ; rather they are written to an in @-@ memory log . Only when the connection is closed are the changes written to the disc in a batch . This helps to optimize disc I / O. The following code snippet , written in C # , creates a contact and stores it in a WinFS store . 
 = = = = Relationships = = = = 
 A datum can be related to one more item , giving rise to a one @-@ to @-@ one relationship , or with more than one items , resulting in a one @-@ to @-@ many relationship . The related items , in turn , may be related to other data items as well , resulting in a network of relationships , which is called a many @-@ to @-@ many relationship . Creating a relationship between two Items create another field in the data of the Items concerned which refer the row in the other Item ’ s table where the related object is stored . 
 In WinFS , a Relationship is an instance of the base type Relationship , which is extended to signify a specialization of a relation . A Relationship is a mapping between two items , a Source and a Target . The source has an Outgoing Relationship , whereas the target gets an Incoming Relationship . WinFS provides three types of primitive relationships – Holding Relationship , Reference Relationship and Embedding Relationship . Any custom relationship between two data types are instances of these relationship types . 
 Holding Relationships specifies ownership and lifetime ( which defines how long the relationship is valid ) of the Target Item . For example , the Relationship between a folder and a file , and between an Employee and his Salary record , is a Holding Relationship – the latter is to be removed when the former is removed . A Target Item can be a part of more than one Holding Relationships . In such a case , it is to be removed when all the Source Items are removed . 
 Reference Relationships provide linkage between two Items , but do not have any lifetime associated , i.e. , each Item will continue to be stored even without the other . 
 Embedding Relationships give order to the two Items which are linked by the Relationship , such as the Relationship between a Parent Item and a Child Item . 
 Relationships between two Items can either be set programmatically by the application creating the data , or the user can use the WinFS Item Browser to manually relate the Items . A WinFS item browser can also graphically display the items and how they are related , to enable the user to know how their data are organized . 
 = = = = Rules = = = = 
 WinFS includes Rules , which are executed when a certain condition is met . WinFS rules work on data and data relationships . For example , a rule can be created which states that whenever an Item is created which contains field " Name " and if the value of that field is some particular name , a relationship should be created which relates the Item with some other Item . WinFS rules can also access any external application . For example , a rule can be built which launches a <unk> application whenever a mail is received from a particular contact . WinFS rules can also be used to add new properties fields to existing data Items . 
 WinFS rules are also exposed as .NET CLR objects . As such any rule can be used for any purpose . A rule can even be extended by inheriting from it to form a new rule which consists of the condition and action of the parent rule plus something more . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 WinFS supports creating Rich Application Views ( <unk> ) by aggregating different data in a virtual table format . Unlike database view , where each individual element can only be a scalar value , RAVs can have complex Items or even collections of Items . The actual data can be across multiple data types or instances and can even be retrieved by traversing relationships . RAVs are intrinsically paged ( dividing the entire set of data into smaller pages containing disconnected subsets of the data ) by the WinFS runtime . The page size is defined during creation of the view and the WinFS API exposes methods to iterate over the pages . RAVs also supports modification of the view according to different grouping parameters . Views can also be queried against . 
 = = = Access control = = = 
 Even though all data are shared , everything is not equally accessible . WinFS uses the Windows authentication system to provide two data protection mechanisms . First , there is share @-@ level security that controls access to your WinFS share . Second , there is item level security that supports NT compatible security descriptors . The process accessing the item must have enough privileges to access it . Also in Vista there is the concept of " integrity level " for an application . Higher integrity data cannot be accessed by a lower integrity process . 
 = = Data retrieval = = 
 The primary mode of data retrieval from a WinFS store is querying the WinFS store according to some criteria , which returns an <unk> set of items matching the criteria . The criteria for the query is specified using the OPath query language . The returned data are made available as instances of the type schemas , conforming to the .NET object model . The data in them can be accessed by accessing the properties of individual objects . 
 Relations are also exposed as properties . Each WinFS Item has two properties , named <unk> and <unk> , which provides access to the set of relationship instances the item participates in . The other item which participates in one relationship instance can be reached through the proper relationship instance . 
 The fact that the data can be accessed using its description , rather than location , can be used to provide end @-@ user organizational capabilities without limiting to the hierarchical organization as used in file @-@ systems . In a file system , each file or folder is contained in only one folder . But WinFS Items can participate in any number of holding relationships , that too with any other items . As such , end users are not limited to only file / folder organization . Rather , a contact can become a container for documents ; a picture a container for contacts and so on . For legacy compatibility , WinFS includes a pseudo @-@ type called Folder which is present only to participate in holding relationships and emulate file / folder organization . Since any WinFS Item can be related with more than one Folder item , from an end user perspective , an item can reside in multiple folders without duplicating the actual data . Applications can also analyze the relationship graphs to present various filters . For example , an email application can analyze the related contacts and the relationships of the contacts with restaurant bills and dynamically generate filters like " Emails sent to people I had lunch with " . 
 = = = Searches = = = 
 The WinFS API provides a class called the ItemContext class , which is bound to a WinFS store . The ItemContext object can be used to scope the search to the entire store or a subset of it . It also provides transactional access to the store . An object of this class can then spawn an <unk> object which then takes the type ( an object representing the type ) of the item to be retrieved or the relationship and the OPath query string representing the criteria for the search . A set of all matches is returned , which can then be bound to a UI widget for displaying en masse or enumerating individually . The properties items can also be modified and then stored back to the data store to update the data . The ItemContext object is closed ( which marks the end of association of the object with the store ) when the queries are made or changes merged into the store . 
 Related items can also be accessed through the items . The <unk> and <unk> properties give access to all the set of relationship instances , typed to the name of the relationship . These relationship objects expose the other item via a property . So , for example , if a picture is related to a picture , it can be accessed by traversing the relationship as : 
 An OPath query string allows to express the parameters that will be queried for to be specified using Item properties , embedded Items as well as Relationships . It can specify a single search condition , such as " title 
 = Something ' " , or a compound condition such as " title = 
 <unk> 1 ' | | title 
 = ' Title 2 ' & & author = 
 <unk> ' " . These boolean and relational operations can be specified using C # like & & , | | , = , ! = operators as well as their English @-@ like equivalent like EQUAL , NOT EQUAL . SQL like operators such as LIKE , GROUP BY and ORDER BY are also supported , as are wildcard conditions . So , " title LIKE ' any * ' " is a valid query string . These operators can be used to execute complex searches such as 
 The above code snippet creates an <unk> object that searches on the <unk> instance that relates pictures and contacts , in effect searching all pictures related with a contact . It then runs the query Name LIKE ' A * ' " on all contacts reachable through <unk> , returning the list of " contacts whose names start with A and whose pictures I have " . Similarly , more relationships could be taken into account to further narrow down the results . Further , a natural language query processor , which parses query in natural language and creates a well @-@ formed OPath query string to search via proper relationships , can allow users to make searches such as " find the name of the wine I had with person X last month " , provided financial management applications are using WinFS to store bills . 
 Different relations specify a different set of data . So when a search is made which encompasses multiple relations , the different sets of data are retrieved individually and a union of the different sets is computed . The resulting set contains only those data items which correspond to all the relations . 
 = = = Notifications = = = 
 WinFS also includes better support for handling data that changes frequently . Using WinFS Notifications , applications choose to be notified of changes to selected data Items . WinFS will raise an <unk> , using the .NET Event model , when a subscribed @-@ to Item changes , and the event will be published to the applications . 
 = = Data sharing = = 
 WinFS allows easy sharing of data between applications , and among multiple WinFS stores , which may reside on different computers , by copying to and from them . A WinFS item can also be copied to a non @-@ WinFS file system , but unless that data item is put back into the WinFS store , it will not support the advanced services provided by WinFS . 
 The WinFS API also provides some support for sharing with non @-@ WinFS applications . WinFS exposes a shell object to access WinFS stores . This object maps WinFS items to a virtual folder hierarchy , and can be accessed by any application . WinFS data can also be manually shared using network shares , by sharing the legacy shell object . Non @-@ WinFS file formats can be stored in WinFS stores , using the File Item , provided by WinFS . Importers can be written , to convert specific file formats to WinFS Item types . 
 In addition , WinFS provides services to automatically synchronize items in two or more WinFS stores , subject to some predefined condition , such as " share only photos " or " share photos which have an associated contact X " . The stores may be on different computers . Synchronization is done in a peer @-@ to @-@ peer fashion ; there is no central authority . A synchronization can be either manual or automatic or scheduled . During synchronization , WinFS finds the new and modified Items , and updates accordingly . If two or more changes conflict , WinFS can either resort to automatic resolution based on predefined rules , or defer the synchronization for manual resolution . WinFS also updates the schemas , if required . 
 = = Application support = = 
 = = = Shell namespace = = = 
 WinFS Beta 1 includes a shell namespace extension , which surfaces WinFS stores as top level objects in My Computer view . Files can be copied into and out of the stores , as well as applications can be directly used to save there . Even folders such as My Documents can be redirected to the stores . WinFS uses <unk> plug @-@ ins to analyze the files as they were being imported to the store and create proper WinFS schemas and objects , and when taking the objects out , re @-@ pack them into files . If importers for certain files are not installed , they are stored as generic File types . 
 = = = Microsoft Rave = = = 
 Microsoft Rave is an application that shipped with WinFS Beta 1 . It allows synchronization of two or more WinFS stores , and supports synchronization in full mesh mode as well as the central hub topology . While synchronizing , Microsoft Rave will determine the changes made to each store since the last sync , and update accordingly . When applying the changes , it also detects if there is any conflict , i.e. , the same data has been changed on both stores since the last synchronization . It will either log the conflicting data for later resolution or have it resolved immediately . Microsoft Rave uses peer @-@ to @-@ peer technology to communicate and transfer data . 
 = = = StoreSpy = = = 
 With WinFS Beta 1 , Microsoft included an unsupported application called StoreSpy , which allowed one to browse WinFS stores by presenting a hierarchical view of WinFS Items . It automatically generated virtual folders based on access permissions , date and other metadata , and presented them in a hierarchical tree view , akin to what traditional folders are presented in . The application generated tabs for different Item types . StoreSpy allowed viewing Items , Relationships , <unk> , Nested Elements , Extensions and other types in the store along with its full metadata . It also presented a search interface to perform manual searches , and save them as virtual folders . The application also presented a graphical view of WinFS Rules . However , it did not allow editing of Items or their properties , though it was slated for inclusion in a future release . But the WinFS project was cut back before it could materialize . 
 = = = Type Browser = = = 
 WinFS also includes another application , named WinFS Type Browser , which can be used to browse the WinFS types , as well as visualize the hierarchical relationship between WinFS types . A WinFS type , both built @-@ in types as well as custom schemas , can be visualized along with all the properties and methods that it supports . It also shows the types that it derives from as well as other types that extend the type schema . However , while it was included with WinFS , it was released as an unsupported tool . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 WinFS Beta 1 also includes an unsupported application , named <unk> . It presents a graphical interface for writing <unk> queries . It can be used by selecting target object type and specifying the parameters of the query . It also includes <unk> @-@ like parameter completion feature . It can then be used to perform visualization tasks like binding results of a query to a <unk> control , create views of the data in WinFS itself , or just extract the query string . 
 = = = Project " Orange " = = = 
 Microsoft launched a project to build a data visualization application for WinFS . It was codenamed " Project Orange " and was supposedly built using Windows Presentation Foundation . It was supposed to provide exploration of Items stored in WinFS stores , and data relationships were supposed to be a prominent part of the navigation model . It was supposed to let people allow organization of the WinFS stores graphically as well – <unk> many of the concepts shown in the <unk> Concept Video WMV File . However , since the WinFS project went dark , the status of this project is unknown . 
 = The Way You Love Me ( Keri Hilson song ) = 
 " The Way You Love Me " is a song recorded by American R & B singer @-@ songwriter Keri Hilson featuring rapper Rick Ross from the former 's second studio album No Boys Allowed ( 2010 ) . It was written by Stanley Benton , India <unk> , Paul Dawson , Hilson , <unk> Hollins , <unk> Michel as well as William Roberts , and was produced by Polow da Don . " The Way You Love Me " surfaced online on November 7 , 2010 ; its explicit lyrics fueled controversy , with music critics accusing the singer of swerving into a racy lane . However , Hilson clarified in several interviews that the song was not just sexual but also had a message for empowerment of women . She added that " The Way You Love Me " was not a song " meant for children " . 
 For the release of No Boys Allowed in December 2010 , " The Way You Love Me " was re @-@ recorded as a clean version with some lyrical modifications and the omission of the word " fuck " in several places . The song , described as a reflection of Hilson 's wilder side , is an R & B – dance @-@ pop song consisting of electro and rock music influences . " The Way You Love Me " is about being in a committed relationship , but the subject 's sexual desire not holding back . It features rough and aggressive vocals by Hilson . The clean version of the song was generally well received by music critics who called it raunchy , and praised how the intense vocal delivery of Hilson matched effectively with the rapid pace and heavy beat of the song . Several of them also chose it as a stand @-@ out track from No Boys Allowed . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was created as a mini @-@ movie , and was directed by Laurie Ann Gibson . It features cameo appearances from JoJo , Faith Evans , Dawn Richard , Columbus Short and Polow Da Don . After its premiere on November 28 , 2010 , on a hip @-@ hop site <unk> , it received negative criticism from critics because of the limited amount of clothing Hilson wore in the video . Some critics also stated that certain scenes of the video nearly resembled those of a pornography movie . Hilson told Hot 97 's Angie Martinez , that she would not be making any apologies for the explicit lyrics as well as the provocative video . Additionally , in an interview with celebrity blogger Perez Hilton , she defended the clip calling the video " racy " but in line with the perspective of her album . She also firmly stated that she would not allow other people or the media to dictate what she can and cannot do . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Way You Love Me " was written by Stanley Benton , India <unk> , Paul Dawson , Hilson , <unk> Hollins , <unk> Michel , William Roberts and was produced by Polow da Don and Hollywood Hot Sauce . The song features additional vocals from rapper Rick Ross . Before the release No Boys Allowed , " The Way You Love Me " leaked online on November 7 , 2010 , and a music video was filmed for it . Both received much coverage by several media outlets who deemed the lyrics as explicit and the video as provocative because of the limited amount of clothing Hilson wore in it . On the unedited version of " The Way You Love Me " Hilson uses more sexually explicit phrasing and repeatedly uses the word " fuck " . 
 In December 2010 , Keri confirmed a clean version of the song would be included on her album . Some lyrical modifications were made . The line " I got the kind of pussy that 'll keep you out the streets " was replaced by " I got the kind of lovin ' that 'll keep you out the streets " , and the word " fuck " was replaced with the word " thug " , while in others it was removed altogether . Ross told Jason Rodriguez of MTV News : " When I got the record , I most definitely knew she was going to another level and I was excited for [ Hilson ] . I love to see the creative side . She 's a sexy female and I think she showed that . When I think of Janet Jackson when I was coming up and she was doing her Control thing , I loved it . So if that 's the feeling that young people [ are getting ] or whoever is feeling the music , if that 's the inspiration they get , I think it 's dope . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " The Way You Love Me " is an R & B @-@ dance @-@ pop song which displays influences of electro , and rock music . It features a " squealing " synth , a banging fast @-@ paced beat , screaming , rough as well as at times hoarse vocals and blaring sonics . According to the staff members of Idolator , the beat in the background is augmented by hand @-@ claps similar to that of " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) by Beyoncé Knowles , most noticeable toward the end . According to a press release by Interscope Records , the song 's lyrics make reference to a " raw infectious club @-@ thumping message to female empowerment " and about being in a committed relationship . She further said the sentiment reflected in the song is " exactly what her girls are apt to shout behind closed doors " and that the lyrics are meant to reflect a woman 's many moods and shifting desires : " I write from a female perspective , but I 'm also telling men what women are really thinking and feeling about them . I don 't want to be held and caressed every night . I 'm talking about one man in the relationship . I 'm not talking about being a slut and a whore . " 
 As stated by Scott Shetler of AOL Radio and Matthew Horton of BBC , the song features an aggressive tone , and dizzying percussion and electro elements create a " frenzied pace that Hilson matches with an intense vocal delivery . " During the bridge and the chorus , she utters gasps and groans , like ' oohs and <unk> ' while singing the lyrics . As the first verse begins , Hilson sings : " Ooh ahh , baby don 't stop / You know how I like it Daddy when you hit the spot / Ooh ahh , baby don 't stop / Imma take control when I climb up on top " . As the song progresses , Hilson sings that she is " so good , I 'll make you think the bed is my workplace [ ... ] Yeah , it 's me , that 's where you wanna be / I got the kind of pussy that 'll keep you out the streets " just before Ross 's verse begins , seemingly summing up the image Hilson is going for : " She looks like an angel , but she 's sexy as hell . " As a whole , the lyrical arrangements are about sexual desire and not holding back . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The clean version of " The Way You Love Me " garnered generally positive reviews from music critics who noted the effective melding of the intense vocal delivery of Hilson with the rapid pace and banging beat of the song . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian said that all the five songs Hilson penned for No Boys Allowed , with the exception of the " frantic electronic firework ' The Way You Love Me ' , are too featureless to make an impression . " Ben <unk> of The New York Times commented that Hilson " gets a certain energy out of bossiness " on " The Way You Love Me " which according to him , goes far for a mainstream female singer in its boasting and sexual hunger . He also added that " it sometimes seems as if it were not a man at all she wants to boss around but Rihanna . " Spence D. of IGN Music commented that Hilson moves " to a gritted @-@ teeth half @-@ rapped , half @-@ sung approach " for " The Way You Love Me " . He went on complimenting the heavy beat of the song which according to him , matches the " shouted vocals " of the singer on the song . Andy Kellman of Allmusic called " The Way You Love Me " the most emblematic track on No Boys Allowed . He praised the line " I got the kinda lovin ' that 'll keep you off the streets " and describing the song as rowdy and sexually direct , he concluded that it could be ideal for " the soundtrack to a straight @-@ to @-@ DVD Showgirls sequel . " 
 Glenn Gamboa of Newsday found that Hilson gets incredibly riled up on " The Way You Love Me " . Rob Sheffield chose " The Way You Love Me " as one of the high points that are worth digging out and called its content " electro @-@ porn . " Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly called the song a " raunchy " one . Chris Parkin Yahoo ! Music commented that the " fantastic banger ' The Way you Love Me ' [ ... ] , [ a ] filthy song , that makes like the oversexed , <unk> cousin of Beyoncé Knowles ' " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) . Idolator 's staff members described " The Way you Love Me " as a " pretty much the definition of down @-@ and @-@ dirty , adequately conveying a sexual energy perfect for , shall we say , a ' particular ' type of dancing . " They also said that vocals of Hilson sound " less like it was recorded during the throes of passion and more like someone just cut her off on the freeway " . However , they ended up saying that the song works . Neil Miller , Jr. of UR Chicago called " The Way You Love Me " an undeniable standout on the record thanks to its " serious bass to rattle your trunk , some tweaked out synth stabs , and Hilson 's bad bitch attitude . " By contrast , Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine said that it seems that Hilson has begun trusting her ability " to thrust her hips toward recoiling cameras more than she believes in the power of her vocal track . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The unedited version of " The Way You Love Me " received very negative reception from music critics . The song has been criticized for its explicit lyrics , particularly the lines " Fuck me , fuck me " and " I got the kinda pussy that 'll keep you out the streets " . Critics accused the singer of swerving into a racy lane just for page views and album sales for No Boys Allowed . However , she insisted that she " was setting the record straight . " In an interview with Hot 97 's Angie Martinez , Hilson stated firmly that she would not apologize for the explicit lyrics or the provocative video : 
 Hilson later told Jocelyn Vena of MTV News that she was indeed a little bit surprised by the reaction she was getting concerning " The Way You Love Me " . She clarified that the song was not just sexual : " In that record I 'm talking about one guy , I 'm talking about one night and this is what I want on this one night , and I 'm not afraid to say it . Not just sexual , I just mean whatever — open your mouth . That 's empowering to me . That 's what the song is about . " In an interview with Perez Hilton , Hilson said that she cannot allow other people or the media to dictate what she can and what cannot do . She also dismissed the negative reviews , because she knew some women were " empowered " by its message . She added that listeners have to be fearless and stand for what they believe in and concluded by saying that " The Way You Love Me " is not meant for children . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " The Way You Love Me " , a mini @-@ movie of about seven minutes long , was shot in Los Angeles during October 2010 and was directed by Laurie Ann Gibson . It premiered on November 28 , 2010 on a hip @-@ hop site , <unk> It also features cameo appearances from JoJo , Faith Evans , Dawn Richard , Columbus Short and Polow Da Don . According to Rap @-@ Up , " [ Hilson and her girls ] work their charm on the boys , including Rick Ross , Columbus Short , and Polow Da Don . " In the video , Hilson plays " femme fatale B.B. " . The video was released to iTunes Stores on December 7 , 2010 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins in a room with a man named Fuzz ( Polow da Don ) telling B.B. ( Hilson ) and her gun @-@ slinging women crew consisting of Boots ( JoJo ) , Danja ( Evans ) , and Money ( Dawn Richard ) about bringing in Hilson 's boyfriend into custody . After Hilson assures Jammal that she can handle it , the song begins and Hilson are seen wearing outfits of black bikinis as they dance seductively to the song 's chorus and verse . Meanwhile , Hilson and her crew are back in the room preparing themselves with scenes of Hilson grinding against a large vault door . As the song moves to the pre @-@ chorus , Hilson and her crew are shown at a party , mingling with the male guests and handing them drinks . As Ross ' verse begins , he , Short and da Don are shown at the party as Hilson 's crew grind themselves around them and Hilson kisses Short 's head . The song pauses and Hilson and her crew move into a room with Polow da Don , Short , and Ross sitting in chair with other men in the background . Unexpectedly , her crew all pull out their guns . Short ( who has turned out to be Hilson 's target ) is able to respond almost immediately by having his men pull out their guns . Seeing they are evenly matched , Short agrees to let Hilson take him into custody , with Hilson removing her top and locking them both in handcuffs . The two walk upstairs , where Short pushes Hilson against the wall and they kiss on the stairway . The video ends with Short following Hilson upstairs while the words " To be continued ... " appear on the screen . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Music critics universally criticized the video because of the limited amount of clothing Hilson wore in it . In an interview with gossip hound Perez Hilton , Hilson defended the clip , calling the video " racy " but in line with the perspective of her album : " If you put it in context with my album , my album is called No Boys Allowed but really it means no bullshit allowed . In this album , I was screaming in a room — just like I was screaming in the song — I was screaming in a room with all my girlfriends , yelling all the shit we really say . " Rebecca Thomas of MTV News wrote : " A platinum @-@ blond Keri gyrates , thrusts , licks and gets ( way ) low as she laces the song with enough saucy language and expletives to make your favorite rapper blush . " while Jocelyn Vena the same news division of MTV commented that even though there are several cameo appearances in the mini @-@ move , it is ultimately Hilson 's " scantily clad popping and locking that has everyone buzzing . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine called the video " overproduced and under @-@ clothed . " 
 Mariel Concepcion of Billboard wrote that she first saw the video for " The Way You Love Me " , it seemed like Hilson was trying a bit hard to her . However , part of her could appreciate that Hilson does what she wants and that she is confident enough to do it . Concepcion further stated : " Then I watched the above interview she did with Perez Hilton , and it made me respect her even more . She stood her ground and made no excuses for her words or her visuals , and I can dig that . " Niki A. M. of Vibe wrote that Hilson " made quite tails wag with her titillating video " and that " men reeled over the scantily clad vixen gyrating and shouting <unk> phrases like " fuck me " while females seethed in disappointment over her crotch shots that went viral just days ago . " Becky Bain , writing for Idolator , stated that " the stilted dialog between Hilson and Columbus Short near the end of the mini @-@ movie as well as the former 's delivery makes the scene come off like the beginning of a porn movie , and unsurprisingly , the scene ends much like a porn movie . " 
 = Locust = 
 Locusts are certain species of short @-@ horned grasshoppers in the family Acrididae which possess both a solitary phase and a swarming phase . 
 = = Description = = 
 In the solitary phase , these grasshoppers are innocuous , their numbers are low and they do not pose a major economic threat to agriculture . However , under suitable conditions of drought followed by rapid vegetation growth , serotonin in their brains triggers a dramatic set of changes : they start to breed abundantly , becoming gregarious and nomadic ( loosely described as migratory ) when their populations become dense enough . They form bands of wingless nymphs which later become swarms of winged adults . Both the bands and the swarms move around and rapidly strip fields and cause damage to crops . The adults are powerful fliers ; they can travel great distances , consuming most of the green vegetation wherever the swarm settles . 
 Locusts have formed plagues since prehistory . The Ancient Egyptians carved them on their tombs and the insects are mentioned in the Bible and the Quran . Swarms have devastated crops and been a contributory cause of famines and human migrations . More recently , changes in agricultural practices and better surveillance of locations where swarms tend to originate , have meant that control measures can be used at an early stage . The traditional means of control are based on the use of insecticides from the ground or the air , but other methods using biological control are proving effective . 
 Swarming behaviour has decreased in the twentieth century , but despite modern surveillance and control methods , the potential for swarms to form is still present , and when suitable climatic conditions occur and vigilance lapses , plagues can still occur . Locusts are large insects and convenient for use in research and the study of zoology in the classroom . They are also edible insects ; they have been eaten throughout history and are considered a delicacy in many countries . The word " locust " is derived from the Vulgar Latin <unk> , meaning locust or lobster . 
 = = Swarming grasshoppers = = 
 Locusts are the swarming phase of certain species of short @-@ horned grasshoppers in the family Acrididae . These insects are usually solitary , but under certain circumstances become more abundant and change their behaviour and habits , becoming gregarious . 
 There is no taxonomic distinction between locust and grasshopper species ; the basis for the definition is whether a species forms swarms under intermittently suitable conditions . In English the term " locust " is used for grasshopper species that change morphologically and <unk> on crowding , forming swarms that develop from bands of immature stages called hoppers . These changes are examples of phase polymorphism ; they were first analysed and described by Boris Uvarov who was instrumental in setting up the Anti @-@ Locust Research Centre . He made his discoveries during his studies of the desert locust , whose solitary and gregarious phases had previously been thought to be separate species . He designated the two phases as solitaria and gregaria . These are also referred to as <unk> and migratory morphs , though strictly speaking their swarms are nomadic rather than migratory . Charles Valentine Riley and Norman <unk> were also involved in achieving the understanding and control of locusts . 
 Swarming behaviour is a response to overcrowding . Increased tactile stimulation of the hind legs causes an increase in levels of serotonin . This causes the locust to change colour , eat much more , and breed much more easily . The transformation of the locust to the swarming form is induced by several contacts per minute over a four @-@ hour period . A large swarm can consist of billions of locusts spread out over an area of thousands of square kilometres , with a population of up to eighty million individuals per square kilometre ( two hundred million per square mile ) . It has been shown that when desert locusts meet , their nervous systems release serotonin , which causes them to become mutually attracted , a prerequisite for swarming . 
 The initial bands of gregarious hoppers are known as " outbreaks " and when these join together into larger groups it is known as an " upsurge " . Continuing agglomerations of upsurges on a regional level originating from a number of entirely separate breeding locations are known as " plagues " . During outbreaks and the early stages of upsurges , only part of the locust population becomes gregarious , with scattered bands of hoppers spread out over a large area . As time goes by , the insects become more cohesive and the bands become concentrated in a smaller area . In the desert locust plague in Africa , the Middle East and Asia that lasted from 1966 to 1969 , the number of locusts increased from two to thirty billion over two generations but the area covered decreased from over 100 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 39 @,@ 000 sq mi ) to 5 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 sq mi ) . 
 = = = Solitary and gregarious phases = = = 
 One of the greatest differences between the solitary and gregarious phases is behavioural . The gregaria nymphs are attracted to each other , this being seen as early as the second instar . They soon form bands of many thousands of individuals . These groups behave like cohesive units and move across the landscape , mostly downhill , but making their way round barriers and merging with other bands . The attraction between the insects seems to be largely visual , but also involves olfactory cues , and the band seem to navigate using the sun . They pause to feed at intervals before resuming their march , and may cover tens of kilometres over a few weeks . There are also differences in morphology and development . In the desert locust and the migratory locust for example , the gregaria nymphs become darker with strongly contrasting yellow and black markings , they grow larger and have a longer developmental period . The adults are larger with different body proportions , less sexual dimorphism and a higher metabolic rate . They mature more rapidly and start reproducing earlier but have a lower level of fecundity . 
 The mutual attraction between individual insects continues into adulthood and they continue to act as a cohesive group . Individuals that get detached from a swarm fly back into the mass . Others that get left behind after feeding , take @-@ off to rejoin the swarm when it passes overhead . When individuals at the front of the swarm settle to feed , others fly past overhead and settle in their turn , the whole swarm acting like a rolling unit with an ever @-@ changing leading edge . The locusts spend much time on the ground feeding and resting , moving on when the vegetation is exhausted . They may then fly a considerable distance before settling in a location where transitory rainfall has caused a green flush of new growth . 
 = = Distribution and diversity = = 
 Several species of grasshopper , including especially the following , swarm as locusts in different parts of the world , on all continents except Antarctica ( and since the extinction of the Rocky Mountain locust , North America ) : For example , the Australian plague locust ( <unk> <unk> ) swarms across Australia . 
 The desert locust ( Schistocerca gregaria ) is probably the best known species owing to its wide distribution ( North Africa , Middle East , and Indian subcontinent ) and its ability to migrate over long distances . A major infestation covered much of western Africa in 2003 @-@ 4 , after unusually heavy rain set up favourable ecological conditions for swarming . The first outbreaks occurred in Mauritania , Mali , Niger and Sudan in the autumn of 2003 . The rain allowed swarms to develop and move north to Morocco and Algeria , threatening croplands . Swarms crossed Africa , appearing in Egypt , Jordan and Israel , the first time in those countries for 50 years . The cost of handling the infestation was put at US $ 122 million , and the damage to crops at up to $ 2 @.@ 5 billion . 
 The migratory locust ( Locusta migratoria ) , sometimes classified into up to ten subspecies , swarms in Africa , Asia , Australia and New Zealand , but has become rare in Europe . In 2013 , the Madagascan form of the migratory locust formed many swarms of over a billion insects , reaching " plague " status and covering about half the country by March 2013 . Species such as the Senegalese grasshopper ( <unk> senegalensis ) and the African rice grasshopper ( <unk> <unk> ) , both from the Sahel , often display locust @-@ like behaviour and change morphologically on crowding . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = Ancient times = = = 
 Study of literature shows how pervasive plagues of locusts were over the course of history . The insects arrived unexpectedly , often after a change of wind direction or weather , and the consequences were devastating . The Ancient Egyptians carved locusts on tombs in the period 2470 to <unk> BC , and a devastating plague is mentioned in the Book of Exodus in the Bible , as taking place in Egypt around 1300 BC . Plagues of locusts are also mentioned in the Quran . In the ninth century BC , the Chinese authorities appointed anti @-@ locust officers . Aristotle studied locusts and their breeding habits and Livy recorded a devastating plague in Capua in 203 BC . He mentioned human epidemics following locust plagues which he associated with the stench from the <unk> corpses ; the linking of human disease outbreaks to locust plagues was widespread . A pestilence in China in 311 AD that killed 98 % of the population locally was blamed on locusts , and may have been caused by an increase in numbers of rats ( and their fleas ) that devoured the locust carcases . 
 = = = More recent times = = = 
 During the last two millennia , locust plagues continued to appear at irregular intervals with the main recorded outbreaks of the desert and migratory locusts occurring in Africa , the Middle East and Europe . Other species of locust caused havoc in North and South America , Asia and Australasia . 173 outbreaks over a period of 1924 years have been recorded in China . The Bombay locust ( <unk> <unk> ) was a major pest in India and southeastern Asia in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , but has seldom swarmed since the last plague in 1908 . 
 The extinction of the Rocky Mountain locust has been a source of puzzlement . It had swarmed throughout the west of the United States and parts of Canada in the nineteenth century . Albert 's swarm of 1875 was estimated to cover 198 @,@ 000 square miles ( 510 @,@ 000 km2 ) ( greater than the area of California ) and to weigh 27 @.@ 5 million tons , with some 12 @.@ 5 trillion insects . The last specimen was seen alive in Canada in 1902 . Recent research suggests the breeding grounds of this insect in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains came under sustained agricultural development during the large influx of gold miners , destroying the underground eggs of the locust . 
 = = = Monitoring = = = 
 Early intervention is a more successful means of dealing with locusts than later action when swarms have already built up . The technology to control locust populations is now available , but the organisational , financial and political problems may be difficult to overcome . Monitoring is the key to reducing damage , with the early detection and eradication of nymphal bands being the objective . Ideally a sufficient proportion of nomadic bands can be treated with insecticide before the swarming phase is reached . Reaching this objective may be possible in richer countries like Morocco and Saudi Arabia , but neighbouring poorer countries lack the resources and may act as a source of locust swarms that threaten the whole region . 
 Several organizations around the world monitor the threat from locusts . They provide forecasts detailing regions likely to suffer from locust plagues in the near future . In Australia this service is provided by the Australian Plague Locust Commission . It has been very successful with dealing with developing outbreaks but has the great advantage of having a defined area to monitor and defend without locust invasions from elsewhere . In Central and Southern Africa the service is provided by the International Locust Control Organization for Central and Southern Africa ( <unk> @-@ CSA ) . In West and Northwest Africa the service is co @-@ ordinated by the Food and Agriculture Organization 's Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Western Region ( <unk> ) , and executed by locust control agencies belonging to each country concerned . The FAO also monitors the situation in the Caucasus and Central Asia , where over twenty @-@ five million hectares of cultivated land are under threat . 
 = = = Control = = = 
 Historically there was little that people could do to protect their crops from being devastated by locusts , although eating the insects themselves may have been some consolation . By the early twentieth century , efforts were being made to disrupt the development of the insects by cultivating the soil where eggs were laid , collecting hoppers with catching machines , killing them with flame @-@ throwers , trapping them in ditches , crushing them with rollers and other mechanical methods . By the 1950s , the organochloride <unk> was found to be an extremely effective insecticide but it was later banned from use in most countries because of its persistence in the environment and its bioaccumulation in the food chain . 
 In years when locust control is needed , the hoppers are targeted in spring by applying water @-@ based , contact pesticides using tractor @-@ based sprayers . This is effective but slow and labour @-@ intensive and it is preferable , where possible , to spray concentrated insecticide solutions from aircraft over the insects or the vegetation on which they feed . The use of ultra @-@ low volume spraying of contact pesticides from aircraft in overlapping swathes is effective against nomadic bands and can be used to treat large areas of land swiftly . Other modern technologies used for planning locust control include GPS , GIS tools and satellite imagery , and computers provide rapid data management and analysis . 
 A biological pesticide to control locusts was tested across Africa by a multinational team in 1997 . Dried fungal spores of a Metarhizium species sprayed in breeding areas pierce the locust exoskeleton on germination and invade the body cavity , causing death . The fungus is passed from insect to insect and persists in the area , making repeated treatments unnecessary . This approach to locust control was used in Tanzania in 2009 to treat around 10 @,@ 000 hectares in the Iku @-@ Katavi National Park infested with adult locusts . The outbreak was contained and the elephants , hippopotamuses and giraffes present in the area were unharmed . 
 The ultimate goal in locust control is the use of preventative and proactive methods that disrupt the environment to the least possible extent . This would make agricultural production easier and more secure in the many regions where growing crops is of vital importance to the survival of the local people . 
 = = = As experimental models = = = 
 The locust is large , easy to breed and rear and is used as an experimental model in research studies . It has been used in evolutionary biology research and to discover to what degree conclusions reached about other organisms , such as the fruit fly ( Drosophila ) and the housefly ( Musca ) , are applicable to all insects . It is a suitable school laboratory animal because of its robustness and the ease with which it can be grown and handled . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Several cultures throughout the world consume insects , and locusts are considered a delicacy and eaten in many African , Middle Eastern and Asian countries . They have been used as food throughout history . They can be cooked in many ways but are often fried , smoked or dried . It is recorded in the Bible that John the Baptist ate locusts and wild honey ( Greek : ἀκρίδες καὶ <unk> <unk> , <unk> kai meli <unk> ) while living in the wilderness ; attempts have been made to explain the locusts as suitably ascetic vegetarian food such as carob beans , but the plain meaning of ἀκρίδες is the insects . The Torah , although disallowing the use of most insects as food , permits the consumption of certain locusts ; specifically , the red , the yellow , the spotted grey and the white are considered permissible . In Islamic jurisprudence , eating locusts is considered halal . There is a Hadith which permits locust eating ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ، <unk> الجراد ، <unk> <unk> ) ( " Permitted for us are two dead things , dead locusts , and dead fish . " ) . Locusts are permitted for consumption by Muslims in “ Al @-@ <unk> Al @-@ <unk> Fi Sharh Zad Al @-@ <unk> ” which is a work on Sunni Hanbali fiqh . All four Sunni <unk> allow consumption of dead locusts . A hadith allowing locust consumption by Muslims was narrated by Abdullah ibn Umar : ( عن عبد الله بن عمر ، <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> : الجراد <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( " about Abdullah bin Umar , he said permitted for us are two dead things and two bloods : the locusts , and the whales , and the liver and the spleen " ) . The Prophet Muhammad was reported to have eaten locusts during a military raid with his companions including Abdullah ibn Abu <unk> who narrated a hadith of this incident : ( عن عبدالله بن أبي <unk> <unk> الله <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> الله <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> أو <unk> ، <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( " About Abdullah bin Abi <unk> <unk> Allahu <unk> he said : our raiding with the Prophet <unk> <unk> wa Salam , seven raids or six , and we ate with him the locusts . " ) . Peninsular Arabs have proverbs in Arabic encouraging the eating of locusts : ( <unk> <unk> الجراد <unk> الدواء ، <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> الدواء ) ( " If the locusts came dispersing the medicine , and if the <unk> came saving the medicine . " ) and ( <unk> <unk> الجراد <unk> الدواء ) ( " If the locusts appeared dispersing the medicine " ) . Locusts are eaten in Saudi Arabia , consumption of locusts spiked around Ramadan in the Al @-@ Qassim Region and Ha 'il Region in 2014 since Saudis believe they are healthy to eat , however the Saudi Ministry of Health warned that pesticides they used against the locusts made them unsafe . The use of pesticides against locusts led to an advisory for Saudi citizens cautioning them against picking locusts off the ground and eating them issued by the Saudi Ministry of Agriculture . Locusts are eaten in Kuwait . Yemenis were interviewed over whether they would like to eat locusts before a swarm of them was forecasted to enter Yemen in 2007 and said they were willing to do it . <unk> al @-@ <unk> <unk> described a locust recipe from Morocco . 19th century European travellers observed Arabs in Arabia , Egypt , and Morocco selling , cooking , and eating locusts . They reported that in Egypt and Palestine locusts were consumed . They reported that in Palestine , around the river Jordan , in Egypt , in Arabia , and in Morocco that Arabs ate locusts , while Syrian peasants did not eat locusts however in the <unk> region <unk> ( peasants ) who were in poverty and suffered from famine ate locusts after removing the guts and head , while locusts were swallowed wholesale by Bedouins . Syrians , Copts , Greeks , Armenians and other Christians and Arabs themselves reported that in Arabia locusts were eaten frequently and one Arab described to a European traveler the different types of locusts which were favored as food by Arabs . Persians use the Anti @-@ Arab racial slur " <unk> <unk> @-@ khor " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( Arab locust eater ) against Arabs . The Iranian rap artist Behzad Pax released a song in 2015 called " Arab Kosh " ( <unk> <unk> ) ( Kill Arabs ) which was widely reported on the Arab media who claimed that it was released with the approval of the Iranian Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance . One of the lyrics in the song call Arabs as " locust eaters " . The Iranian Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance denied that it gave approval to the song and condemned it as a product of a " sick mind " . 
 Locusts yield about five times as much edible protein per unit of fodder as cattle , and produce lower levels of greenhouse gases in the process . The feed conversion rate of <unk> is 1 @.@ 7 kg / kg , while for beef it is typically about 10 kg / kg . The protein content in fresh weight is between 13 – 28 g / 100g for adult locust , 14 – 18 g / 100g for larvae , as compared to 19 – 26 g / 100g for beef . The calculated protein efficiency ratio is however low , with 1 @.@ 69 for locust protein compared to 2 @.@ 5 for standard casein . 100 g of desert locust provides 11 @.@ 5 g of fat , 53 @.@ 5 % of which is unsaturated , and 286 mg of cholesterol . Among the fatty acids , <unk> , oleic and linolenic acids were found to be the most abundant . Varying amounts of potassium , sodium , phosphorus , calcium , magnesium , iron and zinc were present . 
 = Vertebral artery dissection = 
 Vertebral artery dissection ( abbreviated VAD , often vertebral dissection ) is a dissection ( a flap @-@ like tear ) of the inner lining of the vertebral artery , which is located in the neck and supplies blood to the brain . After the tear , blood enters the arterial wall and forms a blood clot , thickening the artery wall and often impeding blood flow . The symptoms of vertebral artery dissection include head and neck pain and intermittent or permanent stroke symptoms such as difficulty speaking , impaired coordination and visual loss . It is usually diagnosed with a contrast @-@ enhanced CT or MRI scan . 
 Vertebral dissection may occur after physical trauma to the neck , such as a blunt injury ( e.g. traffic collision ) , strangulation or manipulation , but may also happen spontaneously . 1 – 4 % of spontaneous cases have a clear underlying connective tissue disorder affecting the blood vessels . Treatment is usually with either antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin or with anticoagulants such as heparin or warfarin . 
 Vertebral artery dissection is less common than carotid artery dissection ( dissection of the large arteries in the front of the neck ) . The two conditions combined account for 10 – 25 % of non @-@ hemorrhagic strokes in young and middle @-@ aged people . Over 75 % recover completely or with minimal impact on functioning , with the remainder having more severe disability and a very small proportion ( about 2 % ) dying from complications . It was first described in the 1970s by the Canadian neurologist C. Miller Fisher . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Vertebral artery dissection is one of the two types of dissection of the arteries in the neck . The other type , carotid artery dissection , involves the carotid arteries . Vertebral artery dissection is further classified as being either traumatic ( caused by mechanical trauma to the neck ) or spontaneous , and it may also be classified by the part of the artery involved : extracranial ( the part outside the skull ) and intracranial ( the part inside the skull ) . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Head pain occurs in 50 – 75 % of all cases of vertebral artery dissection . It tends to be located at the back of the head , either on the affected side or in the middle , and develops gradually . It is either dull or pressure @-@ like in character or throbbing . About half of those with VAD consider the headache distinct , while the remainder have had a similar headache before . It is suspected that VAD with headache as the only symptom is fairly common ; 8 % of all cases of vertebral and carotid dissection are diagnosed on the basis of pain alone . 
 Obstruction of blood flow through the affected vessel may lead to dysfunction of part of the brain supplied by the artery . This happens in 77 – 96 % of cases . This may be temporary ( " transient ischemic attack " ) in 10 – 16 % of cases , but many ( 67 – 85 % of cases ) end up with a permanent deficit or a stroke . The vertebral artery supplies the part of the brain that lies in the posterior fossa of the skull , and this type of stroke is therefore called a posterior circulation <unk> . Problems may include difficulty speaking or swallowing ( lateral medullary syndrome ) ; this occurs in less than a fifth of cases and occurs due to dysfunction of the brainstem . Others may experience unsteadiness or lack of coordination due to involvement of the cerebellum , and still others may develop visual loss ( on one side of the visual field ) due to involvement of the visual cortex in the occipital lobe . In the event of involvement of the sympathetic tracts in the brainstem , a partial Horner 's syndrome may develop ; this is the combination of a drooping eyelid , constricted pupil , and an apparently sunken eye on one side of the face . 
 If the dissection of the artery extends to the part of the artery that lies inside the skull , subarachnoid hemorrhage may occur ( 1 % of cases ) . This arises due to rupture of the artery and accumulation of blood in the subarachnoid space . It may be characterized by a different , usually severe headache ; it may also cause a range of additional neurological symptoms . 
 13 – 16 % of all people with vertebral or carotid dissection have dissection in another cervical artery . It is therefore possible for the symptoms to occur on both sides , or for symptoms of carotid artery dissection to occur at the same time as those of vertebral artery dissection . Some give a figure of multiple vessel dissection as high as 30 % . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The causes of vertebral artery dissection can be grouped under two main categories , spontaneous and traumatic . 
 = = = Spontaneous = = = 
 Spontaneous cases are considered to be caused by intrinsic factors that weaken the arterial wall . Only a very small proportion ( 1 – 4 % ) have a clear underlying connective tissue disorder , such as Ehlers – Danlos syndrome type 4 and more rarely Marfan 's syndrome . Ehlers @-@ Danlos syndrome type 4 , caused by mutations of the <unk> gene , leads to defective production of the collagen , type III , alpha 1 protein and causes skin fragility as well as weakness of the walls of arteries and internal organs . Marfan 's syndrome results from mutations in the <unk> gene , defective production of the protein fibrillin @-@ 1 , and a number of physical abnormalities including aneurysm of the aortic root . 
 There have also been reports in other genetic conditions , such as osteogenesis imperfecta type 1 , autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and <unk> <unk> , α1 antitrypsin deficiency and hereditary hemochromatosis , but evidence for these associations is weaker . Genetic studies in other connective tissue @-@ related genes have mostly yielded negative results . Other abnormalities to the blood vessels , such as fibromuscular dysplasia , have been reported in a proportion of cases . <unk> does not appear to increase the risk . 
 There have been numerous reports of associated risk factors for vertebral artery dissection ; many of these reports suffer from methodological weaknesses , such as selection bias . Elevated homocysteine levels , often due to mutations in the <unk> gene , appear to increase the risk of vertebral artery dissection . People with an aneurysm of the aortic root and people with a history of migraine may be predisposed to vertebral artery dissection . 
 = = = Traumatic = = = 
 Traumatic vertebral dissection may follow blunt trauma to the neck , such as in a traffic collision , direct blow to the neck , strangulation , or whiplash injury . 1 – 2 % of those with major trauma may have an injury to the carotid or vertebral arteries . In many cases of vertebral dissection , people report recent very mild trauma to the neck or sudden neck movements , e.g. in the context of playing sports . Others report a recent infection , particularly respiratory tract infections associated with coughing . Trauma has been reported to have occurred within a month of dissection in 40 % with nearly 90 % of this time the trauma being minor . It has been difficult to prove the association with mild trauma and infections statistically . It is likely that many " spontaneous " cases may in fact have been caused by such relatively minor insults in someone predisposed by other structural problems to the vessels . 
 Vertebral artery dissection has also been reported in association with some forms of neck manipulation . There is significant controversy about the level of risk of stroke from neck manipulation . It may be that manipulation can cause dissection , or it may be that the dissection is already be present in some people who seek manipulative treatment . At this time , conclusive evidence does not exist to support either a strong association between neck manipulation and stroke , or no association . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The vertebral arteries arise from the subclavian artery , and run through the transverse foramen of the upper six vertebrae of the neck . After exiting at the level of the first cervical vertebra , its course changes from vertical to horizontal , and then enters the skull through the foramen magnum . Inside the skull , the arteries merge to form the basilar artery , which joins the circle of Willis . In total , three quarters of the artery are outside the skull ; it has a high mobility in this area due to rotational movement in the neck and is therefore vulnerable to trauma . Most dissections happen at the level of the first and second vertebrae . The vertebral artery supplies a number of vital structures in the posterior cranial fossa , such as the brainstem , the cerebellum and the occipital lobes . The brainstem harbors a number of vital functions ( such as respiration ) and controls the nerves of the face and neck . The cerebellum is part of the diffuse system that coordinates movement . Finally , the occipital lobes participate in the sense of vision . 
 Dissection occurs when blood accumulates in the wall of the blood vessel . This is most likely due to a tear in the tunica intima ( the inner layer ) , allowing blood to enter the tunica media , although other lines of evidence have suggested that the blood may instead arise from the vasa <unk> , the small blood vessels that supply the outer layer of larger blood vessels . Various theories exist as to whether people who sustain carotid and vertebral artery dissection , even if not suffering from a connective tissue disorder , have an underlying vulnerability . Biopsy samples of skin and other arteries has indicated that this might be a possibility , but no genetic defect in collagen or elastin genes has been convincingly proven . Other studies have indicated inflammation of the blood vessels , as measured by highly sensitive C @-@ reactive protein ( <unk> , a marker of inflammation ) in the blood . 
 Once dissection has occurred , two mechanisms contribute to the development of stroke symptoms . Firstly , the flow through the blood vessel may be disrupted due to the accumulation of blood under the vessel wall , leading to ischemia ( insufficient blood supply ) . Secondly , irregularities in the vessel wall and turbulence increase the risk of thrombosis ( the formation of blood clots ) and embolism ( migration ) of these clots of the brain . From various lines of evidence , it appears that thrombosis and embolism is the predominant problem . 
 Subarachnoid <unk> due to arterial rupture typically occurs if the dissection extends into the V4 section of the artery . This may be explained by the fact that the arterial wall is thinner and lacks a number of structural supports in this section . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Various diagnostic modalities exist to demonstrate blood flow or absence thereof in the vertebral arteries . The gold standard is cerebral angiography ( with or without digital subtraction angiography ) . This involves puncture of a large artery ( usually the femoral artery ) and advancing an intravascular catheter through the aorta towards the vertebral arteries . At that point , radiocontrast is injected and its downstream flow captured on fluoroscopy ( continuous X @-@ ray imaging ) . The vessel may appear stenotic ( narrowed , 41 – 75 % ) , occluded ( blocked , 18 – 49 % ) , or as an aneurysm ( area of dilation , 5 – 13 % ) . The narrowing may be described as " rat 's tail " or " string sign " . Cerebral angiography is an invasive procedure , and it requires large volumes of radiocontrast that can cause complications such as kidney damage . Angiography also does not directly demonstrate the blood in the vessel wall , as opposed to more modern modalities . The only remaining use of angiography is when endovascular treatment is contemplated ( see below ) . 
 More modern methods involve computed tomography ( CT angiography ) and magnetic resonance imaging ( MR angiography ) . They use smaller amounts of contrast and are not invasive . CT angiography and MR angiography are more or less equivalent when used to diagnose or exclude vertebral artery dissection . CTA has the advantage of showing certain abnormalities earlier , tends to be available outside office hours , and can be performed rapidly . When MR angiography is used , the best results are achieved in the T1 setting using a protocol known as " fat suppression " . Doppler ultrasound is less useful as it provides little information about the part of the artery close to the skull base and in the vertebral foramina , and any abnormality detected on ultrasound would still require confirmation with CT or MRI . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Treatment is focused on reducing stroke episodes and damage from a <unk> artery . Four treatment modalities have been reported in the treatment of vertebral artery dissection . The two main treatments involve medication : anticoagulation ( using heparin and warfarin ) and antiplatelet drugs ( usually aspirin ) . More rarely , thrombolysis ( medication that dissolves blood clots ) may be administered , and occasionally obstruction may be treated with angioplasty and stenting . No randomized controlled trials have been performed to compare the different treatment modalities . Surgery is only used in exceptional cases . 
 = = = Anticoagulation and aspirin = = = 
 From analysis of the existing small treatment trials of cervical artery dissection ( carotid and vertebral ) it appears that aspirin and anticoagulation ( heparin followed by warfarin ) are equally effective in reducing the risk of further stroke or death . Anticoagulation is regarded as more powerful than antiplatelet therapy , but anticoagulants may increase the size of the hematoma and worsen obstruction of the affected artery . Anticoagulation may be relatively unsafe if a large stroke has already occurred , as hemorrhagic transformation is relatively common , and if the dissection extends into V4 ( carrying a risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage ) . Anticoagulation may be appropriate if there is rapid blood flow ( through a severely narrowed vessel ) on transcranial doppler despite the use of aspirin , if there is a completely occluded vessel , if there are recurrent stroke @-@ like episodes , or if free @-@ floating blood clot is visible on scans . Warfarin is typically continued for 3 – 6 months , as during this time the flow through the artery usually improves , and most strokes happen within the first 6 months after the development of the dissection . Some regard 3 months as sufficient . 
 Professional guidelines in the UK recommend that patients with VA dissection should be enrolled in a clinical trial comparing aspirin and anticoagulation if possible . American guidelines state that the benefit of anticoagulation is not currently established . 
 = = = Thrombolysis , stenting and surgery = = = 
 Thrombolysis , stenting and surgery are not used as widely as anticoagulation or antiplatelet drugs . These treatments are invasive or more risky , and are typically reserved for situations where symptoms worsen despite medical treatment , or where medical treatment may be unsafe ( e.g. an unacceptable bleeding tendency ) . 
 Thrombolysis is enzymatic destruction of blood clots . This is achieved by the administration of a drug ( such as <unk> or <unk> ) that activates plasmin , an enzyme that occurs naturally in the body and digests clots when activated . Thrombolysis is an accepted treatment for heart attacks and stroke unrelated to dissection . In cervical artery dissection , only small case series are available . The <unk> drug is administered either intravenously or during cerebral angiography through a catheter directly into the affected artery . The data indicates that thrombolysis is safe , but its place in the treatment of VAD is uncertain . 
 <unk> involves the catheterization of the affected artery during angiography , and the insertion of a mesh @-@ like tube ; this is known as " endovascular therapy " ( inside the blood vessel ) . This may be performed to allow the blood to flow through a severely narrowed vessel , or to seal off an aneurysm . However , it is unclear whether the technical success of the procedure translates into improved outcomes , as in both cases the problem often resolves spontaneously over time . <unk> , as well as the insertion of coils by means of angiography , may be performed if there is an aneurysm and / or extension of the dissection into the V4 section of the artery . 
 Surgery carries a high risk of complications , and is typically only offered in case of inexorable deterioration or contraindications to any of the other treatments . Various arterial repair procedures have been described . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Prognosis of spontaneous cervical arterial dissection involves neurological and arterial results . The overall functional prognosis of individuals with stroke due to cervical artery dissection does not appear to vary from that of young people with stroke due to other causes . The rate of survival with good outcome ( a modified Rankin score of 0 – 2 ) is generally about 75 % , or possibly slightly better ( 85 @.@ 7 % ) if antiplatelet drugs are used . In studies of anticoagulants and aspirin , the combined mortality with either treatment is 1 @.@ 8 @-@ 2 @.@ 1 % . 
 After the initial episode , 2 % may experience a further episode within the first month . After this , there is a 1 % annual risk of recurrence . Those with high blood pressure and dissections in multiple arteries may have a higher risk of recurrence . Further episodes of cervical artery dissection are more common in those who are younger , have a family history of cervical artery dissection , or have a diagnosis of Ehlers @-@ Danlos syndrome or fibromuscular dysplasia . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The annual incidence is about 1 @.@ 1 per 100 @,@ 000 annually in population studies from the United States and France . From 1994 to 2003 , the incidence increased threefold ; this has been attributed to the more widespread use of modern imaging modalities rather than a true increase . Similarly , those living in urban areas are more likely to receive appropriate investigations , accounting for increased rates of diagnosis in those dwelling in cities . It is suspected that a proportion of cases in people with mild symptoms remains undiagnosed . 
 There is controversy as to whether VAD is more common in men or in women ; an aggregate of all studies shows that it is slightly higher incidence in men ( 56 % versus 44 % ) . Men are on average 37 – 44 years old at diagnosis , and women 34 – 44 . While dissection of the carotid and vertebral arteries accounts for only 2 % of strokes ( which are usually caused by high blood pressure and other risk factors , and tend to occur in the elderly ) , they cause 10 – 25 % of strokes in young and middle @-@ aged people . 
 Dissecting aneurysms of the vertebral artery constitute 4 % of all cerebral aneurysms , and are hence a relatively rare but important cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage . 
 = = History = = 
 Spontaneous vertebral artery dissection was described in the 1970s . Prior to this , there had been isolated case reports about carotid dissection . In 1971 , C. Miller Fisher , a Canadian neurologist and stroke physician working at Massachusetts General Hospital , first noted the " string sign " abnormality in carotid arteries on cerebral angiograms of stroke patients , and subsequently discovered that the same abnormality could occur in the vertebral arteries . He reported the discovery in a paper in 1978 . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 Australian cricketer Phillip Hughes died on 27 November 2014 after developing a vertebral artery dissection as a result of being struck on the side of the neck by a cricket ball during a Sheffield Shield match on 25 November 2014 . The ball struck Hughes on the base of the skull just behind his left ear which caused a vertebral artery dissection complicated by subarachnoid hemorrhage . 
 = Everybody Hates Hugo = 
 " Everybody Hates Hugo " is the fourth episode of the second season of the American drama television series Lost , and the show 's 29th episode overall . The episode was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , and directed by Alan Taylor . It first aired in the United States on October 12 , 2005 , on ABC . 
 In this episode , flashbacks reveal why Hurley is hesitant at his new job of distributing food found in the newly discovered Swan station . Meanwhile , a few castaways become worried that the raft sent by them for rescue may have not gone as far as they hoped . Jack and Sayid explore the hatch , while Sawyer , Jin , and Michael find out that their captors are from the tail section of the plane . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Following Hugo " Hurley " Reyes 's ( Jorge Garcia ) discovery of his winning lottery numbers . Hurley keeps his win a secret , and quits his job at a fast food restaurant along with his friend Johnny ( DJ Qualls ) . The pair enjoy themselves by pulling a prank on their former boss , and going to a record store where Hurley asks out his crush , <unk> ( Marguerite Moreau ) . Hurley asks Johnny to promise that they will never change , and Johnny does so . Johnny pulls into a local gas station to buy some beer , but notices news crews talking to the attendant . When the clerk loudly points out Hurley as the buyer of the winning lottery ticket , Johnny 's stunned expression clearly reveals that , despite his promise , everything has changed . 
 = = = On the island = = = 
 In the The Swan station , Hurley struggles with the task of food rationing . Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) asks Hurley if the bunker contains food , specifically peanut butter for Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) , but Hurley will not answer him . Hurley decides to enlist Rose Henderson @-@ Nadler ( L. Scott Caldwell ) to help him take inventory . At one point , Hurley has a strange dream , in which Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) tells Hurley , in English , that " everything is going to change . " Hurley becomes less and less certain of his ability to ration the food in a manner that keeps everyone happy . He attempts to quit , but John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) refuses to permit it . Hurley then prepares to blow up the pantry with dynamite , but Rose intervenes . He explains that the food , newfound wealth to the survivors , will change everything and everyone will come to hate him , just as things changed when everyone knew he won the lottery ; however Rose talks him out of his plan . Later , Hurley informs Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) of his decision to give all the food away , arguing that the food stores do not amount to very much when divided among all the survivors . The food is distributed freely and the survivors enjoy a feast . Everyone appreciates Hurley 's decision , including Charlie , who gives his benefactor a hug of reconciliation . 
 James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) , Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) and Jin learn that their captors are survivors from the tail section of Oceanic 815 and are taken to a DHARMA Initiative station , which they use for sanctuary . A woman named Libby ( Cynthia Watros ) says that there were 23 survivors from the tail section of the plane , although very few remain . 
 Meanwhile , the bottle of messages from the raft , on which Michael , Sawyer , Jin and Walt Lloyd were travelling , washes ashore . Claire and Shannon Rutherford ( Maggie Grace ) give it to Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) , Jin 's wife , and she opts to bury the bottle on the beach . In the hatch , Jack and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) inspect the mysterious concrete barricade blocking what appears to be a corridor to another section of the bunker . They discover that the barrier is very thick and that the corridor is also blocked on the foundation level . Later , Jack and Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) share a moment of sexual tension when she exits the shower wearing only a towel . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Everybody Hates Hugo " was the first episode of the series directed by Alan Taylor . Taylor had previously directed episodes of The Sopranos and Sex and the City . The episode was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , the pair had previously written the episode " Born to Run " . 
 The character of Libby , played by Cynthia Watros , was introduced in this episode . Originally , Libby had been written to be in her late 40 's or early 50 's . Jennifer Jason Leigh was approached to play the part , but it went to Watros instead . When Watros auditioned for the part of Libby , she did not think that she would end up being cast . Once she was , Watros and her twin daughters immediately moved from Los Angeles to Hawaii . Bernard is also introduced in this episode . As Rose is black , the producers thought the audience would expect Rose 's husband to also be black , and made Bernard white to surprise the audience . They expected the audience to assume Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) , the only black man in the tail @-@ section survivors , was Bernard . L. Scott Caldwell , Rose 's portrayer , was unaware of their plans and had been picturing her own husband , a tall black man , when playing the scenes . When she found out Bernard was white she was surprised , but not shocked . 
 This was the first time in which Raj K. Bose , who played the shop clerk , was credited . Bose had been a background actor on the series , playing a crash survivor and a flight attendant . Bose was originally cast to play the role of Sanjay in the first season episode " Born to Run ( Lost ) " , but was forced to give up the role after he had to teach a marketing class at the University of Phoenix . Casting agent Margaret <unk> later asked Bose to audition for the part of the shop clerk and he got the part . 
 For the flashback scene at the gas station , the crew rented out a 7 @-@ 11 for a day . When Hurley drove in , the van was actually being pushed instead of driven to eliminate any sound from the vehicle . However , every time the van was pushed it would stall or the timing would be off . Once that problem had been solved , it started to rain , but eventually it stopped and the crew was able to get the shots before ending shooting at midnight . Hurley 's dream scene was shot in the Hawaii Film Studio , where the hatch had been constructed . After each take of Hurley eating food in the hatch , the old food would be replaced with newer food . Garcia did not actually eat all the food though , he would sometimes just chew it and then spit it out into a garbage can . The chicken head that Bose had to wear was extremely heavy , causing actor Daniel Dae Kim to have to hold it up while Bose delivered his lines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Everybody Hates Hugo " was viewed by an average of 21 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode achieved a 9 @.@ 4 / 22 in the key 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 9 @.@ 4 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watched the episode , along with 22 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . " Everybody Hates Hugo " was the most watched episode of the night for the fourth week in a row , and the second most watched episode of the week . It also performed better than the previous episode in the key 18 – 49 demographic , and earned its second highest ever rating among teens 12 @-@ 17 . 
 Film Fodder 's Mac Slocum said that he was glad that the show " <unk> this week into a far more reasonable gear " . He felt that an upside to the downshifting was the " return to characters " , and thought that there was no better representation of character than Hurley . Keith McDuffee of TV Squad wrote that although he heard " that this episode would be mostly filler " , he did not " think that 's true " . He liked the fact that there was more revelations of Hurley 's background , and enjoyed the " awesome reveals from the other half of downed Oceanic 815 " . <unk> graded the episode with a " B- " . 
 = USS Neosho ( 1863 ) = 
 USS Neosho , the lead ship of her class , was an ironclad river monitor laid down for the Union Navy in the summer of 1862 during the American Civil War . After completion in mid @-@ 1863 , the ship spent time patrolling the Mississippi River against Confederate raids and ambushes as part of Rear Admiral David Porter 's Mississippi Squadron . She participated in the Red River Campaign in March – May 1864 . Neosho resumed her patrols on the Mississippi after the end of the campaign . She supported the Union Army 's operations on the Cumberland River and provided fire support during the Battle of Nashville in December 1864 . Neosho was decommissioned after the war and remained in reserve until sold in 1873 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The steam @-@ powered gun turret of the Neosho was at the bow . She had a single deckhouse between the funnel and the sternwheel , although another was later added between the turret and the funnel . Her pilothouse was positioned above the rear deckhouse , next to the forward face of the sternwheel . The ship was 180 feet ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) long overall and had a beam of 45 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 m ) . When launched she proved to have a draft 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) deeper than planned and she measured 523 tons burthen . Neosho had four steam boilers powering a two @-@ cylinder , western steamboat @-@ type engine that drove the sternwheel . The ship had a maximum speed of 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) in service and she carried 50 long tons ( 51 t ) of coal . Her crew numbered 100 officers and enlisted men . After commissioning , the ship was modified with a small breakwater at her bow . 
 Neosho 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single turret that had an arc of fire of 300 ° . Firing the guns tended to jam the turret until modifications were made to the guns ' recoil system . Each gun weighed approximately 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) . They could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 650 yards ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . The turret were protected by 6 inches ( 152 mm ) of wrought iron while the hull had 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) of armor . The armor plates of the deck and paddle housing were 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 Neosho , named after the Neosho River that flowed through Kansas and Oklahoma , and the first of her name , was laid down in mid @-@ 1862 by James Eads at his Union Iron Works in Carondelet , Missouri . She was launched on 18 February 1863 and commissioned at Cairo , Illinois on 13 May 1863 , with Commander John C. <unk> in command , but was not completed until 1 July . She left Cairo on 14 July 1863 and reached Vicksburg on 6 August , just over a month after it had surrendered after a lengthy siege . Neosho and other warships patrolled the Mississippi and its tributaries to prevent Confederate raiders and flying batteries from ambushing Union supply ships . One example was on 8 December 1863 when " a Confederate shore battery attacked the disabled the merchant steamer Henry Von Phul ; Neosho and Signal steamed up to defend the ship and silenced the battery . " 
 From 12 March to 22 May 1864 , Neosho participated in the unsuccessful Red River Campaign under the command of Rear Admiral David Porter . During the retreat down the Red River , Neosho was trapped above the falls at Alexandria , Louisiana , along with most of the other ironclads of the Mississippi Squadron , when the river 's water level unexpectedly began to fall . Two temporary dams , known as Bailey 's Dam , had to be built in April – May to raise the water level high enough to allow the ironclads to proceed downstream . During the Franklin @-@ Nashville Campaign in December 1864 Neosho , accompanied by the casemate ironclad Carondelet , bombarded Confederate artillery batteries on the Cumberland River , near Bell 's Mills , Tennessee , on 6 December . Despite being hit over 100 times , she was not seriously damaged . The monitor bombarded the Confederate right wing during the Battle of Nashville on 15 – 16 December . 
 Neosho was decommissioned at Mound City , Illinois on 23 July 1865 and placed in reserve . She was renamed Vixen on 15 June 1869 and renamed again Osceola on 2 August 1869 . The ship was sold on 17 August 1873 for $ 13 @,@ 600 . 
 = The Man Trap = 
 " The Man Trap " is the first episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek to be broadcast . It aired on NBC on September 8 , 1966 . Set in the 23rd century , the series follows the adventures of Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) and his crew aboard the Starfleet starship USS Enterprise . In this episode , the crew visit an outpost to conduct medical exams on the residents , only to be attacked by a shapeshifting alien creature seeking to extract salt from their bodies . " The Man Trap " was written by George Clayton Johnson and directed by Marc Daniels . 
 The story — part of the original Star Trek pitch by series creator Gene Roddenberry — was first assigned to Lee Erwin . Johnson took on the writing duties after Roddenberry disliked his work on another plot proposal . Johnson 's first draft was entitled " Damsel With a <unk> " , incorporating elements from his Twilight Zone episode " The Four of Us Are Dying " . Roddenberry , producer Robert H. Justman and story editor John D. F. Black all tweaked elements of the episode , including the title . " The Man Trap " was the sixth episode to be filmed but the first to be shot to schedule . Prop creator Wah Chang and costume designer William Ware Theiss created the creature . 
 The episode was chosen as the first of the series to be broadcast by the studio due to the horror @-@ based plot . " The Man Trap " placed first in the timeslot with a Nielsen rating of 25 @.@ 2 percent for the first half @-@ hour and 24 @.@ 2 for the remainder . After broadcast , reviewers criticized the levels of violence but praised the acting . More recent appraisals have been mixed ; praise has been given to the plot and diverse cast but Hollywood.com listed it as among the worst episodes of the series . The creature has been dubbed the " salt vampire " by fans ; it was redesigned for possible inclusion in the 2009 film Star Trek but was not used . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The starship USS Enterprise arrives at planet M @-@ 113 to provide medical exams for Professor Robert Crater ( Alfred Ryder ) and his wife Nancy ( Jeanne Bal ) , who operate a research station there . Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) , Chief Medical Officer Dr. Leonard McCoy ( DeForest Kelley ) , and Crewman Darnell ( Michael Zaslow ) transport to the surface as Kirk teases McCoy about his affection for Nancy Crater ten years earlier . They arrive in the research station , and each of the three men see Nancy differently : McCoy as she was when he first met her , Kirk as she should look accounting for her age , and Darnell as a totally different , attractive younger woman . Kirk sends the dazed Darnell outside ; when Nancy goes out to fetch her husband , she beckons Darnell to follow her . 
 When Professor Crater arrives , he is reluctant to be examined , telling Kirk that they only require salt tablets . Before McCoy can complete the examination , they hear a scream from outside . They find Darnell dead , with red ring @-@ like mottling on his face and a plant root visible in his mouth ; Nancy says that she was unable to stop Darnell from tasting the plant . On board Enterprise , Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) analyzes the plant . He confirms that it is poisonous , but the mottling is not a symptom . McCoy conducts a medical exam , and together with Spock determines that Darnell died after all the salt was drained from his body . In response , Kirk transports back down to the planet with McCoy and two crewmen , Green ( Bruce Watson ) and Sturgeon ( John Arndt ) . They spread out to search , but Crater slips away . Kirk and McCoy find Sturgeon 's body . Meanwhile , unseen by them , Nancy has killed Green ; the faces of Green and Sturgeon show the same mottling as Darnell . Nancy alters her shape , assuming the form of Green , and meets Kirk and McCoy . They beam back up to the ship . 
 " Green " roams the corridors , first following Yeoman Janice Rand ( Grace Lee Whitney ) as she brings Lieutenant Hikaru Sulu ( George Takei ) his lunch with a salt shaker . The creature moves on , attacking several crew members , killing one . It then shape @-@ shifts into the form of McCoy . Meanwhile , Spock confirms that scans show only one person , Crater , on the planet ; Kirk and Spock beam down to capture him . They find Green 's body before Crater tries to frighten them away with phaser fire . After they stun him with a phaser beam , the dazed Crater reveals that his real wife was killed by the creature — the last member of a long @-@ dead civilization of shape @-@ shifters who feed on salt — a year earlier . The creature continues to take on the appearance of Nancy out of affection for Crater , and he has been feeding it . Kirk informs Enterprise of the creature 's intrusion , as the away team and Crater transport back to the ship . 
 Crater refuses to help them identify the creature , so Kirk orders the fake " McCoy " to administer truth serum . Kirk arrives in sickbay to find Crater dead and Spock injured ; Spock 's Vulcan blood made him incompatible with the creature 's needs . Back in its " Nancy " form , the creature goes to McCoy 's quarters . Kirk arrives with a phaser to provoke the creature into attacking . McCoy gets in the way , giving the creature the opportunity to attack Kirk . The creature reverts to its natural appearance and starts to feed on Kirk . McCoy opens fire with his phaser . The creature changes back into the shape of " Nancy " to plead for its life as McCoy continues firing and kills it . As Enterprise leaves orbit , Kirk comments , with a degree of compassion , that this creature — the last of its kind — was probably not inherently evil , but simply desperate . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Man Trap " appeared in Gene Roddenberry 's original pitch for Star Trek as the title of a show with a different plot : the crew face several apparitions that are " wish @-@ fulfilment traps which become as real as flesh and blood " ; the traps increase in subtlety until the crew struggle to differentiate between apparition and reality . Lee Erwin , who had previously worked on The Lieutenant with Roddenberry , was commissioned to produce a treatment ; an outline featuring a salt @-@ devouring vampire was handed in on April 8 , 1966 . Meanwhile , George Clayton Johnson had been assigned a storyline , tentatively titled " Chicago II " , in which the crew of the Enterprise visit a planet where the culture was that of 1920s mob @-@ era Chicago . Johnson was hired after story editor John D. F. Black recommended him to the producers . Johnson decided to use the 1953 science fiction novel The <unk> by Cyril M. Kornbluth as the basis for the story . Roddenberry felt that Johnson 's treatment did not match his vision for Star Trek , but did not want to lose him entirely , and asked him to write " The Man Trap " . Erwin was paid in full for his version , and given a separate " kill fee " because it was not going to be used . 
 Roddenberry wanted to see more action , so the creature 's ability to create apparitions was added to the script from the original pitch . Stan Robertson at NBC suggested to Roddenberry that they might wish to get medical advice over whether the draining of a chemical from a person would kill them instantly . To find out , Roddenberry asked Kellum de Forest Research , who said that , while it had never happened in reality , a quick death would be likely . Johnson suggested that the creature in " The Man Trap " could be the last of its species . He compared its situation to the reduction in numbers of American bison . Roddenberry found the idea intriguing . 
 Erwin was paid a further fee to terminate his contract , and Johnson wrote a first draft teleplay entitled " Damsel With a <unk> " . While writing , Johnson consulted Black , who advised him to place the creature on the Enterprise quickly to increase the pace of the episode . This draft was delivered on May 23 , but NBC felt that hallucinations were being overused ; the same plot device had appeared in the pilot episode " The Cage " . Johnson wrote a further draft on May 31 , which reduced the number of apparitions , and was well received by Robert H. Justman . Roddenberry and Justman made further tweaks ; one was to restore the name " The Man Trap " from Erwin 's original treatment , another removed a scene which introduced McCoy 's apprehension when using the transporter . Johnson further edited the script but complained about the change in name . After a second edit by Johnson , it was passed from Justman to story editor Black . While the former felt that the script still needed work , Black felt it was nearly ready . Following Black 's review , Roddenberry re @-@ wrote the script between June 16 and 21 . Johnson felt this re @-@ write had " <unk> [ ed ] the story " . 
 Black later said that Roddenberry removed a large part of Johnson 's work , and that Johnson 's original work was better than Roddenberry 's edited version . Johnson was pleased with the final episode , although he was concerned that viewers might not understand Star Trek after watching " The Man Trap " owing to differences in characterization between this episode and the rest of the series . He admitted that he did not like Spock and was concerned that the character would not be understood after this episode . Roddenberry was pleased with Johnson 's work , and offered him further writing work on " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " , which had been written by Robert Bloch . Roddenberry only wanted Johnson to " polish " the script ; Johnson , feeling he was unable to improve it without starting from scratch , turned down the offer but expressed the desire to work on the show again . He later wrote a story outline entitled " Rock @-@ A @-@ Bye Baby , or Die ! " in which the Enterprise would have become a childlike sentient being who idolizes Kirk as its father . This was not commissioned , so " The Man Trap " was Johnson 's only work on the franchise . 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 Jeanne Bal was cast as Nancy Crater , McCoy 's former love interest ; the actress had previously guest @-@ starred in Perry Mason and was one of the main performers in the sitcom Love and Marriage . Alfred Ryder was well known for his numerous appearances in similar genre series such as The Wild Wild West and The Outer Limits . After his appearance as Robert Crater in " The Man Trap " , he appeared in the science fiction series The Invaders . 
 Actors playing two of the crewmen who died on screen later appeared in other episodes of Star Trek . Michael Zaslow , seen in " The Man Trap " as Darnell , appeared in " I , Mudd " , and later had a long @-@ running role in the soap opera Guiding Light as Roger Thorpe . John Arndt appeared in four further episodes of The Original Series . 
 = = = Direction and filming = = = 
 All previous episodes of Star Trek had overrun their filming schedules , and the producers were concerned that not enough time had been allotted to each production . Marc Daniels was recruited as director of " The Man Trap " ; among his varied directing credits were episodes of I Love Lucy for Desilu Productions . Pre @-@ production began during the six scheduled filming days for " The Enemy Within " , but that episode ran long . Filming for " The Man Trap " commenced around 3 : 20pm on June 22 and continued until 7 : 10pm . Several futuristic @-@ looking salt shakers were sourced for scenes in " The Man Trap " , but due to concerns that they would not be recognized , they were instead used from " The Man Trap " onward as McCoy 's tools in sickbay . 
 The first full day of filming on June 23 was predominantly shot on the set representing the bridge of the Enterprise . Two small establishing shots were postponed until the filming of the next episode . The following day , corridor scenes were filmed , as was the climactic scene featuring the creature 's death . At that point , Daniels estimated that he was only a third of a day behind schedule . After a break for the weekend , production resumed on June 27 for scenes in the botany lab , the briefing room and sickbay . One of Grace Lee Whitney 's favorite sets to work on throughout the series was the lab , which was the sickbay redecorated , as she enjoyed working with George Takei . The animated plant in that scene was a hand puppet controlled from under the table , and Whitney later recalled that the operator could see right up her skirt throughout the shoot and would occasionally try to grope her using the puppet . 
 For the sickbay scenes when Spock bleeds , Daniels decided that Vulcans should have green blood . Roddenberry disliked the idea and unsuccessfully attempted to have it corrected in post @-@ production . By the end of the fifth day of shooting , Daniels estimated that he was now only half an hour behind schedule . Days six and seven were spent on the sets used to show the surface of M @-@ 113 ; while the design of the planet did not match Johnson 's vision , he was pleased with it nonetheless . The ruins were constructed out of cardboard boxes covered in gunite ( a spray @-@ on cement like product ) to give them a rocky appearance . Production wrapped on June 30 , at 2 : <unk> . Bob Justman later referred to Daniels as the " savior " of the series for delivering " The Man Trap " on schedule , and when the director for " The Naked Time " dropped out , Daniels took over and shot the episode back to back with " The Man Trap " a quarter of a day faster than the schedule . By the end of The Original Series , Daniels had filmed more episodes than any other director . 
 During the production of " The Man Trap " , Daniels introduced a system in which actors unneeded on a shoot went to a " cast table " area to practice upcoming scenes rather than return to their dressing rooms . Producers felt that this both sped up the filming process and improved the quality of performances . The cast table system continued to be used throughout the production of The Original Series , even when Daniels was not directing . 
 In post @-@ production , Justman recommended adding an opening narration . Roddenberry agreed and wrote new lines for a Captain 's log . Alexander Courage recorded the music for this episode on August 19 , the same day as the " Theme from Star Trek " , using a 25 @-@ piece orchestra . While Roddenberry liked the theme , he hated the music created specifically for " The Man Trap " . Optical effects work was quicker than usual ; Howard A. Anderson , Jr. took two months , three times faster than for some episodes . The overall production costs for " The Man Trap " came in under @-@ budget at $ 185 @,@ 401 . 
 = = = The creature = = = 
 The producers spent some time considering the creature 's appearance . Justman suggested to Gene Roddenberry that it could be some sort of " terrifying , young lady " with a similar appearance to the green skinned Orion slave girl seen in " The Cage " , but blue skinned and with orange hair . While Roddenberry thought that the idea was good , he already had an agreement with NBC that it would be an animal . Johnson envisaged the creature as a refugee with " ashen skin " wearing " <unk> clothing " . Daniels had some apprehension about using a monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week format , asking " Do you go for cheap thrills or a more intelligent approach ? " He said that the crew decided to " treat everything as if it were real " in order to help the audience buy into it . 
 It was Johnson who suggested the creature should be a shapeshifter , having used the idea in an episode of The Twilight Zone he wrote called " The Four of Us Are Dying " . The creature was designed by Wah Chang , and dancer Sandra Gimpel wore the costume on @-@ screen . The head of the costume was sculpted in clay then covered in a plaster cast . Once the cast was removed , liquid latex was applied to create a flexible single @-@ piece mask , which was then painted . Chang added a white wig and attached glass lenses to the mask for eyes . Once Gimpel was wearing the mask , cuts were made into its wrinkles to offer the actress some limited vision while wearing it . Gloves were modified by Chang to give the fingers the appearance of tentacles with suction cups . William Ware Theiss created the rest of the costume out of a fur bodysuit . 
 Johnson praised both Chang and Gimpel , saying that while the latter embodied the character , the design work meant that , in the final scene , it was as if the crew had to kill a " helpless dog " . After filming , the costume was kept in Justman 's office , becoming the first in an ever @-@ growing number of alien costumes accumulated there . It reappeared on @-@ screen in " The Squire of Gothos " . Although referred to officially as the " M @-@ 113 creature " , during production it was called the " salt sucker " and fans of the show have taken to referring to the alien as the " salt vampire " . 
 = = = = Later appearances = = = = 
 Don Lanning was part of the team working on the creature effects for the 2009 film Star Trek . He was the key sculptor for the production , and personally revamped some of the aliens from The Original Series , including the salt vampire seen in " The Man Trap " . He described the original design as " hokey " , and said that he tried change it to " something organic " . The new version of the creature was unused in the film , which pleased Lanning . The creature did return in Star Trek Online , a massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game . Rather than a single salt vampire , the 20 @-@ player PvE mission " Mine Trap " sees a Romulan colony overrun with them . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his book The Influence of Star Trek on Television , Film and Culture , Lincoln Geraghty wrote that episodes such as " The Man Trap " demonstrated a recurring theme within the series : the more barren the planet , the more likely that characters will be in danger . Other episodes which he said supported this view included " The Cage " and " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " . Geraghty also pointed out that elsewhere in The Original Series , the predominant view was that alien predators such as the salt vampire were a lower life form which should be destroyed . He said that in " The Man Trap " , the alternative argument is presented : that such creatures should not be killed . However , Geraghty felt that the writers tried to prevent viewers from feeling sympathy for the creature by revealing its true appearance as it died . Paula M. Block and Terry J. Erdmann also discussed the killing of the creature in their book Star Trek : The Original Series 365 , saying that it was " the right thing to do " , but suggested that the nature of the death would have troubled McCoy for some time after the event although this was not shown in the series . 
 A vampiric alien is a recurring idea in science fiction television series , such as the Blake 's 7 episode " Sand " , the Babylon 5 episode " Soul Hunter " and the television film Babylon 5 : The River of Souls . The theme had already been used in written form , with Gustave Le Rouge 's French science fiction 1908 work Le <unk> de la Planète Mars . 
 Block and Erdmann also discussed another part of the episode where Spock is in charge on the bridge and Uhura begins to flirt with him , calling it a " quintessential scene of the series " due to the characters ' sexual interest in each other . They suggested this may have been the inspiration for the Spock / Uhura relationship introduced in the 2009 reboot film Star Trek . Nichelle Nichols , who played Uhura , later said that she felt there were hints of an Uhura / Spock relationship in other episodes of the original series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 A month prior to the premiere of Star Trek , Desilu held a screening for NBC executives to help decide which episode to broadcast first , and several stories were considered . Executives were concerned that " Mudd 's Women " , one potential choice , would have reviewers discussing " space hookers " ; they felt another possibility , " Where No Man Has Gone Before " contained too much exposition — even though it was filmed as a second pilot . The final choice was between " The Man Trap " and " The Naked Time " . Justman felt that " The Naked Time " would make it easier for viewers to understand the characters but later agreed with NBC 's decision to show " The Man Trap " first . In the book Inside Star Trek : The Real Story , he suggests that it was " scarier and more exploitable than the others " . 
 " The Man Trap " was the sixth episode produced . Although <unk> initially disagreed with NBC 's decision , he and producer Herbert Franklin Solow came to believe it was the correct choice . Shatner also disagreed with the network , feeling that " The Man Trap " was the worst episode out of those available . The episode was the first episode of Star Trek broadcast , on NBC on September 8 , 1966 . " The Man Trap " formed part of NBC 's " Sneak a Peak Week " , in which the network showed the premiere episodes of several new shows in prime time slots , ahead of the rival channels ABC and CBS , who were still showing repeats from the previous season . Leading into Star Trek was the first episode of Tarzan showing Ron Ely , and leading out was Richard Mulligan 's The Hero . 
 " The Man Trap " placed first in its timeslot , with Nielsen ratings of 25 @.@ 2 during the first half @-@ hour ; some 46 @.@ 7 percent of all televisions in use at the time were tuned in to the episode . In the same timeslot , The Tammy Grimes Show on ABC and My Three Sons on CBS received ratings of 14 @.@ 1 and 9 @.@ 4 respectively . During the second half of the episode , the rating for " The Man Trap " dropped to 24 @.@ 2 , with 42 @.@ 2 percent of televisions tuned in . Bewitched on ABC increased that network 's rating to 15 @.@ 8 , and CBS 's Thursday night movie increased their rating to 10 @.@ 7 . 
 The following episodes saw a drop in ratings after " The Man Trap " . " Charlie X " was broadcast the following week ; the studio did not want that episode to run second but " Where No Man Has Gone Before " was the only other completed story . It placed second in the timeslot during the first half hour , with a rating of 19 @.@ 1 and an overall share of 35 @.@ 9 percent of viewers . It was beaten by My Three Sons on CBS with a rating of 19 @.@ 2 . During the second half hour , Star Trek was pushed into third with a rating of 12 @.@ 3 by the Thursday night movie on CBS and the season premiere of Bewitched , which was also the first episode of that series broadcast in color . The following week , with " Where No Man Has Gone Before " , the series returned to the top place with a 19 @.@ 9 rating during the first half hour , and second in the second half hour to Bewitched . The Trendex rating report for the first few weeks of Star Trek saw it ranked in 33rd spot for the period with an average rating of 18 @.@ 7 . 
 = = = = Overseas broadcasts and re @-@ releases = = = = 
 The episode was not the first to be broadcast in the United Kingdom , which instead premiered Star Trek on BBC One with " Where No Man Has Gone Before " on July 12 , 1969 . The episodes continued to be broadcast in a different order than they had appeared in the United States . " The Man Trap " was shown nearly three months later on October 4 as the 13th episode . This was during the period when the channel was still broadcasting only in black and white ; it was not until " Arena " on November 15 that the series was shown in color . During subsequent repeats of Star Trek , the channel reverted to NBC 's schedule and showed " The Man Trap " as the first episode . 
 A high @-@ definition remastering of " The Man Trap " , which introduced new special effects and starship exteriors as well as enhanced music and audio , was shown for the first time in the United States on September 29 , 2007 , in broadcast syndication . The episode was made available to over 200 local stations across the United States with the rights to broadcast Star Trek . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In an interview published in the 1988 book The Star Trek Interview Book , Johnson claimed that the response of critics to " The Man Trap " , and the initial episodes of Star Trek in general , was " complete bewilderment " . In previewing the broadcast of " The Man Trap " , The Daily Reporter said that Star Trek had the " usual far @-@ fetched suppositions " present in other science fiction works , but praise was given to the acting skills of Shatner and the plots of the initial episodes . The Edwardsville Intelligencer called the reveal of the creature in the episode " the kicker of a great sci @-@ fi plot " . Daily Variety columnist Jack Hellman gave the episode an unfavorable review over its " lack of meaningful cast leads " , who " move around with directorial precision with only violence to provide the excitement . " The weekly edition of the magazine offered a similar opinion , stating that the Enterprise " trudged along for a long hour with hardly any relief from violence , killing , ugly stuff and a distasteful monster " . 
 Among more recent reviews , Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode an " A- " rating , describing the episode as " done very well " with a plot that is dark and ambiguous . Torrie Atkinson and Eugene Myers reviewed the episode in 2009 for Tor.com , saying that it suitably introduced the characters , although certain elements of the show were not yet in place . These included the lack of the death of a redshirted character , as the crewmen who died in " The Man Trap " did not wear red shirts , along with the lack of red and yellow alerts , instead referred to as general quarters three and four in this episode . The duo added that the episode demonstrated that the series was " something special " , and that it remained more culturally diverse than modern television . They gave it a rating of four out of six . 
 Ryan Britt , also writing for Tor.com , said that " The Man Trap " was not a good introduction to the series but praised the screen time given to Rand , Uhura and Sulu . He added that the latter two were more interesting in this episode than they would be at any point until the start of the movie franchise . Britt said that " The Man Trap " was different than the rest of the series , and more akin to The Twilight Zone owing to the background of the writer . In Hollywood.com 's ranking of all 79 episodes of The Original Series , Christian Blauvelt placed " The Man Trap " as 73rd , calling the creature " incredibly pointless " . It was also listed as one of the show 's " cheesiest classic creatures " by Wired magazine in 2007 ; however , Rolling Stone magazine listed it as the tenth best villain in the franchise . 
 = = Home media release and other adaptations = = 
 The first adaptation of " The Man Trap " was as a re @-@ working into a short story by author James Blish as part of the novelization Star Trek . This book contained seven short stories , each based on an episode of The Original Series , and was published in January 1967 . The adaptation of " The Man Trap " appeared as the third story in the book , although it was named " The Unreal McCoy " . The first home media release of " The Man Trap " was on Compact Cassette from <unk> productions in 1982 . A further release on LaserDisc took place in 1985 , alongside " Charlie X " . Further releases of all episodes of the series were made on VHS and Betamax . 
 The episode was released on DVD paired with " The Naked Time " as part of the general release of the series in 1999 . There were no other extras added to that series of releases , except the DVD containing " Turnabout Intruder " . " The Man Trap " was later released within a DVD box set of the first season in 2004 ; all three seasons of The Original Series were released as full @-@ season box sets that year . The episode was included in the remastered season one release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in 2009 . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Autobiography ( Ashlee Simpson album ) = 
 Autobiography is the debut studio album by American singer Ashlee Simpson . Released in the United States by Geffen Records on July 20 , 2004 , the album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was certified triple platinum in the U.S. Musically , it combines elements of rock and pop . Critical reception for the album by critics were mixed . Autobiography has sold more than five million copies worldwide . 
 Three singles from Autobiography were released : " Pieces of Me " — the first and most successful single — which was a hit in several countries in mid to late 2004 , as well as the follow @-@ up singles " Shadow " and " La La " . MTV highlighted the process of making the album in the reality series The Ashlee Simpson Show , which drew a large audience and served as an effective promotional vehicle for the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Simpson described the process of writing the album 's twelve songs as being similar to keeping a diary , and before the album 's US release she said that " My inspiration came from what I have gone through in the past three years . Every single day I was thinking of what I was going through and would write songs about it . " The lyrics primarily deal with love and heartbreak ; in particular , much of the album 's lyrical content was inspired by Simpson 's breakup with her boyfriend at the time , Josh Henderson . She has described the album as being " very honest " and " very true to my emotions " — " I wasn 't afraid to say that I was hurting and how I got over it . " Simpson worked closely with a number of experienced songwriters on the album . The album 's producer , John Shanks — who won a Grammy in February 2005 , in part for his work as producer on Autobiography — receives songwriting credit alongside Simpson on all but two songs . Kara DioGuardi also receives songwriting credit , together with Simpson and Shanks , on seven of the songs , including the three singles . ( See the track listing . ) 
 The album incorporates rock as well as pop elements , which contrasts with the more strongly pop @-@ oriented music of Simpson 's sister , Jessica . One reviewer noted that , unlike Jessica 's music , Autobiography " relies on glitzy guitars and big power @-@ pop riffs " . On her reality show , Simpson emphasized that she did not want to make her music like pop singers such as her sister or Hilary Duff ; instead , she has cited musicians such as Chrissie Hynde and Joan Jett as influences . 
 In a 2004 interview , Simpson said that when she began seeking a recording contract record labels would not meet with her because they thought she just wanted " to be like her sister " . Simpson also said that she did not want to meet with Jessica 's record label ( Columbia ) because she wanted to be signed because of her music , rather than her sister . She eventually signed with Geffen in 2003 . As for her role as co @-@ writer of the songs , Simpson has said that she had a lot of input lyrically : " ... I come up with the whole concept of the song . To me , writing is a very important thing . It 's what I 've always done and what I 've always loved to do , and it was a big part of my wanting to do a record . So my label was amazing because they really let me have my hands in there . I got to write a lot . " Simpson said of making the album : " It 's a lot of work . From finding the right label to the actual recording , it took about nine months , then it was followed by the publicity work . " In an extensive list of thank @-@ <unk> in the album 's liner notes , Simpson includes Benji and Joel Madden of the band Good Charlotte , with whom she worked on a song that did not make it onto the album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The title track , which was also the theme song to her MTV reality series The Ashlee Simpson Show , opens the album by introducing Simpson , who sings " got stains on my t @-@ shirt , and I 'm the biggest flirt " and " if you want my auto , want my autobiography / baby , just ask me " . The Village Voice review described the song as " wrist @-@ pumping Joan Jett rock candy " , but Stylus labelled the track " an age @-@ old trope and a boring one at that " . " Pieces of Me " , a song about the comfort and happiness Simpson found in her relationship with Ryan Cabrera , has been characterised as a soft rock ballad with " stringy guitar riffs " . " Shadow " , described by People magazine as the " most personal song " on the album , is a slower tune in which Simpson recounts playing a lesser role to her sister when she was younger , but eventually finding her own identity . 
 The album continues with " La La " , a song with sexual lyrics that Simpson has described as " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " . One reviewer described " La La " as a " punk inspired , fast beat , screaming anthem " . " Love Makes the World Go Round " , which <unk> described as having a " Duff vibe " , talks about the disappointment of an ending relationship . " Better Off " , which has been described as a " bubbly " song and as a " chunk of pop / rock goodness " , and " Love Me For Me " , which has been called " Joan @-@ Jett @-@ esque " and which Simpson has said is about " self @-@ appreciation " both deal with contradictory feelings about relationships . The synth @-@ driven " Surrender " follows with Simpson consenting to a breakup , with lyrics such as " you make your misery my company " ; <unk> wrote that it is on this track that Simpson sounds " most loose and carefree " . 
 " <unk> " combines a piano line and vintage Chamberlin sounds with lyrics dealing with regrets about rushing into a relationship . Simpson has described " Nothing New " as being about her frustration with an ex @-@ boyfriend 's " dramas " , until she is ultimately " finished with him " , while " Giving It All Away " encourages the listener to stand on one 's own feet : " hold on to your life and don 't give that away " , Simpson said of the song . The album 's closing track , " Undiscovered " ( which Simpson has described as a favorite of hers ) , was written after her breakup with Josh , and is described by <unk> as a song with " haunting strings " and " mellow guitars " ; in the song , Simpson ponders what might have been in a lost pairing . Non @-@ U.S. pressings follow with " Harder Everyday " , and the United Kingdom edition adds " Sorry " . The U.S. Wal @-@ Mart edition of the album also included an access code to download a reduced @-@ quality version of " Sorry " on the internet . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reviews of Autobiography were mixed . People magazine considered it a " passable debut " and said that it showed Simpson was a " credible talent in her own right " ; Allmusic called it " an unexpectedly strong debut " . The Village Voice compared Autobiography favorably to Courtney Love 's 2004 album , America 's Sweetheart , referring particularly to Autobiography 's " Fruit Stripe <unk> guitars and insanely chewy melodies and an ear @-@ tickling production job . " It also praised Simpson 's singing , saying that she " can pack so much contradictory emotion into a single line — a single word — that the music can barely contain it . " According to Blender , all of the album 's songs " paint in huge strokes " ; its review also regarded Simpson 's vocals <unk> ! Online also praised Simpson 's singing and catchy tracks , saying that " Ashlee Simpson still managed to piece together this collection of tracks that sound as if they were ripped right from the pages of her diary . Ashlee even makes you think twice about her <unk> life . So , even if it doesn 't wow you , Autobiography may surprise you . " 
 Other critics were more negative . Rolling Stone called it " mundane ... with a predictable script " , and at one point described Simpson 's singing as " wailing in lieu of hitting notes " . In its review , the BBC said that " half the album ... feels self indulgent and lacks substance " , but also said that " in between the formulaic , innocuous songs are a smattering of catchy pop @-@ rock tracks . " IGN.com called it " by @-@ the @-@ books , generic ( and at times bland ) pop / rock " , although it did say Simpson 's vocals showed maturity and promise . A writer for Stylus magazine commented that " after spending more than forty minutes with Ashlee , I feel like I don ’ t know her any better than I did beforehand ... [ and ] for a record with the name Autobiography , it seems like no bigger criticism could be leveled . " The New York Times said that Autobiography " is a thoroughly calculated package , aiming for the same audience that embraces Avril Lavigne and Pink . " 
 = = Promotion and Saturday Night Live controversy = = 
 The album and singles received considerable promotion in the US — where they sold the most copies — and other countries , and much of this focused on contrasting her with Jessica by highlighting her more rock @-@ oriented image . This image distinction from Jessica did not mean that the two were not associated in publicity , however ; the sisters appeared together in television commercials at around the time of Autobiography 's release , for Pizza Hut and Ice Breakers Liquid Ice . 
 A key element of Simpson 's promotion was The Ashlee Simpson Show , which debuted on June 16 , 2004 , and ran for eight episodes , achieving high ratings for cable television . Jessica 's reality show , Newlyweds : Nick and Jessica , had debuted in 2003 and had proved highly successful , being credited with reviving her flagging music career ; reality television proved similarly effective in helping launch Simpson 's music career . It has been said that Simpson 's father and manager Joe Simpson " redefined how you sell records " through his use of reality television to promote his daughters . Simpson said that she initially did not want to do the reality show but that her father persuaded her to do it because it would be about the production of her album : " ... I thought that was kind of cool . You 're actually seeing a deeper look into how this album got made . " She also thought the show , by showcasing her own personality , would help to distinguish her from Jessica . 
 Geoff Mayfield , Billboard 's director of charts , pointed to a combination of factors in explaining Simpson 's success with Autobiography . He described Simpson as the " right thing at the right time " and said : " The MTV show is a huge catalyst , radio jumped all over the song , and her famous sister opened the door . If Jessica never happened , then Ashlee doesn 't get her own show and this album doesn 't happen . " Zena Burns of Teen People , while noting the importance of effective promotion and Simpson 's connection to Jessica , stressed the appeal of " Pieces of Me " in explaining her success : " Ashlee has an amazing promotional machine , and it doesn 't hurt to have Jessica and MTV behind you , but she also came out with an insanely catchy pop single . " From July 13 to July 20 , the week prior to Autobiography 's release , MTV.com 's " The Leak " featured the album for streaming on its website . Autobiography drew 2 @.@ 66 million requested streams during the time period , breaking a record previously held by Britney Spears ' 2003 album In the Zone . 
 Simpson 's publicity suffered when a performance on the October 23 – 24 edition of Saturday Night Live went awry . According to Simpson 's publicists , her father and manager decided to use a vocal guide track because of problems she was having with her voice , beginning earlier in the day , that were caused by acid reflux . Although her first performance of the night — " Pieces of Me " — was successful , her second performance , which was supposed to be of " Autobiography " ( at the time planned as her third single ) , went wrong : " Pieces of Me " mistakenly began playing , and Simpson 's recorded vocals were heard when her microphone was not near her mouth . She subsequently walked off the stage and then apologized for the error during the show 's closing . Some viewers accused Simpson of lip synching , and the incident received widespread coverage in the news . Simpson joked about the incident with a performance of " Autobiography " at the Radio Music Awards on October 25 . Despite the low points of this period of the album 's promotion , there were also significant successes . According to a Geffen press release , her December 6 AOL Music Live performance " had the biggest 1 week audience ever for AOL with 1 @.@ 6 million plays . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Before The Ashlee Simpson Show debuted , " Pieces of Me " began picking up substantial airplay on radio , In May 2004 , a Los Angeles Times article noted that radio stations were adding the song to their playlists faster than any other songs up to that point in the year . " Pieces of Me " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 in June and reached a peak position of number five in September . The song " Shadow " was the album 's second U.S. single ; it reached a peak of number 57 on the Hot 100 , failing to match the success of " Pieces of Me " . 
 Shortly afterwards , " La La " replaced " Autobiography " as the album 's third single . It reached a chart peak at number 86 on the Hot 100 , falling considerably short of the positions reached by her two previous singles . Simpson suffered further negative publicity at the halftime show for the Orange Bowl in Miami , Florida on January 4 , 2005 , where she performed " La La " and was booed by the crowd . This may have represented backlash from the SNL debacle , as the Orange Bowl publicists said . " Shadow " was not released in Europe ( although it was the second single in Australia ) , where " La La " was the second single . Shortly after the Orange Bowl incident , Simpson performed the song on several television shows in the UK in January 2005 ; " La La " debuted and peaked just outside the top ten , and sales of Autobiography also rose considerably during the same period . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the US , Autobiography was 2004 's biggest debut album by a female artist , and in September the RIAA gave the album a triple platinum certification . Following its July 20 release , it debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , selling about 398 @,@ 000 copies ; according to Nielsen SoundScan figures Autobiography sold a total of 2 @,@ 576 @,@ 945 copies from the time of its release until early January 2005 , making it the ninth best @-@ selling album of 2004 . 
 In Canada , where the album 's release corresponded with the U.S. , it sold about 3 @,@ 000 copies in its first week ( number 37 on the album chart ) ; it rose on the chart to number eight at one point , and went double platinum in February 2005 . The album was released in the UK on October 4 , 2004 , and debuted at number 31 on the album charts . However , it returned to the top 40 in January 2005 , rising substantially from number 91 to number 33 in the week ending January 24 , following Simpson 's promotion of " La La " ( the album 's second single in the UK , released on January 24 ) . In Ireland , the album peaked at number 22 on the chart in late January , at the same time as " La La " was released as a single chart . The album also reached number 36 in Switzerland and number 29 in Norway . Simpson 's success in album sales with Autobiography outshines that of her sister Jessica , who despite having a singing career since 1999 , failed to attain major success with record sales until she appeared on her 2003 reality television show . Geffen President Jordan Schur said of Simpson 's success : " It 's unheard of in this business — even for a superstar — to sell this number of records , " and emphasized her relative obscurity until not long before the album 's release . Simpson expressed surprise at the degree of her album 's success : " I just hoped my album charted . I didn 't expect it to be number one in the country ! It was a huge shock . " In Brazil the single " Pieces of Me " was the theme of the soap opera " America " and made huge success selling about 15 @,@ 000 copies of the album in the country . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 Ashlee Simpson – vocals ; background vocals ( tracks 1 – 4 , 10 and 12 ) 
 Kenny Aronoff – drums ( tracks 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 and 10 ) 
 John Shanks – guitars , bass ; keyboards ( tracks 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 12 ) ; background vocals ( tracks 1 , 5 , 7 , 8 and 9 ) 
 Kara DioGuardi – background vocals ( tracks 1 – 4 , 6 and 10 ) 
 Jeff Rothschild – drums ( tracks 2 , 4 , 11 and 12 ) 
 Jamie Muhoberac – piano , organ ( track 3 ) 
 Patrick Warren – Chamberlin ( tracks 3 and 12 ) 
 Abe Laboriel , Jr . – drums ( tracks 6 , 7 and 9 ) 
 John Feldmann – original programming ( track 11 ) 
 David Campbell – string arrangement ( tracks 3 and 12 ) 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Producer : John Shanks 
 Mixing : Jeff Rothschild , John Shanks 
 Additional engineering : Mark Valentine 
 Mastering : Ted Jensen 
 Executive producer and A & R : Jordan Schur 
 Photography : Mark Liddell 
 Design : Soap Design Co . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Hellenic Nomarchy = 
 Hellenic Nomarchy ( Greek : <unk> <unk> The Greek rule of law ) was a pamphlet written by " Anonymous the Greek " published and printed in Italy in 1806 . It advocated the ideals of freedom , social justice and equality as the main principles of a well @-@ governed society , making it the most important theoretical monument of Greek republicanism . Its author , arguing for both social autonomy and national sovereignty , supported the Greek struggle for national liberation and turned to the moral greatness of ancient Greece in order to stimulate collective pride . Although this work was widely read by Greeks before the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence in 1821 , from its first appearance it was received with discomfort by contemporary scholars , and generated debates on the identity of its author . 
 = = Background = = 
 The origins of modern Greek republican thought can be traced in the works of <unk> <unk> , a major representative of the modern Greek Enlightenment , especially in his work Apology ( Greek : <unk> , 1780 ) . Further development of republican thought in Greek culture was stimulated by French Revolutionary ideas . 
 An articulate expression of Greek republicanism can be found in the works of the revolutionary author Rigas Feraios . Feraios ' execution in 1798 at the hands of the Ottomans gave an aura of heroism to these political ideas , which also visualized the liberation of Greece in the context of political reforms . In addition to Feraios ' writings , other works in the same polemical style took on a sharper revolutionary character , as social contradictions in the Ottoman Empire grew . 
 It was in this context that the most important theoretical monument of Greek republicanism , Hellenic Nomarchy , was written . This work , an anonymous tract , was published somewhere in Italy in 1806 , under the full title : Hellenic Nomarchy : a Discourse on Freedom ( Greek : <unk> <unk> : ' <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The author was perhaps a merchant who lived in Livorno or Venice , in northern Italy , styling himself Anonymous Hellene . Several personalities of that time have been suggested , such as Adamantios Korais , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and George <unk> . However , the author 's identity was so well @-@ concealed that even repeated scholarly investigations in recent decades have proven unable to attribute the work . 
 = = Content = = 
 Hellenic Nomarchy proclaims that society must be governed by laws established by common agreement of the people and that the establishment and preservation of liberty requires a <unk> form of government . Although this term was uncommon in the Greek literature of that time , it is used as an alternative term of democracy . The intent of Hellenic Nomarchy was to show that the sole power and authority of the " law " ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) could only be established through democracy . In this spirit , the author was following the principles stressed by ancient Greek literature and philosophy concerning the subject . The work also argues that Greeks should not have any leader other than their own laws . This principle follows from the works of Rigas Feraios , who stressed in his Revolutionary Manifesto , some years before , that law is the supreme master of men . Feraios also praised democracy as the most successful system of government . 
 The anonymous author dedicates his work to the activist and author Rigas Feraios and condemns the feudal behavior of the Greek clergy . Moreover , he advocates the transition to a new economic structure based upon small agricultural producers and craftsmen . By applying the physiocratic principles , he argued that peasants were society 's backbone , or as he put it , " the column of society " . However , the author argued that because of number of external factors , such as feudalism and state intervention , they had a very low living standard . The main references in the book are to the ancient Greek philosophical works , although the influence of contemporary European thinkers such as Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , Montesquieu , and Voltaire is obvious in the author 's endeavor to describe a " fair and humane " society . On the other hand , when it comes to the struggle for national liberation he turns to the moral greatness of ancient Greece in order to stimulate collective pride and to describe models of heroism and patriotism : 
 Moreover , Hellenic Nomarchy points to the ongoing successful struggle of the Serbs against the Ottoman rule , which began in 1804 . The author states that the Orthodox clergy was holding back the national aspirations of the Greek people , while the educated and dynamic elements of Greek society and the mercantile diaspora should return to Greece and join the movement of national liberation . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 Hellenic Nomarchy was widely read during the late Ottoman rule among Greeks , and propagated the ideals of freedom , social justice and equality as the main principles of every well @-@ governed society . However , since its first appearance it remained an enigmatic work , received with discomfort by some contemporaries , shrouded in silence during the 19th and the early 20th centuries , and causing debate about the identity of the author . A number of modern Greek historians describe the work as " perhaps the most important treatise of the political thought of the <unk> Enlightenment " , " the most important theoretical monument of [ modern ] Greek republicanism " , as well as " the most articulate declaration of social and political discontent before the War of Independence " . 
 = Westerlies = 
 The Westerlies , anti @-@ trades , or Prevailing Westerlies , are prevailing winds from the west toward the east in the middle latitudes between 30 and 60 degrees latitude . They originate from the high @-@ pressure areas in the horse latitudes and tend towards the poles and steer extratropical cyclones in this general manner . Tropical cyclones which cross the subtropical ridge axis into the Westerlies recurve due to the increased westerly flow . The winds are predominantly from the southwest in the Northern Hemisphere and from the northwest in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 The Westerlies are strongest in the southern hemisphere and at times when the pressure is lower over the poles , while they are weakest in the <unk> hemisphere and when pressures are higher over the poles . The Westerlies are particularly strong in areas where land is absent , because land amplifies the flow pattern , making the current more north @-@ south oriented , slowing the Westerlies . The strongest westerly winds in the middle latitudes can come in the Roaring Forties , between 40 and 50 degrees latitude . The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm , equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents , especially in the southern hemisphere because of its vast oceanic expanse . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 If the Earth were a non @-@ rotating planet , solar heating would cause winds across the mid @-@ latitudes to blow in a poleward direction , away from the subtropical ridge . However , the Coriolis effect caused by the rotation of Earth causes winds to steer to the right of what would otherwise be expected across the Northern Hemisphere , and left of what would be expected in the Southern Hemisphere . This is why winds across the Northern Hemisphere tend to blow from the southwest , but they tend to be from the northwest in the Southern Hemisphere . When pressures are lower over the poles , the strength of the Westerlies increases , which has the effect of warming the mid @-@ latitudes . This occurs when the Arctic oscillation is positive , and during winter low pressure near the poles is stronger than it would be during the summer . When it is negative and pressures are higher over the poles , the flow is more meridional , blowing from the direction of the pole towards the equator , which brings cold air into the mid @-@ latitudes . 
 Throughout the year , the Westerlies vary in strength with the polar cyclone . As the cyclone reaches its maximum intensity in winter , the Westerlies increase in strength . As the cyclone reaches its weakest intensity in summer , the Westerlies weaken . An example of the impact of the Westerlies is when dust plumes , originating in the Gobi desert combine with pollutants and spread large distances downwind , or eastward , into North America . The Westerlies can be particularly strong , especially in the Southern Hemisphere , where there is less land in the middle latitudes to cause the progression of west to east winds to slow down . In the Southern hemisphere , because of the stormy and cloudy conditions , it is usual to refer to the Westerlies as the Roaring Forties , Furious Fifties and Shrieking Sixties according to the varying degrees of latitude . 
 = = Impact on ocean currents = = 
 Due to persistent winds from west to east on the poleward sides of the subtropical ridges located in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans , ocean currents are driven in a similar manner in both hemispheres . The currents in the Northern Hemisphere are weaker than those in the Southern Hemisphere due to the differences in strength between the Westerlies of each hemisphere . The process of western intensification causes currents on the western boundary of an ocean basin to be stronger than those on the eastern boundary of an ocean . These western ocean currents transport warm , tropical water polewards toward the polar regions . Ships crossing both oceans have taken advantage of the ocean currents for centuries . 
 The Antarctic Circumpolar Current ( ACC ) , or the West Wind Drift , is an ocean current that flows from west to east around Antarctica . The ACC is the dominant circulation feature of the Southern Ocean and , at approximately 125 <unk> , the largest ocean current . In the northern hemisphere , the Gulf Stream , part of the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre , has led to the development of strong cyclones of all types at the base of the Westerlies , both within the atmosphere and within the ocean . The Kuroshio ( Japanese for " Black Tide " ) is a strong western boundary current in the western north Pacific Ocean , similar to the Gulf Stream , which has also contributed to the depth of ocean storms in that region . 
 = = Extratropical cyclones = = 
 An extratropical cyclone is a synoptic scale low pressure weather system that has neither tropical nor polar characteristics , being connected with fronts and horizontal gradients in temperature and dew point otherwise known as " baroclinic zones " . 
 The descriptor " extratropical " refers to the fact that this type of cyclone generally occurs outside of the tropics , in the middle latitudes of the planet , where the Westerlies steer the system generally from west to east . These systems may also be described as " mid @-@ latitude cyclones " due to their area of formation , or " post @-@ tropical cyclones " where extratropical transition has occurred , and are often described as " depressions " or " lows " by weather forecasters and the general public . These are the everyday phenomena which along with anti @-@ cyclones , drive the weather over much of the Earth . 
 Although extratropical cyclones are almost always classified as baroclinic since they form along zones of temperature and dewpoint gradient , they can sometimes become barotropic late in their life cycle when the temperature distribution around the cyclone becomes fairly uniform along the radius from the center of low pressure . An extratropical cyclone can transform into a subtropical storm , and from there into a tropical cyclone , if it dwells over warm waters and develops central convection , which warms its core and causes temperature and dewpoint gradients near their centers to fade . 
 = = Interaction with tropical cyclones = = 
 When a tropical cyclone crosses the subtropical ridge axis , normally through a break in the high @-@ pressure area caused by a system traversing the Westerlies , its general track around the high @-@ pressure area is deflected significantly by winds moving towards the general low @-@ pressure area to its north . When the cyclone track becomes strongly poleward with an easterly component , the cyclone has begun recurvature , entering the Westerlies . A typhoon moving through the Pacific Ocean towards Asia , for example , will recurve offshore of Japan to the north , and then to the northeast , if the typhoon encounters southwesterly winds ( blowing northeastward ) around a low @-@ pressure system passing over China or Siberia . Many tropical cyclones are eventually forced toward the northeast by extratropical cyclones in this manner , which move from west to east to the north of the subtropical ridge . An example of a tropical cyclone in recurvature was Typhoon Ioke in 2006 , which took a similar trajectory . 
 = Frank Swift = 
 Frank Victor Swift ( 26 December 1913 – 6 February 1958 ) was an English footballer , who played as a goalkeeper for Manchester City and England . After starting his career with local clubs near his home town of Blackpool , in 1932 he was signed by First Division Manchester City , with whom he played his entire professional career . 
 Swift broke into the Manchester City first team in 1933 , taking part in the club 's run to the 1934 FA Cup Final , where the club triumphed 2 – 1 against Portsmouth . Three years later Swift won a League Championship medal , after playing in every match of Manchester City 's championship @-@ winning season . War denied Swift several years of playing in his prime , though during wartime he was chosen to represent his country in international matches . After the war he made his competitive international debut , playing 19 internationals between 1946 and 1949 . 
 Swift retired in 1949 , taking up a career in journalism as a football correspondent for the News of the World . He died , aged 44 , in the Munich air disaster after reporting on Manchester United 's European Cup match against Red Star Belgrade . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career and 1930s successes = = = 
 Born in Blackpool , a coastal town in north @-@ west England , Swift 's first club was Blackpool Gas Works , where he worked as a coke @-@ keeper . A spell at nearby Fleetwood followed , during which Swift attracted interest from a number of Football League clubs . Potential suitors included Blackpool ( where Frank 's elder brother Fred was the goalkeeper ) , Blackburn Rovers , Bradford City and Manchester City . The first to offer Swift a contract were Manchester City , who played in the First Division , the highest level of English football . Initially signed as an amateur in October 1932 , eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Swift turned professional the following month , receiving a wage of ten shillings ( 50p ) per week . The following December he was called up to the first team , having previously made only three reserve team appearances . 
 At this time , goalkeeper was an unsettled position for Manchester City . Len Langford had made over 100 appearances and had appeared in the 1933 FA Cup Final , which City lost 3 – 0 to Everton . He missed the final game of the 1932 @-@ 33 season and the opening match of 1933 @-@ 34 , but went on to play 18 consecutive League games before injury on 16 December 1933 ended his time as City 's first choice . Langford 's replacement for the following game was James Nicholls , but he endured a torrid time as Manchester City lost 8 – 0 to Wolverhampton Wanderers . Consequently , Swift was given an opportunity for the Christmas double @-@ header against Derby County . He conceded four goals in his debut at the Baseball Ground on 25 December , but in the return match the next day , his 20th birthday , he kept a clean sheet in a 2 – 0 win . After making his debut , Swift played in every first team match for more than four seasons , a run of more than 200 consecutive matches . His only absence prior to the suspension of football due to World War II was a single match in September 1938 , where without Swift , Manchester City lost 6 – 1 at home to Millwall . 
 Though Swift quickly established himself as a fixture in the Manchester City first team line @-@ up , his performances were not all positive . In one of his early matches , against West Bromwich Albion , Swift conceded seven goals . This led Swift to believe he would not be picked again , but with Langford unavailable due to a knee injury , Swift kept his place . 
 Despite inconsistency , Manchester City were one of the stronger sides of the 1930s , and in Swift 's first season the club reached the FA Cup final for the second successive year . This period saw football match attendances reach an all time high . During the cup run Swift played in front of 84 @,@ 569 people for Stoke City 's visit to Maine Road , a record attendance for an English club ground which still stands today . Hillsborough 's attendance record of 72 @,@ 841 ( receipts £ 5 @,@ 566 ) was also set by City during this Cup run . The semi @-@ final , against cup favourites Aston Villa , ended in a 6 – 1 victory , a record for an FA Cup semi @-@ final . 
 In the final , Manchester City faced Portsmouth . Swift , the youngest and most inexperienced of the team , was nervous . As the playing surface was wet , he was unsure whether or not to wear gloves . Seeing Portsmouth goalkeeper Jock Gilfillan take to the field without gloves , he decided to follow suit . Portsmouth took the lead in the first half through a Septimus Rutherford shot . At half time Swift slumped in the dressing room , blaming himself and his decision not to wear gloves for the goal . Forward Fred Tilson attempted to improve Swift 's spirits by telling him not to worry as he would " plonk two in next half " . Tilson duly scored two second half goals , the second with less than five minutes remaining . A tense finish followed , in which a photographer behind Swift 's goal gave regular updates of the time remaining . At the final whistle , Swift was so overcome with emotion that he fainted . He recovered in time to receive his winners ' medal from George V , who sent a telegram enquiring about his condition on the following Monday . 
 Manchester City started the 1936 – 37 season poorly , and were in the bottom half of the table until December . The club were better known for goalscoring than solid defence , but frequently both eluded City ; at one point the club gained just one win in twelve matches . However , Christmas proved to be a turning point for the club . Swift conceded five goals in consecutive matches on 19 and 25 December , but a Boxing Day win against Middlesbrough was the start of a long unbeaten run . By April City were second in the table , and faced a fixture against Arsenal , league leaders and the dominant club of the period . Peter Doherty inspired the team to a 2 – 0 win , and City reached the top of the table . The unbeaten run continued until the end of the season , and City secured their first league championship with a 4 – 1 win over Sheffield Wednesday . City 's third goal in this match came as the result of a long clearance by Swift , who was noted for the distance he could propel the ball . 
 In contrast to the championship win , the 1937 – 38 season was one of disappointment . Manchester City achieved several high scoring wins , including two 7 – 1 scorelines , but frequently stuttered to defeat . On the final day of the season the club faced Huddersfield Town , and went into the match four places clear of the relegation zone . A 1 – 0 defeat , coupled with wins for all four of the teams immediately below meant reigning champions City were relegated to the Second Division despite scoring more goals than any other team . 
 = = = Wartime and later career = = = 
 During the Second World War , Swift continued to play regularly for City , making 134 wartime league appearances . He also joined the British Army , and was one several professional footballers to enlist at the Army School of Physical Training as part of a scheme devised by the FA . The school was based near Aldershot F.C. leading Swift to become one of several notable players to guest for the club . Others included Matt Busby , Jimmy Hagan , Joe Mercer , Stan Cullis , Cliff Britton and Tommy Lawton . He also guested for several other clubs during the war including Liverpool . He also played for several representative sides . On 30 October 1943 at Ninian Park , Swift played for a Western Command XI against a Cardiff City XI which featured Lawton and Mercer as guests . The game was a fundraiser for Royal Artillery prisoners of war . In April 1944 in Edinburgh he played for a British Army XI that included Jack Rowley , Leslie Compton , Cullis , Mercer , Hagan and Lawton and against a Royal Air Force XI that included Peter Doherty , Stanley Matthews and Ted Drake . The Army won 4 – 0 . On 9 September 1944 at Windsor Park he played for a Combined Services XI in an 8 – 4 win against Ireland . This team was in effect a Great Britain XI and featured , among others , Busby , Matthews , Lawton , Mullen , Raich Carter and Stan Mortensen . In the same year he also represented an FA Services XI in games against France and Belgium . In May 1945 Swift also travelled with a British Army XI on a European tour . 
 In the first season after the Second World War , Manchester City won the Second Division championship to secure their return to the top flight . In the process Swift kept a club record 17 clean sheets in 35 appearances , a mark which was not surpassed until nearly 40 years later , when Alex Williams broke the record by keeping 20 clean sheets in 1985 . 
 By 1949 Swift was 35 years old , but was still performing well enough to maintain his place in the England team . However , he decided that he wanted to retire while still capable of playing at the top level , rather than fading away . To this end he announced that he would retire at the end of the 1948 – 49 season . He made what he intended to be his last Manchester City appearance against Huddersfield Town on 7 May , which was followed by a parade in his honour organised by the Supporters ' Club . However , just before the next season started , Swift 's replacement Alec Thurlow fell ill with tuberculosis , and Swift agreed to step in until City found a new goalkeeper . Four further appearances took his career total to 338 . Aware of attempts by other clubs to tempt Swift out of retirement , most notably by Manchester United , the Manchester City board continued to hold Swift 's playing registration for several years . 
 = = After football = = 
 Following a period serving as a director of a local catering company , Swift took up a career in journalism , most notably with the News of the World . He continued to be a regular visitor to Maine Road , and became the president of the Supporters ' Club . 
 Swift died , aged 44 , in the Munich air disaster after reporting on Manchester United 's European Cup match against Red Star Belgrade in Belgrade , Yugoslavia for the News of the World . On 6 February 1958 , the flight back to Manchester carrying the Manchester United team and journalists made a refuelling stop at Munich @-@ Riem Airport in poor weather . Two take @-@ off attempts were abandoned due to engine problems , with the weather continuing to deteriorate . On the third attempt , slush on the runway prevented the aircraft from reaching the required speed for take @-@ off . The plane veered off the runway and crashed into a house . One of 23 victims of the disaster , Swift was one of two journalists pulled alive from the wreckage but died on his way to hospital , as his seat belt had cut into his aorta . 
 Swift is widely regarded as one of the best English goalkeepers of all time along with Gordon Banks and Peter Shilton and is frequently noted as one of the best players to have graced the English football league . His replacement in the Manchester City team was Bert Trautmann . 
 Swift was named as one of the Football League 100 Legends in 1998 celebrating 100 seasons of league football in England , alongside other Manchester City players Billy Meredith , Colin Bell and Bert Trautmann . He has also been inducted into the Manchester City Hall of Fame . 
 = = International career = = 
 Swift 's first international call @-@ ups came in the Second World War ; he made 14 wartime appearances for England . The first official England international after the war took place on 28 September 1946 against Ireland , and Swift retained his place to make his full debut in a 7 – 2 victory . Swift became a fixture in the England side of the late 1940s , playing 17 consecutive matches . This run included the famous 1948 victory against Italy in Turin , where he became the first goalkeeper since Alexander Morten in 1873 to captain the side , leading him to describe the match as the greatest day of his career . Later that year he lost his place to Ted <unk> , despite keeping a clean sheet in his previous appearance . He was restored to the line @-@ up the following match , a British Home Championship decider against Scotland . After announcing his retirement from football , he made a farewell appearance against Norway in May 1949 to take his number of caps to 19 , after which the goalkeeper 's jersey was taken by Bert Williams . Swift also represented Great Britain in a 1947 match against a " Rest of Europe " team , played to celebrate the return of the Home Nations to FIFA . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Raich Carter once said of Frank Swift that he looked so big in goal that as a forward it often seemed that trying to score against him was like trying to put the ball into a matchbox . Swift 's hands , which had a finger span of 11 3 ⁄ 4 in ( 29 @.@ 8 cm ) , were sufficiently large for him to easily pick up the ball with one hand , and gave rise to the nickname " Frying Pan Hands " . Swift kicked with his left foot as the result of an injury to his right foot sustained during his youth . However , where possible he preferred throwing the ball to the wing over kicking it downfield . When asked for advice to give to young goalkeepers , Swift replied that he drew diagrams of each goal scored against him to see if he was at fault . 
 = = Outside football = = 
 Swift had three brothers , Cuthbert , Fred and Alf , and one sister , Alice . Fred , also a goalkeeper , played for Bolton Wanderers amongst others . The five grew up in a house a short walk from Blackpool 's Bloomfield Road ground . During football 's off @-@ season , Frank and Alf ran boat trips off the Blackpool coast for tourists . On one such trip he met his future wife , Doris Potter . They married at Blackpool in 1935 . They had a daughter , Jean , who was born in 1936 , and a son , David , who was born in 1948 . 
 During wartime , Swift became a special constable with responsibility for traffic control . He was enrolled in the RAF , and travelled to France after the Invasion of Normandy , but was stationed well behind the front line and did not see combat . This did not prevent risk to his life , however , as in 1944 a Dakota on which he was a passenger was involved in a near miss . 
 Several members of Swift 's family attended the February 2008 Manchester derby , played in the week of the 50th anniversary of the Munich air disaster . The game , at Old Trafford , was won by Manchester City ; the minutes silence was fully observed by the Manchester City fans . Towards the end of the game , the City fans chanted " There 's only one Frank Swift " several times , to rounds of applause from the United fans . 
 = LSWR M7 class = 
 The LSWR M7 class is a class of 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 passenger tank locomotive built between 1897 and 1911 . The class was designed by Dugald Drummond for use on the intensive London network of the London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) , and performed well in such tasks . Because of their utility , 105 were built and the class went through several modifications over five production batches . For this reason there were detail variations such as frame length . Many of the class were fitted with push @-@ pull operation gear that enabled efficient use on branch line duties without the need to change to the other end of its train at the end of a journey . 
 Under LSWR and Southern Railway ownership they had been successful suburban passenger engines , although with the increased availability of newer , standard designs , many of the class were diagrammed to take on a new role as reliable branch line engines , especially in Southern England . 
 Members of the class lasted in service until 1964 , and two examples have survived into preservation : number 245 in the National Railway Museum , and 53 ( as BR <unk> ) on the Swanage Railway . 
 = = Background = = 
 Drummond designed these locomotives to answer the need for a larger and more powerful version of William Adams ' 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 T1 class of 1888 . The Adams T1 design of 1888 with 5 ft 7 in ( 1 @,@ 702 mm ) wheels had been developed to meet the LSWR 's requirement for a compact and sure @-@ footed suburban passenger locomotive to be utilised on the intensive commuter timetables around London . However , by the mid @-@ 1890s the suburban services around London were growing at a rate which began to preclude the use of these and other older classes of locomotive . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 The M7 tank locomotive was the first design by Dugald Drummond upon replacing William Adams as Locomotive Superintendent of the LSWR in 1895 . It was an enlargement of the T1 with a sloping grate of increased area giving greater power . Drummond drew upon his previous experience with the successful London Brighton and South Coast Railway D1 class , whilst he was works manager at Brighton in the early 1870s , and his own 157 class of 1877 , on the North British Railway in Scotland . It was the heaviest 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 type ever to run in Britain . 
 The first 25 were constructed at Nine Elms Locomotive Works between March and November 1897 . Thereafter the M7 class had a long production run with five major sets of design variants . Between 1897 and 1899 the locomotives were constructed with a short overhang at the front , and sandboxes combined with the front splashers . <unk> and a lever @-@ type reverser were also added , and a conical , as opposed to flat , smokebox door was implemented on numbers 252 – 256 . In 1900 the design was modified to incorporate the sandboxes inside the smokebox ; these were later relocated below the running plate . 
 After 1903 , a 36 ft 3 in ( 11 @.@ 05 m ) frame with a longer overhang at the front end was introduced and steam reversing gear fitted . Some sources record these locomotives as <unk> class , and this designation was sometimes used to refer to the longer @-@ framed versions , but for most purposes the two sub @-@ classes were grouped together and known as M7 . The 1904 / 05 construction batch moved the sandboxes back to the front <unk> and new items were feed water heating , single ram pumps and balanced crank axles . For the remainder of construction from the <unk> of the 105th locomotive in 1911 , duplex pumps were fitted . 
 Several of the most successful features of the class were used by Drummond on his other designs . Thus the boiler , cylinders and motion were identical and interchangeable with those used on his 700 class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 freight locomotives of 1897 and the same boiler was used on his C8 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 passenger class . 
 = = = Boiler pressure = = = 
 According to Bradley ( p . 108 ) the original 175 lbf / in2 ( 1 @.@ 21 MPa ) working pressure was reduced to 150 lbf / in2 ( 1 @.@ 03 MPa ) to reduce wear on the boilers in 1900 when it became clear that they were no longer to be used for sustained high speed running . However H. C. <unk> states that the pressure was increased from 150 to 175 pounds @-@ force per square inch ( 1 @.@ 03 to 1 @.@ 21 MPa ) . 
 = = = Push @-@ pull equipment = = = 
 After 1912 thirty @-@ one M7 locomotives were equipped with push @-@ pull train capabilities with the provision of a primitive cable and pulley device . This was a modification that was designed to save time on country branch lines where the locomotive would usually have to run around its train in order to make a return journey . As a result , it was possible for the driver to drive his train from a cab located at the front of a designated push @-@ pull coach , leaving the fireman to tend the fire and operate the injectors on the locomotive footplate . 
 The pulley system was eventually deemed unsafe due to instances of sagging and delayed reaction . As a result , it was replaced on 36 engines by a safer compressed air system between 1930 and 1937 . This system had seen previous successful use on the LBSCR . Because the air compressor required extra space for installation , these conversions were confined to the long @-@ framed members of the class . 
 A further four conversions to push @-@ pull capability appeared between 1960 – 62 . This was the result of short @-@ framed M7s having long frames substituted during overhaul in order to create room for the air compressor . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 Following the successful use of superheating on other Drummond classes , Robert Urie experimentally fitted a superheated boiler to <unk> in December 1920 , together with an extended smokebox and larger cylinders . The additional weight of the new boiler raised the centre of gravity of the locomotive , thereby adding to problems of instability on faster main line trains , whilst simultaneously preventing its use on many branch lines . As a result , no further examples were fitted , and <unk> was eventually broken up for spare parts in 1937 . In 1931 No. 672 was experimentally fitted with the <unk> @-@ Hudd Automatic Warning System , but the equipment was not adopted by the Southern Railway and the equipment later removed . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 When first introduced to LSWR , several of the class were allocated to work semi @-@ fast passenger services between London and Portsmouth , Exeter and Plymouth , and Bournemouth and Weymouth . However they were withdrawn from these duties after a high speed derailment near Tavistock in 1898 , following criticism by the Board of Trade inspector about the use of front @-@ coupled locomotives on fast services . As a result , the class was to become synonymous with local main line and branch workings , as well as London suburban services . 
 With the gradual growth of the electrification of the inner London suburban lines after 1915 , the class tended to be used on stopping trains on the LSWR main line , and on services to Guildford and Reading . After the formation of the Southern Railway in 1923 the class gradually began to be used , further afield , notably in the west of England , but also on branch lines in Kent , and on the former South Eastern and Chatham Railway line between Redhill and Reading . 
 During the 1950s a substantial number of the " push @-@ pull " fitted members of the class was transferred to the Central Section of the Southern Region , at Brighton and Horsham , replacing worn @-@ out D3 locomotives on the branch lines of the former London Brighton and South Coast Railway in West Sussex . A further ten were transferred to Tunbridge Wells and Three Bridges in 1955 for use on East Sussex branches . These were less well accepted by the train crews , who preferred the less powerful SECR H class . Others remained in the London area on empty stock workings , notably between Clapham Junction and Waterloo Station . 
 The class was gradually replaced in the southeast England during the late 1950s and early 1960s due to the introduction of further electrification , new lightweight standard steam classes , diesel shunters , and diesel @-@ electric multiple units . By the end of 1963 the majority that remained were based at Bournemouth to work the Swanage branch . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 25 May 1933 , locomotive No. 107 was hauling a passenger train when it was derailed at Raynes Park , London , coming to rest foul of an adjacent line . Another passenger train was in a side @-@ long collision with it . Five people were killed and 35 were injured . The accident was caused by a failure to implement a speed restriction on a section of track under maintenance . 
 On 27 November 1962 , locomotive No. <unk> was derailed at Eastleigh , Hampshire after it was moved by an unauthorised person ] ] . 
 = = Withdrawal and preservation = = 
 Apart from the experimentally boilered No. 126 , all the M7s entered into British Railways service in 1948 . In that year No. 672 fell down the lift shaft which provided rolling stock access to the Waterloo and City Line at Waterloo , and was cut up . The remainder survived until 1957 , but over the next seven years the remainder of the class was withdrawn as part of the Modernisation Plan .. 
 Two examples of this quintessential class of steam locomotive have survived into preservation . They are : 
 No. 245 ( built 1897 ) is at the National Railway Museum in York Surviving records indicate that number 245 was constructed in 1897 at the cost of £ 1 @,@ 846 , and lasted in service until 1962 . 
 No. <unk> ( built 1905 ) is based at the Swanage Railway ; this locomotive was sold to Steamtown in Bellows Falls , Vermont in the United States of America in 1967 , but was repatriated in 1987 . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = LSWR and Southern Railway = = = 
 Under the LSWR the class saw various liveries over its pre @-@ grouping career . Most associated with the class during this period was the LSWR passenger light sage green livery with purple @-@ brown edging , creating panels of green . This was further lined in white and black with " LSWR " in gilt on the water tank sides , and the locomotive number on the coal bunker sides . The National Railway Museum has chosen a non @-@ typical green for the livery on No 245 . 
 When transferred to Southern Railway ownership after 1923 the locomotives were outshopped in Richard Maunsell 's darker version of the LSWR livery , with numbering having an ' E ' prefix to denote Eastleigh . This was to prevent confusion with other locomotives of the same number inherited by the Southern from its constituent railways . " A " ( denoting Ashford ) was used for former South Eastern and Chatham Railway locomotives and " B " ( Brighton for those from the London Brighton and South Coast Railway . After 1931 the prefixes were dropped from former LSWR locomotives and the remainder were renumbered . 
 The gilt lettering was changed to yellow with " Southern " on the water tank sides with black and white lining . 
 With the appointment of Oliver Bulleid as Chief Mechanical Engineer of the Southern , livery policy was changed once again to malachite green for passenger locomotives , with Sunshine Yellow lettering on the tank sides . This was lined with yellow and black with solid black edging . The numbers also lost their " E " prefix . During the war years the locomotives were outshopped in wartime black after overhaul , and some of the class retained this livery to nationalisation . Numbering depended on which batch the locomotive belonged to , and therefore each batch was allocated a series . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1948 ( nationalisation ) = = = 
 The M7 Class was given the BR Power Classification of 2P upon Nationalisation . Livery remained Southern lined malachite , though two which were painted soon after ( numbers <unk> / <unk> ) were lettered for British Railways in Sunshine yellow Gill Sans style along the sides of their tanks . This was eventually replaced with BR lined mixed traffic black livery . Numbering was initially that of the Southern , though for a period an " S " prefix was added to the number . This was replaced with the BR standard numbering system , with all locomotives being allocated , by batch , numbers within the <unk> series . 
 = = Models = = 
 Hornby Railways manufacture a model of the M7 in OO gauge . Dapol manufactured a model of the M7 for British N gauge in 2006 but has since ended production of this model . 
 = Volvopluteus michiganensis = 
 Volvopluteus michiganensis is a species of mushroom in the family Pluteaceae . It was originally described under the name Pluteus michiganensis but molecular studies have placed it in the Volvopluteus , a genus described in 2011 . The cap of this mushroom is about 7 – 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , gray , and has a cracked margin that is sticky when fresh . The gills start out as white but they soon turn pink . The stipe is white and has a volva at the base . Microscopical features and DNA sequence data are of great importance for separating this taxon from related species . V. michiganensis is a saprotrophic fungus that was originally described as growing on sawdust . It has only been reported from Michigan ( USA ) and the Dominican Republic . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was originally described by American mycologist Alexander H. Smith in 1934 as Pluteus michiganensis , based on collections made in Ann Arbor in October 1932 . In the original description there is no mention of a volva at the base of the stipe , one of the morphological characters separating Pluteus from Volvopluteus . Smith did mention that " the large spores are unusual for the genus Pluteus " . The species then disappeared from the mycological literature of the 20th century and Smith did not include his own species when he revised the type collections of North American Pluteus . Morphological revision of the type and DNA sequence data ( based on Internal transcribed spacer sequences ) obtained from the collection confirmed that this taxon belongs in the genus Volvopluteus , and that it is a separate species from all the other members of that genus . 
 The epithet michiganensis refers to the state of Michigan , where the fungus was originally described . The original holotype specimens of this species are preserved at the University of Michigan Herbarium . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Macroscopic characters = = = 
 The cap of Volvopluteus michiganensis is between 7 and 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 and 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , more or less ovate or conical when young , then expands to convex or flat . It can have low , broad umbo at center in old specimens ; the surface is markedly viscid in fresh basidiocarps and covered with radially arranged <unk> ; the cap is ash gray , similar to the color of Tricholoma terreum . The gills are crowded , free from the stipe , ventricose , up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) broad ; white when young turning pink with age . The stipe is 8 – 11 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) long and 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide , club @-@ shaped with a bulbous base ; the surface is white , smooth or tomentose . The volva is sac @-@ like , white and has a smooth surface . The context is white in the stipe and cap and it does not change when bruised or exposed to air . The smell was recorded as " earthy , fragrant " ; the taste was not recorded . The spore print color was not recorded , but it is assumed to be pinkish @-@ brown . 
 = = = Microscopic characters = = = 
 The basidiospores are 10 @.@ 5 – 13 @.@ 5 by 6 @.@ 5 – 8 µm with an ellipsoid shape . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 35 – 55 by 10 – 15 µm , and four @-@ spored . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill faces ) are 70 – 110 by 25 – 45 µm , fusiform ( spindle @-@ shaped ) , utriform ( shaped like a leather bottle ) or lageniform ( flask shaped ) ; some have an apical excrescence ( outgrowth ) . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are 60 – 75 by 15 – 27 µm , commonly fusiform or utriform ; they cover completely the gill edge . The cap cuticle is an ixocutis ( parallel hyphae embedded in a gelatinous matrix ) . The stipitipellis is a cutis ( parallel hyphae not embedded in a gelatinous matrix ) . Caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stipe surface ) are sometimes present , and they are 100 – 360 by 10 – 20 µm and mostly cylindrical . 
 = = = Ecology and distribution = = = 
 Volvopluteus michiganensis is a saprotrophic mushroom . The type collection was collected on sawdust . The collections from the Dominican Republic were collected on piles of vegetable matter . 
 This species is only known from the type locality ( Ann Arbor ) and a second locality in the Dominican Republic . Morphologically , the Dominican collection matches the type collection well , but no molecular comparison has been performed . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Molecular analyses of the internal transcribed spacer region clearly separate the four species currently recognized in Volvopluteus but identification can be more difficult due to the sometimes overlapping morphological variation among the species . Size of the fruit bodies , color of the cap , spore size , presence or absence of cystidia and morphology of the cystidia are the most important characters for morphological species delimitation in the genus . Volvopluteus michiganensis is distinguished from other species of Volvopluteus by its relatively shorter spores , measuring on average less than 12 @.@ 5 µm long . 
 = Navy – Johns Hopkins football rivalry = 
 The Navy – Johns Hopkins rivalry was an American intercollegiate football rivalry between the Navy Midshipmen football team of the United States Naval Academy and the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays football team of Johns Hopkins University . The two institutions , located within the span of a few miles in the state of Maryland , first met for a football game in 1882 . Following the initial contest , both teams played each other annually for eight years , before it was called off for unknown reasons . The teams competed again in 1911 and 1912 , again disbanding the contest until a final match took place in 1919 . 
 The rivalry was controlled by Navy for its entirety , with the Midshipmen winning nine out of twelve contests played . While Johns Hopkins ' largest win was a 25 – 12 defeat of the Naval Academy in 1888 , Navy shutout Hopkins five times , including a 66 – 0 blowout in the 1919 contest . The rivalry was an essential contest for the beginning of both schools ' football programs . Prior to the first game , Navy had competed in only a single contest . Johns Hopkins began their football program with the rivalry , originally having to play under a fake title in order to compete . 
 = = Background = = 
 It is widely believed by football researchers that the playing of intercollegiate football began in November 1869 , when a player at Rutgers University challenged another player at the nearby College of New Jersey ( now Princeton ) . The contest more closely resembled soccer , with teams scoring by kicking the ball into the opponent 's net , and lacked a uniform rules structure . The game developed slowly ; the first rules were drafted in October 1873 , and only consisted of twelve guidelines . Even though the number of teams participating in the sport increased , the game was still effectively controlled by the College of New Jersey , who claimed eight national championships in ten years . Only Yale presented any form of challenge , claiming four national championships in the same time period . 
 According to biographer C. Douglas Kroll , the first evidence of football at the United States Naval Academy came in 1857 , but the school 's cadets lost interest in the game shortly afterward . The first occurrence of serious interest in the sport came in 1879 , when a squad of twelve cadets challenged men from the Baltimore Athletic Club to a contest . The team was captained by William John Maxwell , lacking " official " support from all academy supervisors . The team was student operated , and supported by the friends of the players . The 1879 game with Baltimore ended in a 0 – 0 tie , where the Naval Academy apparently never gained control of the ball . The team was credited with creating the first football uniform , worn during the game . Following the 1879 season , football at the Naval Academy went on a two @-@ year hiatus , returning in 1882 under the leadership of Vaulx Carter . 
 Johns Hopkins University , located north of the Naval Academy , in Baltimore , started their football program a couple years after Navy . Hopkins ' first team was assembled in 1881 , and spent an entire year training and learning a version of the game . Their sport , which was closer to rugby , was played in Druid Hill Park . After the training , the team planned a two @-@ game 1882 season . The squad had to play the season under the title of the Clifton Athletic Club , due to the school 's policy on the sport of football . The first was a practice game with the Baltimore Athletic Club , played on October 7 . The Hopkins team lost the contest 4 – 0 . The following game was their first true game , to be played against the Naval Academy . 
