 = = Series history = = 
 = = = Beginnings , 1882 – 83 = = = 
 The rivalry began in 1882 , when cadet Vaulx Carter reintroduced football to the United States Naval Academy . Acting as both a player and a coach , Carter procured a single game for the Academy to play . The team challenged the Baltimore @-@ based Clifton Athletic Club to a game during the Academy 's Thanksgiving Day athletic carnival . The Clifton team was actually made up of players from Johns Hopkins , who were unable to play as their school due to the institution 's harsh opinion on football . 
 It snowed heavily before the game , to the point where players for both teams had to clear layers of snow off of the field , making large piles of snow along the sides of the playing ground . The field was 110 yards by 53 yards , with goalposts 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) apart and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high . The first half of the game went scoreless ; the Baltimore American reported that " the visitors pushed Navy every place but over the goal line in the first half " . During play , the ball was kicked over the seawall a number of times , once going so far out it had to be retrieved by boat before play could continue . The American described the second half in detail : 
 After ten minutes interval the ball was again put in play , this time being kicked off by the Cliftons . The rest period had apparently stiffened the Cliftons , for the Academy making a vigorous spurt got the ball thru them , and Street , following it up well , scored a touchdown for the Academy . 
 The try at goal failed , but the ball , instead of going to the Cliftons behind the line , fell into the field and into the hands of one of the Academy team . By a quick decisive run , he again got the ball over the Cliftons goal line and scored a touchdown . 
 Cadet George Washington Street was identified as the first person ever to score a touchdown for the Naval Academy . The Baltimore Sun stated that William <unk> O 'Malley was the cadet who caught Street 's blocked kick and scored the second touchdown . The Sun also covered , in detail , the uniforms the squads wore ; Johns Hopkins sported black and light blue striped jerseys and caps , with white pants and blue socks . The Naval Academy wore maroon socks , caps , and belts , with white pants and jerseys . Both teams also nailed strips of leather to the bottom of their shoes to help deal with slipping . 
 The Naval Academy challenged Johns Hopkins again the next year . By this time the Hopkins team had procured the approval of their school officials to participate in football and were playing under the name Johns Hopkins for the first time . The 1883 game , again played during the Academy 's Thanksgiving Day athletic carnival , was a 2 – 0 victory for Johns Hopkins . Hopkins won the game on two single @-@ point safeties , both of which were intentionally made by Navy to prevent Johns Hopkins from gaining possession on the edge of the endzone . Writer Morris Allison Bealle summed up the game as a " backed up " victory for Hopkins , due to its manner of scoring . 
 = = = Annual competition , 1884 – 89 = = = 
 Starting in 1884 , the rivalry was played annually or bi @-@ annually until 1889 . All of the games were hosted at the Naval Academy . According to writers Taylor Baldwin <unk> and Jamie <unk> , all games played during that time were hosted on whatever parade or drill field was unused at the time at the Academy , instead of Navy having a specific football @-@ dedicated area . The 1884 game , which was played entirely under the rules of rugby , was a rematch with Johns Hopkins . In the first half , Hopkins scored twice , on a touchdown from a Mr. Bonsall and on a two @-@ point safety . Navy returned the favor in the second half of the game when halfback Julius Dashiell , brother of Hopkins ' Paul Dashiell , kicked a five @-@ point goal and rusher David W. Taylor scored a touchdown to secure a victory . 
 The next year , in 1885 , Naval Academy officials finally approved of the playing of football . According to Morris Allison Bealle , " Football at Annapolis had shed its swaddling clothes when the autumn of 1885 rolled around . Some of the faculty actually gave in and admitted that football might , at that , be or become an interesting diversion " . After Navy won their opener and Hopkins split their record at 1 – 1 , the two teams met again at the Naval Academy Thanksgiving Day athletic carnival . Johns Hopkins managed a 12 – 8 victory over the Academy , tying the series at two wins apiece . 
 In 1886 , the Thanksgiving Day tradition was changed slightly . On November 13 , Johns Hopkins traveled to Annapolis and lost to Navy 6 – 0 . After the Naval Academy defeated St. John 's College again and Hopkins won back @-@ to @-@ back contests with Gallaudet , the two teams played for a second time that season , again in Annapolis . The game , which was the traditional Thanksgiving Day competition , was a 15 – 14 victory for the Naval Academy . Johns Hopkins led for the majority of the game , with Navy only gaining the lead at the very end of the match . The Baltimore American covered the game in detail : 
 " Early in the first half , by much rushing , forcing , snapbacks and vigorous <unk> Riggs , the huge Hopkins quarterback , crashed over the goal line for 4 points . Paul Dashiell converted . Riggs repeated his performance but Dashiell missed conversion . Navy then adopted the Hopkins rushing tactics and Stone went over for the first score " . 
 " With Hopkins backed up against her own goal line , Dashiell broke through the entire Navy team for a touchdown . Goal was missed and the score was 14 to 6 against Navy . With the game fast coming to a close The Tars formed a closely knit ball with the halfback in center " . 
 " Navy hit paydirt but the referee found something illegal and called the ball back , much to the consternation of the Cadet <unk> . But on the next play George Hayward kicked a field goal , making the score 14 to 11 . Just before the game ended a double pass , Bill Cloke to captain Clarence Stone , carried to ball over the Hopkins goal for the 4 points that won the game " . 
 The following year , the contest was again played as a part of the Academy 's athletic carnival . As an experiment , the Academy hosted a double @-@ header that day ; the official Navy team challenged their " by @-@ this @-@ time ancient rivals from Johns Hopkins " while their junior team would play against the Dupont Athletic Club immediately afterwards . The Naval Academy defeated Hopkins 8 – 0 and their junior team won 14 – 0 . Navy 's first score on Hopkins was when a cadet recovered a missed field goal and returned it for a touchdown . The score which secured the game for Navy was a safety , awarded after a Hopkins player accidentally stepped out of the back of the endzone . The Baltimore Sun noted how fans for both teams in the 1887 contest " did everything but get into the game themselves " . 
 The decline of the series began following the 1887 match . Bitter feelings were evident at Johns Hopkins , which put strained feelings on the schools ' competition . In Navy 's following game , against the Princeton Reserves team , Hopkins students traveled to the Academy to support the Princeton squad . The following year , Hopkins returned to the Naval Academy , where they managed their largest ever defeat of Navy , 25 – 12 . During the contest , Hopkins supporters " discovered " the using of a cheering section . Morris Allison Bealle wrote that " the ' Hoppies ' uncovered something new in sports — a cheering section which gave the team yell in unison " . 
 Despite the strong win , bitter feelings at Johns Hopkins continued to grow into the next season . The school 's attitude towards the series worsened to the point where the 1889 game was rescheduled away from the traditional Thanksgiving Day playing and was moved to a week earlier . That year 's game ended in a 36 – 0 shutout victory for the Naval Academy , and wound up being the breaking point for Johns Hopkins . Hopkins decided to terminate the series following that game . However , Hopkins ' students returned to the Naval Academy the following year , yet again to root against Navy , this time supporting Lehigh . 
 = = = Brief renewal , 1911 – 12 & 1919 = = = 
 It took twenty @-@ two years for an attempt to revive the rivalry . In 1911 , both schools agreed to open their seasons with an effort to bring back the competition . The game , played on October 7 , began " [ as ] somewhat of a disappointment " for the Naval Academy , when Johns Hopkins scored early in the contest . Navy managed an 8 – 0 – 1 record the previous season , and went unscored upon . However , the Academy recovered and put up twenty @-@ seven unanswered points to win 27 – 5 . Only one other team , North Carolina A & M , managed to score on the Naval Academy that season , putting up just six points . The teams agreed to start their following season with another playing of the rivalry . Navy considered Hopkins to be " a small eastern college to practice upon " , instead of a serious opponent . The Academy 's team entered the game expecting an easy win , but were surprised by Johns Hopkins and barely managed a 7 – 3 victory . The rivalry was yet again ended after that game , but returned for one final playing in 1919 . The 1921 Naval Academy yearbook wrote that Johns Hopkins was " outweighed , <unk> , and outclassed in every department of the game , they were shoved back over their goal line ten times " . The game was the most lopsided in the rivalry 's history , Navy winning 66 – 0 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Game results = = 
 = 2008 Spanish Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Spanish Grand Prix ( formally the L Gran Premio de España Telefónica ) was a Formula One motor race held on 27 April 2008 at the Circuit de Catalunya , Barcelona , Spain . It was the fourth race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 66 @-@ lap race was won by Kimi Räikkönen for the Ferrari team after starting from pole position . Felipe Massa finished second in the other Ferrari , and Lewis Hamilton was third in a McLaren . 
 Räikkönen began the race from pole position alongside Renault driver Fernando Alonso . Massa began from third , alongside BMW Sauber driver Robert Kubica . Hamilton , the eventual Drivers ' Champion , began from fifth and passed Kubica into the first corner , as Massa passed Alonso . Räikkönen maintained his lead through most of the race , leading to Ferrari 's one @-@ two finish . The safety car was deployed several times throughout the race , including for a serious crash involving McLaren driver Heikki Kovalainen , though the Finn escaped with only a minor concussion . 
 Prior to the race weekend , the event was put on probation by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile , the sport 's governing body , for racist taunting during pre @-@ season testing at the circuit . Subsequently , no such racism was reported during the race weekend . The event was Super Aguri 's final Grand Prix , withdrawing afterwards due to financial pressures , leaving the sport with ten teams ; this was also the last race for both of the team 's drivers , Takuma Sato and Anthony Davidson . The result promoted Ferrari to the lead in the Constructors ' Championship , 12 points ahead of BMW Sauber and 13 points ahead of McLaren . Räikkönen extended his lead in the Drivers ' Championship to 29 points , nine points ahead of Hamilton and ten points ahead of Kubica . Massa moved into fourth place on 18 points , with 14 races remaining in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 22 drivers , in 11 teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , Honda , Force India , BMW Sauber , Toyota , Red Bull Racing , Williams , Toro Rosso and Super Aguri . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre compounds to the race ; the softer of the two marked by a single white stripe down one of the grooves . 
 Prior to the race , Ferrari driver Kimi Räikkönen led the Drivers ' Championship with 19 points , and BMW Sauber driver Nick Heidfeld was second with 16 points . McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton , BMW driver Robert Kubica and Hamilton 's teammate Heikki Kovalainen held the next three positions , all with 14 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , BMW Sauber were leading with 30 points , one point ahead of Ferrari , and two ahead of McLaren @-@ Mercedes . 
 After Hamilton won the season opener in Australia , Ferrari had dominated the next two races in Malaysia and Bahrain . In the Malaysian Grand Prix , Ferrari driver Felipe Massa had claimed pole position , and while he later spun off and retired , his teammate Räikkönen went on to win the race . Ferrari 's form had continued at the Bahrain Grand Prix , where Massa had led Räikkönen to a one @-@ two finish . Despite the promising start to the season , Ferrari team principal Stefano Domenicali said the team was not celebrating prematurely : 
 The real Ferrari is not the one we 've seen at the Australian GP . The team reacted immediately and has shown the great potential of our package , which is extremely competitive . Having said that , we have to be aware . We 're approaching the Spanish GP with a maximum effort , keeping our feet on the ground : we were not depressed after the first race and we are not euphoric after Bahrain . We need absolute motivation and we are aware of the fact that our competitors are getting better . 
 With his team leading the Constructors ' Championship , Heidfeld said BMW was outperforming expectations : " It 's better than expected after the winter time , of course , but it could also be better . It can always be better . " BMW had opened the season with podium finishes in each of the first three races , which team principal Mario Theissen said put his team amongst the top three , along with Ferrari and McLaren . 
 After a poor race in Bahrain , where he narrowly avoided stalling on the grid before colliding with Renault 's Fernando Alonso a lap later , Hamilton said he would return stronger in Spain : " I approach it in the same way and obviously I won 't be making the same mistake again . This weekend being here , feeling fresh after a good break from racing , and making sure we come here fresh has been important . I feel good . " His team said that they had made significant improvements to their car , the McLaren MP4 @-@ 23 , in the three @-@ week break , but were reserving judgement until the race to see how their performance had improved in comparison to their rivals . 
 The event also took place under the shadow of incidents that had taken place at the same circuit during pre @-@ season testing . At one of the test sessions , Hamilton was subjected to racist taunting by some of the spectators . In response , the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) launched a " Racing Against Racism " programme , and placed the Spanish and European Grands Prix on probation , the latter event being held in the Spanish city of Valencia . During the course of the event itself , no such incidents were reported . Hamilton was particularly unpopular with the country 's Formula One fans due to his acrimonious inter @-@ team rivalry with Spaniard Alonso during the previous year 's championship , which had resulted in the latter leaving the McLaren team and returning to Renault for 2008 . 
 The Super Aguri team had been in financial trouble since a proposed takeover deal backed by equity firm Dubai International Capital , under the " Magma Group " banner , failed to take effect . The team narrowly avoided folding in mid @-@ April , and were only given confirmation to compete by team owners Honda on the Friday prior to the race . This would be the team 's final Grand Prix , withdrawing after two years in Formula One prior to the Turkish Grand Prix , leaving the sport with ten teams for the first time since the 2005 season . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and a third on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . The Ferraris were fastest in the first session ; Räikkönen was quickest with a time of 1 : 20 @.@ 649 , ahead of Massa , who recovered from a spin and an off @-@ track excursion on his first two laps to take second . Hamilton , Kubica and Kovalainen took the next three positions , ahead of home driver Alonso in sixth . Räikkönen repeated his morning effort in the second session , with a time of 1 : 21 @.@ 935 , as the frontrunners experimented with higher fuel loads . Renault driver Nelson Piquet was next quickest , ahead of Alonso , Williams driver Kazuki Nakajima , Massa and Red Bull driver Mark Webber . The McLarens had a less successful session ; Kovalainen struggled with gearbox problems , and difficulty with Hamilton 's set @-@ up meant he managed 11th after suffering from excessive oversteer . Heidfeld was quickest in the final session , his 1 : 21 @.@ 269 benefiting from use of the quicker soft compound tyre . Webber 's teammate David Coulthard was next quickest , ahead of Alonso , Kubica , Toyota driver Jarno Trulli and Sébastien Bourdais of Toro Rosso . Ferrari and McLaren again ran heavier cars , and neither team managed better than ninth quickest . Mechanical problems meant Webber failed to set a time , his car coming to a halt in the pit @-@ lane exit after two installation laps . 
 The qualifying session on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for 20 minutes , and cars that finished the session 17th or lower were eliminated from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted 15 minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions 11 to 16 . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth , and decided pole position . Cars which failed to make the final session could refuel before the race , so ran lighter in those sessions . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Räikkönen clinched his first pole position of the season with a time of 1 : 21 @.@ 813 . Alonso would start alongside him on the grid , amid suspicions the Spaniard was fuelled light for the race . Massa , Kubica and Hamilton qualified next quickest ; just 0 @.@ 2 seconds separated Hamilton 's time from that of Räikkönen . Kovalainen would line up on the third row of the grid next to his teammate ; Webber and Trulli would start from the fourth row . Heidfeld was disappointed with his ninth place , after suffering from tyre problems on his final lap ; Piquet , who made it into the final session for the first time in his career , qualified just ahead of Honda driver Rubens Barrichello and Nakajima . Honda driver Jenson Button and Timo Glock of Toyota would occupy the seventh row ; Williams driver Nico Rosberg was outqualified by his teammate for the first time in the season , and would start from 15th , ahead of Bourdais . Coulthard failed to make it through the first session after failing to get sufficient heat into his tyres ; Toro Rosso driver Sebastian Vettel and the two Force Indias of Giancarlo Fisichella and Adrian Sutil took positions 18 to 20 . The Super <unk> of Anthony Davidson and Takuma Sato would line up on the back row of the grid in their final race . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions on the grid were dry before the race . The air temperature was 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) and the track temperature was 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) ; weather forecasts indicated a light wind , but otherwise calm conditions . Räikkönen held his lead into the first corner , as Massa passed Alonso to take second ; Hamilton passed Kubica to take fourth . However , an incident further down the field brought out the safety car . Sutil 's car entered a spin after attempting to pass Coulthard ; the resulting collision eliminated Sutil and Vettel from the Grand Prix . The race restarted on lap four when the safety car peeled off , Räikkönen quickly increased his lead over Massa to more than a second . The gap between the Ferraris increased as Räikkönen continued to lap the quickest on track ; Hamilton began to close in on Alonso , only to see the Renault pit on lap 16 , promoting the McLaren to third place . 
 Further down the field , several incidents reduced the field to 15 cars . Piquet , after running off the track on lap five , collided with Bourdais two laps later while attempting to pass at turn 10 . The Renault retired from the race immediately ; Bourdais struggled back to the pit lane before Toro Rosso decided to retire his car . The resulting debris ended Davidson 's race when he retired on lap eight after sustaining radiator damage . On lap 22 Kovalainen 's front left tyre suffered a rapid deflation , hurling his car into the barriers at an estimated 210 kilometres per hour ( 130 mph ) , with an impact of 26 g . As the track marshals extracted the McLaren from the barriers , the safety car was once again deployed . Heidfeld was forced to pit immediately as he was low on fuel , incurring a ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty for coming in before the pit @-@ lane was officially re @-@ opened . Barrichello and Fisichella then collided in the pit @-@ lane on lap 26 , heavily damaging the Honda 's front wing , and requiring Barrichello to drive the whole lap with a disintegrating car , before retiring into his team 's garage . 
 Räikkönen , Massa , Hamilton , Kubica and Alonso , having already made their pit stops , trailed the safety car until it peeled off on lap 29 . As Räikkönen again increased his lead over Massa to more than two seconds , Alonso pulled over to the side of the track , smoke billowing from his engine , and retired . Rosberg 's engine also suffered a failure , and the Williams retired on lap 42 from seventh place . Four laps later , Räikkönen set the fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 21 @.@ 670 ( a lap record that still stands ) , as Massa pitted from behind him . Räikkönen , Hamilton and Kubica followed into the pit @-@ lane on lap 47 . Coulthard and Glock collided on lap 53 after the Toyota driver attempted to pass the Red Bull at the first corner . Glock sustained front wing damage , and Coulthard suffered a puncture to his left rear tyre ; both pitted soon after for repairs . 
 Räikkönen took his second win of the season when he crossed the line at the end of the 66th lap , 3 @.@ 2 seconds ahead of the second @-@ placed Massa . Hamilton took third , ahead of Kubica , Webber and Button , who scored Honda 's first points for the season . Nakajima finished in seventh place , ahead of Trulli , who was running in sixth place before his team mistakenly called him into the pit @-@ lane . Toyota had mistaken Glock 's damaged car for Trulli , dropping the latter down the order after the stop . Heidfeld , recovering after his penalty , finished in ninth place ahead of Fisichella . Glock and Coulthard filled the next two positions after their late collision , ahead of Sato in 13th . Rosberg , Alonso , Barrichello , Kovalainen , Davidson , Bourdais , Piquet , Vettel and Sutil were the retirements from a punishing Spanish Grand Prix . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three finishers appeared on the podium and in the subsequent press conference , where Räikkönen said his pole position start was an important factor in his victory : " This circuit is very difficult to overtake . The start is the best place and when you have a lot of things going with the safety car you might be lucky or very unlucky , so the best place to try to win is always from the front . It was good yesterday and it really helped us today . " 
 Massa said that the result was a good one for his team , as they moved ahead of BMW Sauber in the Constructors ' Championship : " We did our homework and brought two Ferrari 's in the front – first and second – which is very important for the Championship . " Although Ferrari had performed well , Massa said their speed was not significantly better than their opponents , so " we need to keep working like crazy in the factory to improve the car in every area . " 
 Hamilton agreed that the start was the most important part of the race : " Obviously when we qualified fifth we knew that it would be very difficult to beat the Ferraris . But the key was to get a good start and make as many places as possible and fortunately I was able to do that . " Apart from the start of the race , only two passing manoeuvres were recorded : Heidfeld 's lap 55 pass on Fisichella and Coulthard 's lap 61 pass on Sato . 
 Despite his accident , Kovalainen suffered no physical injuries , except for minor concussion . After spending the night under observation in a nearby hospital , the McLaren driver was cleared to race in the next Grand Prix , two weeks later . McLaren said that the wheel failure was due to a faulty wheel clamp which made it vulnerable to the rapid changes in load and pressure that a Formula One car endures , eventually leading to the deflated tyre and Kovalainen 's accident . Kovalainen praised Formula One 's safety procedures and medical staff : 
 It was a serious accident and I managed to walk away . I was a bit lucky , but the safety standards the FIA has been pushing worked very well , ... The chassis , the impact , all the barriers took the impact well , the FIA medical team plus the marshals and the team took the job very well and did a fantastic job to get me out of there quickly in a short period of time ... I was able to make a recovery without any injuries . I think it is something that we must still keep working on , but the work paid off that day . 
 However , Mark Webber , a director of the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association , said that standards at the track should have been better . Speaking in his regular BBC Online column , Webber said the " run @-@ off on that corner is too tight and we need to have a look at it because any driver that has an error there is going to have a big crash . If Heikki 's accident had happened two seconds later he would have been fine and controlled the car , but it probably happened on the worst section of that whole track . " 
 Räikkönen 's win increased his points tally in the Drivers ' Championship to 29 points , nine ahead of second @-@ placed Hamilton . Kubica and Massa were one and two points behind Hamilton , respectively ; Heidfeld was fifth on 16 points , after failing to score . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari took the lead with 47 points , 12 points ahead of BMW Sauber and 13 points ahead of McLaren , with 14 races remaining in the season . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 1 . ^ – Heikki Kovalainen 's accident was caused by a wheel rim failure . 
 2 . This marks the last race for both Super Aguri drivers , Takuma Sato and Anthony Davidson as Super Aguri decided to withdraw from Formula One due to financial troubles . 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Neighbors Know My Name = 
 " Neighbors Know My Name " is a song by American R & B singer Trey Songz . It was written by Songz with Patrick Hayes and Troy Taylor , who produced the song with John " $ K " McGee . It was released to rhythmic and urban airplay as the fifth and final single from his third studio album , Ready on February 16 , 2010 . The song , described as being hook @-@ heavy and having a powerful bassline , received generally positive reviews from critics . The song reached forty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 and four on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , becoming Songz 's third consecutive top five R & B hit . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard gave the song a positive review , stating , " he utilizes his vocal range here , including the teasing falsetto with which he gently instructs his partner to ' take this pillow right here / If you bite it , they won 't hear . ' Bertoldi also complimented the song 's production , commenting , " ' Neighbors ' employs a knocking bassline and drip @-@ drop effect to provide the ideal erotic backdrop for Songz 's dirty talk . " She also pointed out that the song was inspired by Songz 's " stylistic antecedent " , R. Kelly . Mark Edward Nero of About.com also said the song was R. Kelly influenced , calling the song among the album 's best material . Nero said , " Trey brags about how the people next door probably know who he is because his woman screams it during sex . ' While I be bangin ' on your body , they be bangin ' on our wall , ' he sings . ' While they be dreamin ' , you be <unk> ' , now they bangin ' on our door . ' " Ready album reviews from Allmusic and PopMatters , noted the track as a standout , with Tyler Lewis of the latter stating the " good " songs like " Neighbors " and " I Need A Girl " " thump as they should " . Ken Capobianco of the Boston Globe complimented the song 's braggadocio along with " I Invented Sex " , however commented that the song was " unintentionally humorous " . Andrew Rennie of Now Magazine said the album 's hook @-@ heavy and playful style was evident on the track and on " LOL " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending March 13 , 2010 , " Neighbors Know My Name " debuted at eighty @-@ eight on the Billboard Hot 100 . A little over a month later , on the week ending May 15 , 2010 , it peaked at forty @-@ three on the chart . In its twenty @-@ seventh week on the chart , " Neighbors Know My Name " peaked at the top spot on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , becoming his fourth top ten single from Ready and his third consecutive top five hit . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video was directed by Yolande Geralds , also director for the " I Invented Sex and Say Aah videos . Teairra Mari , D. Woods , and <unk> were reported to have cameos , but the scenes were evidently cut . The video premiered on March 1 , 2010 . On March 3 , 2010 , the video was " The New Joint of the Day " on BET 's 106 & Park . The music video starts off with an intimate milk bath scene with Trey Songz and model @-@ actress , Jessica White along with the song " Panty <unk> " , the intro track on Ready , played in the background . It then branches off into " Neighbors Know My Name " playing in the background with the rest of the music video taking place in a bedroom with love scenes of both Songz and White . Some scenes also include Trey Songz in front of a red background . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 He performed the song on 106 & Park on February 11 , 2010 for " Love Week " with a medley of " Say Aah " , and " I Invented Sex " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Trey Songz , Troy Taylor , Patrick Hayes 
 Production - Troy Taylor , Patrick Hayes 
 Recording - John McGee 
 Mixing - Jean Marie Horvat 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Operation Trio = 
 Operation Trio ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Operacija Trio ) was the first large @-@ scale joint German @-@ Italian counter @-@ insurgency operation of World War II conducted in the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) , which included modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina . It was carried out in two phases within eastern Bosnia from 20 April to 13 May 1942 , with Ustaše militia and Croatian Home Guard forces taking part on the Axis side . The aim of the operation was to target all insurgents between Sarajevo and the Drina river in eastern Bosnia . These included groups led by communists and Serb nationalist Chetniks . Differentiating between the rank and file of the two insurgent factions was difficult , as even the communist @-@ led insurgent groups consisted mainly of Serb peasants who had little understanding of the political aims of their leaders . 
 Operation Trio consisted of two parts , Trio I and Trio II . Together they comprised one element of the Axis effort known as the Third Enemy Offensive ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> neprijateljska ofenziva ) . The joint Italian @-@ Chetnik offensive in Montenegro and eastern Herzegovina formed the other element . The Third Enemy Offensive forms part of the Seven Enemy Offensives framework in Yugoslav historiography . 
 The operation was of limited effectiveness due to several factors , including preemptive action by the Ustaše militia and Italian delays . The area of operations straddled the demarcation line between the German and Italian zones of occupation within the NDH , which led to mutual suspicion and lack of coordination . Both insurgent factions avoided fighting the Axis and NDH forces , instead focusing on fighting each other . After Operation Trio , the Partisan leader Josip Broz Tito , his Supreme Headquarters and the Partisan main force , consisting of the 1st and 2nd Proletarian Brigades , withdrew from their base of operations around Foča . After briefly reorganising around <unk> mountain south @-@ east of Foča , they moved their operations to western Bosnia for the remainder of 1942 . 
 Operation Trio coincided with and contributed to the polarisation of the almost exclusively Serb rebels in eastern Bosnia into two groups : the Serb @-@ chauvinist Chetniks and the multi @-@ ethnic and communist @-@ led Partisans . Encouraged by Chetnik propaganda against Croats and Bosnian Muslims and repelled by the sectarian left @-@ wing policies and actions of the communists , many Serb peasant fighters were swayed to the Chetnik cause . Violent coups occurred against the communist leadership of all but one of the Partisan detachments in eastern Bosnia , and these detachments effectively defected to the Chetniks . Most of the surviving communist fighters from these detachments joined the Partisan forces , and many withdrew with Tito to western Bosnia during the Partisan Long March . Within a few weeks of the end of Operation Trio only 600 Partisan fighters were left in eastern Bosnia , comprising the Group of Shock Battalions and the Birač Partisan Detachment . All these forces sought refuge in the Birač region . The Chetnik movement in eastern Bosnia , at best a confederacy of local warlords , was strengthened by mass defections from the Partisans . For a time they ruled large parts of the region , after making accommodations with the Ustaše regime in May and June 1942 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Foča Republic = = = 
 During Operation Southeast Croatia , Josip Broz Tito , his Supreme Headquarters and the 1st Proletarian Brigade commanded by Spanish Civil War veteran Konstantin " Koča " Popović , had withdrawn south to Foča , on the boundary between eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina . With the help of Montenegrin Partisans , they established a liberated area around Foča and Goražde . This area , known as the " Foča Republic " , was expanded by subsequent military operations . By late March , People 's Liberation Councils had been established to govern 10 towns and 92 villages in the liberated area , but communist organisation in the area was limited and of poor quality . 
 = = = Insurgent forces = = = 
 At the end of 1941 , there were six Partisan detachments in eastern Bosnia , with about 7 @,@ 300 fighters operating in the Majevica , Ozren , Birač , Romanija , Zvijezda and Kalinovik areas . In January 1942 , the Romanija detachment had borne the brunt of Operation Southeast Croatia and had been effectively destroyed . Many Partisan fighters were Serb peasants who took to the forests and mountains to defend their families and villages against the Ustaše ; few were ideologically committed to the Partisan cause . The Chetnik forces in eastern Bosnia had not opposed the Axis offensive . Many had withdrawn across the Drina river into the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia to avoid engagement with German and NDH forces . 
 Both the Partisan Supreme Headquarters and the Partisan General Staff of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina were based in the area of operations , with Tito 's Supreme Headquarters directly controlling the 1st Proletarian Brigade , and the General Staff , commanded by Svetozar Vukmanović @-@ Tempo , controlling the Partisan detachments in East Bosnia under the overall direction of the Supreme Headquarters . 
 In early January 1942 , the Partisan Supreme Headquarters decided to permit fighters who were not willing to formally become Partisans to fight alongside Partisan units . These " volunteer detachments " were under the control of the Supreme Headquarters of the renamed People 's Liberation Partisan and Volunteer Army of Yugoslavia , and were established from former Chetnik @-@ aligned fighters as the <unk> , Foča , Vlasenica , Srebrenica and Krajina Volunteer Detachments . The Krajina Volunteer Detachment consisted of refugees from that region who had fled to the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia to escape the Ustaše terror . Volunteer battalions and companies were also placed under the staff of the original Partisan detachments , with many of them absorbed as whole units with the addition of a communist cadre . Some volunteer detachments fought under their own leaders , and all volunteer detachments fought under the Serbian tri @-@ colour flag . 
 In February 1942 , Major Jezdimir Dangić and other former Royal Yugoslav Army officers ( many of whom had allegiance to the Serbian puppet regime of Milan Nedić and / or Draža Mihailović ) entered eastern Bosnia from the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia , where some of them had withdrawn to avoid Operation Southeast Croatia . They started to re @-@ form Chetnik units in eastern Bosnia and began agitating against the Partisans on a " conservative , Serb @-@ nationalist and anti @-@ Muslim basis " . Other Chetnik units crossed into eastern Bosnia from the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia and attacked the Partisans . They included the " Chetnik Proletarian Shock Brigade " , a unit of 200 fighters under Captain Dragoslav Račić , and another group under Captain Milorad <unk> . 
 The Partisan forces in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina initially consisted almost entirely of Serb peasants , and this made much of the rank and file of both Partisan and volunteer detachments highly susceptible to pro @-@ Chetnik agitation , accommodations with Chetnik forces in the local area and hostility towards non @-@ Serbs . The Partisan moves towards multi @-@ ethnic recruiting , imposition of extreme left @-@ wing policies and use of terror against " class enemies " made all the Partisan and volunteer detachments vulnerable to such agitation . Chetnik infiltrators were able to join detachments and turn the rank and file against their communist cadres . An example of this occurred in the Majevica Partisan Detachment on 20 February , when the communist staff were massacred by Chetniks at Vukosavci near Lopare . 
 The 2nd Proletarian Brigade was formed at Čajniče on 1 March from Partisan forces that had withdrawn from Serbia after Operation Uzice . In early March the Partisans began collecting the most loyal fighters from each Partisan detachment into " Shock Companies " and established structures for the development of " Shock Battalions " and " Shock Brigades " . At the same time , Partisan forces that had been dispersed by Operation Southeast Croatia were threatening the Tuzla @-@ Doboj railway line . In mid @-@ March the 1st East Bosnian Shock Battalion was established at <unk> ( outside Sarajevo ) , and by the end of the month the 2nd East Bosnian Shock Battalion had been established in Drinjača ( near Zvornik ) ; it incorporated the remaining 240 fighters of the Majevica Partisan Detachment . 
 The concentration of the most reliable fighters into proletarian brigades , shock battalions and shock companies weakened the integrity of the four remaining Partisan detachments in eastern Bosnia , but enabled the Partisan Supreme Headquarters to concentrate its best forces in mobile units to undertake successful offensive operations against the Chetniks . They captured several towns in March , including Vlasenica and Srebrenica . Partisan operations were threatening the railway network throughout eastern Bosnia , including around Sarajevo , by the end of March . Many Bosnian Chetniks deserted to the Partisans , often joining as complete units under their previous Chetnik commanders . These former Chetnik units became units of the " Volunteer Army " , which reached a strength of around 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 fighters by the end of March . Their loyalty and military value to the Partisans was very limited . 
 On 25 March the Partisan General Staff of Serbia advised the Partisan Supreme Headquarters that the Serbian Partisan movement had been " extinguished " , largely as a result of Operation Uzice and subsequent operations by the German occupation forces and their Serb collaborators . This was a significant setback for the Partisan cause , as Tito had always considered that a return to Serbia was a necessary ingredient for a successful revolution . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Planning for Operation Trio and the associated Operation West @-@ <unk> in the Bosanska Krajina occurred during two Axis conferences in March 1942 . During the initial conference at Opatija on 2 – 3 March , the NDH Chief of the General Staff Vladimir Laxa objected to an Italian proposal to involve the Bosnian and Herzegovinian Chetniks in the planned operations , and with the support of the Germans , this idea was initially shelved . Operation Trio was to be one of a series of counter @-@ insurgency operations planned for eastern Bosnia , Herzegovina , Sandžak , Montenegro , western Bosnia and Lika . Despite this , the only operations that were actually conducted between March and June 1942 were Operation Trio , and a combined Italian @-@ Montenegrin Chetnik offensive in Montenegro and eastern Herzegovina which is also associated with the Third Enemy Offensive in Yugoslav historiography . 
 Detailed planning and orders for Operation Trio were finalised at a conference in Ljubljana on 28 – 29 March 1942 . Laxa , General Mario Roatta ( the commander of the Italian Second Army ) , and General der Artillerie Paul Bader ( the commander of German forces in the NDH ) negotiated a compromise permitting temporary non @-@ political agreements to be concluded with the Herzegovinian Chetniks , led by Dobroslav Jevđević , but not with any of the Bosnian Chetnik groups , whose leaders were Petar Baćović in the area of Foča and Jezdimir Dangić , who was aligned with the Serb collaborationist Milan Nedić . 
 Significant delays in finalising arrangements for Operation Trio were caused by disagreements regarding where it would commence , who would be in command , the involvement of Chetniks and NDH forces , how to deal with the demarcation line between the German and Italian zones of occupation , and what local authorities would be put in place as localities were cleared of insurgents . The NDH contributed to the mutual suspicion between the Germans and Italians . The Italian demands prevailed , because they were committing larger forces to the operation . The decision was ultimately made to target all insurgents in eastern Bosnia between Sarajevo and the Drina . Throughout the preparation for Operation Trio , the Italians looked for opportunities to cross over the demarcation line and expand their sphere of influence into eastern Bosnia to take advantage of German weakness in the NDH . Bader 's final orders for the operation granted several key Italian demands , including military control over civil affairs in the area of operations , fair treatment of the local population , and treating non @-@ resisting Chetniks as prisoners of war . 
 Bader was named tactical commander of the combined forces ( known as Kampfgruppe Bader ) committed to Operation Trio , but to appease the Italians the force was formally under the overall command of the Italian Second Army , commanded by Roatta . Kampfgruppe Bader consisted of the 718th Infantry Division ( the only German division stationed in the NDH at the time ) , the Italian 22nd Infantry Division , 1st Alpine Division , 5th Alpine Division and 28 NDH battalions . Since 18 February , the 718th Infantry Division had been responsible for an area of operations bounded by the Sava and Bosna in the north , the Drina to the east and the German @-@ Italian demarcation line to the south . Mainly because of lack of transport and firepower , the division had only conducted limited offensive operations against the Partisans between mid @-@ February and mid @-@ April . 
 The original planned start date of 15 April was pushed back when the Italians had problems moving to their start positions and later had trouble providing transport to establish lines of communication across the Adriatic . The operation was rescheduled to 25 April Prior to the Ljubljana conference , the Ustaše authorities were concerned about negotiations between the German and Italian commanders and Dangić , and were particularly worried that the Germans would permit the Italians and Chetniks to use Sarajevo as a base . On 31 March the commander of the Ustaše Black Legion , Jure Francetić , launched a pre @-@ emptive offensive primarily against Dangić 's Chetniks . Francetić captured Vlasenica , Bratunac and Srebrenica , meeting limited resistance from the Partisans , and then scattered the more numerous Chetniks while inflicting significant losses . 
 In early April , Dangić travelled to Belgrade for discussions with representatives of Nedić and Chetnik leaders . He was arrested by the German authorities and sent to a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp in occupied Poland . Dangić was replaced by Stevan Botić . On 15 April 1942 the Wehrmacht commander in south @-@ east Europe , Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Wilhelm List , issued an order forbidding Wehrmacht units to negotiate with any rebel groups . Only Abwehr ( military intelligence ) and police units were to maintain surveillance of such groups through informants and undercover agents . 
 After several months of increasing tension between the factions struggling for power within the insurgency , the first of the pro @-@ Chetnik coups occurred , in the Ozren Partisan Detachment . It was sparked by the arrest and execution on 18 April of pro @-@ Chetnik agitator Bogdan <unk> by Vukmanović @-@ Tempo and the newly formed 1st East Bosnian Shock Battalion . Fighting ensued between pro @-@ Chetnik members of the detachment and the Shock Battalion . Vukmanović @-@ Tempo then abandoned the Ozren Partisan Detachment , taking the detachment staff and remaining loyal Partisans with him . 
 = = Operation = = 
 In the wake of Francetić 's offensive , the Germans pre @-@ emptively moved to clear the area north of the demarcation line before the formal start of the operation . This advance towards the Drina from 20 – 30 April , coordinated with NDH forces , was the first phase of Operation Trio ( Trio I ) . The 718th Infantry Division advanced from assembly areas in Sarajevo , Olovo and Tuzla , with the aim of relieving Rogatica and clearing the surrounding area of Partisans . The fighting became very confused , with the Chetniks , who were under attack from the Black Legion , avoiding the German units , who went past them to attack the Partisans . The Partisan main force avoided fighting the Black Legion , instead attacking the Chetniks from the rear while they were engaged against Francetić 's troops . The Italian 5th Alpine Division <unk> utilised Chetnik troops from the Sandžak as auxiliaries during their advance on Čajniče which coincided with the German @-@ NDH advance towards the Drina . 
 More pro @-@ Chetnik coups occurred in the second half of April . The first was in one of the remaining battalions of the Romanija Partisan Detachment , followed by all three battalions of the Zvijezda Partisan Detachment . The political commissars of every company were killed . By the start of May , coups had also occurred in battalions of the Kalinovik Partisan Detachment and the Foča Volunteer Detachment . 
 On 8 – 9 May 1942 , another pro @-@ Chetnik coup occurred in the recently created Zenica Partisan Detachment , and about 30 communists and their supporters were killed . About 100 remaining Partisan fighters from the Ozren and Zenica detachments were incorporated into the 3rd East Bosnian Shock Battalion . 
 The Italians believed the German @-@ NDH preliminary operation had been designed to avoid the need to involve the Italians in clearing eastern Bosnia , thereby preventing them from expanding their sphere of influence . After Italian complaints and political manoeuvrings , Roatta took over direct control of the operation on 10 May . The second phase of the operation ( known as Trio II or " Operation Foča " ) was a fairly minor joint operation to capture Foča , but by then the Partisan Supreme Headquarters and main force had already evacuated the town . Despite their attempts to avoid fighting , the Partisans suffered significant losses . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After clearing the larger towns of the Birač region of Partisans and Chetniks , the Black Legion committed large @-@ scale atrocities against Serbs and Jews in the region , including massacring about 890 people from Vlasenica after raping the women and girls . 
 Along with the three East Bosnian Shock Battalions , the Partisan General Staff of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina first attempted to cross the Bosna to follow the Partisan Supreme Headquarters and main force to western Bosnia , but instead retreated to Birač , where they joined forces with the Birač Detachment at the end of May . The Birač Partisan Detachment was the only Partisan or volunteer detachment in East Bosnia not to suffer a pro @-@ Chetnik coup in March – May 1942 . By June – July 1942 , the Partisans in eastern Bosnia had been reduced to a strength of around 600 fighters . 
 In mid @-@ May , Operation Trio was followed by the joint Italian @-@ Chetnik offensive against Partisan detachments within the Italian zone of occupation in eastern Herzegovina and Montenegro , with similar effects : the Partisans lost almost all of the liberated territory in these areas . This offensive is also considered part of the Third Enemy Offensive in Yugoslav historiography . After Operation Trio , NDH forces remained south of the demarcation line between the German and Italian zones of occupation , in spite of protests from the Italians . 
 After Operation Trio and the joint Italian @-@ Chetnik offensive , the Partisans formed three more Proletarian Brigades , consisting mainly of Montenegrins . Operation Trio contributed to the decision of the Partisan Supreme Headquarters to withdraw to western Bosnia in the Partisan Long March , which commenced in late June 1942 . 
 While incurring significant casualties fighting the Black Legion , the Chetnik movement in eastern Bosnia benefited from the mass desertion of Partisans and the many pro @-@ Chetnik coups in Partisan and volunteer detachments . Despite their lack of unity , the Chetnik movement thrived in eastern Bosnia for the reminder of 1942 because some Chetnik leaders made accommodations with the Ustaše regime and as many Chetniks and Partisans were unwilling to kill fellow Bosnian Serbs of the opposing faction . 
 = My Story ( Julie Couillard book ) = 
 My Story ( or Mon histoire ) is a tell @-@ all memoir by Canadian Julie Couillard . It was first written in French , then during summer 2008 , translated into English . Both versions were published across Canada in October 2008 . 
 Couillard first appeared in the national media when she dated the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Maxime Bernier . The Bernier @-@ Couillard Affair erupted in May 2008 over confidential , NATO @-@ related documents left at Couillard 's house . Media coverage , and Bernier 's reaction , left Couillard feeling victimized . To help dispel rumours regarding her life and her role with Bernier , Couillard signed a book deal . 
 In her book , she recounts her early years , describes her relationship with Bernier , and reveals his confidential opinions . 
 Intended to be released on October 14 , 2008 , the book 's release date was moved forward when that same day was selected for the Canadian federal election . Bernier dismissed the embarrassing allegations against him in her book as ridiculous . Though My Story was released eight days prior to the election , Bernier nonetheless was re @-@ elected in his district of Beauce . The English version peaked at # 6 on La Presse 's bestseller list while the French version reached # 5 . Critics found Couillard 's story self @-@ righteous and sometimes conveniently vague , but noted that it provided a unique view into the government 's inner circle . 
 = = Background = = 
 Julie Couillard began dating Conservative Party of Canada Member of Parliament , Maxime Bernier , in April 2007 . The media started covering her in August , when she wore a revealing dress to Bernier 's swearing @-@ in ceremony for his new position as Minister of Foreign Affairs . The couple had first met at a restaurant @-@ dinner with business associates . Couillard and Bernier dated until December 2007 but continued seeing each other until April 2008 . Their relationship became the subject of a political scandal which brought about intense media attention . As the scandal unfolded , Couillard decided to write an autobiography , telling her side of the story . She formally signed a contract in July with publishers , McClelland & Stewart ; and with the help of journalist , Serge Demers , a ghostwriter , she wrote My Story in French within a few months . The publisher translated the text into English . 
 = = Bernier @-@ Couillard affair = = 
 Bernier was elected as a Conservative star candidate in Quebec and became the Minister of Industry before being reassigned to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in August 2007 . Though his relationship with Couillard had ended in December , they continued with occasional trysts . In April 2008 , as Bernier hurriedly departed Couillard 's home , he left behind confidential , NATO @-@ related briefing notes ; they were from the 2008 Bucharest summit . He asked Couillard to destroy them . Couillard , on the other hand , put the notes aside and forgot about them until May when she returned the notes to a foreign affairs office . Significant discussion about the affair was then voiced in both the Canadian House of Commons and the Standing Committee on Public Safety and National Security . 
 After discussions with Prime Minister of Canada , Stephen Harper , Bernier resigned as Minister of Foreign Affairs , a day before the airing of Couillard 's interview with TVA . Political commentators called the affair a threat to national security due to Bernier 's carelessness and to Couillard 's background with motorcycle biker gangs . According to Couillard , Bernier 's response to the subsequent media coverage made her feel betrayed and abandoned . 
 = = Content = = 
 The book begins as an autobiography . Couillard was born in the late @-@ 1960s in the Montreal district of Ville @-@ <unk> ; then she moved to the suburb of Lorraine when she was 4 . Her parents often fought as her mother believed that her husband was unfaithful ; the family incurred financial problems when Couillard 's father changed careers . At age 12 , Couillard was diagnosed with epilepsy . At age 17 , she bought several properties with a boyfriend . They lived together briefly before breaking up and selling the properties . Couillard then became a friend , then lover , of Gilles Giguère , a money lender who was associated with the controversial , motorcycle club , Hells Angels . In 1996 , after the police raided Giguère 's apartment and ( according to Couillard ) threatened him , Giguère became sullen and withdrawn : the police had charged him with conspiracy to commit murder . But two months later , they let the charge drop . Giguère was soon murdered . 
 In 1997 , Couillard met Stéphane Sirois , a reputed enforcer and drug dealer , member of the Rockers a Hells Angels affiliate club . They married . However , financial problems interfered with their relationship ; furthermore , Couillard had cheated on Sirois with a man named Bruno . During their divorce , Sirois became an informant for the police and entered a witness protection program . Couillard then became pregnant with Bruno 's child , and had an abortion ; they subsequently separated . Following further personal , financial problems , Couillard declared bankruptcy in 2002 . She then began an affair with a married man who abandoned her while they visited Venice , Italy . When she returned to Canada , Couillard launched a security firm , Integrated Global Solutions , along with an auto @-@ leasing business . Meanwhile , she began to date Bernard Coté , an aide to federal Minister of Public Works , Michael Fortier . Couillard then introduced Coté to Philippe Morin of the Kevlar Group , a real estate company which signed a deal with the federal government to acquire land from Kevlar . When the deal became public Coté 's involvement was considered a conflict of interest and Fortier , responsible for the actions of his staff , was forced to resign , despite Morin denying any connection between Kevlar and Couillard . 
 Then , in April 2007 , while attending a Conservative Party of Canada fundraising affair , Couillard was asked to consider being a candidate for the party . Later , she attended a dinner where she met Maxime Bernier ; they began dating . Bernier registered Couillard as his designated traveling companion with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order for Couillard to accompany Bernier on government business . 
 In her book , Couillard characterizes Bernier as intellectually lazy , preoccupied with his appearance , and as concerned that he appears gay . She writes further that Bernier privately criticized Prime Minister Stephen Harper 's eating habits and his physique . She adds that Bernier spoke with party supporters about replacing Harper as the party leader , and says that Bernier opposed the invasion of Iraq contrary to his party 's stance . Further revelations regarding Bernier include that he whispered negative comments to Couillard about members of his electoral district ; and that he did not own a laptop , yet frequently used her house and home computer as a second office . 
 Couillard goes on to describe the NATO document incident and the ensuing media coverage from her perspective . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The original publication date for the book was October 14 , 2008 . After the Canadian federal election was called and set for that day the book 's release was re @-@ scheduled to October 6 , eight days before the election in which Bernier was seeking re @-@ election . The English version was published as a hard cover by McClelland & Stewart while the French version was released by Montreal publishers , Les Editions de l 'Homme , as a trade paperback . According to La Presse , 17 @,@ 000 copies were printed ; 5 @,@ 000 sold in the first two weeks . In the Montreal market , the book was listed on the bestseller list at # 6 for two weeks while the French version spent one week at # 5 . 
 In response to the book , Bernier dismissed the contents as " soap @-@ opera politics and completely ridiculous " and denied ever criticizing Harper or constituents . The Ottawa Citizen reviewer , Chris Cobb , and The Globe and Mail 's , Christie Blatchford called Couillard 's story self @-@ righteous , contradictory , and conveniently vague . Cobb commented that " viewed through a political lens , it 's an entertaining page @-@ turner " as it provides " a rare glimpse inside the closed , controlled society that is the Harper government . " Additionally , writer , William Johnson , said the book story unfolds like pulp fiction or a soap opera and compares Couillard to the abused heroine in Justine who does not learn from her calamities . 
 Bernier went on to win his election in Beauce with 62 % of the vote . Harper won re @-@ election as prime @-@ minister ; he did not appoint Bernier to a cabinet position . Stemming from Couillard 's actions during the entire affair , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) launched investigations on how she obtained the secret documents ; on whether Couillard 's mother was offered a patronage appointment by a Conservative Party official to the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada ; and on whether there was influence peddling during the land sale between the Kevlar Group and Public Works . 
 = Matt Damon = 
 Matthew Paige " Matt " Damon ( / <unk> / ; born October 8 , 1970 ) is an American actor , film producer and screenwriter . He is ranked among Forbes magazine 's most bankable stars and is one of the highest @-@ grossing actors of all time . Damon has received several accolades , including an Academy Award from four nominations , two Golden Globe Awards , and has been nominated for two British Academy Film Awards and five Emmy Awards . 
 Born and raised in Cambridge , Massachusetts , Damon began his acting career by appearing in high school theater productions and he made his professional acting debut in the film Mystic Pizza ( 1988 ) . He came to prominence in 1997 when he wrote and starred in Good Will Hunting alongside Ben Affleck , which won them the Academy and Golden Globe awards for Best Screenplay , and earned Damon a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor . He continued to garner praise from critics for his roles as the eponymous character in Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) , the antihero in The Talented Mr. Ripley ( 1999 ) , a fallen angel in Dogma ( 1999 ) , an energy analyst in Syriana ( 2005 ) , and an Irish @-@ American criminal in The Departed ( 2006 ) . 
 Damon is also known for his starring roles as Jason Bourne in the Bourne franchise ( 2002 – 16 ) and as a con man in the Ocean 's Trilogy ( 2001 – 07 ) . For his supporting role as the rugby player Francois Pienaar in Invictus ( 2009 ) and his leading role as an astronaut stranded on Mars in The Martian ( 2015 ) , Damon received Oscar nominations for Best Supporting Actor and Best Actor , respectively . The latter also won him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor . Damon has received Emmy Award nominations for his portrayal of Scott Thorson in the biopic Behind the Candelabra ( 2013 ) and for producing the reality series Project Greenlight . 
 In addition to acting in films , Damon has performed voice @-@ over work in both animated and documentary films , and has established two production companies with Affleck . He has been actively involved in charitable work , including the ONE Campaign , H2O Africa Foundation , Feeding America , and <unk> With his wife , Luciana <unk> Barroso , he has three daughters and a stepdaughter from Barroso 's prior marriage . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Damon was born in Cambridge , Massachusetts , the second son of Kent Telfer Damon ( born 1942 ) , a stockbroker , and Nancy Carlsson @-@ Paige ( born 1944 ) , an early childhood education professor at Lesley University . His father is of three @-@ fourths English and one @-@ fourth Scottish descent , and his mother is of five @-@ eighths Finnish and three @-@ eighths Swedish ancestry ( his mother 's family surname had been changed from the Finnish " <unk> " to " Paige " ) . Damon and his family moved to Newton for two years . His parents divorced when he was two years old , and Damon and his brother returned with their mother to Cambridge , where they lived in a six @-@ family communal house . His brother Kyle is now an accomplished sculptor and artist . 
 As a lonely adolescent , Damon has said that he felt that he did not belong . Due to his mother 's " by the book " approach to child @-@ rearing , he had a hard time defining a self identity . He attended Cambridge Alternative School ( now Graham and Parks ) and then Cambridge Rindge and Latin School , where he was a good student , but had a " terrifying " first two years due to his short stature . Damon performed as an actor in several high school theater productions . He credited his drama teacher , Gerry <unk> , as an important artistic influence , though Ben Affleck , his good friend and schoolmate , got the " biggest roles and longest speeches " . 
 Damon attended Harvard University , where he was a resident of Lowell House ( Harvard College ) and a member of the class of 1992 , but left before receiving his degree to take a lead role in the film Geronimo : An American Legend . While at Harvard , he wrote an early treatment of the screenplay for Good Will Hunting as an exercise for an English class . Damon was a member of the Delphic Club , one of the University 's select Final Clubs . In 2013 , he was awarded the Harvard Arts Medal . Damon received an Academy Award for the screenplay of Good Will Hunting in 1998 , which was handed to him by Harvard alumnus Jack Lemmon , who had also been a member of Harvard 's Delphic Club . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early years : 1988 – 1996 = = = 
 Damon entered Harvard in 1988 , where he appeared in student theater plays , such as Burn This and A ... My Name is Alice . Later , he made his film debut at the age of 18 , with a single line of dialogue in the romantic comedy Mystic Pizza . As a student at Harvard , he acted in small roles such as in the TNT original film Rising Son and the ensemble prep @-@ school drama School Ties . He left the university in 1992 , a semester - 12 credits - shy of completion of his Bachelor of Arts in English to feature in Geronimo : An American Legend in Los Angeles , erroneously expecting the movie to become a big success . Damon next appeared as an opiate @-@ addicted soldier in 1996 's Courage Under Fire , for which he lost 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) in 100 days on a self @-@ prescribed diet and fitness regimen . Courage Under Fire gained him critical notice , when The Washington Post labeled his performance " impressive " . 
 = = = Breakthrough roles : 1997 – 2000 = = = 
 During the early 1990s , Damon and Affleck wrote Good Will Hunting ( 1997 ) , a screenplay about a young math genius , an extension of a screenplay he wrote for an assignment at Harvard , having integrated advice from director Rob Reiner , screenwriter William Goldman , and writer / director Kevin Smith . It received nine Academy Awards nominations , earning Damon and Affleck Oscars and Golden Globes for Best Screenplay . Damon was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for the same film , which netted an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor for co @-@ star Robin Williams . He and Affleck were each paid salaries of $ 600 @,@ 000 , while the film grossed over $ 225 million at the worldwide box office . The two later parodied their roles from the film in Kevin Smith 's 2001 movie Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back . 
 Also in 1997 , Damon was the lead in the critically acclaimed drama The Rainmaker , where he was recognized by the Los Angeles Times as " a talented young actor on the brink of stardom . " After meeting Damon on the set of Good Will Hunting , director Steven Spielberg cast him as the titular character in the 1998 World War II film Saving Private Ryan . He co @-@ starred with Edward Norton in the poker film " Rounders " where he plays a reformed gambler in law school who must return to playing big stakes poker to help a friend pay off loan sharks . Then he portrayed Patricia Highsmith 's antihero Tom Ripley in The Talented Mr. Ripley ( 1999 ) , in which " Damon outstandingly conveys his character 's slide from innocent enthusiasm into cold calculation " , according to Variety magazine . He played a fallen angel who discusses pop culture as intellectual subject matter with Affleck in Dogma ( 1999 ) . 
 Damon 's attempts at <unk> leading characters in romantic dramas such as 2000 's All the Pretty Horses and The Legend of Bagger Vance were commercially and critically unsuccessful . Variety said of his work in All the Pretty Horses : " [ Damon ] just doesn 't quite seem like a young man who 's spent his life amidst the dust and dung of a Texas cattle ranch . Nor does he strike any sparks with [ Penelope ] Cruz . " He was similarly deemed " uncomfortable being the center " of Robert Redford 's The Legend of Bagger Vance . 
 = = = Hollywood star : 2001 – 2007 = = = 
 From 2001 to 2007 , Damon gained wider international recognition as part of two major film franchises . He co @-@ starred as thief Linus Caldwell in Steven Soderbergh 's 2001 film Ocean 's Eleven , a remake of the Rat Pack 's 1960 film Ocean 's 11 ; the successful crime dramedy spawned two sequels , Ocean 's Twelve ( 2004 ) and Ocean 's Thirteen ( 2007 ) . He played amnesiac assassin Jason Bourne / David Webb in the hit action thrillers , The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) , The Bourne Supremacy ( 2004 ) , and The Bourne Ultimatum ( 2007 ) , for which Entertainment Weekly named Damon among " the decade 's best mixer of brawn and brains . " 
 Damon did the voice of Spirit in the animated movie Spirit Stallion of the <unk> ( 2002 ) and later played a conjoined twin in Stuck on You ( 2003 ) , which received a 60 % Rotten Tomatoes score and mixed critical reception . He played a fictionalized version of Wilhelm Grimm in Terry Gilliam 's fantasy adventure The Brothers Grimm ( 2005 ) , which was a critically panned commercial failure ; The Washington Post concluded , " Damon , constantly flashing his newscaster 's teeth and flaunting a fake , ' Masterpiece Theatre ' dialect , comes across like someone who got lost on the way to an audition for a high school production of The Pirates of Penzance . " Later that year , he appeared as an energy analyst in Syriana . 
 In 2006 , Damon joined Robert De Niro in The Good Shepherd as a career CIA officer , and played an undercover mobster working for the Massachusetts State Police in Martin Scorsese 's The Departed , a remake of the Hong Kong police thriller Infernal Affairs . Assessing his work in the two films , Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote that Damon has the unique " ability to recede into a film while also being fully present , a recessed intensity , that distinguishes how he holds the screen . " The Departed has a score of 92 % on Rotten Tomatoes , and critical reception was very good . According to Forbes in August 2007 , Damon was the most bankable star of the actors reviewed , his last three films at that time averaged US $ 29 at the box office for every dollar he earned . Damon had an uncredited cameo in Francis Ford Coppola 's Youth Without Youth ( 2007 ) and another cameo in the 2008 Che Guevara biopic Che . 
 = = = Critically acclaimed roles : 2009 – present = = = 
 He made a guest appearance in 2009 on the sixth @-@ season finale of Entourage as himself , where he tries to pressure Vincent Chase ( Adrian Grenier ) into donating to his real foundation ONEXONE . His next role was Steven Soderbergh 's dark comedy The Informant ! ( 2009 ) , in which his Golden Globe @-@ nominated work was described by Entertainment Weekly as such : " The star – who has quietly and steadily turned into a great Everyman actor – is in nimble control as he reveals his character 's deep crazies . " Also in 2009 , Damon portrayed South Africa national rugby union team captain François Pienaar in the Clint Eastwood @-@ directed film Invictus , which is based on the 2008 John Carlin book Playing the Enemy : Nelson Mandela and the Game That Changed a Nation and features Morgan Freeman as Nelson Mandela . Invictus earned Damon an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor . The New Republic observed that he brought " it off with low @-@ key charm and integrity . " 
 In 2010 , he reteamed with director Paul Greengrass , who directed him in the Bourne Supremacy and Bourne Ultimatum , for the action thriller Green Zone , which flopped commercially and received a score of 53 % on Rotten Tomatoes and ambivalent reception from critics . He has appeared as a guest star in an episode of Arthur , titled " The Making of Arthur " , as himself . During season 5 of 30 Rock , he appeared as guest star in the role of Liz Lemon 's boyfriend in the episodes " I Do Do " , " The Fabian Strategy " , " Live Show " , and " Double @-@ edged Sword " . Damon 's 2010 projects included Clint Eastwood 's Hereafter and the Coen brothers ' remake of the 1969 John Wayne @-@ starring Western True Grit . 
 In 2011 , he starred in The Adjustment Bureau , Contagion , and We Bought a Zoo . In April 2012 , Damon filmed Promised Land , directed by Gus Van Sant , which he co @-@ wrote with John Krasinski . Damon 's next film with frequent collaborator Steven Soderbergh was Behind the Candelabra , a drama about the life of pianist / entertainer Liberace ( played by Michael Douglas ) with Damon playing Liberace 's longtime partner Scott Thorson . The film premiered on HBO on May 26 , 2013 . 
 Damon starred in the science fiction film Elysium ( 2013 ) , where he played former car @-@ thief @-@ turned @-@ factory @-@ worker Max DeCosta . He also appeared in the science fiction movie The Zero Theorem by Terry Gilliam in 2013 . In 2014 , he starred in George Clooney 's The Monuments Men , and played the minor role of scientist Dr. Mann , in Christopher Nolan 's Interstellar . In 2014 , Affleck appeared as a celebrity correspondent for Years of Living Dangerously . He played the main character , astronaut Mark Watney , in Ridley Scott 's The Martian ( 2015 ) , based on Andy Weir 's best @-@ selling novel of the same name , a role that earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and his second Academy Award nomination for Best Actor . Having not returned for the fourth film in the Bourne film series , Damon reprised his role as Jason Bourne in the series fifth instalment Jason Bourne . He has signed to star in Alexander Payne 's upcoming film , <unk> , and Zhang Yimou 's , The Great Wall . 
 = = Producing career = = 
 Along with Affleck and producers Chris Moore and Sean Bailey , Damon founded the production company <unk> , through which the four created the Emmy @-@ nominated documentary series Project Greenlight to find and fund worthwhile film projects from novice filmmakers . The company produced and founded the short @-@ lived mystery @-@ hybrid series Push , Nevada , as well as other projects . In March 2010 , Damon and Affleck teamed up again to create Pearl Street Films , a Warner Bros. based production company . 
 = = Voice @-@ over career = = 
 He lent his voice to the English version of the animated film Ponyo , which was released in the United States in August 2009 . The documentary which he narrated , American Teacher , opened in New York in 2011 prior to national screening . He also voiced the lead character Cale Tucker in Titan A.E. , took the narrative voice of the Stallion Spirit in Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron , and voiced a krill named Bill in Happy Feet Two . 
 In January 2012 , it was announced that Damon had signed a multiyear deal to be the voice of TD Ameritrade advertisements , replacing Sam Waterston as the discount brokerage 's spokesman . Damon donates all fees from the advertisements to charity . In 2013 , Damon appeared in a 20 @-@ second advertisement for <unk> , directed by Grant <unk> , with whom he worked on The Monuments Men . The deal earned Damon $ 3 million . 
 Damon also provided voice @-@ over for United Airlines 's resurrected " Fly the Friendly Skies " advertisement campaign in 2013 . 
 = = Humanitarian work = = 
 Damon was the founder of H2O Africa Foundation , the charitable arm of the Running the Sahara expedition , which merged with <unk> to create <unk> in July 2009 . He , along with George Clooney , Brad Pitt , Don Cheadle , David Pressman , and Jerry Weintraub , is one of the founders of Not On Our Watch Project , an organization that focuses global attention and resources to stop and prevent mass atrocities such as in Darfur . Damon supports the ONE Campaign , which is aimed at fighting AIDS and poverty in Third World countries . He has appeared in their print and television advertising . 
 Damon is also an ambassador for ONEXONE , a nonprofit foundation committed to supporting , preserving and improving the lives of children at home in Canada , the United States , and around the world . Damon is also a spokesperson for Feeding America , a hunger @-@ relief organization , and a member of their Entertainment Council , participating in their Ad Council public service announcements . Damon is a board member of Tonic <unk> ( formerly <unk> ) , a company that attempts to halt junk mail delivered to American homes each day . 
 = = In the media = = 
 = = = Jimmy Kimmel Live ! = = = 
 Comedian Jimmy Kimmel had a running gag at the end of his ABC television show , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , where he apologized for not being able to interview Damon at the end of each show . It culminated in a planned skit on September 12 , 2006 , when Damon stormed off after having his interview cut short . Damon appeared in several of E ! Entertainment 's top ten Jimmy Kimmel Live ! spoofs . On January 24 , 2013 , Damon took over his show and mentioned the long @-@ standing feud and having been bumped from years of shows . It involved celebrities who were previously involved in the " feud " , including Robin Williams , Ben Affleck , and Sarah Silverman . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Damon appeared on Hardball with Chris Matthews in December 2006 , and while discussing the ongoing war in Iraq , expressed concern about inequities across socioeconomic classes with regards to who in the United States is tasked with the responsibility of fighting wars . Damon is a supporter of the Democratic Party , and has made several critical statements against Republican Party figures , but has also expressed his disillusionment with the policies of President Barack Obama . In 2012 Damon , Ben Affleck , and John Krasinski hosted a fundraiser for Democratic Senate nominee Elizabeth Warren . 
 In 2010 , Matt Damon narrated the documentary film Inside Job about the part played by financial deregulation in the late @-@ 2000s financial crisis . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Damon dated his Good Will Hunting co @-@ star Minnie Driver . He later had a two @-@ year relationship with actress Winona Ryder . From 2001 to 2003 , he dated Odessa Whitmire , the former personal assistant of Billy Bob Thornton and Ben Affleck . 
 Damon met Argentine Luciana <unk> Barroso ( born 1976 ) in April , 2003 , while filming Stuck on You in Miami . They became engaged in September , 2005 , and married in a private civil ceremony on December 9 , 2005 , at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau . The couple have three daughters : Isabella ( b . 2006 ) , Gia Zavala ( b . 2008 ) and Stella Zavala ( b . 2010 ) . He also has a step @-@ daughter , Alexia Barroso ( b . 1998 ) , from Luciana 's previous marriage . Since 2012 , they have lived in Pacific Palisades , Los Angeles , having previously lived in Miami and New York . 
 Damon is a fan of the Boston Red Sox . After the team won the 2007 World Series , he narrated the commemorative DVD release of the event . He has competed in several World Series of Poker ( WSOP ) events , including the 2010 World Series of Poker main event . He was busted out of the 1998 WSOP by poker professional Doyle Brunson . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Aside from awards he has garnered for his role as actor and producer , Damon became the <unk> person to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on July 25 , 2007 . He reacted to the award by stating : " A few times in my life I 've had these experiences that are just kind of too big to process and this looks like it 's going to be one of those times . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Films that garnered Damon the most recognition or awards include : 
 = Helium = 
 Helium is a chemical element with symbol He and atomic number 2 . It is a colorless , odorless , tasteless , non @-@ toxic , inert , monatomic gas , the first in the noble gas group in the periodic table . The He boiling and melting points are the lowest among all the elements . 
 Helium is the second lightest element and is the second most abundant element in the observable universe , being present at about 24 % of the total elemental mass , which is more than 12 times the mass of all the heavier elements combined . Its abundance is similar to this figure in the Sun and in Jupiter . This is due to the very high nuclear binding energy ( per nucleon ) of helium @-@ 4 with respect to the next three elements after helium . This helium @-@ 4 binding energy also accounts for why it is a product of both nuclear fusion and radioactive decay . Most helium in the universe is helium @-@ 4 , and is believed to have been formed during the Big Bang . Large amounts of new helium are being created by nuclear fusion of hydrogen in stars . 
 Helium is named for the Greek god of the Sun , Helios . It was first detected as an unknown yellow spectral line signature in sunlight during a solar eclipse in 1868 by French astronomer Jules Janssen . Janssen is jointly credited with detecting the element along with Norman Lockyer . <unk> observed during the solar eclipse of 1868 while Lockyer observed from Britain . Lockyer was the first to propose that the line was due to a new element , which he named . The formal discovery of the element was made in 1895 by two Swedish chemists , Per Teodor Cleve and Nils Abraham Langlet , who found helium emanating from the uranium ore cleveite . In 1903 , large reserves of helium were found in natural gas fields in parts of the United States , which is by far the largest supplier of the gas today . 
 Liquid helium is used in cryogenics ( its largest single use , absorbing about a quarter of production ) , particularly in the cooling of superconducting magnets , with the main commercial application being in MRI scanners . Helium 's other industrial uses — as a pressurizing and purge gas , as a protective atmosphere for arc welding and in processes such as growing crystals to make silicon wafers — account for half of the gas produced . A well @-@ known but minor use is as a lifting gas in balloons and airships . As with any gas whose density differs from that of air , inhaling a small volume of helium temporarily changes the timbre and quality of the human voice . In scientific research , the behavior of the two fluid phases of helium @-@ 4 ( helium I and helium II ) is important to researchers studying quantum mechanics ( in particular the property of superfluidity ) and to those looking at the phenomena , such as superconductivity , produced in matter near absolute zero . 
 On Earth it is relatively rare — 5 @.@ 2 ppm by volume in the atmosphere . Most terrestrial helium present today is created by the natural radioactive decay of heavy radioactive elements ( thorium and uranium , although there are other examples ) , as the alpha particles emitted by such decays consist of helium @-@ 4 nuclei . This radiogenic helium is trapped with natural gas in concentrations up to 7 % by volume , from which it is extracted commercially by a low @-@ temperature separation process called fractional distillation . Previously , terrestrial helium was thought to be a non @-@ renewable resource because once released into the atmosphere , it readily escapes into space . However , recent studies suggest that helium is produced deep in the earth by radioactive decay , and that large untapped reserves may exist under the Rocky Mountains in North America and in natural gas reserves . Geologists / Researchers of Durham and Oxford universities found large quantities of helium within the Tanzanian East African Rift Valley . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Scientific discoveries = = = 
 The first evidence of helium was observed on August 18 , 1868 , as a bright yellow line with a wavelength of 587 @.@ 49 nanometers in the spectrum of the chromosphere of the Sun . The line was detected by French astronomer Jules Janssen during a total solar eclipse in Guntur , India . This line was initially assumed to be sodium . On October 20 of the same year , English astronomer Norman Lockyer observed a yellow line in the solar spectrum , which he named the D3 Fraunhofer line because it was near the known D1 and D2 lines of sodium . He concluded that it was caused by an element in the Sun unknown on Earth . Lockyer and English chemist Edward Frankland named the element with the Greek word for the Sun , <unk> ( helios ) . 
 In 1882 , Italian physicist Luigi Palmieri detected helium on Earth for the first time through its D3 spectral line , when he analyzed the lava of Mount Vesuvius . 
 On March 26 , 1895 , Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay isolated helium on Earth by treating the mineral cleveite ( a variety of uraninite with at least 10 % rare earth elements ) with mineral acids . Ramsay was looking for argon but , after separating nitrogen and oxygen from the gas liberated by sulfuric acid , he noticed a bright yellow line that matched the D3 line observed in the spectrum of the Sun . These samples were identified as helium by Lockyer and British physicist William Crookes . It was independently isolated from cleveite in the same year by chemists Per Teodor Cleve and Abraham Langlet in Uppsala , Sweden , who collected enough of the gas to accurately determine its atomic weight . Helium was also isolated by the American geochemist William Francis Hillebrand prior to Ramsay 's discovery when he noticed unusual spectral lines while testing a sample of the mineral uraninite . Hillebrand , however , attributed the lines to nitrogen . His letter of congratulations to Ramsay offers an interesting case of discovery and near @-@ discovery in science . 
 In 1907 , Ernest Rutherford and Thomas Royds demonstrated that alpha particles are helium nuclei by allowing the particles to penetrate the thin glass wall of an evacuated tube , then creating a discharge in the tube to study the spectra of the new gas inside . In 1908 , helium was first liquefied by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes by cooling the gas to less than one kelvin . He tried to solidify it by further reducing the temperature but failed because helium does not solidify at atmospheric pressure . Onnes ' student Willem Hendrik <unk> was eventually able to solidify 1 cm3 of helium in 1926 by applying additional external pressure . 
 In 1938 , Russian physicist Pyotr <unk> Kapitsa discovered that helium @-@ 4 has almost no viscosity at temperatures near absolute zero , a phenomenon now called superfluidity . This phenomenon is related to Bose – Einstein condensation . In 1972 , the same phenomenon was observed in helium @-@ 3 , but at temperatures much closer to absolute zero , by American physicists Douglas D. <unk> , David M. Lee , and Robert C. Richardson . The phenomenon in helium @-@ 3 is thought to be related to pairing of helium @-@ 3 fermions to make bosons , in analogy to Cooper pairs of electrons producing superconductivity . 
 = = = Extraction and use = = = 
 After an oil drilling operation in 1903 in Dexter , Kansas , produced a gas geyser that would not burn , Kansas state geologist Erasmus Haworth collected samples of the escaping gas and took them back to the University of Kansas at Lawrence where , with the help of chemists Hamilton Cady and David McFarland , he discovered that the gas consisted of , by volume , 72 % nitrogen , 15 % methane ( a combustible percentage only with sufficient oxygen ) , 1 % hydrogen , and 12 % an unidentifiable gas . With further analysis , Cady and McFarland discovered that 1 @.@ 84 % of the gas sample was helium . This showed that despite its overall rarity on Earth , helium was concentrated in large quantities under the American Great Plains , available for extraction as a byproduct of natural gas . 
 This enabled the United States to become the world 's leading supplier of helium . Following a suggestion by Sir Richard Threlfall , the United States Navy sponsored three small experimental helium plants during World War I. The goal was to supply barrage balloons with the non @-@ flammable , lighter @-@ than @-@ air gas . A total of 5 @,@ 700 m3 ( 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of 92 % helium was produced in the program even though less than a cubic meter of the gas had previously been obtained . Some of this gas was used in the world 's first helium @-@ filled airship , the U.S. Navy 's C @-@ 7 , which flew its maiden voyage from Hampton Roads , Virginia , to Bolling Field in Washington , D.C. , on December 1 , 1921 , nearly two years before the Navy 's first rigid helium @-@ filled airship , the Naval Aircraft Factory @-@ built USS Shenandoah , flew in September 1923 . 
 Although the extraction process , using low @-@ temperature gas liquefaction , was not developed in time to be significant during World War I , production continued . Helium was primarily used as a lifting gas in lighter @-@ than @-@ air craft . During World War II , the demand increased for helium for lifting gas and for shielded arc welding . The helium mass spectrometer was also vital in the atomic bomb Manhattan Project . 
 The government of the United States set up the National Helium Reserve in 1925 at Amarillo , Texas , with the goal of supplying military airships in time of war and commercial airships in peacetime . Because of the Helium Control Act ( 1927 ) , which banned the export of scarce helium on which the US then had a production monopoly , together with the prohibitive cost of the gas , the Hindenburg , like all German Zeppelins , was forced to use hydrogen as the lift gas . The helium market after World War II was depressed but the reserve was expanded in the 1950s to ensure a supply of liquid helium as a coolant to create oxygen / hydrogen rocket fuel ( among other uses ) during the Space Race and Cold War . Helium use in the United States in 1965 was more than eight times the peak wartime consumption . 
 After the " Helium Acts Amendments of 1960 " ( Public Law 86 – 777 ) , the U.S. Bureau of Mines arranged for five private plants to recover helium from natural gas . For this helium conservation program , the Bureau built a 425 @-@ mile ( 684 km ) pipeline from <unk> , Kansas , to connect those plants with the government 's partially depleted Cliffside gas field near Amarillo , Texas . This helium @-@ nitrogen mixture was injected and stored in the Cliffside gas field until needed , at which time it was further purified . 
 By 1995 , a billion cubic meters of the gas had been collected and the reserve was US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in debt , prompting the Congress of the United States in 1996 to phase out the reserve . The resulting " Helium Privatization Act of 1996 " ( Public Law 104 – 273 ) directed the United States Department of the Interior to empty the reserve , with sales starting by 2005 . 
 Helium produced between 1930 and 1945 was about 98 @.@ 3 % pure ( 2 % nitrogen ) , which was adequate for airships . In 1945 , a small amount of 99 @.@ 9 % helium was produced for welding use . By 1949 , commercial quantities of Grade A 99 @.@ 95 % helium were available . 
 For many years , the United States produced more than 90 % of commercially usable helium in the world , while extraction plants in Canada , Poland , Russia , and other nations produced the remainder . In the mid @-@ 1990s , a new plant in Arzew , Algeria , producing 17 million cubic meters ( 600 million cubic feet ) began operation , with enough production to cover all of Europe 's demand . Meanwhile , by 2000 , the consumption of helium within the U.S. had risen to more than 15 million kg per year . In 2004 – 2006 , additional plants in Ras Laffan , Qatar , and <unk> , Algeria were built . Algeria quickly became the second leading producer of helium . Through this time , both helium consumption and the costs of producing helium increased . From 2002 to 2007 helium prices doubled . 
 As of 2012 , the United States National Helium Reserve accounted for 30 percent of the world 's helium . The reserve was expected to run out of helium in 2018 . Despite that , a proposed bill in the United States Senate would allow the reserve to continue to sell the gas . Other large reserves were in the <unk> in Kansas , United States , and nearby gas fields of Kansas and the panhandles of Texas and Oklahoma . New helium plants were scheduled to open in 2012 in Qatar , Russia , and the United States state of Wyoming , but they were not expected to ease the shortage . 
 In 2013 , Qatar started up the world 's largest helium unit . 2014 was widely acknowledged to be a year of over @-@ supply in the helium business , following years of renowned shortages . Nasdaq reported ( 2015 ) that for Air Products , an international corporation that sells gases for industrial use , helium volumes remain under pressure due to feedstock supply constraints . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = The helium atom = = = 
 = = = = Helium in quantum mechanics = = = = 
 In the perspective of quantum mechanics , helium is the second simplest atom to model , following the hydrogen atom . Helium is composed of two electrons in atomic orbitals surrounding a nucleus containing two protons and ( usually ) two neutrons . As in Newtonian mechanics , no system that consists of more than two particles can be solved with an exact analytical mathematical approach ( see 3 @-@ body problem ) and helium is no exception . Thus , numerical mathematical methods are required , even to solve the system of one nucleus and two electrons . Such computational chemistry methods have been used to create a quantum mechanical picture of helium electron binding which is accurate to within < 2 % of the correct value , in a few computational steps . Such models show that each electron in helium partly screens the nucleus from the other , so that the effective nuclear charge Z which each electron sees , is about 1 @.@ 69 units , not the 2 charges of a classic " bare " helium nucleus . 
 = = = = The related stability of the helium @-@ 4 nucleus and electron shell = = = = 
 The nucleus of the helium @-@ 4 atom is identical with an alpha particle . High @-@ energy electron @-@ scattering experiments show its charge to decrease exponentially from a maximum at a central point , exactly as does the charge density of helium 's own electron cloud . This symmetry reflects similar underlying physics : the pair of neutrons and the pair of protons in helium 's nucleus obey the same quantum mechanical rules as do helium 's pair of electrons ( although the nuclear particles are subject to a different nuclear binding potential ) , so that all these fermions fully occupy 1s orbitals in pairs , none of them possessing orbital angular momentum , and each cancelling the other 's intrinsic spin . Adding another of any of these particles would require angular momentum and would release substantially less energy ( in fact , no nucleus with five nucleons is stable ) . This arrangement is thus energetically extremely stable for all these particles , and this stability accounts for many crucial facts regarding helium in nature . 
 For example , the stability and low energy of the electron cloud state in helium accounts for the element 's chemical inertness , and also the lack of interaction of helium atoms with each other , producing the lowest melting and boiling points of all the elements . 
 In a similar way , the particular energetic stability of the helium @-@ 4 nucleus , produced by similar effects , accounts for the ease of helium @-@ 4 production in atomic reactions that involve either heavy @-@ particle emission or fusion . Some stable helium @-@ 3 ( 2 protons and 1 neutron ) is produced in fusion reactions from hydrogen , but it is a very small fraction compared to the highly favorable helium @-@ 4 . 
 The unusual stability of the helium @-@ 4 nucleus is also important <unk> : it explains the fact that in the first few minutes after the Big Bang , as the " soup " of free protons and neutrons which had initially been created in about 6 : 1 ratio cooled to the point that nuclear binding was possible , almost all first compound atomic nuclei to form were helium @-@ 4 nuclei . So tight was helium @-@ 4 binding that helium @-@ 4 production consumed nearly all of the free neutrons in a few minutes , before they could beta @-@ decay , and also leaving few to form heavier atoms such as lithium , beryllium , or boron . Helium @-@ 4 nuclear binding per nucleon is stronger than in any of these elements ( see <unk> and binding energy ) and thus , once helium had been formed , no energetic drive was available to make elements 3 , 4 and 5 . It was barely energetically favorable for helium to fuse into the next element with a lower energy per nucleon , carbon . However , due to lack of intermediate elements , this process requires three helium nuclei striking each other nearly simultaneously ( see triple alpha process ) . There was thus no time for significant carbon to be formed in the few minutes after the Big Bang , before the early expanding universe cooled to the temperature and pressure point where helium fusion to carbon was no longer possible . This left the early universe with a very similar ratio of hydrogen / helium as is observed today ( 3 parts hydrogen to 1 part helium @-@ 4 by mass ) , with nearly all the neutrons in the universe trapped in helium @-@ 4 . 
 All heavier elements ( including those necessary for rocky planets like the Earth , and for carbon @-@ based or other life ) have thus been created since the Big Bang in stars which were hot enough to fuse helium itself . All elements other than hydrogen and helium today account for only 2 % of the mass of atomic matter in the universe . Helium @-@ 4 , by contrast , makes up about 23 % of the universe 's ordinary matter — nearly all the ordinary matter that is not hydrogen . 
 = = = Gas and plasma phases = = = 
 Helium is the second least reactive noble gas after neon , and thus the second least reactive of all elements . It is inert and monatomic in all standard conditions . Because of helium 's relatively low molar ( atomic ) mass , its thermal conductivity , specific heat , and sound speed in the gas phase are all greater than any other gas except hydrogen . For these reasons and the small size of helium monatomic molecules , helium diffuses through solids at a rate three times that of air and around 65 % that of hydrogen . 
 Helium is the least water @-@ soluble monatomic gas , and one of the least water @-@ soluble of any gas ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> have lower mole fraction solubilities : 0 @.@ <unk> , 0 @.@ <unk> , and 0 @.@ 2372 x2 / 10 − 5 , respectively , versus helium 's 0 @.@ <unk> x2 / 10 − 5 ) , and helium 's index of refraction is closer to unity than that of any other gas . Helium has a negative Joule @-@ Thomson coefficient at normal ambient temperatures , meaning it heats up when allowed to freely expand . Only below its Joule @-@ Thomson inversion temperature ( of about 32 to 50 K at 1 atmosphere ) does it cool upon free expansion . Once precooled below this temperature , helium can be liquefied through expansion cooling . 
 Most extraterrestrial helium is found in a plasma state , with properties quite different from those of atomic helium . In a plasma , helium 's electrons are not bound to its nucleus , resulting in very high electrical conductivity , even when the gas is only partially ionized . The charged particles are highly influenced by magnetic and electric fields . For example , in the solar wind together with ionized hydrogen , the particles interact with the Earth 's magnetosphere , giving rise to Birkeland currents and the aurora . 
 = = = Liquid helium = = = 
 Unlike any other element , helium will remain liquid down to absolute zero at normal pressures . This is a direct effect of quantum mechanics : specifically , the zero point energy of the system is too high to allow freezing . Solid helium requires a temperature of 1 – 1 @.@ 5 K ( about − 272 ° C or − 457 ° F ) and about 25 bar ( 2 @.@ 5 MPa ) of pressure . It is often hard to distinguish solid from liquid helium since the refractive index of the two phases are nearly the same . The solid has a sharp melting point and has a crystalline structure , but it is highly compressible ; applying pressure in a laboratory can decrease its volume by more than 30 % . With a bulk modulus of about 27 MPa it is ~ 100 times more compressible than water . Solid helium has a density of 0 @.@ 214 ± 0 @.@ 006 g / cm3 at 1 @.@ 15 K and 66 atm ; the projected density at 0 K and 25 bar ( 2 @.@ 5 MPa ) is 0 @.@ 187 ± 0 @.@ 009 g / cm3 . 
 = = = = Helium I state = = = = 
 Below its boiling point of 4 @.@ 22 kelvins and above the lambda point of 2 @.@ 1768 kelvins , the isotope helium @-@ 4 exists in a normal colorless liquid state , called helium I. Like other cryogenic liquids , helium I boils when it is heated and contracts when its temperature is lowered . Below the lambda point , however , helium does not boil , and it expands as the temperature is lowered further . 
 Helium I has a gas @-@ like index of refraction of 1 @.@ 026 which makes its surface so hard to see that floats of Styrofoam are often used to show where the surface is . This colorless liquid has a very low viscosity and a density of 0 @.@ 145 – 0 @.@ 125 g / mL ( between about 0 and 4 K ) , which is only one @-@ fourth the value expected from classical physics . Quantum mechanics is needed to explain this property and thus both states of liquid helium ( helium I and helium II ) are called quantum fluids , meaning they display atomic properties on a macroscopic scale . This may be an effect of its boiling point being so close to absolute zero , preventing random molecular motion ( thermal energy ) from masking the atomic properties . 
 = = = = Helium II state = = = = 
 Liquid helium below its lambda point ( called helium II ) exhibits very unusual characteristics . Due to its high thermal conductivity , when it boils , it does not bubble but rather evaporates directly from its surface . Helium @-@ 3 also has a superfluid phase , but only at much lower temperatures ; as a result , less is known about the properties of the isotope . 
 Helium II is a superfluid , a quantum mechanical state ( see : macroscopic quantum phenomena ) of matter with strange properties . For example , when it flows through capillaries as thin as 10 − 7 to 10 − 8 m it has no measurable viscosity . However , when measurements were done between two moving discs , a viscosity comparable to that of gaseous helium was observed . Current theory explains this using the two @-@ fluid model for helium II . In this model , liquid helium below the lambda point is viewed as containing a proportion of helium atoms in a ground state , which are superfluid and flow with exactly zero viscosity , and a proportion of helium atoms in an excited state , which behave more like an ordinary fluid . 
 In the fountain effect , a chamber is constructed which is connected to a reservoir of helium II by a sintered disc through which superfluid helium leaks easily but through which non @-@ superfluid helium cannot pass . If the interior of the container is heated , the superfluid helium changes to non @-@ superfluid helium . In order to maintain the equilibrium fraction of superfluid helium , superfluid helium leaks through and increases the pressure , causing liquid to fountain out of the container . 
 The thermal conductivity of helium II is greater than that of any other known substance , a million times that of helium I and several hundred times that of copper . This is because heat conduction occurs by an exceptional quantum mechanism . Most materials that conduct heat well have a valence band of free electrons which serve to transfer the heat . Helium II has no such valence band but nevertheless conducts heat well . The flow of heat is governed by equations that are similar to the wave equation used to characterize sound propagation in air . When heat is introduced , it moves at 20 meters per second at 1 @.@ 8 K through helium II as waves in a phenomenon known as second sound . 
 Helium II also exhibits a creeping effect . When a surface extends past the level of helium II , the helium II moves along the surface , against the force of gravity . Helium II will escape from a vessel that is not sealed by creeping along the sides until it reaches a warmer region where it evaporates . It moves in a 30 nm @-@ thick film regardless of surface material . This film is called a Rollin film and is named after the man who first characterized this trait , Bernard V. Rollin . As a result of this creeping behavior and helium II 's ability to leak rapidly through tiny openings , it is very difficult to confine liquid helium . Unless the container is carefully constructed , the helium II will creep along the surfaces and through valves until it reaches somewhere warmer , where it will evaporate . Waves propagating across a Rollin film are governed by the same equation as gravity waves in shallow water , but rather than gravity , the restoring force is the van der Waals force . These waves are known as third sound . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 There are nine known isotopes of helium , but only helium @-@ 3 and helium @-@ 4 are stable . In the Earth 's atmosphere , one atom is 3He for every million that are 4He . Unlike most elements , helium 's isotopic abundance varies greatly by origin , due to the different formation processes . The most common isotope , helium @-@ 4 , is produced on Earth by alpha decay of heavier radioactive elements ; the alpha particles that emerge are fully ionized helium @-@ 4 nuclei . Helium @-@ 4 is an unusually stable nucleus because its nucleons are arranged into complete shells . It was also formed in enormous quantities during Big Bang nucleosynthesis . 
 Helium @-@ 3 is present on Earth only in trace amounts ; most of it since Earth 's formation , though some falls to Earth trapped in cosmic dust . Trace amounts are also produced by the beta decay of tritium . Rocks from the Earth 's crust have isotope ratios varying by as much as a factor of ten , and these ratios can be used to investigate the origin of rocks and the composition of the Earth 's mantle . 3He is much more abundant in stars as a product of nuclear fusion . Thus in the interstellar medium , the proportion of 3He to 4He is about 100 times higher than on Earth . <unk> material , such as lunar and asteroid regolith , have trace amounts of helium @-@ 3 from being bombarded by solar winds . The Moon 's surface contains helium @-@ 3 at concentrations on the order of 10 ppb , much higher than the approximately 5 ppt found in the Earth 's atmosphere . A number of people , starting with Gerald <unk> in 1986 , have proposed to explore the moon , mine lunar regolith , and use the helium @-@ 3 for fusion . 
 Liquid helium @-@ 4 can be cooled to about 1 kelvin using evaporative cooling in a 1 @-@ K pot . Similar cooling of helium @-@ 3 , which has a lower boiling point , can achieve about 0 @.@ 2 kelvin in a helium @-@ 3 refrigerator . Equal mixtures of liquid 3He and 4He below 0 @.@ 8 K separate into two immiscible phases due to their dissimilarity ( they follow different quantum statistics : helium @-@ 4 atoms are bosons while helium @-@ 3 atoms are fermions ) . Dilution refrigerators use this <unk> to achieve temperatures of a few <unk> . 
 It is possible to produce exotic helium isotopes , which rapidly decay into other substances . The shortest @-@ lived heavy helium isotope is helium @-@ 5 with a half @-@ life of 7 @.@ 6 × 10 − 22 s . Helium @-@ 6 decays by emitting a beta particle and has a half @-@ life of 0 @.@ 8 second . Helium @-@ 7 also emits a beta particle as well as a gamma ray . Helium @-@ 7 and helium @-@ 8 are created in certain nuclear reactions . Helium @-@ 6 and helium @-@ 8 are known to exhibit a nuclear halo . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Helium has a valence of zero and is chemically unreactive under all normal conditions . It is an electrical insulator unless ionized . As with the other noble gases , helium has metastable energy levels that allow it to remain ionized in an electrical discharge with a voltage below its ionization potential . Helium can form unstable compounds , known as excimers , with tungsten , iodine , fluorine , sulfur , and phosphorus when it is subjected to a glow discharge , to electron bombardment , or reduced to plasma by other means . The molecular compounds <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , and the molecular ions He + 
 2 , He2 + 
 2 , HeH + , and <unk> + have been created this way . HeH + is also stable in its ground state , but is extremely reactive — it is the strongest Brønsted acid known , and therefore can exist only in isolation , as it will <unk> any molecule or <unk> it contacts . This technique has also produced the neutral molecule He2 , which has a large number of band systems , and <unk> , which is apparently held together only by polarization forces . 
 Van der Waals compounds of helium can also be formed with cryogenic helium gas and atoms of some other substance , such as <unk> and He2 . 
 Theoretically , other true compounds may be possible , such as helium fluorohydride ( <unk> ) which would be analogous to HArF , discovered in 2000 . Calculations show that two new compounds containing a helium @-@ oxygen bond could be stable . Two new molecular species , predicted using theory , <unk> and N ( CH3 ) <unk> , are derivatives of a metastable [ F – <unk> ] anion first theorized in 2005 by a group from Taiwan . If confirmed by experiment , the only remaining element with no known stable compounds would be neon . 
 Helium atoms have been inserted into the hollow carbon cage molecules ( the fullerenes ) by heating under high pressure . The endohedral fullerene molecules formed are stable at high temperatures . When chemical derivatives of these fullerenes are formed , the helium stays inside . If helium @-@ 3 is used , it can be readily observed by helium nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy . Many fullerenes containing helium @-@ 3 have been reported . Although the helium atoms are not attached by covalent or ionic bonds , these substances have distinct properties and a definite composition , like all stoichiometric chemical compounds . 
 Under high pressures helium can form compounds with various other elements . Helium @-@ nitrogen clathrate ( He ( N2 ) 11 ) crystals have been grown at room temperature at pressures ca . 10 GPa in a diamond anvil cell . At 130 GPa <unk> is thermodynamically stable with a fluorite structure . 
 = = Occurrence and production = = 
 = = = Natural abundance = = = 
 Although it is rare on Earth , helium is the second most abundant element in the known Universe ( after hydrogen ) , constituting 23 % of its baryonic mass . The vast majority of helium was formed by Big Bang nucleosynthesis one to three minutes after the Big Bang . As such , measurements of its abundance contribute to cosmological models . In stars , it is formed by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen in proton @-@ proton chain reactions and the CNO cycle , part of stellar nucleosynthesis . 
 In the Earth 's atmosphere , the concentration of helium by volume is only 5 @.@ 2 parts per million . The concentration is low and fairly constant despite the continuous production of new helium because most helium in the Earth 's atmosphere escapes into space by several processes . In the Earth 's <unk> , a part of the upper atmosphere , helium and other lighter gases are the most abundant elements . 
 Most helium on Earth is a result of radioactive decay . Helium is found in large amounts in minerals of uranium and thorium , including cleveite , pitchblende , carnotite and monazite , because they emit alpha particles ( helium nuclei , He2 + ) to which electrons immediately combine as soon as the particle is stopped by the rock . In this way an estimated 3000 metric tons of helium are generated per year throughout the lithosphere . In the Earth 's crust , the concentration of helium is 8 parts per billion . In seawater , the concentration is only 4 parts per trillion . There are also small amounts in mineral springs , volcanic gas , and meteoric iron . Because helium is trapped in the subsurface under conditions that also trap natural gas , the greatest natural concentrations of helium on the planet are found in natural gas , from which most commercial helium is extracted . The concentration varies in a broad range from a few ppm up to over 7 % in a small gas field in San Juan County , New Mexico . 
 As of 2011 the world 's helium reserves were estimated at 40 billion cubic meters , with a quarter of that being in the South Pars / North Dome Gas @-@ <unk> field owned jointly by Qatar and Iran . 
 = = = Modern extraction and distribution = = = 
 For large @-@ scale use , helium is extracted by fractional distillation from natural gas , which can contain up to 7 % helium . Since helium has a lower boiling point than any other element , low temperature and high pressure are used to liquefy nearly all the other gases ( mostly nitrogen and methane ) . The resulting crude helium gas is purified by successive exposures to lowering temperatures , in which almost all of the remaining nitrogen and other gases are precipitated out of the gaseous mixture . Activated charcoal is used as a final purification step , usually resulting in 99 @.@ 995 % pure Grade @-@ A helium . The principal impurity in Grade @-@ A helium is neon . In a final production step , most of the helium that is produced is liquefied via a cryogenic process . This is necessary for applications requiring liquid helium and also allows helium suppliers to reduce the cost of long distance transportation , as the largest liquid helium containers have more than five times the capacity of the largest gaseous helium tube trailers . 
 In 2008 , approximately 169 million standard cubic meters ( SCM ) of helium were extracted from natural gas or withdrawn from helium reserves with approximately 78 % from the United States , 10 % from Algeria , and most of the remainder from Russia , Poland and Qatar . By 2013 , increases in helium production in Qatar ( under the company <unk> managed by Air Liquide ) had increased Qatar 's fraction of world helium production to 25 % , and made it the second largest exporter after the United States . 
 In the United States , most helium is extracted from natural gas of the <unk> and nearby gas fields in Kansas , Oklahoma , and the Panhandle Field in Texas . Much of this gas was once sent by pipeline to the National Helium Reserve , but since 2005 this reserve is being depleted and sold off , and is expected under present law to be largely depleted by 2021 . 
 Diffusion of crude natural gas through special <unk> membranes and other barriers is another method to recover and purify helium . In 1996 , the U.S. had proven helium reserves , in such gas well complexes , of about 147 billion standard cubic feet ( 4 @.@ 2 billion SCM ) . At rates of use at that time ( 72 million SCM per year in the U.S. ; see pie chart below ) this would have been enough helium for about 58 years of U.S. use , and less than this ( perhaps 80 % of the time ) at world use rates , although factors in saving and processing impact effective reserve numbers . 
 Helium must be extracted from natural gas because it is present in air at only a fraction of that of neon , yet the demand for it is far higher . It is estimated that if all neon production were retooled to save helium , that 0 @.@ 1 % of the world 's helium demands would be satisfied . Similarly , only 1 % of the world 's helium demands could be satisfied by re @-@ tooling all air distillation plants . Helium can be synthesized by bombardment of lithium or boron with high @-@ velocity protons , but this process is a completely uneconomic method of production . 
 Helium is commercially available in either liquid or gaseous form . As a liquid , it can be supplied in small insulated containers called <unk> which hold up to 1 @,@ 000 liters of helium , or in large ISO containers which have nominal capacities as large as 42 m3 ( around 11 @,@ 000 U.S. gallons ) . In gaseous form , small quantities of helium are supplied in high @-@ pressure cylinders holding up to 8 m3 ( approx . 282 standard cubic feet ) , while large quantities of high @-@ pressure gas are supplied in tube trailers which have capacities of up to 4 @,@ 860 m3 ( approx . 172 @,@ 000 standard cubic feet ) . 
 In Tanzania there are large amounts of helium detected . 
 = = = Conservation advocates = = = 
 According to helium conservationists like Nobel laureate physicist Robert Coleman Richardson , the free market price of helium has contributed to " wasteful " usage ( e.g. for helium balloons ) . Prices in the 2000s have been lowered by U.S. Congress ' decision to sell off the country 's large helium stockpile by 2015 . According to Richardson , the current price needs to be multiplied by 20 to eliminate the excessive wasting of helium . In their book , the Future of helium as a natural resource ( Routledge , 2012 ) , Nuttall , Clarke & <unk> ( 2012 ) also proposed to create an International Helium Agency ( IHA ) to build a sustainable market for this precious commodity . 
 = = Applications = = 
 While balloons are perhaps the best known use of helium , they are a minor part of all helium use . Helium is used for many purposes that require some of its unique properties , such as its low boiling point , low density , low solubility , high thermal conductivity , or inertness . Of the 2014 world helium total production of about 32 million kg ( 180 million standard cubic meters ) helium per year , the largest use ( about 32 % of the total in 2014 ) is in cryogenic applications , most of which involves cooling the superconducting magnets in medical MRI scanners and NMR spectrometers . Other major uses were pressurizing and purging systems , welding , maintenance of controlled atmospheres , and leak detection . Other uses by category were relatively minor fractions . 
 = = = Controlled atmospheres = = = 
 Helium is used as a protective gas in growing silicon and germanium crystals , in titanium and zirconium production , and in gas chromatography , because it is inert . Because of its inertness , thermally and <unk> perfect nature , high speed of sound , and high value of the heat capacity ratio , it is also useful in supersonic wind tunnels and impulse facilities . 
 = = = Gas tungsten arc welding = = = 
 Helium is used as a shielding gas in arc welding processes on materials that at welding temperatures are contaminated and weakened by air or nitrogen . A number of inert shielding gases are used in gas tungsten arc welding , but helium is used instead of cheaper argon especially for welding materials that have higher heat conductivity , like aluminium or copper . 
 = = = Minor uses = = = 
 = = = = Industrial leak detection = = = = 
 One industrial application for helium is leak detection . Because helium diffuses through solids three times faster than air , it is used as a tracer gas to detect leaks in high @-@ vacuum equipment ( such as cryogenic tanks ) and high @-@ pressure containers . The tested object is placed in a chamber , which is then evacuated and filled with helium . The helium that escapes through the leaks is detected by a sensitive device ( helium mass spectrometer ) , even at the leak rates as small as 10 − 9 mbar · L / s ( 10 − 10 Pa · m3 / s ) . The measurement procedure is normally automatic and is called helium integral test . A simpler procedure is to fill the tested object with helium and to manually search for leaks with a hand @-@ held device . 
 Helium leaks through cracks should not be confused with gas permeation through a bulk material . While helium has documented permeation constants ( thus a calculable permeation rate ) through glasses , ceramics , and synthetic materials , inert gases such as helium will not permeate most bulk metals . 
 = = = = Flight = = = = 
 Because it is lighter than air , airships and balloons are inflated with helium for lift . While hydrogen gas is more buoyant , and escapes permeating through a membrane at a lower rate , helium has the advantage of being non @-@ flammable , and indeed fire @-@ retardant . Another minor use is in rocketry , where helium is used as an <unk> medium to displace fuel and oxidizers in storage tanks and to condense hydrogen and oxygen to make rocket fuel . It is also used to purge fuel and oxidizer from ground support equipment prior to launch and to pre @-@ cool liquid hydrogen in space vehicles . For example , the Saturn V rocket used in the Apollo program needed about 370 @,@ 000 m3 ( 13 million cubic feet ) of helium to launch . 
 = = = = Minor commercial and recreational uses = = = = 
 Helium as a breathing gas has no narcotic properties , so helium mixtures such as trimix , heliox and <unk> are used for deep diving to reduce the effects of narcosis , which worsen with increasing depth . As pressure increases with depth , the density of the breathing gas also increases , and the low molecular weight of helium is found to considerably reduce the effort of breathing by lowering the density of the mixture . This reduces the Reynolds number of flow , leading to a reduction of turbulent flow and an increase in laminar flow , which requires less work of breathing . At depths below 150 metres ( 490 ft ) divers breathing helium – oxygen mixtures begin to experience tremors and a decrease in psychomotor function , symptoms of high @-@ pressure nervous syndrome . This effect may be countered to some extent by adding an amount of narcotic gas such as hydrogen or nitrogen to a helium – oxygen mixture . 
 Helium – neon lasers , a type of low @-@ powered gas laser producing a red beam , had various practical applications which included barcode readers and laser pointers , before they were almost universally replaced by cheaper diode lasers . 
 For its inertness and high thermal conductivity , neutron transparency , and because it does not form radioactive isotopes under reactor conditions , helium is used as a heat @-@ transfer medium in some gas @-@ cooled nuclear reactors . 
 Helium , mixed with a heavier gas such as xenon , is useful for <unk> refrigeration due to the resulting high heat capacity ratio and low Prandtl number . The inertness of helium has environmental advantages over conventional refrigeration systems which contribute to ozone depletion or global warming . 
 Helium is also used in some hard disk drives . 
 = = = = Scientific uses = = = = 
 The use of helium reduces the distorting effects of temperature variations in the space between lenses in some telescopes , due to its extremely low index of refraction . This method is especially used in solar telescopes where a vacuum tight telescope tube would be too heavy . 
 Helium is a commonly used carrier gas for gas chromatography . 
 The age of rocks and minerals that contain uranium and thorium can be estimated by measuring the level of helium with a process known as helium dating . 
 Helium at low temperatures is used in cryogenics , and in certain cryogenics applications . As examples of applications , liquid helium is used to cool certain metals to the extremely low temperatures required for superconductivity , such as in superconducting magnets for magnetic resonance imaging . The Large Hadron Collider at CERN uses 96 metric tons of liquid helium to maintain the temperature at 1 @.@ 9 kelvin . 
 = = Inhalation and safety = = 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Neutral helium at standard conditions is non @-@ toxic , plays no biological role and is found in trace amounts in human blood . 
 The speed of sound in helium is nearly three times the speed of sound in air . Because the fundamental frequency of a gas @-@ filled cavity is proportional to the speed of sound in the gas , when helium is inhaled there is a corresponding increase in the resonant frequencies of the vocal tract . The fundamental frequency ( sometimes called pitch ) does not change , since this is produced by direct vibration of the vocal folds , which is unchanged . However , the higher resonant frequencies cause a change in timbre , resulting in a reedy , duck @-@ like vocal quality . The opposite effect , lowering resonant frequencies , can be obtained by inhaling a dense gas such as sulfur hexafluoride or xenon . 
 = = = Hazards = = = 
 Inhaling helium can be dangerous if done to excess , since helium is a simple asphyxiant and so displaces oxygen needed for normal respiration . Fatalities have been recorded , including a youth who suffocated in Vancouver in 2003 and two adults who suffocated in South Florida in 2006 . In 1998 , an Australian girl ( her age is not known ) from Victoria fell unconscious and temporarily turned blue after inhaling the entire contents of a party balloon . Inhaling helium directly from pressurized cylinders or even ( pressure <unk> ) balloon filling valves is extremely dangerous , as high flow rate and pressure can result in barotrauma , fatally rupturing lung tissue . 
 Death caused by helium is rare . The first media @-@ recorded case was that of a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl from Texas who died in 1998 from helium inhalation at a friend 's party ; the exact type of helium death is unidentified . 
 In the United States only two fatalities were reported between 2000 and 2004 , including a man who died in North Carolina of barotrauma in 2002 . A youth asphyxiated in Vancouver during 2003 , and a 27 @-@ year @-@ old man in Australia had an embolism after breathing from a cylinder in 2000 . Since then two adults asphyxiated in South Florida in 2006 , and there were cases in 2009 and 2010 , one a Californian youth who was found with a bag over his head , attached to a helium tank , and another teenager in Northern Ireland died of asphyxiation . At Eagle Point , Oregon a teenage girl died in 2012 from barotrauma at a party . A girl from Michigan died from hypoxia later in the year . 
 On February 4 , 2015 it was revealed that during the recording of their main TV show on January 28 , a 12 @-@ year @-@ old member ( name withheld ) of Japanese all @-@ girl singing group 3B Junior suffered from air embolism , losing consciousness and falling in a coma as a result of air bubbles blocking the flow of blood to the brain , after inhaling huge quantities of helium as part of a game . The incident was not made public until a week later . The staff of TV Asahi held an emergency press conference to communicate that the member had been taken to the hospital and is showing signs of rehabilitation such as moving eyes and limbs , but her consciousness has not been sufficiently recovered as of yet . Police have launched an investigation due to a neglect of safety measures . 
 The safety issues for cryogenic helium are similar to those of liquid nitrogen ; its extremely low temperatures can result in cold burns , and the liquid @-@ to @-@ gas expansion ratio can cause explosions if no pressure @-@ relief devices are installed . Containers of helium gas at 5 to 10 K should be handled as if they contain liquid helium due to the rapid and significant thermal expansion that occurs when helium gas at less than 10 K is warmed to room temperature . 
 At high pressures ( more than about 20 atm or two MPa ) , a mixture of helium and oxygen ( heliox ) can lead to high @-@ pressure nervous syndrome , a sort of reverse @-@ anesthetic effect ; adding a small amount of nitrogen to the mixture can alleviate the problem . 
 = = Additional images = = 
 = Myrmecia regularis = 
 Myrmecia regularis is a species of ant endemic to Australia . A member of the genus Myrmecia in the subfamily Myrmeciinae , it was first described by American entomologist Walter Cecil Crawley in 1925 . These ants are medium to large in size , measuring 10 to 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) , and they are bright brownish @-@ red in colour . Queens and workers share similar morphological features , but they can be distinguished by the noticeable size difference . Males also look similar , but collected specimens are too damaged to be examined properly . 
 M. regularis is found in the south @-@ western coastal regions , inhabiting eucalypt woodland and open forests . They nest underground and do not build mounds . Workers are active during the day and night , foraging on trees in search for prey and sweet substances such as sap and nectar . The larvae are strictly carnivorous and only eat insects that workers capture . Nuptial flight occurs around February to April , with queens shedding their wings inside the nest and mating near to their parent nest . Queens tend to look for food for their young before they hatch , taking as long as eight months to develop . Certain frog species are known to dwell inside M. regularis colonies . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Myrmecia regularis was first described by American entomologist Walter Cecil Crawley , who provided the first detailed description of the ant in a 1925 article , " New ants from Australia - II " , published in the Annals and Magazine of Natural History . The ant was described from two syntype workers Crawley collected from Albany , Western Australia , now preserved in Crawley 's collection in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History . This name was initially short @-@ lived , with Australian entomologist John S. Clark <unk> M. regularis with Myrmecia lucida , now a junior synonym of Myrmecia forficata . Clark 's reasons for this were unknown , and William Morton Wheeler revived the species from synonymy , stating that specimens he and W.S. Brooks collected from southwest Australia were distinct from M. lucida , after comparing the two . Wheeler also stated that M. lucida was similar to M. forficata . Despite disagreeing with Wheeler 's views , Clark noted in his publication that Wheeler 's classification should be retained until the type specimen of M. lucida could be properly examined . In this same publication , Clark synonymised M. lucida with M. regularis . In 1991 , entomologists Kazuo Ogata and Robert Taylor reviewed the species groups of Myrmecia . They assigned M. regularis to the M. gulosa species group , based on the morphological characters of worker ants . 
 = = Description = = 
 Excluding the mandibles , M. regularis workers measure 10 to 14 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) , with the mandibles measuring 3 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) . Including the mandibles , workers measure 14 to 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) , queens are 18 to 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 7 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) and males are 15 to 17 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 7 in ) . These ants are bright brownish @-@ red in colour , with brown legs and scapes , and a black gaster . The whole of the head and thorax is a bright mahogany red , while the mandibles are shaded with brown . The hair is yellow , moderately long , erect and found all over the body , but the hairs are shorter on the legs and absent on the antennae . The pubescence ( soft short hair ) is confined to the clypeus . 
 The queen shares the same colour variation , body sculpture and pilosity of a worker , but they are usually larger . Queens show reduced thoracic development , and Clark described them as " <unk> " , suggesting that wings are present in the females as undifferentiated wing buds . However , queens collected from Manjimup bore well developed wings . The head , epinotum , mesonotum and pronotum are finely striate @-@ rugose . The head is as long as it is broad with a straight occipital border . The mandibles are slightly shorter than the head with a concave border . The pronotum is broader than its total length by one @-@ third and the mesonotum is broader by one @-@ sixth , being almost circular in shape and clearly convex . The epinotum is also broader , but only slightly . The gaster is slightly broader , and the postpetiole is one @-@ fifth broader than long . The scutellum is oval and almost twice as broad as long . Male specimens have been rarely collected , and those that are available are too badly damaged for a proper examination . However , the colour and pilosity of male and worker specimens show little differentiation . 
 The heads of the workers and queens are as long as broad with <unk> sides . The mandibles are long with thirteen known teeth . The first and third segments of the funiculus are equally long . The thorax is longer than broad by two to three @-@ fourths its width , and the mesonotum is longer than it is broad in workers ; the mesonotum is broader than it is long in queens . The node ( a segment between the mesosoma and gaster ) is as long as it is broad , and the postpetiole is one @-@ sixth broader than long . The first segment of the gaster is broader than its length . M. regularis shares a similar appearance to M. forficata , but there are several morphological differences that separate the two . Owing to the rugose sculpture of the head and thorax , M. regularis is noticeably smaller than M. forficata . The mandibles of M. regularis are much narrower , the posterior corners of the head are more round and the <unk> peduncle is longer . The mandibles appear to be deep red , and some areas , such as the gastric segments , are golden brown . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 M. regularis is found in the south @-@ western coastal regions of Australia . Nests have been recorded in the towns of Albany , Denmark , <unk> , Manjimup , Pemberton and around the Margaret River in south Western Australia , Kangaroo Island in South Australia and Portland in Victoria . The ant prefers to inhabit a variety of rural environments , including woodland , open forests , dry marri forests , tree heath and granite mountains . In particular , it is a dominant species in Eucalyptus woodland , especially when E. diversicolor , E. gomphocephala and E. marginata trees are present . M. regularis colonies do not form mounds , but rather nest in damp , black soil or under large stones and logs with 100 to 200 workers present . These colonies are usually found at altitudes of between 80 and 350 m ( 260 and 1 @,@ 150 ft ) above sea level . Excavated incipient nests ( young colonies beginning to develop ) show small chambers 2 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 to 1 @.@ 57 in ) wide , where logs and stones form the roof of the cell . The ground is flat with walls continuous on all sides ; the outer walls tend to be thin , as they are situated near the edges of a log or stone . Most nests have a gallery which descends further into the ground , usually around 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) and forms a small and more irregular chamber . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 M. regularis is a highly aggressive ant that will pursue any intruder to a distance of 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 2 – 3 yards ) if their nests are disturbed . Their stings are very painful and particularly powerful . In some cases , human victims of M. regularis bites have displayed an allergy to the venom . In a 2011 study which investigated the causes of ant sting anaphylaxis in Australia , 265 of the 376 human participants reacted to the sting of several Myrmecia species . Of these , nine serum samples taken from patients were IgE positive to the venom of M. regularis . These ants are both diurnal and nocturnal , foraging on the trunks of Eucalyptus trees to feed on sap and nectar , or capturing small insects ( such as caterpillars and ants in the genus Camponotus or subgenus <unk> ) . The larvae are carnivorous and exclusively feed on insects , either consuming small portions of the insect or all of it . Unlike most Myrmecia species , trophallaxis takes place among adults or between adults and larvae . All stages of the frog <unk> <unk> are known to dwell inside M. regularis colonies , where they use several galleries constructed by the ants . The parasitic ant M. inquilina may attempt to enter M. regularis nests to establish colonies , but M. inquilina queens may be seized and killed as soon as the two species come into contact . 
 Observations show that nuptial flight does not occur before February . This is based on larvae spinning into cocoons by November , and by January , these cocoons could not produce adult workers or reproductive males and females . Queens are most likely fertilised by males sometime between February and April ; however , scientists have seen alates engage in nuptial flight during March . Before emerging from their parent nest , queens will shed their wings inside the nest and mate with low @-@ flying males nearby . After nuptial flight , a queen will isolate herself and form a small chamber underground , where she remains for seven to eight months . However , it is improbable that a queen can survive on her own storage of fat and wing @-@ musculature for that long . During this time , the queen may emerge from her nest occasionally , but she will only lay eggs from October to November when there is a rich supply of food . While this may be the case , some queens will lay eggs after a month of isolation during winter . M. regularis is a semi @-@ <unk> ant , meaning that a queen will go out and forage in order to feed her young . Queens will emerge from their nests from time to time , during which they will capture insects for their young or feed on sweet substances . If food sources are deprived , a queen will only rely on her fat to feed the larvae until she perishes or finds food , but the larvae will not be cannibalised , and remain alive until a week after the queen 's death . An individual ant may take eight months to develop from an egg to an adult . 
 = <unk> = 
 The quoll ( / <unk> / ; genus Dasyurus ) is a carnivorous marsupial native to mainland Australia , New Guinea , and Tasmania . It is primarily nocturnal and spends most of the day in its den . Of the six species of quoll , four are found in Australia and two in New Guinea . Another two species are known from fossil remains in Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits in Queensland . Genetic evidence indicates that the quoll evolved around 15 million years ago in the Miocene , and that the ancestors of the six species had all diverged by around four million years ago . The quoll species vary in weight and size , from 300 g ( 11 oz ) to 7 kg ( 15 lb ) . They have brown or black fur and pink noses . They are largely solitary , but come together for a few social interactions such as mating which occurs during the winter season . A female gives birth to up to 18 puppies , of which only six survive to suckle on her teats . 
 The quoll eats smaller mammals , small birds , lizards , and insects . Its natural lifespan is between two and five years . All species have drastically declined in numbers since Australasia was colonised by Europeans , with one species , the eastern quoll , becoming extinct on the Australian mainland , now being found only in Tasmania . Major threats to their survival include the cane toad , predators , urban development , and poison baiting . Conservation efforts include breeding programs in captivity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The name Dasyurus ( from Greek <unk> , <unk> ) means " hairy @-@ tail " , and was coined by Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire in 1796 . 
 In 1770 , Captain Cook collected quolls on his exploration of the east coast of Australia , adopting the Aboriginal name for the animals . Although the origin of Cook 's specimens are unclear , the word and its variants je @-@ quoll , <unk> or <unk> are derived from the language of the <unk> <unk> people of far north Queensland . No evidence indicates the local indigenous people used the word in the Sydney area . They were likened in appearance to a polecat or marten in the earliest reports , the tiger quoll being called " spotted marten " and eastern quoll " spotted opossum " , but by 1804 , the names " native cat " and " tiger cat " had been adopted by early settlers . In the 1960s , noted naturalist David Fleay pushed for the revival of the term " quoll " , as he felt the then current vernacular names were misleading . They are very well known animals in Australia . 
 Four species have been recovered from Pleistocene cave deposits from Mount Etna Caves National Park near Rockhampton in central Queensland . Remains of the tiger quoll and the northern quoll , and a species either identical or very similar to the eastern quoll , as well as a prehistoric species as yet undescribed , all lived in what was a rainforest climate . The northern quoll is still found in the region . The fossil species D. <unk> , described by <unk> in 1971 , is the oldest species recovered to date . Its remains were found in Pliocene deposits near Chinchilla in southeastern Queensland . Known only from a lower jaw and some teeth , it was a relative of the tiger quoll . 
 The first species described , the eastern quoll , was originally placed in the American opossum genus Didelphis by an anonymous author , and named Didelphis maculata . This name is no longer considered valid , and the second part of the name is now given to a different species , the tiger quoll , Dasyurus maculatus , while the eastern quoll was renamed Dasyurus <unk> by George Shaw in 1800 . 
 The tribe <unk> , to which quolls belong , also includes the Tasmanian devil , the antechinus , the <unk> , and the <unk> . Genetic analysis of cytochrome b DNA and 12S rRNA of the mitochondria indicates the quolls evolved and diversified in the late Miocene between 15 and 5 million years ago , a time of great diversification in marsupials . The ancestors of all current species had diverged by the early Pliocene , around 4 million years ago . 
 The genus Dasyurus consists of six species of quoll : 
 The bronze quoll ( D. <unk> ) is the only mammal found in the Trans Fly ecoregion , but not in northern Australia . It is found in the southern part of New Guinea south of the Fly River . Rising sea levels due to an increase in global temperature caused a land bridge that once connected Australia and New guinea to be covered up with water . A 2007 study conducted by the University of New South Wales suggests the bronze quoll is closely related to the western quoll , their ancestors diverging with the separation of land masses . 
 The western quoll or <unk> ( D. <unk> ) is restricted to the Jarrah Forest and the central and southern Australian Wheatbelt . The western quoll is believed to have once occupied 70 % of Australia , but because of cane toads , predators , habitat destruction , and poison baiting , it is now less abundant . 
 The New Guinean quoll ( D. <unk> ) is found throughout most of New Guinea . It tends to live at an elevation of about 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , and is not found in the south @-@ western lowlands , although it can found on <unk> Island . 
 The eastern quoll ( D. <unk> ) is now considered extinct on mainland Australia ; the last sighting there was in the 1960s . But it does inhabit much of nearby Tasmania , where it can be found in rainforests , heathland , alpine areas , and scrubs . It can be found near farms , as it eats pasture food . The eastern quoll can also be seen in the Mount Field National Park . 
 The tiger quoll or spotted tail quoll ( D. maculatus ) , lives in south @-@ eastern Australia . It tends to prefer rock dens more than dens made out of wood . In a study submitted by Belcher and <unk> in 2006 , the habitats of tiger quoll were directly related to the amount of prey found in the area . <unk> and drainage ditches were used quite often by the quolls , and ridges with rocky outcrops were used to make the rock dens the animals enjoy . The species in Queensland has declined rapidly and is now absent from the Brisbane region . Important strongholds for the population occur in the Blackall / <unk> ranges , Main Range , Lamington Plateau and the McPherson and Border ranges . 
 The northern quoll ( D. <unk> ) could be found in the northern third of Australia a century ago . Presently , it resides in high rocky areas and areas with heavy rainfall . It is abundant on the minor islands surrounding northern Australia . In 2003 , northern quolls were translocated to Astell and <unk> Islands for conservation reasons . Genetic analysis indicates it is the earliest offshoot from the ancestors of other quolls . 
 = = Description = = 
 Adults are between 25 and 75 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 and 29 @.@ 5 in ) long , with hairy tails about 20 to 35 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 to 13 @.@ 8 in ) long . Females have six nipples and develop a pouch during the breeding season , which opens toward the tail ( with the exception of the tiger quoll , which has a true pouch ) when they are rearing young . Their coats are brown or black , with some colour variants in between . They have bright pink noses and long snouts . Their natural lifespans are between two and five years ; the larger species tend to live longer than the smaller . Quolls are solitary , nocturnal animals . The average weight differs greatly depending on the species ; male western and eastern quolls weigh about 1 @.@ 3 kg ( 2 @.@ 9 lb ) and females 0 @.@ 9 kg ( 2 @.@ 0 lb ) . The tiger quoll is the largest , with the male weighing about 7 kg ( 15 lb ) and the female 4 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) . The northern quoll is the smallest , and the male weighs on average 400 to 900 g ( 14 to 32 oz ) , and the female 300 to 500 g ( 11 to 18 oz ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The quoll is indigenous to mainland Australia , New Guinea , and Tasmania . The six species were once widely distributed across the three land masses , but are now restricted to only a few areas . Although primarily ground @-@ dwelling , the genus has developed secondary arboreal characteristics . Each species of quoll lives in distinct geographical areas . The tiger quoll and eastern quoll are exclusively mesic zone species , that is they inhabit moister habitats . The western quoll also inhabits mesic habitat , but has adapted to arid regions across inland Australia , while the northern quoll inhabits tropical habitat of high rainfall . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The quoll is a carnivorous marsupial . It is primarily nocturnal , sleeping in hollowed @-@ out logs or rocky dens and coming out to hunt during the night , though on rare occasions it can be seen looking for prey during the day . It is mostly ground @-@ dwelling , but it is not uncommon to see a quoll climbing a tree . The quoll marks its territory several kilometres away from its den . A male 's territory often overlaps many females ' territories , and male and female quolls only meet for mating . Quolls have communal toilet areas , usually on an outcropping used for marking territory and social functions . These communal latrines may have up to 100 droppings in them . 
 The quoll is a mostly solitary creature , limiting contact with others to mating or other social activities such as using the latrines . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The quoll is mostly carnivorous ; the smaller quolls primarily eat insects , birds , frogs , lizards and fruit ; the larger species eat birds , reptiles , and mammals , including echidnas and possums . The tiger quoll 's diet is dominated by mammals such as brushtail possums , rabbits and hares . The exact mix is variable depending on the availability of prey after bushfires , and can include carrion or bandicoots when food is scarce . The other species of quoll have also been known to eat carrion . The quoll 's paws and vibrissae allow it to reach into small burrows to find prey . The quoll hunts by stalking . Depending on the size of its prey , the quoll may leap or pounce on it . It pins small prey down with its front paws while devouring it , and jumps onto larger prey , sinking in its claws and closing its jaws around the neck . The quoll can obtain all the water it needs from its food , making it quite adaptable during droughts or other periods of water shortage . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Mating occurs during the winter months . Once a female quoll has been impregnated , the folds on her abdomen convert into a pouch that opens at the back . The gestation period is 21 days . A baby quoll , or pup , is the size of a grain of rice . Up to 18 quolls are born in each litter , but only six survive the first two weeks . The survivors stay in their mother 's pouch for eight weeks , suckling on one of the mother 's six teats for milk . During the ninth week , the pups venture out of the pouch and onto the mother 's back , where they remain for six weeks . The quoll reaches maturity when it is one year old , and has a natural lifespan of between two and five years . A 2008 study of the pouches of tiger quolls reported the pouches ' appearance ' were reliable indicators of the quolls ' reproductive status : during the follicular phase , pouches were found to be red and have many secretions . After ovulation , pouches became deep and wet . Researchers can use this information to determine where a female quoll is in her ovarian cycle , which is anticipated to be helpful in breeding management . 
 = = Threats = = 
 Cane toads were introduced into Queensland in 1935 ; their numbers have since grown exponentially . These poisonous toads pose a significant threat to the northern quoll , which may die after consuming one . The Department of Sustainability , Environment , Water , Population and Communities has stated that cane toads are highly invasive and are major threats to the quoll 's survival . 
 Predators such as foxes and cats prey on quolls and compete with them for food . For example , both quolls and foxes catch and consume rabbits . Since the introduction of foxes , the rabbit population has dropped dramatically . Foxes have been eradicated from many of the islands off the coast of Australia in an effort to protect the quoll . 
 The quoll is suffering badly from urbanisation , housing development , mining development , and expansion of agricultural lands . Habitats are also being destroyed by large herbivores trampling the grass and overgrowth , making camouflage difficult . Forest fires and weeds also contribute to habitat destruction . 
 The poison sodium monofluoroacetate is commonly used in Australia to control pests such as European rabbits , foxes , feral predators , and wild dogs such as dingoes . It is cooked into meat which is put into the wild for the animals to ingest . The poison is extremely toxic to wild dogs and other pests , but considerably less so to quolls . Size is a main factor in how the poison will affect a quoll ; larger quolls will suffer no ill effects from eating one piece of prepared meat containing sodium <unk> , but will suffer if they eat more than one within a short period of time . One piece of meat may be lethal to female and juvenile quolls . Since the quoll is a carnivore and will readily consume any meat left out , it is at high risk from the poison . The meat should be buried at least 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) underground , but has been found under minimal soil that a quoll can dig around to get to it . Poisoning is currently being investigated , as the number of quolls protected from predators by the bait may be much more than those which ingest the poison and die . 
 = = Conservation efforts = = 
 Since 1770 , all Australian quoll species have declined in number owing to habitat loss caused by urbanization . The northern quoll is threatened by toxic cane toads , but a University of Sydney project revealed in 2010 is teaching them to avoid eating the invasive amphibians . In 2008 , the Northern Territory Wildlife Park in Australia recorded their first litter of quoll pups in the park . The quolls bred well in captivity , with over 15 litters in the 2008 breeding season alone . 
 In late October 2011 , a litter of five tiger quoll pups was born at Wild Life Sydney in Darling Harbour , Australia . The pups were born to inexperienced parents , both just one year old . The reason for the young parents was because older male quolls can become violent and kill the female if they do not want to mate . By breeding one @-@ year @-@ old quolls , there was no threat of violence . Four of the quoll pups will be sent to other zoos or wildlife parks across Australia , but one , which the researchers named Nelson , will stay at the centre to become an " ambassador for all quolls " . 
 Fox control programs have benefited the western quoll . The Department of Environment and Conservation ( Western Australia ) monitors western quoll populations in the Jarrah Forest as part of its faunal management programs , as well as ongoing research into fox control , timber harvesting , and prescribed burning . The Perth Zoo has been monitoring a successful captive @-@ breeding program since 1989 . It has successfully bred more than 60 western quolls , most of which it transferred to <unk> Conservation Park , with proposals to translocate to Wheatbelt reserves and Shark Bay . 
 The bronze quoll is kept in <unk> National Park and Tonda Wildlife Management Area . More research on distribution and threats is needed for further conservation . 
 Creating a native pet industry in Australia related to quolls could aid in their conservation . However , concerns exist about this methodology in regards to animal husbandry , conservation benefits , and other issues . Some scientists believe that keeping quolls as pets could aid in their long @-@ term conservation , but further research is needed on this topic to conclude whether this is true or false . 
 = Saturdays of Thunder = 
 " Saturdays of Thunder " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 14 , 1991 . In the episode , Homer takes a fatherhood quiz and realizes that he knows nothing about Bart. He strives to be a better father and learns that Bart is participating in a Soap Box Derby . Homer and Bart make a racer together ; however , it is not very good . Bart decides to drive Martin 's far superior racer instead , after Martin is involved in an accident where he receives a series of serious skin burns . Homer is at first devastated , but decides that he must be a good father and support Bart. 
 The episode was written by Ken Levine and David Isaacs , and directed by Jim Reardon . American actors Larry McKay and Phil Hartman both made guest appearances as a television announcer and Troy McClure respectively . " Saturdays of Thunder " features cultural references to films such as Ben @-@ Hur , Lethal Weapon , and Days of Thunder . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics , who praised its sports theme . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 9 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer takes a fatherhood quiz and discovers he knows next to nothing about his son . He signs up for therapy at the National Fatherhood Institute and after a confidence @-@ building pep talk , offers to help Bart build his own soapbox racer , which they dub " Li 'l Lightnin ' " , for the upcoming Soap Box Derby . Bart is reluctant to want his father to help him , concerned that he may cost him the race . However , Homer refuses to hear any of it , insisting to help him out . At the qualifying race Bart and Martin , who has built a high tech , aerodynamically superior racer , form an alliance vowing that either must somehow beat bully Nelson and his very intimidating racer , the " Roadkill 2000 " , " armed with every dirty trick in the book . " As the race starts , Bart can barely reach any kind of noticeable speed with Li 'l Lightnin ' and the car falls apart before reaching the finish line . 
 Martin 's car wins the race. but was built too aerodynamically precise and the steepness of the hill causes it to careen past the finish line and crashes . Martin suffers a fractured arm in the accident and thus cannot race against Nelson , who finished second . Martin offers Bart the seat , and even though Bart believes Homer will be devastated if he abandons the racer they built , he accepts the offer as there is no other way he can race and win . 
 As Bart feared , Homer is bitterly disappointed over his decision . Homer is so upset that he even refuses to go to the final race to support Bart , insulting him and Martin and acting spiteful toward Bart and the rest of the family . Troy McClure starts crying too . Marge decides that she has had enough of Homer 's surly attitude and confronts him , by telling Homer that she defended him when people , including her sisters Patty and Selma , called him an incompetent father . However , she states that his latest behavior proved he is being selfish and if this is how Homer wants to act on such an important day for Bart , he really is a bad father , a statement that only makes Homer feel worse . Maggie tries to cheer Bart up but he ended up calling Los Angeles . 
 As Bart gets ready to race in the final match with Martin 's newly tuned racer , Homer thinks to himself about how wrong he has been . After retaking the fatherhood quiz again , he realizes that Bart needs his support regardless of whose racer he is using and he rushes off to the race . At the starting line , Homer wishes Bart good luck and tells him that no matter how the race ends he will still be proud of him . The race is tough as Nelson pulls every dirty trick in his arsenal , but through his skill Bart finishes first and the team enjoys their victory . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Ken Levine and David Isaacs , and directed by Jim Reardon . The inspiration for it originated from a line in " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " , a previous episode in which Marge bans Bart and Lisa from watching their favorite cartoon , The Itchy & Scratchy Show , and Bart says " I 'm gonna go build a soapbox racer instead . " Actor Phil Hartman made his fourth guest appearance on The Simpsons in this episode as the voice of celebrity Troy McClure . The character appears at the beginning of the episode in I Can 't Believe They Invented It ! , a television show that Homer watches . Larry McKay guest starred as the television announcer at the Soap Box Derby . 
 The idea for the subplot of Homer 's parenting originated from a real fatherhood test executive producer Sam Simon found and brought to the Simpsons studio . Levine later commented on writing the episode , " At the time David and I were writing this , my son , Matt , was about Bart 's age . [ ... ] So for me there was a certain amount of guilt associated , like ' Do I know my son 's hobby ? Do I know my son 's best friend ? ' etc . " The scene in which Bart welds on his racer resulted in an argument between the staff of the show and the Fox network 's censors . The censors were concerned that children would imitate Bart by misusing welding tools ; however , the staff was able to convince them that very few children have access to welding tools . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Saturdays of Thunder " features a number of references to popular culture . The title of the episode is itself a play on the film Days of Thunder , starring American actor Tom Cruise . The song used at the end of the episode is " Wind Beneath My Wings " , a song by Bette Midler . While Homer is watching television at the beginning of the episode , Marge and her sisters , Patty and Selma , go through a catalog of different hairstyles ; Patty tells her sisters that she wants Mary Tyler Moore 's hairstyle , referencing the American actress known for her roles in television sitcoms . When Marge and her sisters head to the beauty parlor , Homer promises Marge that he will take Lisa to the video store . When they arrive at the store , Homer watches a clip from the latest McBain film that sees McBain 's partner being brutally shot in the chest , a reference to a similar scene in the film Lethal Weapon . McBain 's partner is black , a reference to the fact that Dirty Harry 's partner is black in the film Sudden Impact . 
 When Homer calls the National Fatherhood Institute , he is put on hold and Harry Chapin 's song " Cat 's in the Cradle " plays in the telephone while he waits . Cast member Harry Shearer based the voice of Dave , the director of the Fatherhood Institute , on actor Mason Adams . At the institute , Dave gives Homer a copy of the book Fatherhood by American actor Bill Cosby . In a subsequent episode , " Dog of Death " , Homer throws the book into the fireplace as replacement for wood . When Homer and Bart build the soapbox racer , Mac Davis 's song " Watching Scotty Grow " , sung by Bobby Goldsboro , plays in the background . The whipping and spikes coming out of Nelson 's racer are a reference to the chariot race in the film Ben @-@ Hur . The idea of Nelson 's racer being " armed with every dirty trick in the book " was based on the 1973 Soap Box Derby World Championship scandal , when a 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy was stripped of his title two days after winning the national race for cheating . During the final race , Homer stands up in the crowd to cheer on Bart and his body is silhouetted against the sun , a reference to a scene in the film The Natural . The theme song from The Natural plays in the scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Saturdays of Thunder " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 14 , 1991 . It received high ratings due to the fact that it was immediately followed by the premiere of the music video for Michael Jackson 's song " Black or White " . In its original American broadcast , the episode finished 26th in the ratings for the week of November 11 – 17 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 7 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Niel Harvey of The Roanoke Times called it a " classic bit of Simpsonia , " and the Daily Record said it is " definitely one not to miss . " The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the sixth best episode of the show with a sports theme . Michael Coulter of The Age commented that " Saturdays of Thunder " is " one of the many excellent " The Simpsons episodes to feature a sporting theme . He went on to say : " A ' classic ' Simpsons , insofar as it boasts a plot , rather than a sequence of surreal pop @-@ culture parodies . " The episode 's parody of Ben @-@ Hur , however , was named the eighth greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict looked unfavorably on the episode , writing that it " has a premise — Bart builds a soapbox racer — that frankly has very limited modern day appeal . We can 't really get into the whole Martin / Nelson / Bart race dynamic and today , soapbox derby has been <unk> all out of proportion to the point where very few , if any , practice it . With such a narrow target , many of the jokes just don 't work . " Gibron preferred the subplot of Homer 's attempts to become a better father . 
 Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed was more positive about the episode , commenting that the episode 's emphasis is on Homer 's parenting , like many other season three episodes , and " contrary to popular opinion , Homer is actually a good father who tries to do good by his children . " He thought the racing sequences featured " good animation and direction " , but considered the highlight of the episode to be the clip from the film McBain that Homer watches in the video store . Meyers gave the episode a 4 / 5 rating . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson , who listed the episode as one of his favorites from season three , said that " on the surface , ' Saturdays of Thunder ' essentially just rehashes " the theme of the previous episode , " Lisa 's Pony " , in which Homer tries to be a better father for Lisa . Jacobson commented that " Saturdays of Thunder " , however , " simply seems funnier than ' Lisa 's Pony ' . The soapbox derby elements provide lots of great gags . [ It ] offers a great episode . " Like Meyers , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide thought the highlight of the episode was the McBain video . 
 = Broadway Limited = 
 The Broadway Limited was a passenger train operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad between New York City and Chicago . It operated from 1912 to 1995 . It was the Pennsylvania 's premier train , competing directly with the New York Central Railroad 's 20th Century Limited . The Broadway Limited continued operating after the Penn Central Transportation merger , one of the few long @-@ distance trains to do so . Penn Central conveyed the train to Amtrak in 1971 ; Amtrak discontinued it in 1995 . The train 's name referred not to Broadway in Manhattan , but rather to the " broad way " of the Pennsylvania 's four @-@ track right of way along a large portion of the route . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pennsylvania Railroad = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Special was one of nine express trains the Pennsylvania operated between New York City and Chicago . On November 14 , 1912 the Pennsylvania renamed it the Broadway Limited , to avoid confusion with the similarly @-@ named Pennsylvania Limited . The name , though spelled as " Broadway " , honored the Pennsylvania 's four @-@ track " broad way " main line . In the heavyweight era the Broadway Limited was an extra @-@ fare , all sleeper ( no coach service ) train with an open @-@ platform observation car at the end , such as Continental Hall and Washington Hall . The scheduled running time was 20 hours until it was reduced to 18 hours in 1932 . Further reductions took place between 1932 and 1935 , with the final heavyweight running time at 16 hours , 30 minutes . 
 On June 15 , 1938 , the Broadway Limited received lightweight streamlined cars to replace its heavyweight steel cars ; on the same day rival New York Central 's 20th Century Limited was streamlined . Raymond Loewy styled the new cars and the PRR GG1 electric locomotive as well as some streamlined steam locomotives for the Pennsylvania , notably the S1 and T1 Duplex drive engines . The Broadway Limited was one of four pre @-@ World War II Pennsylvania trains to receive such equipment ; the others being the General ( New York – Chicago ) , Spirit of St. Louis ( New York – St. Louis ) , and Liberty Limited ( Washington – Chicago ) . Other Pennsylvania trains continued to use heavyweight cars until after the end of World War II . Most of the 1938 cars were built new by Pullman @-@ Standard between March and May of that year , but the diners , RPO and baggage cars were rebuilt from heavyweight cars by the railroad 's Altoona shops . The Broadway Limited was the only Pennsylvania train to be completely re @-@ equipped with lightweight sleeping cars before World War II . The train 's running time was further reduced to 16 hours . 
 In 1949 the PRR again re @-@ equipped the Broadway Limited with new streamlined equipment . The all @-@ sleeper train carried compartments , bedrooms , duplex rooms , <unk> for a single occupant and drawing rooms for three persons . The buffet @-@ lounge @-@ observation cars built by Pullman Standard were named Mountain View and Tower View . They had squared @-@ off observation ends , instead of the tapered or rounded ends in the 1938 version , and contained two master rooms with radio and showers . 
 Also introduced was a twin @-@ unit dining car and a mid @-@ train lounge car , such as Harbor Rest , described by a PRR brochure as " cheerful , spacious ... richly appointed for leisure with deep , soft carpets ... latest periodicals are in the libraries . " The February 1956 Official Guide listed the westbound Broadway Limited ( train 29 ) consist as having fourteen cars normally assigned : nine sleeping cars between New York and Chicago , one additional sleeping car from New York continuing through to Los Angeles on the Santa Fe 's Super Chief , the twin @-@ unit dining car , lounge car , and observation car . The train departed New York at 6 : 00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time and arrived at Chicago the following morning at 9 : 00 a.m. Central Time . 
 The Broadway Limited was not immune to the decline in passenger rail transport , though it resisted longer than most . The 20th Century Limited began carrying coaches in 1957 . In late 1967 , when the Illinois Central Railroad 's Panama Limited also began carrying coaches the Broadway Limited became the last " all @-@ Pullman " train in the United States , a distinction that did not last long . The Pennsylvania merged the Broadway Limited with the General on December 13 , 1967 . The train was one of the few long @-@ distance trains to survive the merger of the Pennsylvania and the New York Central Railroad into Penn Central . 
 = = = Amtrak = = = 
 Amtrak 's incorporators selected the Broadway Limited as the new company 's sole New York @-@ Chicago route . Amtrak operated a Washington , D.C. section via Port Road Branch which separated at Harrisburg . In the 1970s the Broadway Limited experienced chronic lateness as the tracks it ran on degraded . Beginning in 1979 the route changed as tracks were abandoned and downgraded by Conrail , Penn Central 's successor . These changes included : 
 A minor re @-@ route over the ex @-@ New York Central in Gary , Indiana in 1979 . 
 A major re @-@ route over the ex @-@ Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( B & O ) in Indiana and Ohio , due to Conrail 's desire to abandon part of the former Pittsburgh , Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway . This change took effect on November 10 , 1990 . 
 Amtrak discontinued the Broadway Limited on September 10 , 1995 , in the face significant funding problems . The Broadway Limited then earned $ 6 @.@ 6 million against costs of $ 24 million . Amtrak replaced it with the all @-@ coach Three Rivers , which would in turn be discontinued in 2005 . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Pullman @-@ Standard built the entirety of the equipment pool for the 1938 lightweight re @-@ equipping , with the exception of two dining cars which were rebuilt in the Pennsylvania 's Altoona shops . The equipment delivered included eight 18 @-@ roomette sleeping cars ; two sleeper @-@ bar @-@ lounges ; four 4 @-@ compartment , 2 @-@ drawing room , 4 @-@ double bedroom sleeping cars ; two 13 @-@ double bedroom sleeping cars ; and two sleeper @-@ buffet @-@ lounge @-@ observation cars , including the famed Metropolitan View . The dining car seated 24 at tables ( in both <unk> and 2x2 configurations ) and featured a small bar at one end with seating for two . The sleeper @-@ bar @-@ lounge included a secretary 's room , barber shop , shower @-@ bath , and a bar / lounge with both booth and chair seating . 
 The Broadway Limited received additional Pullman equipment in 1949 . This included Harbor Cove and Harbor Rest , sleeper @-@ bar @-@ lounges with three double bedrooms , and Mountain View and Tower View , sleeper @-@ buffet @-@ lounge @-@ observation cars with two master rooms and a double bedroom . The Broadway Limited received coaches for the first time in 1967 , when it merged with the General . Under the Penn Central the train carried " two or more coaches , two lounges , twin @-@ unit diner , and four sleepers . " This was better than most remaining passenger trains , which often had just two or three cars , but a far cry from the old days . 
 Amtrak singled out the Broadway Limited for special treatment and in 1972 completely refurbished its equipment , most of which was ex @-@ Penn Central , although former Union Pacific Railroad sleeping cars were also used . Amtrak also added a <unk> to the consist . In 1974 Amtrak tried out rebuilt 6 @-@ bedroom , 8 @-@ roomette ex @-@ Rock Island sleeping cars , but their limited capacity reduced revenue . The Broadway Limited began receiving rebuilt Heritage Fleet cars in 1980 , and Amfleet coaches thereafter . 68 cars were rebuilt at a total cost of $ 9 @.@ 8 million . 
 = United States v. Progressive , Inc . = 
 United States of America v. Progressive , Inc . , Erwin Knoll , Samuel Day , Jr . , and Howard Morland , 467 F. Supp . 990 ( W.D. Wis . 1979 ) , was a lawsuit brought against The Progressive magazine by the United States Department of Energy ( DOE ) in 1979 . A temporary injunction was granted against The Progressive to prevent the publication of an article by activist Howard Morland that purported to reveal the " secret " of the hydrogen bomb . Though the information had been compiled from publicly available sources , the DOE claimed that it fell under the " born secret " clause of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 . 
 Although the case was filed in the Western District of Wisconsin , the judge there recused himself as a friend of the magazine . The case was therefore brought before Judge Robert W. Warren , a judge in the Eastern District of Wisconsin . Because of the sensitive nature of information at stake in the trial , two separate hearings were conducted , one in public , and the other in camera . The defendants , Morland and the editors of The Progressive , would not accept security clearances , which would put restraints on their free speech , and so were not present at the in camera hearings . Their lawyers did obtain clearances so that they could participate , but were forbidden from conveying anything they heard there to their clients . 
 The article was eventually published after the government lawyers dropped their case during the appeals process , calling it moot after other information was independently published . Despite its indecisive conclusion , law students still study the case , which " could have been a law school hypothetical designed to test the limits of the presumption of unconstitutionality attached to prior restraints " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Secrecy and disclosure = = = 
 The first atomic bombs were developed by the wartime Manhattan Project . This was carried out in secret , lest its discovery induce the Axis powers , particularly Germany , to accelerate their own nuclear projects , or undertake covert operations against the project . The military and scientific leaders of the Manhattan Project anticipated a need to release details of their wartime accomplishments , principally as a form of recognition for the participants who had labored in secrecy . Press releases were prepared in advance of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , and an official account , known as the Smyth Report after its author , the physicist Henry DeWolf Smyth , was commissioned in April 1944 to provide a history of the project for public release . The Director of the Manhattan Project , Major General Leslie Groves , his scientific adviser , Richard Tolman , and Smyth agreed that information could be publicly released if it was essential for an understanding of the project , or was already generally known or <unk> , or had no significance to the production of atomic bombs . The first copies went on sale on August 12 , 1945 . 
 In its October 8 , 1945 , issue , The New Republic took the position , emphasized with italics , that " there is no secret to be kept " : the knowledge of how to build an atomic bomb had been " the common property of scientists throughout the world for the last five years " . President Harry S. Truman took a similar line in his first speech to Congress on nuclear matters that month , proclaiming that " the essential theoretical knowledge upon which the discovery is based is already widely known . " In November 1945 , Groves instructed Tolman to draw up a policy for the declassification of the Manhattan Project 's documents . Tolman assembled a committee , which took a list of the Manhattan Project 's activities and assigned each a classification . Four reviewers assessed the documents and declassified about 500 of them by the end of the year . 
 = = = Atomic Energy Act = = = 
 If there was no secret , then there was no reason for security . The scientists , in particular , chafed under the wartime controls , which were not lifted with the surrender of Japan . On September 1 , 1945 , Samuel K. Allison used the occasion of the announcement of the founding of the Institute for Nuclear Studies to call for freedom to research and develop atomic energy . He told the press that if controls were not removed , nuclear scientists might turn to the study of the color of butterfly wings . Enrico Fermi warned that " unless research is free and outside of control , the United States will lose its superiority in scientific pursuit " . 
 The War Department envisaged that the Manhattan Project would be superseded by a statutory authority . Legislation to create it was drafted by two War Department lawyers , Kenneth C. Royall and William L. Marbury . Their draft bill ran into strong opposition , particularly from the influential Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg . On December 20 , 1945 , Senator Brien McMahon introduced an alternative bill on atomic energy , which quickly became known as the McMahon bill . This was initially a very liberal bill towards the control of scientific research , and was broadly supported by scientists . McMahon framed the controversy as a question of military versus civilian control of atomic energy , although the May @-@ Johnson bill also provided for civilian control . Section 10 assigned the patent for any invention related to atomic energy to the commission . 
 While the bill was being debated , the news broke on February 16 , 1946 , of the defection of Igor Gouzenko in Canada , and the subsequent arrest of 22 people . The members of Congress debating the bill feared that " atomic secrets " were being systematically stolen by Soviet atomic spies . McMahon convened an executive session at which Federal Bureau of Investigation Director J. Edgar Hoover , Secretary of State James F. Byrnes and Groves were called to appear . Groves revealed that the British physicist Alan Nunn May had passed information about the Manhattan Project to Soviet agents . The more conservative elements in Congress now moved to toughen the act . Section 10 , which was formerly titled " Dissemination of Information " , now became " Control of Information " . Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas , who sponsored the McMahon bill in the House , vigorously defended the section against counterarguments . She dismissed objections that it would " give away the secret of the bomb " , asserting that America 's advantage in nuclear weapons could only be temporary , whereas the bill could perpetuate the U.S. lead in scientific research . Truman signed the compromise bill into law as the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . It established the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) as the controlling body for atomic energy . 
 = = = Hydrogen bomb = = = 
 The Manhattan Project had been a crash program to produce a nuclear weapon . Along the way , promising ideas had been set aside . Norris Bradbury , who replaced J. Robert Oppenheimer as director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory in late 1945 , revived such projects in order to entice scientists to remain at , or return to , Los Alamos . One of these projects was the " Super " , a nuclear weapon using nuclear fusion , which Edward Teller 's F @-@ 1 group had worked on under Fermi 's direction . The technical problem was figuring out a way to get a fusion reaction to initiate and propagate , which required temperatures attainable only with a fission bomb . The hydrodynamic calculations involved were daunting , and ENIAC was used to run a computer simulation of the Super in December 1945 and January 1946 . 
 The Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam , his wife Francoise Ulam , who performed the calculations , and their collaborator , Cornelius Everett , worked on the Super design through 1949 . There was no push from the military for the weapon , because the AEC regarded it as too secret to inform either its own Military Liaison Committee or the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project about it . In September 1949 , the Soviet Union detonated a nuclear device . It fell to Oppenheimer , as chairman of the AEC General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) , to decide whether the United States should develop the Super in response . The Super design used large quantities of tritium , which could only be manufactured in a reactor , and therefore at the expense of plutonium production for smaller weapons , so the GAC advised against it . Nonetheless , Truman approved the Super on January 31 , 1950 . Because of the secrecy surrounding the decision , accounts published in the 1950s incorrectly portrayed Oppenheimer as obstructing its development on political grounds , and this was a factor in the Oppenheimer security hearing in 1954 . 
 Ulam still only gave the design a " 50 – 50 chance " of success in February 1950 . At the end of March , he reported that it would not work at all . Scientists like Hans Bethe and George Gamow felt that Teller had committed the nation to an expensive crash program on the basis of a model that he knew was flawed . However , in February 1951 , Ulam had a new idea , in which the shock wave from an atomic bomb " primary " stage , through an arrangement he called " hydrodynamic lensing " , would compress a " secondary " stage of deuterium fusion fuel wrapped around a plutonium rod or " spark plug " . On being informed , Teller immediately grasped the potential for using the X @-@ rays produced by the primary explosion for hydrodynamic lensing . This arrangement , which made thermonuclear weapons possible , is now known as the Teller @-@ Ulam design . Although it was not what Truman had approved , the design did work , and was capable of producing multi @-@ megaton explosions . " Rarely in the history of technology " , wrote Howard Morland , " has such a seemingly daunting problem turned out to have such a nifty solution . " 
 In 1950 , the Atomic Energy Commission asked Scientific American not to publish an article by Hans Bethe that it claimed revealed classified information about the hydrogen bomb . Scientific American reluctantly agreed to stop the presses and make changes in the article , and to recall and burn the 3 @,@ 000 copies that had already been printed . The 1951 arrest of Klaus Fuchs , Harry Gold , David Greenglass , Morton <unk> and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg who , according to Hoover , " stole the basic secrets of nuclear fission " , caused great concern . President Dwight D. Eisenhower denied the Rosenbergs clemency on the grounds that their actions " could well result in the deaths of many , many thousands of innocent citizens " , and they were executed . After the Soviet Union detonated Joe 4 in August 1953 , newspapers proclaimed that the Soviets had tested a hydrogen bomb . In fact it was only a boosted fission device , but the veil of secrecy covering the thermonuclear program prevented scientists from informing the public . 
 = = = Prior restraint = = = 
 Prior restraint has generally been regarded by U.S. courts , particularly the U.S. Supreme Court , as being " the most serious and least tolerable " of restrictions on the First Amendment . The Blackstone Commentaries defined freedom of the press as " laying no previous restraints upon publication , and not in freedom from censure for criminal matter when published . " The Supreme Court had however never held that prior restraint was unconstitutional . On the contrary , in Near v. Minnesota 283 U.S. 697 ( 1931 ) , Chief Justice Charles E. Hughes remarked that in wartime , " no one would question but that a government might prevent actual obstruction to its recruiting service or the publication of the sailing dates of transports or the number and location of troops . " He further suggested that obscenity or incitement to insurrection would be similar grounds for prior restraint . The court subsequently upheld free speech exceptions such as restrictions on demonstrations in Cox v. New Hampshire , 312 U.S. 569 ( 1941 ) , and censorship of motion pictures in Times Film Corp. v. City of Chicago , 365 U.S. 43 ( 1961 ) . 
 In New York Times Co. v. United States 403 U.S. 713 ( 1971 ) — better known as the Pentagon Papers case — the government had sought to prevent the publication of classified material by The New York Times . In this case , the Supreme Court ruled 6 – 3 that the government had not reached the standard required by Near to justify prior restraint , but the concurring justices gave differing opinions about where the line should be drawn . In his opinion , Justice Potter Stewart wrote that while publication of The Pentagon Papers would likely harm the national interest , it would not result in " direct , immediate or irreparable harm to our Nation or its people " . Failure to provide a clear line inevitably meant that the court had to deal with prior restraint on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . In Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart , 427 U.S. 539 ( 1976 ) , the court was called upon to decide whether news reportage of a lurid mass murder case in a small town in Nebraska would justify prior restraint in order to protect the defendant 's right to a fair trial . In this case , the court ruled unanimously that it would not . Most of the justices viewed Near as providing the only grounds for prior restraint , and declined to expand its scope any further . 
 = = Trial = = 
 = = = Morland 's research = = = 
 The Progressive was a left @-@ wing American monthly magazine of politics , culture and opinion with a circulation of around 40 @,@ 000 . In 1978 , its managing editor , Sam Day , Jr . , a former editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , and its editor , Erwin Knoll , commissioned freelance journalist Howard Morland to write an article on the secrecy surrounding nuclear weapons production in America . In October 1978 , Representative Ronald V. Dellums had asked the Department of Energy ( DOE ) , the successor to the AEC , a series of questions about plutonium production . The DOE responded by classifying his questions . In September and October 1978 , the House Armed Services Committee held hearings on the proposed Comprehensive Nuclear @-@ Test @-@ Ban Treaty . There was widespread public ignorance of issues surrounding nuclear weapons , and associated environmental concerns . Day and Morland hoped that by demystifying nuclear weapons , they would promote more critical public debate , and improve the prospects for nuclear disarmament . Morland claimed that " I am precisely the type of person the First Amendment was intended to protect : a political advocate whose ideas are unpopular with the general public and threatening to the government . " 
 Over a period of six months , Morland systematically pieced together a design for a hydrogen bomb . He visited a number of nuclear weapons facilities and interviewed government employees , with the permission of the DOE , usually identifying himself and his purpose . He never held a security clearance , and never had any access to classified documents , although it is possible that some classified information or ideas were accidentally or deliberately leaked to him . His scientific background was minimal ; he had taken five undergraduate courses in physics and chemistry as part of his Bachelor of Arts degree in economics at Emory University . Morland identified the features of the Teller @-@ Ulam design as staging , with a primary and secondary compression around a fissile " sparkplug " , and radiation pressure from soft X @-@ rays . " The notion that X @-@ rays could move solid objects with the force of thousands of tons of dynamite " , noted Morland , " was beyond the grasp of the science fiction writers of the time . " 
 Day sent draft copies of Morland 's article out to reviewers in late 1978 and early 1979 , including Ron Siegel , a graduate student at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Siegel gave his draft copy to George Rathjens , a professor of political science there in February 1979 . For many years , Rathjens had issued a challenge to his graduate students to produce a workable design for a hydrogen bomb , but no one had ever succeeded . Rathjens phoned The Progressive and urged that the article not be published . When the editors dismissed his suggestion , he sent the draft to the DOE . " Apparently , " wrote Morland , " I had earned a passing grade on the Rathjens challenge " . 
 = = = Legal arguments = = = 
 In March 1979 , the editors sent a final draft to the DOE for comment . DOE officials , first in phone calls and then in person , attempted to dissuade The Progressive from publishing the article on the grounds that it contained " secret restricted data " as defined by the Atomic Energy Act . The Progressive 's editors were not persuaded , and told the officials that they intended to proceed with publishing Morland 's article . The DOE filed a motion to suppress the article with the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin in Madison on March 8 , 1979 . There was only one judge in the Western District of Wisconsin at the time , Judge James Doyle , but he recused himself as a friend of the magazine . The case was therefore brought before Judge Robert W. Warren , a judge in the Eastern District of Wisconsin , and heard by Warren in Milwaukee . 
 Lawyers for The Progressive voluntarily underwent security reviews and were granted Q clearances that allowed them to access restricted nuclear information . Morland and The Progressive 's editors declined to obtain clearances , as they would have had to sign non @-@ disclosure agreements that would have prevented them from publishing the article . This resulted in the lawyers being restricted in their communications with their clients . 
 In seeking a temporary restraining order , government lawyers argued that The Progressive was about to break the law , causing irreparable harm . The data in the article was born classified , so it did not matter that it was an original work of the author . They noted that prior restraint had been upheld by the courts before in matters of national security , and argued that the Pentagon Papers decision did not apply as the Atomic Energy Act specifically allowed for injunctive relief . Moreover , the Pentagon Papers were historical , whereas the hydrogen bomb was a current military weapon . Finally , they pointed out that the government had obligations under the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty not to assist non @-@ nuclear states in acquiring nuclear weapons . In granting the temporary restraining order on March 9 , Warren said that he would have " to think long and hard before I gave the hydrogen bomb to Idi Amin . " 
 Dr. James R. Schlesinger , the Secretary of Energy , telephoned leading newspapers and warned them not to support The Progressive . This was probably unnecessary , for the media were supportive of the government 's case . Fred Graham , the New York Times 's legal correspondent , predicted that the government would win the case . In an editorial on March 11 , 1979 , The Washington Post wrote that the The Progressive case , " as a press @-@ versus @-@ government First Amendment contest , is John Mitchell 's dream case — the one the Nixon Administration was never lucky enough to get : a real First Amendment loser . " The newspaper called on The Progressive to " forget about publishing it " . In the Pentagon Papers case , Professor Alexander Bickel , an expert on the United States Constitution , when asked hypothetically if prior restraint could ever be justified , had told the court that he would draw the line at the hydrogen bomb . Daniel Ellsberg , who had leaked the Pentagon Papers , told Morland that he believed that nuclear weapon designs should be kept secret . Because of the horrific nature of thermonuclear weapons , and the expectation that The Progressive would probably lose the case , mainstream media organizations feared that the result would be an erosion of freedom of the press . 
 However , the court 's role was to rule on whether publication was legal , not whether it was wise . In keeping with the usual practice of keeping a temporary restraining order in effect for as short a time as possible , Warren ordered that hearings be held on a preliminary injunction in one week 's time , on March 16 . At the request of both parties , this was postponed to March 26 so they would have time to file their briefs and affidavits . The parties were therefore back in court again on March 26 for a hearing on the government 's request for a preliminary injunction . Warren decided not to hold an evidentiary hearing at which the opposing teams of experts could be cross examined . He also declined a suggestion by the Federation of American Scientists in its amicus curiae brief that a panel of experts be charged with examining the issue . The case relied on written affidavits and briefs , and the opposing counsels ' oral arguments . 
 The Progressive 's legal team argued that the government had not established a case sufficient " to overcome the First Amendment 's presumption against prior restraint " . The article was based upon information in the public domain , and was therefore neither a threat to national security nor covered by the Atomic Energy Act , which in any case did not authorize prior restraint , or was unconstitutional if it did . In this , counsel relied on the United States v. Heine decision , in which Judge Learned Hand ruled that information in the public domain could not be covered by the Espionage Act of 1917 . The government 's lawyers argued , on the contrary , that there was sensitive information in the article , which was not in the public domain , and which , if published , would harm arms control efforts . 
 In attempting to apply the Near and Pentagon Papers standards , the court was concerned about the prospect of publication causing the proliferation of nuclear weapons , and potentially a global nuclear holocaust . The government did not go so far as to claim that publication might pose an immediate or inevitable danger , only that it " would substantially increase the risk that thermonuclear weapons would become available or available at an earlier date to those who do not now have them . If this should occur , it would undermine our nonproliferation policy , irreparably impair the national security of the United States , and pose a threat to the peace and security of the world . " However , the court still found that " a mistake in ruling against the United States could pave the way for thermonuclear annihilation for us all . In that event , our right to life is extinguished and the right to publish becomes moot " , and that publication could indeed cause " grave , direct , immediate and irreparable harm to the United States " , thereby meeting the test the Supreme Court had enunciated in the Pentagon Papers case . The preliminary injunction was therefore granted . 
 Lawyers for The Progressive filed a motion to vacate the decision on the grounds that the information contained in Morland 's article was already in the public domain . The basis for this claim was two reports from the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory UCRL @-@ <unk> , " Weapons Development During June 1956 " , and UCRL @-@ 5280 , " Weapons Development During June 1958 " , which contained detailed information on thermonuclear weapon design . The documents gave details about Bassoon , a three @-@ stage thermonuclear device tested during Operation Redwing in 1956 . They were found on the shelves of the Los Alamos library by Dmitri <unk> , a researcher for the American Civil Liberties Union . According to the government , the reports had been inadvertently declassified . On June 15 , in 486 F. Supp . 5 ( W.D. Wis . 1979 ) , Warren therefore denied the motion on the grounds that such an error did not place the documents in the public domain . The appellants , in 610 F. 2d 819 ( 7th Cir . 1979 ) , immediately appealed to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago , claiming that the two documents had been on the shelves for a considerable period of time . The government now advanced the argument that " technical data " was not protected by the First Amendment . The motions for an expedited review were denied because the magazine 's lawyers had waived that right — something Morland and The Progressive editors discovered only from the court . The preliminary injunction therefore remained in effect for six months . 
 = = = Case dropped = = = 
 On April 25 , 1979 , a group of scientists who worked at the Argonne National Laboratory wrote to Senator John Glenn , the Chairman of the United States Senate Subcommittee on Energy , Nuclear Proliferation and Federal Services . They were concerned about information being leaked , in particular by the government 's tacit acknowledgement that Morland 's bomb design was substantially correct , something that could not otherwise have been deduced from unclassified information . These included the affidavits by the United States Secretary of Defense Harold Brown and government expert witness Jack Rosengren . Copies of the letter were sent to major newspapers , but with a cover note explaining that it was for background information and not publication . After about four weeks , the Glenn subcommittee forwarded it to the DOE , which classified it . 
 Unaware of this , Hugh DeWitt , a physicist at the Lawrence Livermore nuclear weapons laboratory , forwarded a copy to Chuck Hansen . Hansen was a computer programmer from Mountain View , California , who collected information about nuclear weapons as a hobby . He had run a competition to design an H @-@ bomb , the winner of which would be the first person to have their design classified by the DOE . It now began to occur to him that his hobby might not be legal . He wrote a letter to Senator Charles H. Percy detailing how much information he had deduced from publicly available sources . This included his own design , one not as good as Morland 's , which Hansen had not seen . Hansen further charged that government scientists — including Edward Teller , Ted Taylor , and George Rathjens — had leaked sensitive information about thermonuclear weapons , for which no action had been taken . In this , Hansen was mistaken : Taylor had indeed been reprimanded , and Teller was not the source of the information that Hansen attributed to him . Hansen made copies of his letter available to several newspapers . 
 When The Daily Californian published excerpts from the Hansen letter on June 11 , the DOE obtained a court order to prevent further publication . Undeterred , The Daily Californian published the letter in its entirety on June 13 . The DOE obtained a temporary restraining order against The Daily Californian prohibiting publication , but the letter was published by the Madison Press Connection on September 16 . The government then moved to dismiss their cases against both The Progressive and The Daily Californian as moot . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Morland 's article was published in the November 1979 issue of The Progressive . A month later he published an erratum in The Progressive with updates based on information that he had gathered during the trial from UCRL @-@ <unk> , Chuck Hansen 's letter and other sources . In Morland 's opinion , the article contributed to a wave of anti @-@ nuclear activism in the late 1970s and early 1980s that resulted in , amongst other things , the closure of the Rocky Flats Plant near Denver . Chuck Hansen went on to publish a book , U.S. Nuclear Weapons : The Secret History in 1988 . This was subsequently expanded to a self @-@ published five volume work entitled Swords of Armageddon . However , many mainstream media organizations still remained reluctant to test the law by publishing . On September 30 , 1980 , the Justice Department issued a statement that it would not prosecute alleged violations of the Atomic Energy Act during the Daily Californian or The Progressive cases . 
 Hearings on the case were held by Glenn 's subcommittee and by the House Subcommittee on Government Information and Individual Rights . The subcommittees looked into the implications of the decision with regards to nuclear proliferation . They also examined the doctrine of " classified at birth " , but did not decide to amend the Atomic Energy Act to remove such provisions . As it turned out , fears of nuclear proliferation were unfounded . While over the course of the next 25 years some countries , such as Pakistan and North Korea , ultimately developed nuclear weapons , while others , such as Iraq and Libya , tried and failed , no other countries managed to develop thermonuclear weapons . 
 From a legal standpoint , the case " proved to be a victory for no one " , due to the indecisive nature of its conclusion . Yet it remains a celebrated case nonetheless . In 2004 , the 25th anniversary of the decision was commemorated with an academic conference at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law , attended by many of the participants , at which papers were presented . Law students still study the case , which " could have been a law school hypothetical designed to test the limits of the presumption of unconstitutionality attached to prior restraints . " 
 = Parks and Recreation ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of Parks and Recreation originally aired in the United States on the NBC television network starting September 17 , 2009 , and ended on May 20 , 2010 . The season was produced by Deedle @-@ Dee Productions and Universal Media Studios , and series co @-@ creators Greg Daniels and Michael Schur served as executive producers . Like the first season , it focused on Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) and her staff on the parks and recreation department of the fictional Indiana town of Pawnee . The episodes were approximately 22 minutes long each , all of which aired at 8 : 30 p.m. on Thursdays . 
 All of the members of the original principal cast were retained and Chris Pratt , who made guest appearances throughout the previous season , joined the permanent cast in the second season . It also featured guest appearances by Louis C.K. , Megan Mullally , Fred Armisen , Will Arnett , Justin Theroux and John Larroquette . The writing staff made changes based on feedback from the first season and attempted to be more topical , with episodes touching on such topics as same @-@ sex marriage , the arrest of Henry Louis Gates and the sex scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford . 
 Although the first season received generally mixed reviews , the second season was highly praised , with some reviewers declaring it one of the best comedies of the television season . Nevertheless , Parks and Recreation continued to struggle in the Nielsen ratings and averaged about 4 @.@ 68 million household viewers per week , lower than Thursday night NBC shows Community , 30 Rock , and The Office . Amy Poehler was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series , and both the series and actor Nick Offerman received nominations from the Television Critics Association Awards . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main = = = 
 Amy Poehler as Leslie Knope , the deputy director of the Pawnee parks department , who has not let politics dampen her sense of optimism ; her ultimate goal is to become President of the United States . She has a strong love for her home town of Pawnee , and desires to use her position to improve it . Leslie 's sense of confidence grows over the course of the season , leading her to get over her crush on Mark and begin to pursue romantic relationships . 
 Rashida Jones as Ann Perkins , a nurse and Leslie 's best friend . She and Leslie continue to work to get the pit next to Ann 's house filled in and transformed in to a park . Ann develops a romantic interest in city planner Mark , and they enter in to a relationship . 
 Paul Schneider as Mark Brendanawicz , a city planner with the Pawnee municipal government . He has long been disillusioned with government after being unable to achieve his career ambitions . After developing a romantic interest in Ann , Mark abandons his promiscuous lifestyle and enters in to a relationship with her . 
 Aziz Ansari as Tom Haverford , Leslie 's self @-@ absorbed and underachieving subordinate . While he is an employee at the parks department , he cares little about his job , and is instead more focused on his entrepreneurial ambitions . He takes great pride in his appearance and regularly pursues women despite being married . During the season it is revealed that his marriage to his wife Wendy is a green card marriage , and he and Wendy go through a divorce after she obtains her citizenship . This affects Tom greater than he anticipated , as he realizes that he actually did harbor feelings for Wendy . 
 Nick Offerman as Ron Swanson , the cynical director of the parks department and Leslie 's boss . Due to his incredibly negative view of politics , he regularly works to make his department as inefficient as possible . This leads him to butt heads with Leslie on a number of occasions , as her philosophy regarding politics is the polar opposite . Despite that , both he and Leslie have a large amount of respect for one another . Ron has been married twice , both of whom are named Tammy . He despises and fears them greatly , as they are both the only two women in the world that can control him . 
 Aubrey Plaza as April Ludgate , a young apathetic intern at the parks department . She cares little for her internship , and often shows annoyance at having to complete tasks . Due to her rebellious and emotionless attitude , she is often annoyed by her co @-@ workers , especially Leslie . She has a boyfriend named Derek , who is openly gay and dating another openly gay boy named Ben . Despite being in this relationship , April begins to develop a crush on Andy , as he is one of the only people that has the ability to make her smile . She goes to the lengths of accepting a job as Ron 's assistant just so she can stay in the parks department and see Andy . 
 Chris Pratt as Andy Dwyer , Ann 's ex @-@ boyfriend and lead singer of a band called " Mouse Rat " . He and Ann broke up after he revealed to her that he had delayed the removal of the casts on his legs so that she would continue to pamper him . He now lives in a tent pitched in the pit next to Ann 's house , so he can watch over her . After being injured when Leslie attempts to fill in the pit with dirt , he threatens to sue Pawnee in order to get money and impress Ann . Andy settles the lawsuit out of court however , when Leslie offers him a job as the shoe shiner in Pawnee town hall . It is here he begins to develop a romantic interest in intern April , feelings which she reciprocates . 
 = = = Recurring = = = 
 Alison Becker as Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep , a newspaper journalist with The Pawnee Journal . 
 Andrew Burlinson as Wyatt " Burly " Burlinson , the lead guitarist in Andy 's band " Mouse Rat " . 
 Louis C.K. as Dave Sanderson , a socially awkward Pawnee police sergeant who enters in to a romantic relationship with Leslie . 
 Mo Collins as Joan Callamezzo , a tabloid journalist and hostess of news / talk show Pawnee Today . 
 Josh Duvendeck as Ben , Derek 's openly gay boyfriend . 
 Andy Forrest as Kyle , a government employee who is constantly ridiculed by Andy . 
 Jay Jackson as Perd Hapley , a popular Pawnee television journalist and the host of news program Ya Heard ? With Perd ! . 
 Blake Lee as Derek , April 's openly gay boyfriend who is in a relationship with Ben . 
 Jim O 'Heir as Jerry Gergich , an incompetent and widely ridiculed employee at the parks department . 
 Retta as Donna Meagle , the no @-@ nonsense office manager at the parks department . 
 Phil Reeves as Paul Iaresco , Pawnee city manager . 
 Ben Schwartz as Jean @-@ Ralphio Saperstein , Tom 's dimwitted and cocky best friend . 
 Justin Theroux as Justin Anderson , a lawyer and old friend of Ann 's that enters in to a romantic relationship with Leslie . He is incredibly cultured and he constantly tells stories of his adventures around the globe . 
 Jama Williamson as Wendy Haverford , a surgeon and Tom 's attractive wife . She and Tom divorce and she pursues a romantic interest in Ron . 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 Fred Armisen as Raul , a parks official from <unk> , Pawnee 's Venezuelan sister city . 
 JC Gonzalez as Johnny , a parks intern official from <unk> , Pawnee 's Venezuelan sister city . 
 Will Arnett as Chris , a strange radiologist who Ann sets Leslie up on a date with . 
 John <unk> as Barney <unk> , an incredibly boring accountant . 
 H. Jon Benjamin as Scott Braddock , a high @-@ strung Pawnee city attorney . 
 Kirk Fox as Joe <unk> , an employee at Pawnee 's sewage department and an enemy of the Parks department . 
 Michael Gross as Michael Tansley , a former director of the parks department . 
 Darlene Hunt as Marcia Langman , a conservative activist with the Pawnee organization , the Society for Family Stability Foundation . 
 Yvans Jourdain as Councilman Douglass Howser , head of Pawnee 's city council . 
 John Larroquette as Frank Beckerson , a man who had a passionate love affair with Leslie 's mother Marlene in their youth . 
 Rob Lowe as Chris Traeger , a state auditor who comes to Pawnee to evaluate the town 's funds . 
 Jim Meskimen as Martin <unk> , an MC at many special events throughout Pawnee . 
 Natalie Morales as Lucy , a bartender and love interest for Tom . 
 Megan Mullally as Tammy Swanson ( aka Tammy Two ) , a librarian and Ron 's sex @-@ crazed ex @-@ wife . 
 Ian Roberts as Ian Winston , a Pawnee citizen . 
 Pamela Reed as Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope , Leslie 's mother and a successful politician in Pawnee . 
 Andy Samberg as Carl <unk> , a park ranger and the head of Pawnee 's outdoor security . 
 Paul Scheer as Keef <unk> , the energetic founder of KaBOOM ! , a charitable organization . 
 Detlef Schrempf as himself . 
 Adam Scott as Ben Wyatt , a state auditor who comes to Pawnee to evaluate the town 's funds . 
 Kevin Symons as Councilman Bill Dexhart , a member of the Pawnee city council who is constantly embroiled in outrageous sex scandals . 
 Cooper Thornton as Dr. Harris , Ann 's boss at Pawnee 's hospital . 
 Gillian <unk> as Alexa <unk> , a tabloid journalist from The Pawnee Sun . 
 Susan Yeagley as Jessica Wicks , a beauty pageant winner and the wife of Nick Newport Sr. , one of the richest men in Pawnee . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 † denotes an extended episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The second season of Parks and Recreation was produced by Deedle @-@ Dee Productions , Universal Media Studios , <unk> and 3 Arts Entertainment . Series creators Greg Daniels and Michael Schur were executive producers along with David Miner , who previously worked on the NBC comedy series 30 Rock , and Howard Klein , who worked on The Office , another NBC comedy created by Daniels . Schur served as the showrunner of Parks and Recreation . Amy Poehler and Morgan Sackett were producers , while Daniel J. Goor was supervising producer , and Norm Hiscock and Emily Kapnek worked as consulting producers , David Hyman and Dean Holland were co @-@ producers , and Holland also worked as an editor along with Michael Trim , who doubled as director of photography . Dorian Frankel was the casting director , Ian Phillips was the production designer , <unk> Mann was the costume designer , and Alan Yang , Harris Wittels and Katie Dippold worked as executive story editors . Tucker Cawley , who had been a consulting producer during first season of Parks and Recreation , did not return and instead created the short @-@ lived ABC sitcom Hank , starring Kelsey Grammer . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 All principal cast members from the first season returned for the second , including Amy Poehler , Rashida Jones , Aziz Ansari , Nick Offerman , Aubrey Plaza and Paul Schneider . Chris Pratt , who was billed as a guest star throughout the first season despite appearing in every episode , was promoted to the main cast in season two . Andy Dwyer , Pratt 's character , was originally supposed to appear only in the first season , but the producers liked Pratt so much that almost immediately after casting him , they decided to make Andy a regular character . Schneider left the cast after the second season . Schur said when Schneider 's character Mark Brendanawicz was conceived , it was anticipated he would eventually become a less frequent character who switched back and forth between government and private sector jobs . Schur claimed that both the producers and Schneider were interested in having the character return for guest appearances in future episodes , though Schneider states that he is not interested in returning and has never been contacted about it . 
 Rob Lowe and Adam Scott joined the Parks and Recreation cast starting in the penultimate second season episode , " The Master Plan " . Scott left his starring role on the Starz comedy series Party Down to join Parks and Recreation , and Lowe had recently departed from the ABC drama series Brothers & Sisters . From the beginning , Scott was expected to become a regular cast member and , during the third season , eventual love interest for Leslie Knope , while Lowe was originally only intended to make a string of guest appearances in the third season and then depart the series . However , Lowe later signed a multi @-@ year contract to become a regular cast member . Schur said even when the character Ben Wyatt was conceived , Adam Scott was considered the " dream scenario " casting choice . 
 Jim O 'Heir and Retta , who made regular appearances as parks employees Jerry Gergich and Donna Meagle in the first season , continued to appear in season two . Although still considered guest actors , their characters started to become more fully developed and play larger roles in the episodes . Several other actors played regular supporting roles throughout the second season . Jama Williamson continued her recurring role as Wendy , Tom Haverford 's ex @-@ wife who becomes a romantic interest for Ron Swanson . Mo Collins and Jay Jackson made repeated appearances as Pawnee journalists Joan Callamezzo and Perd Hapley . Both actors were originally expected to appear only in one episode , but both returned for subsequent episodes because the writing staff enjoyed their performances . Alison Becker played another Pawnee reporter , Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep , a character she also played in the first season . Ben Schwartz played Jean @-@ Ralphio , an arrogant and fast @-@ talking playboy friend of Tom , in several episodes . Pamela Reed reprised her recurring role as Leslie 's mother , Marlene , in several second season episodes . 
 The second season also included several prominent guest appearances , something that distinguished Parks and Recreation from Greg Daniels ' other comedy series , The Office . Schur said high @-@ profile guests on The Office would be too distracting because most episodes are confined to one setting , while he said Parks and Recreation was " a little bit more bright and colorful than The Office " . Megan Mullally , the real @-@ life wife of Nick Offerman , appeared as Ron 's ex @-@ wife Tammy in the episode " Ron and Tammy " . Schur said Mullally 's appearance was well received and not overly distracting to viewers , which made the Parks and Recreation producers feel more comfortable about using future guest actors . Stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. appeared in several episodes as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer and romantic interest to Leslie Knope . Although typically known for his raunchy and caustic comedy style , Louis C.K. adopted a far more deadpan sense of humor and technical tone of voice for Sanderson . 
 Two of Amy Poehler 's previous cast members from Saturday Night Live appeared in Parks and Recreation episodes : Fred Armisen played the vice director of a Venezuelan parks department in " Sister City " , and Andy Samberg portrayed the head of security for Pawnee 's parks in " Park Safety " . Will Arnett , the real @-@ life husband of Amy Poehler , made a guest appearance as an MRI technician in " The Set Up " . In that same episode , Justin Theroux started a string of a guest appearances as Justin Anderson , a friend of Ann and love interest for Leslie . John Larroquette appeared in " Galentine 's Day " as the long @-@ lost former love of Leslie 's mother . Kevin Symons appeared in two episodes as Bill Dexhart , a Pawnee councilman prone to sexual affairs and political scandals . Paul Scheer , who appeared in the MTV sketch comedy show Human Giant with Aziz Ansari , played a charity leader in " Kaboom " . In that same episode , comedian and voice actor H. Jon Benjamin played a Pawnee lawyer . Michael Gross , best known for his role as Steven Keaton from Family Ties , appeared in " Summer Catalog " as a former parks department director who loves marijuana . Detlef Schrempf , a retired basketball player who played for the Indiana Pacers , portrayed himself in " Telethon " . Natalie Morales appeared in the last two episodes of the season as Lucy , a bartender who becomes Tom 's girlfriend . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 Following season one , Parks and Recreation was originally renewed for a half season @-@ worth of episodes , but was picked up for a full season in late October 2009 . Greg Daniels said since the Parks and Recreation characters had now been established in the second season , the writers were able to write more specifically for the actors . Daniels said he believed this allowed the characters to become more balanced , rather than simply an accumulation of flaws , as they sometimes appeared in the first season . The writing staff also made an effort to be more topical with the second season episodes . For example , the episode " Pawnee Zoo " included social commentary about same @-@ sex marriage . Likewise , " The Stakeout " included a parody of the arrest of Henry Louis Gates , a black Harvard University professor who was arrested after police mistakenly thought he was breaking into his own home in Cambridge , Massachusetts , and a sex scandal involving a Pawnee councilman in " Practice Date " mirrored the real @-@ life 2009 scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford , who publicly admitted to a long @-@ term extramarital affair with an Argentinian woman . 
 The writers made several other changes going from season one to season two , including making the scripts more focused around the entire cast rather than just Leslie . They also tried to make Leslie appear more intelligent in the second season after receiving audience feedback that she appeared " ditzy " , which Michael Schur said was never their intention . Schur said , " In the end , we just felt that Amy is an enormously likable presence on screen , so as the season went on we just tried to create situations where that would shine through . " During the episode " Kaboom " , a major subplot was resolved when the large construction pit that Leslie had long sought to turn into a park was filled with dirt and turned into a lot . The pit was first established in the premiere episode and had been a focal point of the series since the show began . Schur said while the pit project was originally conceived as a device to bring all the characters together working toward a common goal , and it was expected to only become a park during the series finale . However , Schur said he felt the early episodes were too focused on the pit and had led viewers to believe the entire show was about filling the pit , which was not the writers ' intention , so they accelerated the resolution of that story arc . The idea of Ben and Chris , two state auditors who come in from outside Pawnee to help the town deal with budget problems , was conceived from news reports at the time of a number of states considering shutting down schools , parks and other services due to the global recession . 
 Poehler became pregnant during the latter half of the season , with her baby due in the summer or early fall of 2010 . The Parks and Recreation producers decided not to write the pregnancy into the show , so they decided to enter into a continuous production after the season ended to bank episodes for the third season . Six season three episodes were filmed in this fashion . However , in May 2010 , NBC announced the third season of Parks and Recreation was being moved to an undisclosed midseason premiere date to allow the network 's new comedy , Outsourced , to run in the Thursday two @-@ hour comedy schedule block . NBC chief executive officer Jeff Gaspin said this move was not a reflection on Parks and Recreation , and suggested the extended hiatus would not only have no effect on the show 's momentum , but could actually build anticipation for its eventual return . In November 2010 , it was announced Parks and Recreation would return to a 9 : 30 p.m. Thursday timeslot effective January 20 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The first season of Parks and Recreation received mixed to negative reviews , with many critics deeming it too similar to The Office , which shared the same mock documentary style as Parks and Recreation . In particular , several commentators said the naive and well @-@ meaning Leslie Knope character too closely resembled The Office protagonist Michael Scott , a well @-@ intentioned but dimwitted protagonist manager of a paper company sales office . However , most critics declared the second season a vast improvement over the first , with some even claiming it had surpassed The Office and 30 Rock as the best comedy of NBC 's Thursday line @-@ up . It was declared the best comedy of the television season by Entertainment Weekly writer Henning Fog and The Star @-@ Ledger television columnist Alan Sepinwall . Entertainment Weekly writer Michael Ausiello , who was critical of the first season , called it the " most improved " show of the season . Time magazine writer James Poniewozik included Parks and Recreation in his list of the 10 best television shows of 2009 , and IGN declared it the best comedy series of 2009 . Several reviewers called the second season one of the most impressive comebacks in television history . 
 Amy Poehler said the first season struggled in part due to extremely high expectations from comparisons to The Office . Parks and Recreation staff also felt part of the reason for the improvement was that the characters have become better developed , and viewers have come to like and care more about them . Likewise , Michael Schur believed much of the early criticism stemmed from the fact that audiences were not yet familiar with the characters , and he believed viewers liked the second season better because they had gotten to know the characters better as the series progressed . Commentators said the supporting cast was now working with better material and that Poehler 's character had improved and become less over @-@ the @-@ top and more human than in the first season , and more distinct from Michael Scott . Several reviewers praised the decision to drop season one subplots that risked becoming stale , like whether Andy and Ann would keep dating , and Leslie 's long @-@ standing crush on Mark . Others complimented the decision to fill in the pit during the second season , which they said freed the show up for more stories and better scripts . Despite the vast change in critical reception , Parks and Recreation staff said they felt only a few minor changes were made to the show itself . Michael Schur said , " I don 't think magical fairy dust was sprinkled over the show . I just think we 're getting better at it . " NBC officials compared the late rush of critical acclaim for Parks and Recreation to that of The Office , which received mixed reviews during its first season before most critics agreed it found its rhythm in the second season . 
 Nick Offerman received considerable praise for his performance as Ron Swanson during the second season . Many reviewers praised Offerman 's subtle and understated style of comedy , and said he was often the funniest part of the scenes he was in . Jonah Weiner of Slate magazine declared Swanson " Parks and Recreation 's secret weapon " and " vital to the show 's improvement " . Aziz Ansari , who was particularly acclaimed during the first season for his role as Tom Haverford , received similar praise in the second season as well . Many reviewers were critical of the pairing of Mark and Ann , feeling the couple lacked chemistry and were often the least funny parts of the individual episodes . Entertainment Weekly writer Margaret Lyons called Mark and Ann the show 's " Achilles ' heel " , and Sandra Gonzalez , also from Entertainment Weekly , wrote , " No matter what they do with these two , I can ’ t help but be bored . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Despite the critical success , the second season of Parks and Recreation continued to suffer in the Nielsen ratings . By December 2009 , the average episode viewership was 5 @.@ 3 million households . The average was lower than the other NBC comedy shows that aired Thursday night along with Parks and Recreation : Community drew an average 6 @.@ 5 million households , 30 Rock an average 7 @.@ 3 million , and The Office an average 10 @.@ 1 million . By February 2010 , ratings had begun to improve all of NBC 's Thursday comedy shows , especially Parks and Recreation , but the network remained in fourth place among the major networks in Nielsen ratings . By the end of the season , the average viewership for the 24 episodes of season two was 4 @.@ 68 million , lower than season one 's average of 5 @.@ 45 million households . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Amy Poehler was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series . The episode " Telethon " , in which Leslie frantically stays awake for 36 hours to volunteer for a charity telethon , was her performance submitted for Emmy award consideration . This marked Poehler 's third Primetime Emmy nomination , having previously received twice for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series during her time on Saturday Night Live . Poehler ultimately lost to Edie Falco for her performance on the Showtime comedy series Nurse Jackie . Also that year , the Parks and Recreation theme song by Gaby Moreno and Vincent Jones was for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Main Title Theme Music , but the award again went to Nurse Jackie . 
 Parks and Recreation was also nominated for a Television Critics Association Award for Outstanding Achievement in Comedy , and Nick Offerman received a nomination for Individual Achievement in Comedy ; the awards ultimately were awarded , respectively , to the comedy series Modern Family and to Jane Lynch for her performance in the musical comedy @-@ drama Glee . The second season premiere episode , " Pawnee Zoo " , won the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Individual Episode . It was nominated alongside the ABC drama series Private Practice , the NBC supernatural drama The Listener and the CW drama / horror series Supernatural in the category . Aubrey Plaza received a Best Supporting Actress in Television nomination from the Imagen Awards , which honors positive portrayals of Latinos in entertainment , but the award went to María Canals Barrera for her role in Wizards of Waverly Place : The Movie ( 2009 ) . Also in 2010 , Parks and Recreation received two nominations from Entertainment Weekly 's <unk> Awards : one for Best Comedy Series , and one for Nick Offerman as Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy . 
 = YouTube = 
 YouTube is a global video @-@ sharing website headquartered in San Bruno , California , United States . 
 The service was created by three former PayPal employees in February 2005 . In November 2006 , it was bought by Google for US $ 1 @.@ 65 billion . YouTube now operates as one of Google 's subsidiaries . The site allows users to upload , view , rate , share , and comment on videos , and it makes use of WebM , H.264 / MPEG @-@ 4 AVC , and Adobe Flash Video technology to display a wide variety of user @-@ generated and corporate media video . Available content includes video clips , TV clips , music videos , movie trailers , and other content such as video blogging , short original videos , and educational videos . 
 Most of the content on YouTube has been uploaded by individuals , but media corporations including CBS , the BBC , Vevo , Hulu , and other organizations offer some of their material via YouTube , as part of the YouTube partnership program . Unregistered users can watch videos , and registered users are permitted to upload an unlimited number of videos and add comments to videos . Videos deemed potentially offensive are available only to registered users affirming themselves to be at least 18 years old . 
 = = Company history = = 
 YouTube was founded by Chad Hurley , Steve Chen , and Jawed Karim , who were all early employees of PayPal . Hurley had studied design at Indiana University of Pennsylvania , and Chen and Karim studied computer science together at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign . 
 According to a story that has often been repeated in the media , Hurley and Chen developed the idea for YouTube during the early months of 2005 , after they had experienced difficulty sharing videos that had been shot at a dinner party at Chen 's apartment in San Francisco . Karim did not attend the party and denied that it had occurred , but Chen commented that the idea that YouTube was founded after a dinner party " was probably very strengthened by marketing ideas around creating a story that was very digestible " . 
 Karim said the inspiration for YouTube first came from Janet Jackson 's role in the 2004 Super Bowl incident , when her breast was exposed during her performance , and later from the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami . Karim could not easily find video clips of either event online , which led to the idea of a video sharing site . Hurley and Chen said that the original idea for YouTube was a video version of an online dating service , and had been influenced by the website Hot or Not . 
 YouTube began as a venture @-@ funded technology startup , primarily from a $ 11 @.@ 5 million investment by Sequoia Capital between November 2005 and April 2006 . YouTube 's early headquarters were situated above a pizzeria and Japanese restaurant in San Mateo , California . The domain name www.youtube.com was activated on February 14 , 2005 , and the website was developed over the subsequent months . 
 The first YouTube video , titled Me at the zoo , shows co @-@ founder Jawed Karim at the San Diego Zoo . The video was uploaded on April 23 , 2005 , and can still be viewed on the site . 
 YouTube offered the public a beta test of the site in May 2005 . The first video to reach one million views was a Nike advertisement featuring Ronaldinho in September 2005 . Following a $ 3 @.@ 5 million investment from Sequoia Capital in November , the site launched officially on December 15 , 2005 , by which time the site was receiving 8 million views a day . The site grew rapidly , and in July 2006 the company announced that more than 65 @,@ 000 new videos were being uploaded every day , and that the site was receiving 100 million video views per day . According to data published by market research company comScore , YouTube is the dominant provider of online video in the United States , with a market share of around 43 % and more than 14 billion views of videos in May 2010 . 
 In 2014 YouTube said that 300 hours of new videos were uploaded to the site every minute , three times more than one year earlier and that around three quarters of the material comes from outside the U.S. The site has 800 million unique users a month . It is estimated that in 2007 YouTube consumed as much bandwidth as the entire Internet in 2000 . According to third @-@ party web analytics providers , Alexa and <unk> , YouTube is the third most visited website in the world , as of June 2015 ; <unk> also lists YouTube as the top TV and video website globally , attracting more than 15 billion visitors per month . 
 The choice of the name www.youtube.com led to problems for a similarly named website , <unk> The site 's owner , Universal Tube & <unk> Equipment , filed a lawsuit against YouTube in November 2006 after being regularly overloaded by people looking for YouTube . Universal Tube has since changed the name of its website to <unk> 
 In October 2006 , Google Inc. announced that it had acquired YouTube for $ 1 @.@ 65 billion in Google stock , and the deal was finalized on November 13 , 2006 . 
 In March 2010 , YouTube began free streaming of certain content , including 60 cricket matches of the Indian Premier League . According to YouTube , this was the first worldwide free online broadcast of a major sporting event . 
 On March 31 , 2010 , the YouTube website launched a new design , with the aim of simplifying the interface and increasing the time users spend on the site . Google product manager Shiva <unk> commented : " We really felt like we needed to step back and remove the clutter . " In May 2010 , it was reported that YouTube was serving more than two billion videos a day , which it described as " nearly double the prime @-@ time audience of all three major US television networks combined " . In May 2011 , YouTube reported in its company blog that the site was receiving more than three billion views per day . In January 2012 , YouTube stated that the figure had increased to four billion videos streamed per day . 
 In October 2010 , Hurley announced that he would be stepping down as chief executive officer of YouTube to take an advisory role , and that Salar <unk> would take over as head of the company . 
 In April 2011 , James <unk> , a YouTube software engineer , revealed that 30 % of videos accounted for 99 % of views on the site . 
 In November 2011 , the Google + social networking site was integrated directly with YouTube and the Chrome web browser , allowing YouTube videos to be viewed from within the Google + interface . 
 In December 2011 , YouTube launched a new version of the site interface , with the video channels displayed in a central column on the home page , similar to the news feeds of social networking sites . At the same time , a new version of the YouTube logo was introduced with a darker shade of red , the first change in design since October 2006 . 
 In May 2013 , YouTube launched a pilot program to begin offering some content providers the ability to charge $ 0 @.@ 99 per month or more for certain channels , but the vast majority of its videos would remain free to view . 
 In February 2015 , YouTube announced the launch of a new app specifically for use by children visiting the site , called YouTube Kids . It allows parental controls and restrictions on who can upload content , and is available for both Android and iOS devices . Later on August 26 , 2015 , YouTube Gaming was launched , a platform for video gaming enthusiasts intended to compete with <unk> 2015 also saw the announcement of a premium YouTube service titled YouTube Red , which provides users with both ad @-@ free content as well as the ability to download videos among other features . 
 On August 10 , 2015 , Google announced that it was creating a new company , Alphabet , to act as the holding company for Google , with the change in financial reporting to begin in the fourth quarter of 2015 . YouTube remains as a subsidiary of Google . 
 In January 2016 , YouTube expanded its headquarters in San Bruno by purchasing an office park for $ 215 million . The complex has 554 @,@ 000 square feet of space and can house up to 2 @,@ 800 employees . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Video technology = = = 
 = = = = Playback = = = = 
 Previously , viewing YouTube videos on a personal computer required the Adobe Flash Player plug @-@ in to be installed in the browser . 
 In January 2010 , YouTube launched an experimental version of the site that used the built @-@ in multimedia capabilities of web browsers supporting the HTML5 standard . This allowed videos to be viewed without requiring Adobe Flash Player or any other plug @-@ in to be installed . The YouTube site had a page that allowed supported browsers to opt into the HTML5 trial . Only browsers that supported HTML5 Video using the H.264 or WebM formats could play the videos , and not all videos on the site were available . 
 On January 27 , 2015 , YouTube announced that HTML5 will be the default playback method on supported browsers . Supported browsers include Google Chrome , Safari 8 , and Internet Explorer 11 . 
 YouTube experimented with Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP ( MPEG @-@ DASH ) , which is an adaptive bit @-@ rate HTTP @-@ based streaming solution optimizing the <unk> and quality for the available network . Currently they are using Adobe Dynamic Streaming for Flash . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 All YouTube users can upload videos up to 15 minutes each in duration . Users who have a good track record of complying with the site 's Community Guidelines may be offered the ability to upload videos up to 12 hours in length , which requires verifying the account , normally through a mobile phone . When YouTube was launched in 2005 , it was possible to upload long videos , but a ten @-@ minute limit was introduced in March 2006 after YouTube found that the majority of videos exceeding this length were unauthorized uploads of television shows and films . The 10 @-@ minute limit was increased to 15 minutes in July 2010 . If an up @-@ to @-@ date browser version is used , videos greater than 20 GB can be uploaded . 
 YouTube accepts videos uploaded in most container formats , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , DivX , <unk> , and <unk> and <unk> These include video formats such as MPEG @-@ 4 , MPEG , <unk> , and <unk> It also supports <unk> , allowing videos to be uploaded from mobile phones . Videos with progressive scanning or interlaced scanning can be uploaded , but for the best video quality , YouTube suggests interlaced videos be <unk> before uploading . All the video formats on YouTube use progressive scanning . 
 = = = = Quality and formats = = = = 
 YouTube originally offered videos at only one quality level , displayed at a resolution of 320 × 240 pixels using the Sorenson Spark codec ( a variant of <unk> ) , with mono MP3 audio . In June 2007 , YouTube added an option to watch videos in <unk> format on mobile phones . In March 2008 , a high @-@ quality mode was added , which increased the resolution to 480 × 360 pixels . 
 In November 2008 , 720p HD support was added . At the time of the 720p launch , the YouTube player was changed from a 4 : 3 aspect ratio to a widescreen 16 : 9 . With this new feature , YouTube began a switchover to H.264 / MPEG @-@ 4 AVC as its default video compression format . In November 2009 , 1080p HD support was added . In July 2010 , YouTube announced that it had launched a range of videos in 4K format , which allows a resolution of up to 4096 × <unk> pixels . In June 2015 , support for 8K resolution was added , with the videos playing at <unk> × <unk> pixels . 
 In June 2014 , YouTube introduced videos playing at 60 frames per second , in order to reproduce video games with a frame rate comparable to high @-@ end graphics cards . The videos play back at a resolution of 720p or higher . 
 YouTube videos are available in a range of quality levels . The former names of standard quality ( SQ ) , high quality ( HQ ) and high definition ( HD ) have been replaced by numerical values representing the vertical resolution of the video . The default video stream is encoded in the <unk> format with stereo Opus audio ; if <unk> / WebM is not supported in the browser / device or the browser 's user agent reports Windows XP , then H.264 / MPEG @-@ 4 AVC video with stereo AAC audio is used instead . 
 = = = = 3D videos = = = = 
 In a video posted on July 21 , 2009 , YouTube software engineer Peter Bradshaw announced that YouTube users can now upload 3D videos . The videos can be viewed in several different ways , including the common anaglyph ( cyan / red lens ) method which utilizes glasses worn by the viewer to achieve the 3D effect . The YouTube Flash player can display stereoscopic content interleaved in rows , columns or a checkerboard pattern , side @-@ by @-@ side or anaglyph using a red / cyan , green / magenta or blue / yellow combination . In May 2011 , an HTML5 version of the YouTube player began supporting side @-@ by @-@ side 3D footage that is compatible with Nvidia 3D Vision . 
 = = = = 360 ° videos = = = = 
 In January 2015 , Google announced that 360 ° videos would be natively supported on YouTube . On March 13 , 2015 , YouTube enabled 360 ° videos which can be viewed from Google Cardboard . 
 = = = Content accessibility = = = 
 YouTube offers users the ability to view its videos on web pages outside their website . Each YouTube video is accompanied by a piece of HTML that can be used to embed it on any page on the Web . This functionality is often used to embed YouTube videos in social networking pages and blogs . Users wishing to post a video discussing , inspired by or related to another user 's video are able to make a " video response " . On August 27 , 2013 , YouTube announced that it would remove video responses for being an underused feature . Embedding , rating , commenting and response posting can be disabled by the video owner . 
 YouTube does not usually offer a download link for its videos , and intends for them to be viewed through its website interface . A small number of videos , such as the weekly addresses by President Barack Obama , can be downloaded as MP4 files . Numerous third @-@ party web sites , applications and browser plug @-@ ins allow users to download YouTube videos . In February 2009 , YouTube announced a test service , allowing some partners to offer video downloads for free or for a fee paid through Google Checkout . In June 2012 , Google sent cease and desist letters threatening legal action against several websites offering online download and conversion of YouTube videos . In response , <unk> removed the ability to download YouTube videos from its site . The default settings when uploading a video to YouTube will retain a copyright on the video for the uploader , but since July 2012 it has been possible to select a Creative Commons license as the default , allowing other users to reuse and remix the material if it is free of copyright . 
 = = = = Platforms = = = = 
 Most modern smartphones are capable of accessing YouTube videos , either within an application or through an optimized website . YouTube Mobile was launched in June 2007 , using <unk> streaming for the video . Not all of YouTube 's videos are available on the mobile version of the site . 
 Since June 2007 , YouTube 's videos have been available for viewing on a range of Apple products . This required YouTube 's content to be <unk> into Apple 's preferred video standard , H.264 , a process that took several months . YouTube videos can be viewed on devices including Apple TV , iPod Touch and the iPhone . In July 2010 , the mobile version of the site was relaunched based on HTML5 , avoiding the need to use Adobe Flash Player and optimized for use with touch screen controls . The mobile version is also available as an app for the Android platform . In September 2012 , YouTube launched its first app for the iPhone , following the decision to drop YouTube as one of the preloaded apps in the iPhone 5 and iOS 6 operating system . According to <unk> , YouTube was used by 35 % of smartphone users between April and June 2013 , making it the third most used app . 
 A TiVo service update in July 2008 allowed the system to search and play YouTube videos . In January 2009 , YouTube launched " YouTube for TV " , a version of the website tailored for set @-@ top boxes and other TV @-@ based media devices with web browsers , initially allowing its videos to be viewed on the PlayStation 3 and Wii video game consoles . In June 2009 , YouTube XL was introduced , which has a simplified interface designed for viewing on a standard television screen . YouTube is also available as an app on Xbox Live . On November 15 , 2012 , Google launched an official app for the Wii , allowing users to watch YouTube videos from the Wii channel . An app is also available for Wii U and Nintendo 3DS , and videos can be viewed on the Wii U Internet Browser using HTML5 . Google made YouTube available on the Roku player on December 17 , 2013 and in October 2014 , the Sony PlayStation 4 . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 On June 19 , 2007 , Google CEO Eric Schmidt was in Paris to launch the new localization system . The interface of the website is available with localized versions in 88 countries , one territory ( Hong Kong ) and a worldwide version . 
 The YouTube interface suggests which local version should be chosen on the basis of the IP address of the user . In some cases , the message " This video is not available in your country " may appear because of copyright restrictions or inappropriate content . 
 The interface of the YouTube website is available in 76 language versions , including Amharic , Albanian , Armenian , Bengali , Burmese , Khmer , Kyrgyz , Laotian , Mongolian , Persian and Uzbek , which do not have local channel versions . 
 Access to YouTube was blocked in Turkey between 2008 and 2010 , following controversy over the posting of videos deemed insulting to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and some material offensive to Muslims . In October 2012 , a local version of YouTube was launched in Turkey , with the domain <unk> The local version is subject to the content regulations found in Turkish law . 
 In March 2009 , a dispute between YouTube and the British royalty collection agency PRS for Music led to premium music videos being blocked for YouTube users in the United Kingdom . The removal of videos posted by the major record companies occurred after failure to reach agreement on a licensing deal . The dispute was resolved in September 2009 . In April 2009 , a similar dispute led to the removal of premium music videos for users in Germany . 
 = = = YouTube Red = = = 
 YouTube Red is YouTube 's premium subscription service . It offers advertising @-@ free streaming , access to exclusive content , background and offline video playback on mobile devices , and access to the Google Play Music " All Access " service . YouTube Red was originally announced on November 12 , 2014 , as " Music Key " , a subscription music streaming service , and was intended to integrate with and replace the existing Google Play Music " All Access " service . On October 28 , 2015 , the service was re @-@ launched as YouTube Red , offering ad @-@ free streaming of all videos , as well as access to exclusive original content . 
 = = Social impact = = 
 Both private individuals and large production companies have used YouTube to grow audiences . Independent content creators have built grassroots followings numbering in the thousands at very little cost or effort , while mass retail and radio promotion proved problematic . Concurrently , old media celebrities moved into the website at the invitation of a YouTube management that witnessed early content creators accruing substantial followings , and perceived audience sizes potentially larger than that attainable by television . While YouTube 's revenue @-@ sharing " Partner Program " made it possible to earn a substantial living as a video producer — its top five hundred partners each earning more than $ 100 @,@ 000 annually and its ten highest @-@ earning channels grossing from $ 2 @.@ 5 million to $ 12 million — in 2012 CMU business editor characterized YouTube as " a free @-@ to @-@ use ... promotional platform for the music labels " . In 2013 Forbes ' Katheryn Thayer asserted that digital @-@ era artists ' work must not only be of high quality , but must elicit reactions on the YouTube platform and social media . In 2013 , videos of the 2 @.@ 5 % of artists categorized as " mega " , " mainstream " and " mid @-@ sized " received 90 @.@ 3 % of the relevant views on YouTube and Vevo . By early 2013 Billboard had announced that it was factoring YouTube streaming data into calculation of the Billboard Hot 100 and related genre charts . 
 Observing that face @-@ to @-@ face communication of the type that online videos convey has been " fine @-@ tuned by millions of years of evolution " , TED curator Chris Anderson referred to several YouTube contributors and asserted that " what Gutenberg did for writing , online video can now do for face @-@ to @-@ face communication " . Anderson asserted that it 's not far @-@ fetched to say that online video will dramatically accelerate scientific advance , and that video contributors may be about to launch " the biggest learning cycle in human history . " In education , for example , the Khan Academy grew from YouTube video tutoring sessions for founder Salman Khan 's cousin into what Forbes ' Michael Noer called " the largest school in the world " , with technology poised to disrupt how people learn . 
 YouTube was awarded a 2008 George Foster Peabody Award , the website being described as a Speakers ' Corner that " both embodies and promotes democracy . " The Washington Post reported that a disproportionate share of YouTube 's most subscribed channels feature minorities , contrasting with mainstream television in which the stars are largely white . 
 A Pew Research Center study reported the development of " visual journalism " , in which citizen eyewitnesses and established news organizations share in content creation . The study also concluded that YouTube was becoming an important platform by which people acquire news . 
 YouTube has enabled people to more directly engage with government , such as in the CNN / YouTube presidential debates ( 2007 ) in which ordinary people submitted questions to U.S. presidential candidates via YouTube video , with a <unk> co @-@ founder saying that Internet video was changing the political landscape . Describing the Arab Spring ( <unk> ) , sociologist Philip N. Howard quoted an activist 's succinct description that organizing the political unrest involved using " Facebook to schedule the protests , Twitter to coordinate , and YouTube to tell the world . " In 2012 , more than a third of the U.S. Senate introduced a resolution condemning Joseph Kony 16 days after the " Kony 2012 " video was posted to YouTube , with resolution co @-@ sponsor Senator Lindsey Graham remarking that the video " will do more to lead to ( Kony 's ) demise than all other action combined . " 
 Conversely , YouTube has also allowed government to more easily engage with citizens , the White House 's official YouTube channel being the seventh top news organization producer on YouTube in 2012 and in 2013 a healthcare exchange commissioned Obama impersonator Iman Crosson 's YouTube music video spoof to encourage young Americans to enroll in the Affordable Care Act ( Obamacare ) <unk> health insurance . In February 2014 , U.S. President Obama held a meeting at the White House with leading YouTube content creators to not only promote awareness of Obamacare but more generally to develop ways for government to better connect with the " YouTube Generation " . Whereas YouTube 's inherent ability to allow presidents to directly connect with average citizens was noted , the YouTube content creators ' new media savvy was perceived necessary to better cope with the website 's distracting content and fickle audience . 
 Some YouTube videos have themselves had a direct effect on world events , such as Innocence of Muslims ( 2012 ) which spurred protests and related anti @-@ American violence internationally . 
 TED curator Chris Anderson described a phenomenon by which geographically distributed individuals in a certain field share their independently developed skills in YouTube videos , thus challenging others to improve their own skills , and spurring invention and evolution in that field . Journalist Virginia Heffernan stated in The New York Times that such videos have " surprising implications " for the dissemination of culture and even the future of classical music . 
 The Legion of Extraordinary Dancers and the YouTube Symphony Orchestra selected their membership based on individual video performances . Further , the <unk> charity video " We Are the World 25 for Haiti ( YouTube edition ) " was formed by mixing performances of 57 globally distributed singers into a single musical work , with The Tokyo Times noting the " We Pray for You " YouTube cyber @-@ collaboration video as an example of a trend to use crowdsourcing for charitable purposes . 
 The anti @-@ bullying It Gets Better Project expanded from a single YouTube video directed to discouraged or suicidal LGBT teens , that within two months drew video responses from hundreds including U.S. President Barack Obama , Vice President Biden , White House staff , and several cabinet secretaries . Similarly , in response to fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Amanda Todd 's video " My story : Struggling , bullying , suicide , self @-@ harm " , legislative action was undertaken almost immediately after her suicide to study the prevalence of bullying and form a national anti @-@ bullying strategy . 
 = = Revenue = = 
 Google does not provide detailed figures for YouTube 's running costs , and YouTube 's revenues in 2007 were noted as " not material " in a regulatory filing . In June 2008 , a Forbes magazine article projected the 2008 revenue at $ 200 million , noting progress in advertising sales . In January 2012 , it was estimated that visitors to YouTube spent an average of 15 minutes a day on the site , in contrast to the four or five hours a day spent by a typical U.S. citizen watching television . In 2012 , YouTube 's revenue from its ads program was estimated at 3 @.@ 7 billion . In 2013 it nearly doubled and estimated to hit 5 @.@ 6 billion dollars according to <unk> , others estimated 4 @.@ 7 billion , 
 The vast majority of videos on YouTube are free to view and supported by advertising . In May 2013 , YouTube introduced a trial scheme of 53 subscription channels with prices ranging from $ 0 @.@ 99 to $ 6 @.@ 99 a month . The move was seen as an attempt to compete with other providers of online subscription services such as Netflix and Hulu . 
 = = = Advertisement partnerships = = = 
 YouTube entered into a marketing and advertising partnership with NBC in June 2006 . In November 2008 , YouTube reached an agreement with MGM , Lions Gate Entertainment , and CBS , allowing the companies to post full @-@ length films and television episodes on the site , accompanied by advertisements in a section for US viewers called " Shows " . The move was intended to create competition with websites such as Hulu , which features material from NBC , Fox , and Disney . In November 2009 , YouTube launched a version of " Shows " available to UK viewers , offering around 4 @,@ 000 full @-@ length shows from more than 60 partners . In January 2010 , YouTube introduced an online film rentals service , which is available only to users in the US , Canada and the UK as of 2010 . The service offers over 6 @,@ 000 films . 
 = = = Partnership with video creators = = = 
 In May 2007 , YouTube launched its Partner Program , a system based on <unk> which allows the uploader of the video to share the revenue produced by advertising on the site . YouTube typically takes 45 percent of the advertising revenue from videos in the Partner Program , with 55 percent going to the uploader . There are over a million members of the YouTube Partner Program . According to <unk> , in 2013 a pre @-@ roll advertisement on YouTube ( one that is shown before the video starts ) cost advertisers on average $ 7 @.@ 60 per 1000 views . Usually no more than half of eligible videos have a pre @-@ roll advertisement , due to a lack of interested advertisers . Assuming pre @-@ roll advertisements on half of videos , a YouTube partner would earn 0 @.@ 5 X $ 7 @.@ 60 X 55 % = $ 2 @.@ 09 per 1000 views in 2013 . 
 = = = Revenue to copyright holders = = = 
 Much of YouTube 's revenue goes to the copyright holders of the videos . In 2010 it was reported that nearly a third of the videos with advertisements were uploaded without permission of the copyright holders . YouTube gives an option for copyright holders to locate and remove their videos or to have them continue running for revenue . In May 2013 , Nintendo began enforcing its copyright ownership and claiming the advertising revenue from video creators who posted screenshots of its games . In February 2015 , Nintendo agreed to share the revenue with the video creators . 
 = = Community policy = = 
 YouTube has a set of community guidelines aimed to reduce abuse of the site 's features . Generally prohibited material includes sexually explicit content , videos of animal abuse , shock videos , content uploaded without the copyright holder 's consent , hate speech , spam , and predatory behaviour . Despite the guidelines , YouTube has faced criticism from news sources for content in violation of these guidelines . 
 = = = <unk> material = = = 
 At the time of uploading a video , YouTube users are shown a message asking them not to violate copyright laws . Despite this advice , there are still many unauthorized clips of copyrighted material on YouTube . YouTube does not view videos before they are posted online , and it is left to copyright holders to issue a DMCA takedown notice pursuant to the terms of the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act . Any successful complaint about copyright infringement results in a YouTube copyright strike . Three successful complaints for copyright infringement against a user account will result in the account and all of its uploaded videos being deleted . 
 Organizations including Viacom , Mediaset , and the English Premier League have filed lawsuits against YouTube , claiming that it has done too little to prevent the uploading of copyrighted material . Viacom , demanding $ 1 billion in damages , said that it had found more than 150 @,@ 000 unauthorized clips of its material on YouTube that had been viewed " an astounding 1 @.@ 5 billion times " . YouTube responded by stating that it " goes far beyond its legal obligations in assisting content owners to protect their works " . 
 During the same court battle , Viacom won a court ruling requiring YouTube to hand over 12 terabytes of data detailing the viewing habits of every user who has watched videos on the site . The decision was criticized by the Electronic Frontier Foundation , which called the court ruling " a setback to privacy rights " . In June 2010 , Viacom 's lawsuit against Google was rejected in a summary judgment , with U.S. federal Judge Louis L. Stanton stating that Google was protected by provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . Viacom announced its intention to appeal the ruling . 
 On April 5 , 2012 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reinstated the case , allowing Viacom 's lawsuit against Google to be heard in court again . On March 18 , 2014 , the lawsuit was settled after seven years with an undisclosed agreement . 
 In August 2008 , a US court ruled in Lenz v. Universal Music Corp. that copyright holders cannot order the removal of an online file without first determining whether the posting reflected fair use of the material . The case involved Stephanie Lenz from Gallitzin , Pennsylvania , who had made a home video of her 13 @-@ month @-@ old son dancing to Prince 's song " Let 's Go Crazy " , and posted the 29 @-@ second video on YouTube . 
 In the case of Smith v. Summit Entertainment LLC , professional singer Matt Smith sued Summit Entertainment for the wrongful use of copyright takedown notices on YouTube . He asserted seven causes of action , and four were ruled in Smith 's favor . 
 In April 2012 , a court in Hamburg ruled that YouTube could be held responsible for copyrighted material posted by its users . The performance rights organization GEMA argued that YouTube had not done enough to prevent the uploading of German copyrighted music . YouTube responded by stating : 
 As of 2013 , YouTube and GEMA have still not reached a licensing agreement . As a result , most videos containing copyrighted music have been blocked in Germany since 2009 . 
 In April 2013 , it was reported that Universal Music Group and YouTube have a contractual agreement that prevents content blocked on YouTube by a request from UMG from being restored , even if the uploader of the video files a DMCA counter @-@ notice . When a dispute occurs , the uploader of the video has to contact UMG . 
 YouTube 's owner Google announced in November 2015 that they would help cover the legal cost in select cases where they believe " fair use " laws apply . 
 = = = = Content ID = = = = 
 In June 2007 , YouTube began trials of a system for automatic detection of uploaded videos that infringe copyright . Google CEO Eric Schmidt regarded this system as necessary for resolving lawsuits such as the one from Viacom , which alleged that YouTube profited from content that it did not have the right to distribute . The system , which became known as Content ID , creates an ID File for copyrighted audio and video material , and stores it in a database . When a video is uploaded , it is checked against the database , and flags the video as a copyright violation if a match is found . 
 When this occurs , the content owner has the choice of blocking the video to make it <unk> , tracking the viewing statistics of the video , or adding advertisements to the video . YouTube describes Content ID as " very accurate in finding uploads that look similar to reference files that are of sufficient length and quality to generate an effective ID File " . Content ID accounts for over a third of the monetized views on YouTube . 
 An independent test in 2009 uploaded multiple versions of the same song to YouTube , and concluded that while the system was " surprisingly resilient " in finding copyright violations in the audio tracks of videos , it was not infallible . The use of Content ID to remove material automatically has led to controversy in some cases , as the videos have not been checked by a human for fair use . If a YouTube user disagrees with a decision by Content ID , it is possible to fill in a form disputing the decision . YouTube has cited the effectiveness of Content ID as one of the reasons why the site 's rules were modified in December 2010 to allow some users to upload videos of unlimited length . 
 = = = Controversial content = = = 
 YouTube has also faced criticism over the offensive content in some of its videos . The uploading of videos containing defamation , pornography , and material encouraging criminal conduct is prohibited by YouTube 's terms of service . Controversial content has included material relating to Holocaust denial and the Hillsborough disaster , in which 96 football fans from Liverpool were crushed to death in 1989 . 
 YouTube relies on its users to flag the content of videos as inappropriate , and a YouTube employee will view a flagged video to determine whether it violates the site 's terms of service . In July 2008 , the Culture and Media Committee of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom stated that it was " unimpressed " with YouTube 's system for policing its videos , and argued that " proactive review of content should be standard practice for sites hosting user @-@ generated content " . YouTube responded by stating : 
 We have strict rules on what 's allowed , and a system that enables anyone who sees inappropriate content to report it to our 24 / 7 review team and have it dealt with promptly . We educate our community on the rules and include a direct link from every YouTube page to make this process as easy as possible for our users . Given the volume of content uploaded on our site , we think this is by far the most effective way to make sure that the tiny minority of videos that break the rules come down quickly . ( July 2008 ) 
 In October 2010 , U.S. Congressman Anthony Weiner urged YouTube to remove from its website videos of imam Anwar al @-@ Awlaki . YouTube pulled some of the videos in November 2010 , stating they violated the site 's guidelines . In December 2010 , YouTube added " promotes terrorism " to the list of reasons that users can give when flagging a video as inappropriate . 
 = = = User comments = = = 
 Most videos enable users to leave comments , and these have attracted attention for the negative aspects of both their form and content . In 2006 , Time praised Web 2 @.@ 0 for enabling " community and collaboration on a scale never seen before " , and added that YouTube " harnesses the stupidity of crowds as well as its wisdom . Some of the comments on YouTube make you weep for the future of humanity just for the spelling alone , never mind the obscenity and the naked hatred " . The Guardian in 2009 described users ' comments on YouTube as : 
 In September 2008 , The Daily Telegraph commented that YouTube was " notorious " for " some of the most confrontational and ill @-@ formed comment exchanges on the internet " , and reported on YouTube Comment <unk> , " a new piece of software that blocks rude and illiterate posts " . The Huffington Post noted in April 2012 that finding comments on YouTube that appear " offensive , stupid and crass " to the " vast majority " of the people is hardly difficult . 
 On November 6 , 2013 , Google implemented a new comment system that requires all YouTube users to use a Google + account in order to comment on videos and making the comment system Google + oriented . The changes are in large part an attempt to address the frequent criticisms of the quality and tone of YouTube comments . They give creators more power to moderate and block comments , and add new sorting mechanisms to ensure that better , more relevant discussions appear at the top . The new system restored the ability to include URLs in comments , which had previously been removed due to problems with abuse . In response , YouTube co @-@ founder Jawed Karim posted the question " why the fuck do I need a google + account to comment on a video ? " on his YouTube channel to express his negative opinion of the change . The official YouTube announcement received 20 @,@ 097 " thumbs down " votes and generated more than 32 @,@ 000 comments in two days . Writing in the Newsday blog Silicon Island , Chase Melvin noted that " Google + is nowhere near as popular a social media network as Facebook , but it 's essentially being forced upon millions of YouTube users who don 't want to lose their ability to comment on videos " and " Discussion forums across the Internet are already bursting with outcry against the new comment system " . In the same article Melvin goes on to say : 
 On July 27 , 2015 , Google announced in a blog post that it would be removing the requirement to sign up to a Google + account to post comments to YouTube . 
 = = = View counts = = = 
 In December 2012 , two billion views were removed from the view counts of Universal and Sony music videos on YouTube , prompting a claim by The Daily Dot that the views had been deleted due to a violation of the site 's terms of service , which ban the use of automated processes to inflate view counts . This was disputed by Billboard , which said that the two billion views had been moved to Vevo , since the videos were no longer active on YouTube . 
 On August 5 , 2015 , YouTube removed the feature of the site which caused a video 's view count to freeze at " 301 " ( later " 301 + " ) until the actual count was verified to prevent view count fraud . YouTube view counts now update in real time . 
 = = Censorship and filtering = = 
 As of September 2012 , countries with standing national bans on YouTube include China , Iran , and Turkmenistan . 
 YouTube is blocked for a variety of reasons , including : 
 limiting public exposure to content that may ignite social or political unrest ; 
 preventing criticism of a ruler , government , government officials , religion , or religious leaders ; 
 violations of national laws , including : 
 copyright and intellectual property protection laws ; 
 violations of hate speech , ethics , or morality @-@ based laws ; and 
 national security legislation . 
 preventing access to videos judged to be inappropriate for youth ; 
 reducing distractions at work or school ; and 
 reducing the amount of network bandwidth used . 
 In some countries , YouTube is completely blocked , either through a long term standing ban or for more limited periods of time such as during periods of unrest , the run @-@ up to an election , or in response to upcoming political anniversaries . In other countries access to the website as a whole remains open , but access to specific videos is blocked . In cases where the entire site is banned due to one particular video , YouTube will often agree to remove or limit access to that video in order to restore service . 
 Businesses , schools , government agencies , and other private institutions often block social media sites , including YouTube , due to bandwidth limitations and the site 's potential for distraction . 
 Several countries have blocked access to YouTube : 
 Iran temporarily blocked access on December 3 , 2006 , to YouTube and several other sites , after declaring them as violating social and moral codes of conduct . The YouTube block came after a video was posted online that appeared to show an Iranian soap opera star having sex . The block was later lifted and then reinstated after Iran 's 2009 presidential election . In 2012 , Iran <unk> access , along with access to Google , after the controversial film Innocence of Muslims ' trailer was released on YouTube . 
 Thailand blocked access between 2006 and 2007 due to offensive videos relating to King Bhumibol Adulyadej . 
 Some Australian state education departments block YouTube citing " an inability to determine what sort of video material might be accessed " and " There 's no educational value to it and the content of the material on the site . " 
 China blocked access from October 15 , 2007 , to March 22 , 2008 , and again starting on March 24 , 2009 . Access remains blocked . 
 Morocco blocked access in May 2007 , possibly as a result of videos critical of Morocco 's actions in Western Sahara . YouTube became accessible again on May 30 , 2007 , after Maroc Telecom unofficially announced that the denied access to the website was a mere " technical glitch " . 
 Turkey blocked access between 2008 and 2010 after controversy over videos deemed insulting to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk . In November 2010 , a video of the Turkish politician Deniz <unk> caused the site to be blocked again briefly , and the site was threatened with a new shutdown if it did not remove the video . During the two and a half year block of YouTube , the video @-@ sharing website remained the eighth most @-@ accessed site in Turkey . In 2014 , Turkey blocked the access for the second time , after " a high @-@ level intelligence leak . " 
 Pakistan blocked access on February 23 , 2008 , because of " offensive material " towards the Islamic faith , including display of the Danish cartoons of Muhammad . This led to a near global blackout of the YouTube site for around two hours , as the Pakistani block was inadvertently transferred to other countries . On February 26 , 2008 , the ban was lifted after the website had removed the objectionable content from its servers at the request of the government . Many Pakistanis circumvented the three @-@ day block by using virtual private network software . In May 2010 , following the Everybody Draw Mohammed Day , Pakistan again blocked access to YouTube , citing " growing sacrilegious content " . The ban was lifted on May 27 , 2010 , after the website removed the objectionable content from its servers at the request of the government . However , individual videos deemed offensive to Muslims posted on YouTube will continue to be blocked . Pakistan again placed a ban on YouTube in September 2012 , after the site refused to remove the film Innocence of Muslims , with the ban still in operation as of September 2013 . The ban was lifted in January 2016 after YouTube launched a Pakistan @-@ specific version . 
 Turkmenistan blocked access on December 25 , 2009 , for unknown reasons . Other websites , such as LiveJournal were also blocked . 
 Libya blocked access on January 24 , 2010 , because of videos that featured demonstrations in the city of Benghazi by families of detainees who were killed in Abu Salim prison in 1996 , and videos of family members of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi at parties . The blocking was criticized by Human Rights Watch . In November 2011 , after the Libyan Civil War , YouTube was once again allowed in Libya . 
 Afghanistan , Bangladesh , Russia , and Sudan blocked access in September 2012 following controversy over a 14 @-@ minute trailer for the film Innocence of Muslims which had been posted on the site . 
 In Libya and Egypt , the Innocence of Muslims trailer was blamed for violent protests in September 2012 . YouTube stated that " This video — which is widely available on the Web — is clearly within our guidelines and so will stay on YouTube . However , given the very difficult situation in Libya and Egypt we have temporarily restricted access in both countries . " 
 = = = Music Key licensing = = = 
 In May 2014 , prior to the launch of YouTube 's subscription @-@ based Music Key service , the independent music trade organization Worldwide Independent Network alleged that YouTube was using non @-@ negotiable contracts with independent labels that were " undervalued " in comparison to other streaming services , and that YouTube would block all music content from labels who do not reach a deal to be included on the paid service . In a statement to the Financial Times in June 2014 , Robert <unk> confirmed that YouTube would block the content of labels who do not negotiate deals to be included in the paid service " to ensure that all content on the platform is governed by its new contractual terms . " Stating that 90 % of labels had reached deals , he went on to say that " while we wish that we had [ a ] 100 % success rate , we understand that is not likely an achievable goal and therefore it is our responsibility to our users and the industry to launch the enhanced music experience . " The Financial Times later reported that YouTube had reached an aggregate deal with Merlin Network — a trade group representing over 20 @,@ 000 independent labels , for their inclusion in the service . However , YouTube itself has not confirmed the deal . 
 = = April Fools = = 
 YouTube has featured an April Fools prank on the site on April 1 of every year since 2008 : 
 2008 : All the links to the videos on the main page were redirected to Rick Astley 's music video " Never Gonna Give You Up " , a prank known as " Rickrolling " . 
 2009 : When clicking on a video on the main page , the whole page turned upside down . YouTube claimed that this was a new layout . 
 2010 : YouTube temporarily released a " <unk> " mode , which translated the colors in the videos to random upper case letters . YouTube claimed in a message that this was done in order to reduce bandwidth costs by $ 1 per second . 
 2011 : The site celebrated its " 100th anniversary " with a " 1911 button " and a range of sepia @-@ toned silent , early 1900s @-@ style films , including " <unk> Feline " , a parody of Keyboard Cat . 
 2012 : Clicking on the image of a DVD next to the site logo led to a video about " The YouTube Collection " , an option to order every YouTube video for home delivery on DVD , videocassette , Laserdisc , or Betamax tapes . The spoof promotional video touted " the complete YouTube experience completely offline . " 
 2013 : YouTube teamed up with newspaper satire company The Onion to claim that the video sharing website was launched as a contest which had finally come to an end , and would announce a winner of the contest when the site went back up in 2023 . A video of two presenters announcing the nominees streamed live for twelve hours . 
 2014 : YouTube announced that it was responsible for the creation of all viral video trends , and revealed previews of upcoming memes , such as " Clocking " , " Kissing Dad " , and " <unk> <unk> Water Dance " . 
 2015 : YouTube added a music button to the video bar that played samples from " Sandstorm " by Darude . Additionally , when users searched for a song title , a message would appear saying " Did you mean : Darude – Sandstorm by Darude " . 
 2016 : YouTube announced " <unk> Beta " , telling their users that soon they would have the option to watch every video on the platform in 360 degree mode with Snoop Dogg . 
 = Daphne Clarke = 
 Daphne Rose Clarke ( previously Lawrence ) is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Elaine Smith . Daphne was created by Reg Watson as one of Neighbours ' twelve original characters . The producer had originally wanted Rebecca Gibney to play the role , but she joined the cast of another television series . When Smith came in to audition for a guest part , her appearance , particularly her short haircut , caught the attention of the casting director , who had been looking for an " outrageous image " for the character of Daphne . Smith won the role and she made her on @-@ screen debut in the soap 's first episode , which was broadcast on 18 March 1985 . 
 Daphne was portrayed as a smart , confident and independent woman from a good background . She sported a short haircut and bright clothing , which made her stand out from the other female characters on television at the time . Daphne was not embarrassed by her profession as a stripper and her " no @-@ nonsense approach " to life made her an immediate favourite with the viewers . Daphne gave up stripping when her grandfather gave her the lease to the local coffee shop . She used her position to help customers with their problems and gained the trust of many of the teenage characters , particularly Mike Young ( Guy Pearce ) . 
 Daphne 's marriage to Des Clarke ( Paul Keane ) was central to many of her storylines . After a brief relationship with Shane Ramsay ( Peter O 'Brien ) and two engagements , Daphne married Des in July 1986 . She gave birth to their son , Jamie ( S.J. Dey ) , in July 1987 . That same year , Smith announced her departure from Neighbours . Not wanting to kill off a popular character , the producers sent Daphne to care for her dying father . However , viewers were not satisfied with this ending and Smith returned to conclude Daphne 's storyline . The actress asked for Daphne to be killed @-@ off and the producers agreed . She made her final appearance on 25 March 1988 , becoming the first regular character to die . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 Daphne is one of the twelve original characters conceived by the creator and then executive producer of Neighbours , Reg Watson . When it came to casting , <unk> had initially wanted actress Rebecca Gibney to play the role . However , she joined the cast of children 's television series Zoo Family instead . Elaine Smith had previously made several small appearances in various established television series . In 1984 , she came in to Neighbours to audition for a guest role and her short , spiky haircut caught the attention of the casting director . Smith told Hilary Kingsley , author of Soap Box , " The casting director of Neighbours was looking some outrageous image for Daphne , this stripper – he didn 't quite know what , but my haircut was it ! " Smith revealed that the idea of playing a stripper amused her and quipped that Daphne was the only stripper who never had to take her clothes off . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 The character of Daphne was introduced to Neighbours as a " saucy stripper with a heart of gold . " In their 1989 book , The Neighbours Factfile , Neil Wallis and Dave Hogan wrote that Daphne came from a rich , but uncaring family . They were rarely mentioned on @-@ screen , making her past somewhat of a mystery . Daphne had received a good education and worked in an office as a secretary , until she told her sexist boss to " jump in a lake . " Daphne then chose to become a stripper rather than ask her mother , Tina ( Beverley Dunn ) , for a loan . Of Daphne 's profession as a stripper , Smith explained " The whole point of Daphne being a stripper is that she 's completely counter to the black stockings and garters cliche . She 's a bright girl from a good background who gets fed up with being ogled and pinched by men in her secretarial job and says , right I might as well make some money out of it . " 
 With her spiky hair and bright clothing , Daphne stood out from other female characters on television at the time . She was portrayed as a strong , smart and independent woman . She was often shrewd and " a warm friend " to those around her . Tony Johnston , author of Neighbours : 20 years of Ramsay Street stated that Daphne had " an appealing mix of cheek , savvy and the @-@ girl @-@ next @-@ door . " She was a woman in charge of her own life , which helped her to become the serial 's first " sweetheart . " Smith told Kingsley that her favourite aspects of Daphne 's personality were her confidence and stubborn streak . Smith also commented that Daphne wore " <unk> clothes " than she did and was more outgoing . The fact that she embodied a " no @-@ nonsense approach " to life and was not embarrassed by her profession as a stripper , meant Daphne became an immediate favourite with viewers . 
 The way she treated the serial 's teenagers as adults also endeared her to the younger viewers . Daphne gave up her career as a stripper to run the coffee shop , which her grandfather Harry Henderson ( Johnny Lockwood ) gave to her , after he won it in a poker game . Kingsley commented that Daphne ran the business like " a pro " . Daphne 's position in the coffee shop meant that customers often confided in her and she helped mediate between several parents and their children . She also gained the trust and affection of the teenage characters , most notably Mike Young ( Guy Pearce ) , who she took under her wing , later becoming his legal guardian . 
