 = = = Marriage to Des = = = 
 The first episode of Neighbours saw Daphne hired to strip at Des Clarke 's ( Paul Keane ) bucks party . When the night was interrupted by a neighbour , Daphne left some belongings behind and returned the following morning to collect them . Des 's fiancée assumed she had spent the night and called the wedding off . Realising that Des needed a lodger to help him pay the mortgage off , Daphne moved in . Des was instantly attracted to Daphne , but he tried to hide his feelings and became awkward around her . Josephine Monroe , author of Neighbours : The First 10 Years , wrote that the local men queued up to date Daphne , but it was Shane Ramsay ( Peter O 'Brien ) who first caught her eye and they soon began a relationship . 
 During Neighbours ' first season finale in 1985 , Daphne broke up with Shane and proposed to Des , who accepted . However , on the day of their wedding , Daphne 's bridal car was hijacked by a bank robber and she was late to the church . Having been stood up five times in the past , Des gave up waiting and left . The couple failed to sort out what had happened and their relationship ended . Daphne rekindled her romance with Shane and they became engaged , but Daphne became worried about rushing into marriage on the rebound and they eventually ended their engagement . Following advice and encouragement from his mother , Eileen ( Myra De Groot ) , and friend , Clive ( Geoff Paine ) , Des tried to " woo Daphne back . " 
 In June 1986 , Stephen Cook from TV Week announced that Daphne would accept a proposal from either Des or Shane , which would definitely result in her getting married . Smith told Cook " I don 't know whether Daphne actually needs a man in her life but she 's certainly got two men there . It 's a triangle that 's developed , but to try and give a rational explanation to it is next to impossible . " Smith thought Daphne was ideal for Shane and that she had a great deal of love for him . On the other hand , Daphne also loved Des , who she trusted and had become good friends with . O 'Brien stated that as far as Shane was concerned , Daphne was the only woman he ever loved and thought that he was more suited to her than Des . Keane commented that despite being engaged five times and stood up once by Daphne , Des had always loved her . He added " It was love at first sight for Des . " 
 Cook later revealed that it was Des who would propose to and marry Daphne . The wedding episodes were broadcast in July and Cook quipped that from the moment Daphne moved into Ramsay Street , there had always been a feeling that she and Des would eventually marry . Despite Shane having once been Des 's " rival in romance " , he acted as best man . Cook added that the wedding , which saw most of the regular cast on @-@ set , was " no small affair " . A few months after the wedding , Daphne became pregnant . Her pregnancy lasted over the usual nine months and Smith explained that the producers had stretched it out for longer , so they could tie it into other storylines . Daphne and Des 's son , Jamie ( S.J. Dey ) , arrived in July 1987 and became the first baby to be born in Neighbours . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In 1987 , after two and a half years of playing Daphne , Smith decided to leave Neighbours and asked to be written out . She felt that while Daphne had been " a bit of a challenge at first " , she felt trapped by her persona . Smith also believed that the role no longer offered her variety and she did not want to stay to be bored , but comfortable . As Daphne was one of Neighbours ' most popular characters , the producers chose not to kill her off . Instead Daphne 's father , Allen ( Neil Fitzpatrick ) , re @-@ entered her life and told her he was dying . Realising that she only had a short time to make her peace with him , Daphne took Jamie and moved away to nurse Allen . Viewers were not satisfied with this ending for the character , especially as it meant Daphne and Des would have to break up , a situation that they would not accept . 
 Smith agreed to return for a few days in 1988 to finish off Daphne 's storyline . This time , the actress asked for her character to be killed off . Smith told Robyn Harvey from The Sydney Morning Herald , " I wanted Daphne to die . I didn 't want to be stuck in a television series for the rest of my life . I 'd taken Daphne as far as she could go . She 's run the gamut of every life experience she could possibly have . I 'd had enough . " Daphne was critically injured during a car crash on the way to her father 's funeral and she was left in a coma . Off @-@ screen , representatives from the serial 's production company tried to persuade Smith to sign a new contract , but she refused . Daphne briefly regained consciousness to say " I love you <unk> " to Des , before becoming the first regular character to die . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Daphne is hired to perform at Des Clarke 's buck 's party in Ramsay Street . She returns the following morning to collect her watch and emerges from the bedroom when Des 's fiancée , Lorraine ( Antoinette Byron ) , arrives with her parents to call off the wedding . Daphne comforts Des and helps clean up his house . Shane Ramsay flirts with Daphne and asks her to watch him train at the pool some day . He tells her that he wants to see her again and she agrees to go to dinner with him . Daphne decides to move into Number 28 with Des to help him pay off the mortgage . Daphne becomes good friends with Des and she begins dating Shane . Daphne falls in love with Des and after breaking up with Shane , she proposes to him and he accepts . On the day of their wedding , Daphne 's car is hijacked by a bank robber dressed in a gorilla suit and she is late to the church . Des assumes that Daphne has changed her mind and he leaves . After failing to sort out what happened , Daphne moves out , while Des 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Andrea Townsend ( Gina <unk> ) , turns up and claims that Des is the father of her son , Bradley ( Bradley Kilpatrick ) . Daphne rents a room from Clive Gibbons at Number 22 and her best friend , Zoe Davis ( Ally Fowler ) , also moves in . 
 Daphne 's grandfather , Harry gives her the lease to the local coffee shop and she gives up her career as a stripper . She renames the business ' Daphne 's ' and despite an initial struggle , the coffee shop soon begins making a profit . Daphne gets back together with Shane and they become engaged , but she starts to have doubts about whether she is moving on too quickly . When Des learns that he is not Bradley 's father , he tries to win Daphne back . Shane becomes jealous of Daphne and Des 's friendship and when he verbally attacks them , Daphne breaks up with him . She gets back together with Des and they eventually marry . Daphne and Des become Mike Young 's legal guardians when they learn that he comes from a violent home . Daphne helps Mike when he is banned from seeing Jane Harris ( Annie Jones ) by her grandmother , Mrs. Mangel ( Vivean Gray ) . Daphne soon discovers that Sue Parker ( Kate Gorman ) has been sending poison pen letters about Mike to Mrs. Mangel and exposes her . Daphne contracts meningitis , but she recovers and then learns that she is pregnant . Daphne and Des 's marriage becomes strained when she learns that he has been in contact with Lorraine . The couple eventually talk and Des explains that he had just given Lorraine some financial advice . 
 Mrs. Mangel offers to help Daphne paint the nursery and she is knocked off a ladder by Mike 's pet Labrador , Bouncer , and suffers amnesia . Mrs. Mangel threatens to sue and Des decides to settle out of court , so that Daphne does not become stressed . But when Daphne learns what Des has done , she is angry with him for keeping it from her . During a picnic , Daphne goes into labour and Beverly Marshall ( Lisa Armytage ) delivers her son , Jamie . Daphne briefly suffers from postnatal depression following Jamie 's birth . During Jamie 's christening , Daphne 's mother , Tina , turns up . She and Daphne sit down and talk through their problems and part on speaking terms . Shortly after , Daphne learns that her father is dying . Des persuades her to make things right with Allen . Daphne then decides to nurse her father and she takes Jamie to stay with him . Months later , Gail Robinson ( Fiona Corke ) offers to drive Daphne and Jamie back to Ramsay Street after Allen 's funeral . During the journey , they are involved in a car crash , which leaves Daphne in a coma . Des stays by her side and is holding her hand when she briefly wakes up to tell him that she loves him . Daphne then suffers a cardiac arrest and dies . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Josephine Monroe , author of Neighbours : The First 10 Years , stated that Daphne became one of the most popular and colourful characters to have been in Neighbours . A writer for the BBC 's Neighbours website thought Daphne 's most notable moment was " Going into labour with Jamie at a riverside picnic . " Claudia Pattison from mobile network operator Orange branded Des and Daphne one of the most popular couples in the serial 's history , while a Virgin Media writer thought that they had " one of soapland 's happiest marriages " . The Sydney Morning Herald 's Michael Idato called them Neighbours ' first supercouple . Mary Fletcher from Inside Soap commented that Des and Daphne 's troubled romance was " one of Neighbours ' best storylines . " The couple 's wedding gained a lot of attention in the UK and Terry Wogan even discussed the episode with Rolf Harris on his talk show the day after it aired . 
 Tim Teeman and James Jackson from The Times named Daphne 's death as one of their top 15 most memorable Neighbours moments . They commented " Like , was that her in the bed or an actress with a Daphne wig ? The romance of Des and Daphne ( Mr Ordinary and the ex @-@ stripper ) was an early Neighbours classic so we felt this one hard " . A Herald Sun reporter also included Daphne 's death in their list of top ten Neighbours moments . The reporter wrote that Daphne was a popular character during the serial 's peak in 1988 and called Des " her soulmate " . They added that her death was watched by millions of viewers in Australia and the UK . 
 Sarah Megginson from SheKnows placed Daphne 's death at number three in her feature on the eight most memorable Neighbours moments . She called the relationship between Daphne and Des " one of the series ' classic romances . " She added " The couple were the first to tie the knot on the show , so when Daphne was fatally hit by a car , Des – and the Neighbours viewing audience across Australia and the UK – was suitably devastated . A columnist from NOW said that the moment Daphne dies was " a tear @-@ jerking moment . " 
 = Ridwan dynasty = 
 The Ridwan dynasty ( also spelled Radwan ; Turkish : <unk> ) was the most prominent pasha family in Palestine and the southwestern districts of the Damascus Eyalet ( " Province of Damascus " ) in the 16th and 17th centuries under Ottoman rule . The dynasty was based in Gaza , where its members continuously served as the hereditary sanjak @-@ beys ( district governors ) of the sanjak ( provincial district ) for over a century . Members also ruled different provinces and districts throughout the Ottoman Empire and held additional titles at different times . The Ridwan period in Gaza was considered the city 's last golden age . 
 The dynasty was founded by Kara Shahin Mustafa , who served as governor of a number of provinces and district , including Gaza , during his career . However , the dynasty was named after Mustafa 's son Ridwan Pasha who served as Gaza 's governor in 1570 until he was succeeded in this office by his son Ahmad Pasha ibn Ridwan in 1572 . The latter served for 30 years , during which time Gaza became the chief stronghold of the dynasty . The sanjaks of Jerusalem and Nablus were made part of Ahmad Pasha 's domain intermittently throughout his rule . 
 After Ahmad Pasha was reassigned as beylerbey of Damascus in 1601 , his son Hasan ' Arap Pasha inherited Gaza 's governorship , occupying the office for 43 years . His rule impoverished Gaza and bankrupted the dynasty . Hasan Pasha 's son and successor Husayn Pasha was appointed the office in 1644 and he served until 1672 . Under Husayn Pasha 's leadership , Gaza became a prosperous , secure and religiously diverse city . He was deposed and executed by the Ottoman authorities in 1663 , after which his brother Musa Pasha was appointed to the post , serving the office until 1679 . The last Ridwan governor of Gaza was Musa Pasha 's son Ahmad Pasha whose governorship ended in 1690 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The Ridwan dynasty was founded by Kara Shahin Mustafa ( later known as " Mustafa Pasha " ) , an ethnic Bosnian , and former <unk> ( " slave of the Porte " ) of Suleiman the Magnificent . As part of the Ottoman <unk> system , Mustafa Pasha received his education from the inner service of the palace , gradually being promoted to high @-@ ranking positions in the government . In 1524 , after having successively served as the governor of Erzerum and Diyarbekir and then as the personal tutor of Sultan Suleiman 's son <unk> <unk> , he was temporarily appointed the governorship of Gaza , which was the capital of a sanjak ( " district " ) still maintaining its importance from the previous Mamluk era . By 1560 , he had been promoted to the governorship of Egypt . 
 Mustafa Pasha was succeeded as governor of Gaza by his son Ridwan Pasha , who gave the Ridwan dynasty its name . Ridwan had formerly served as the treasurer of Yemen . In 1565 , Ridwan Pasha was promoted to beylerbey ( " governor @-@ general " ) of Yemen for two years before returning to rule Gaza for a short period of time in 1567 . Meanwhile , in 1566 , Mustafa Pasha was deposed by the new sultan Selim II for his closeness to <unk> , Selim 's brother and rival for power . Mustafa Pasha died shortly thereafter . According to historian Jean @-@ Pierre Filiu , Ridwan became governor of Gaza in 1570 . By 1571 , Ridwan Pasha had been promoted to <unk> ( " provincial governor " ) of <unk> ( Coastal Ethiopia ) , Basra and Diyarbekir in succession , while Bahram Pasha , a second son of Mustafa Pasha and a high @-@ ranking official in the Ottoman government , became governor of Nablus in the mid @-@ 16th @-@ century . After some time Bahram Pasha was promoted to beylerbey of Damascus and later amir al @-@ hajj ( commander of the hajj ; pl. umara al @-@ hajj ) , making him responsible for the Muslim pilgrimage caravan to Mecca . 
 = = = Stronghold in Gaza = = = 
 In Gaza , Ridwan Pasha was replaced by his son Ahmad Pasha , who ruled for nearly 30 years . At times during his rule , the sanjaks of Nablus and Jerusalem were attached to Gaza Sanjak . The latter became the family 's stronghold and base of power under Ahmad Pasha 's leadership . Towards the 17th century , he had the Mamluk @-@ era Qasr al @-@ Basha in Gaza enlarged and transformed into the family 's fortress and governor 's palace . Ahmad Pasha intermittently served as amir al @-@ hajj , but struggled to gain further promotion by the Ottoman government , having to lobby several Istanbul @-@ based viziers and bureaucrats with large sums of money and other gifts , unlike his predecessors . He was eventually appointed as governor of Damascus in 1601 , while his son Hasan " ' Arap " Pasha subsequently inherited the governorship of Gaza . Ahmad Pasha later died in 1607 . 
 Hasan Pasha 's nickname Arap ( " Bedouin " ) derived from the Ridwan family 's good relations with and reputation for keeping the Bedouin tribes in check . When Hasan was commissioned by Sultan Murad IV to help suppress the long @-@ running rebellion of Fakhr ad @-@ Din II ( 1623 @-@ 1635 ) , Hasan 's Bedouin units often proved effective in battle . During this period , Hasan Pasha gained the additional governorship of Tripoli , although he was deposed in 1644 . His rule impoverished Gaza Sanjak and burdened the Ridwan family with heavy debts . According to the Damascene historian and Hasan 's contemporary , Muhammad Amin al @-@ Muhibbi , Hasan Pasha had numerous wives and concubines and fathered 85 children . During Hasan Pasha 's lifetime , one of his sons , Husayn Pasha , served as governor of Nablus and Jerusalem as well as amir al @-@ hajj . 
 After Hasan Pasha 's 1644 dismissal , Husayn Pasha inherited the governorship of Gaza and administered the district well . Because he was able to guarantee the safety of the main roads and the countryside by securing and maintaining close relations with the local Bedouin tribes , Gaza and other cities in Palestine were able to prosper and develop extensively during Husayn Pasha 's reign . The city 's importance was elevated to the point where Gaza was considered the " capital of Palestine " by the French consul of Sidon , Chevalier d <unk> . Husayn Pasha also developed friendly relationships with the city 's Christian and Jewish communities , allowing the former to construct new churches and restore existing ones . Husayn Pasha appointed his son Ibrahim as governor of Jerusalem , but Ibrahim died in a 1661 military expedition against the Druze clans of Lebanon . 
 = = = Fall = = = 
 In 1663 , Husayn Pasha was sent on an expedition to assist the governor of Damascus in quelling a Bedouin rebellion , but failed and left the battle disgraced . After petitions by his enemies in the Ottoman government , he was summoned to Istanbul where he was imprisoned and killed shortly afterward . According to historian Dror Ze 'evi , the Ottoman state become wary of the growing power of the Ridwans and believed that eliminating Husayn Pasha would enable them to " destroy the remnants of the extended dynasty . " The imperial authorities were also uncomfortable with Husayn Pasha 's ties to the French consul and the local Christians . According to Filiu , Husayn 's elimination was a result of this " special relationship " . 
 Musa Pasha succeeded his brother Husayn Pasha as governor of Gaza and central Palestine , but the length of his tenure is not exactly known , although a document from Jerusalem in 1670 listed him as governor . According to historian Jean @-@ Pierre Filiu , Musa Pasha 's rule ended in 1679 . Musa discontinued Husayn 's liberal policies with non @-@ Muslims and was more cautious of Ottoman wishes during his rule . Ahmad Pasha ibn Musa succeeded his father and was the last Ridwan governor of Gaza , serving until 1690 . Following the end of his rule , the Ridwan dynasty was stripped of its hereditary governorship and afterward officials appointed by the Ottoman government came to rule Gaza , which gradually declined in importance . This coincided with a general withdrawal of support for local dynasties from the Sublime Porte ( Ottoman imperial government ) . The modern @-@ day descendants of the Ridwan dynasty are known in Gaza as Dar al @-@ Basha or " House of the Pashas " . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Ridwan family modeled their dynasty on the imperial Ottoman household and during military engagements they would carry battle standards representing their dynasty and bring marching bands . The Ridwan family saw themselves as the leaders of the wider region and the patrons of other ruling families . Farrukh Pasha , the Circassian governor of Jerusalem and founder of the prominent Farrukh dynasty , was a former mamluk ( slave soldier ) of Bahram Pasha . The Farrukh dynasty ruled the Nablus Sanjak up until the mid @-@ 17th century . Kiwan , another mamluk of the Ridwan dynasty , became a major aide to the governor of Damascus before his son gained the governorship and the office of amir al @-@ hajj in the 1670s . 
 It is not known whether the Ridwan family members preferred to use Arabic or Turkish to communicate with each other and the mostly Arabic @-@ speaking people living in their districts . As Ottoman officials , they spoke Turkish well , but it is also apparent that they were well @-@ versed in Arabic language and customs , due to the command of Arabic literature possessed by the various Ridwan governors and the close ties they maintained with the local elites , such as the Arab Turabay family , and the Bedouin tribes . With the exception of imperial or provincial decrees , court records in the sanjaks of Gaza , Nablus , Jerusalem and Lajjun , which the Ridwans and their allies often ruled , were recorded in Arabic , although the qadi was typically an imperial Turkish speaker and thus , Turkish @-@ language records were not required . The intermarriage and socio @-@ political ties that the Ridwans maintained with the <unk> and the Circassian <unk> created a " new Bedouin @-@ Ottoman hybrid culture " that was " evident in court life , dress and probably language as well " , according to historian Dror Ze 'evi . 
 = = = Ridwan @-@ Turabay @-@ Farrukh alliance = = = 
 Between the 16th and 17th centuries , three families controlled the sanjaks that constituted the region of Palestine : the Ridwans presided over Gaza , while the <unk> and <unk> presided over Nablus and Lajjun , respectively . Because of common interests and prior military slave relationships , the three families forged close ties throughout the course of their rule . The Ridwans were the dominant faction in this emerging unified dynasty . Evidence of intermarriage between the families is indicated by Ottoman registers . For example , the granddaughter of Ahmad ibn Turabay , the founder of the Turabay dynasty , was the mother of Governor Assaf Farrukh Pasha . Assaf 's wife was <unk> Khatun , a daughter of Governor Husayn Pasha . After the deaths of Assaf Pasha and <unk> , two of their sons , Muhammad Bey and Ali Bey , entered the custody of Husayn 's brother , Governor Musa Pasha . A daughter of Hasan " Arap " Pasha , sister to Musa and Husayn , was married to Assaf 's brother Ali Farrukh . Sharing common property also helped sustain the families ' unity . 
 The Ridwan @-@ Farrukh @-@ Turabay alliance treated the territories of Palestine and , at times , Transjordan , as hereditary fiefdoms . During troublesome periods , the three families would unite their forces to confront challenges from rebels or local rivals . The military relationship between them originated with the protection of the annual hajj caravan . When a particular governor was assigned the role of amir al @-@ hajj , it would require him to depart from his sanjak for extended time periods . In order to protect their districts from Bedouin raids , tax evasion and personal property damage , departing governors normally entrusted their authority with the rulers of the neighboring sanjak . For example , in 1589 , Ridwan Pasha requested Assaf ibn Turabay to temporarily replace him as governor of Damascus , beginning a tradition that lasted well into the 17th century . 
 The mutual trust between the families developed into a firm military alliance in the early 17th century as a result of the increasing strength of Fakhr @-@ al @-@ Din II in Ottoman Syria . Backed by the Medici Grand Duke of Tuscany , Fakhr @-@ al @-@ Din briefly repaired his relations with the Ottoman government and in 1622 gained control of the Safad and Ajlun sanjaks , became governor of Nablus and appointed mutasallim ( tax collector ) of Gaza . His forces proceeded to head towards Jerusalem , traversing Palestine 's coastal plain . Fakhr al @-@ Din 's moves threatened the rule of the three families who , after encouragement from the Sublime Porte in Istanbul , formed a coalition to stop his advance . In 1623 , the armies of Hasan " Arap " Pasha , Muhammad ibn Farrukh and Ahmad ibn Turabay successfully routed Fakhr al @-@ Din 's army at the Awja River , forcing him to withdraw from Palestine . 
 = = = Building works = = = 
 Throughout their reign , the Ridwan dynasty accumulated vast wealth in Gaza , including agricultural lands and several real estate properties . The family allocated a large part of that wealth to <unk> ( religious trusts ) , which they used to fund the construction and maintenance of various public buildings . Some members of the dynasty were buried in <unk> al @-@ Ridwan ( Ridwan Family Graveyard ) located just south of the Great Mosque of Gaza . As of 2008 , the cemetery contained a few marble graves . 
 The family restored the minarets of two mosques in the Shuja 'iyya quarter of Gaza , while Musa Pasha had the minaret of the Great Mosque of Gaza rebuilt . A mosque was also constructed within the confines of the Qasr al @-@ Basha fortress , which later came to be known as the Ridwan Castle in light of its function as the Ridwans ' residence ( ad @-@ <unk> ) . The fortress itself was outfitted with additional defenses , including arrow slits and narrow openings , which were extended to employ the use of cannon . During Ridwan rule , the <unk> Market in Gaza 's al @-@ Daraj quarter was reconstructed as was the Hamam al @-@ <unk> bathhouse and the former Khan az @-@ <unk> caravansary . Bahram Pasha ordered the construction of the main <unk> ( " fountain " ) in Gaza in the mid @-@ 16th @-@ century . 
 At the Temple Mount ( Haram al @-@ Sharif ) in Jerusalem , Ahmad Pasha ibn Ridwan had a khalwa , known as the Mamluk <unk> , built for local Sufis headed by al @-@ Ghazi Abu al @-@ Sa 'ud , and for the study of Islamic jurisprudence in 1601 . The architect of the khalwa was Abd al @-@ Muhsin ibn Nimr , who worked Ahmad Pasha 's other projects in Jerusalem . Ahmad Pasha established a waqf to fund Abu al @-@ Sa 'ud and the khalwa 's upkeep and management . 
 = = List of Ridwan governors of Gaza = = 
 = U.S. Route 41 Business ( Marquette , Michigan ) = 
 Business US Highway 41 ( Bus . US 41 ) was a state trunkline highway that served as a business loop off US 41 and M @-@ 28 in Marquette , Michigan , along Washington and Front streets . The streets serve the downtown area of Marquette and are bordered by several commercial properties and businesses . Those two streets originate with the early founding of the city in the middle of the 19th century . Jurisdiction over them was transferred to the city as part of a highway swap that resulted in the decommissioning of the trunkline in 2005 . It was also previously co @-@ designated Bus . M @-@ 28 , mirroring the Bus . US 41 / Bus . M @-@ 28 designation previously used along Bus . M @-@ 28 in Ishpeming and Negaunee . Washington and Front streets had been a part of the state highway system since the 1910s , and a part of the United States Numbered Highway System since 1926 . The business loop designation dates back to the 1960s and was removed in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The western terminus of Bus . US 41 was the west end of Washington Street at the intersection with US 41 / M @-@ 28 near the western Marquette city limits . The intersection features a stoplight to allow traffic from eastbound US 41 / M @-@ 28 to cross the westbound lanes of the main highway to access Washington Street ; the remaining connections are made through stop @-@ sign @-@ controlled access lanes . Running eastward , Washington Street is four lanes , divided by a center median for about 300 yards ( 270 m ) before a center turn lane replaces the median . The street is bordered by several commercial developments . There is a stoplight for the intersection with McClellan Avenue as the business loop runs uphill toward downtown . A few blocks east past other businesses and restaurants , Washington intersects the southern end of Lincoln Avenue at another stoplight . East of this junction , the roadway narrows to one lane in each direction with a center turn lane . Washington Street turns to the southeast and heads downhill in the next block , which is bordered by some houses on the north side . The turn lane drops by Seventh Street as the street passes Harlow Park . 
 From the park east , the business loop entered the downtown area . Each side of the street is bordered by retail shops , restaurants and other service providers . Washington Street passes the federal building containing the post office and federal courthouse at the intersection with Third Street . At Front Street , Bus . US 41 turned south one block away from Lake Superior ; Front Street is also a commercial section of downtown . The street passes Father Marquette Park which is named for the city 's namesake , Jacques Marquette . The roadway climbs a hill headed southbound next to the park . Bus . US 41 ended where US 41 turns south along Front Street at the east end of the Marquette Bypass . 
 At the time the business loop was still under state control , it was maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) as a segment of the State Trunkline Highway System . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracked the volume of traffic that used Bus . US 41 . These volumes were expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . In the department 's last survey , conducted in 2004 , there were 10 @,@ 272 vehicles per day using Washington Street between Lincoln Avenue and Front Street , the lowest traffic count for the trunkline . The highest volume was 19 @,@ 036 vehicles between McClellan and Lincoln Avenues , while the Front Street section received 16 @,@ 309 vehicles on an average day . The former business loop has not been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 Marquette 's founding settlers arrived in the area on May 18 , 1849 , to establish the community , and the original thoroughfares were platted by 1855 , including Washington and Front streets . The widest street in the city at 100 feet ( 30 m ) , Baraga Avenue was intended to be the Marquette 's main street when the downtown area was originally laid out , but businesses centered their locations along Washington Street instead . The community was incorporated as a village in 1859 , and it was later reincorporated as a city on February 21 , 1871 . The original city hall was built in 1895 on Washington Street , and in 1910 , the city started paving its streets , replacing wooden planks with asphalt . 
 A state highway was routed through downtown starting on May 13 , 1913 , when the system was created . It was first a part of M @-@ 15 when the highway system was signed in 1919 , and then later as US 41 / M @-@ 28 after the creation of the United States Numbered Highway System in 1926 . ( Under the original 1925 draft plan for the U.S. Highway System , US 102 was the number assigned to run through Marquette . ) The streets have been paved since at least the 1920s . 
 The Marquette Bypass opened on November 21 , 1963 , and the business loop was marked for the first time on the 1964 state highway map . A Bus . M @-@ 28 designation was added to the route for the 1975 state map , marking it similar to the Bus . US 41 / Bus . M @-@ 28 designation that was previously assigned along Bus . M @-@ 28 in Ishpeming and Negaunee . This second designation was removed by 1981 . 
 In April 2005 , the City of Marquette agreed to exchange jurisdiction over a number of roadways with MDOT . These transfers placed Bus . US 41 and the unsigned M @-@ 554 under city jurisdiction ; at the same time , the state would take over a section of McClellan Avenue to extend M @-@ 553 to its current northern terminus at the Marquette Bypass . Negotiations regarding the transfer centered on MDOT deferring to city zoning ordinances along McClellan Avenue regarding driveway and snowmobile access and the city 's assumption of expenses and liabilities related to the business loop . The transfers were made official on October 10 , 2005 , when MDOT and the city finalized the paperwork . As a result , Bus . US 41 was decommissioned when the city took control over Washington and Front streets ; signage was removed on November 9 , 2005 , to complete the process . Some local maps continue to label Bus . US 41 through downtown Marquette , even years after the decommissioning of the designation , and some local businesses and organizations still use it in their advertising . 
 Marquette received $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 3 @.@ 2 million in 2015 ) in state funding for improvements to Washington Street near downtown as a part of the transfer agreement . The city also assumed responsibility for maintaining the stoplights installed along the former highway . These improvements rebuilt Washington Street from 5th Street westward during 2007 . The roadway was narrowed from four lanes to two with a center turn lane between Lincoln Avenue and 7th Street . The speed limit was reduced from 35 to 25 mph ( 55 to 40 km / h ) along the street to deal with the traffic that turns into and out of businesses . In 2010 , the intersection between Front Street and the eastern end of the Marquette Bypass was converted into a roundabout configuration , opening to traffic on August 19 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in Marquette , Marquette County . 
 = Lipid bilayer = 
 The lipid bilayer is a thin polar membrane made of two layers of lipid molecules . These membranes are flat sheets that form a continuous barrier around all cells . The cell membranes of almost all living organisms and many viruses are made of a lipid bilayer , as are the membranes surrounding the cell nucleus and other sub @-@ cellular structures . The lipid bilayer is the barrier that keeps ions , proteins and other molecules where they are needed and prevents them from diffusing into areas where they should not be . Lipid bilayers are ideally suited to this role because , even though they are only a few nanometers in width , they are impermeable to most water @-@ soluble ( hydrophilic ) molecules . <unk> are particularly impermeable to ions , which allows cells to regulate salt concentrations and pH by transporting ions across their membranes using proteins called ion pumps . 
 Biological bilayers are usually composed of amphiphilic phospholipids that have a hydrophilic phosphate head and a hydrophobic tail consisting of two fatty acid chains . <unk> with certain head groups can alter the surface chemistry of a bilayer and can , for example , serve as signals as well as " anchors " for other molecules in the membranes of cells . Just like the heads , the tails of lipids can also affect membrane properties , for instance by determining the phase of the bilayer . The bilayer can adopt a solid gel phase state at lower temperatures but undergo phase transition to a fluid state at higher temperatures , and the chemical properties of the lipids ' tails influence at which temperature this happens . The packing of lipids within the bilayer also affects its mechanical properties , including its resistance to stretching and bending . Many of these properties have been studied with the use of artificial " model " bilayers produced in a lab . Vesicles made by model bilayers have also been used clinically to deliver drugs . 
 Biological membranes typically include several types of molecules other than phospholipids . A particularly important example in animal cells is cholesterol , which helps strengthen the bilayer and decrease its permeability . Cholesterol also helps regulate the activity of certain integral membrane proteins . Integral membrane proteins function when incorporated into a lipid bilayer , and they are held tightly to lipid bilayer with the help of an annular lipid shell . Because bilayers define the boundaries of the cell and its compartments , these membrane proteins are involved in many intra- and inter @-@ cellular signaling processes . Certain kinds of membrane proteins are involved in the process of fusing two bilayers together . This fusion allows the joining of two distinct structures as in the fertilization of an egg by sperm or the entry of a virus into a cell . Because lipid bilayers are quite fragile and invisible in a traditional microscope , they are a challenge to study . Experiments on bilayers often require advanced techniques like electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy . 
 = = Structure and organization = = 
 When phospholipids are exposed to water , they self @-@ assemble into a two @-@ layered sheet with the hydrophobic tails pointing toward the center of the sheet . This arrangement results in two “ leaflets ” that are each a single molecular layer . The center of this bilayer contains almost no water and excludes molecules like sugars or salts that dissolve in water . The assembly process is driven by interactions between hydrophobic molecules ( also called the hydrophobic effect ) . An increase in interactions between hydrophobic molecules ( causing clustering of hydrophobic regions ) allows water molecules to bond more freely with each other , increasing the entropy of the system . This complex process includes noncovalent interactions such as van der Waals , electrostatic and hydrogen bonds . 
 = = = Cross section analysis = = = 
 The lipid bilayer is very thin compared to its lateral dimensions . If a typical mammalian cell ( diameter ~ 10 micrometers ) were magnified to the size of a watermelon ( ~ 1 ft / 30 cm ) , the lipid bilayer making up the plasma membrane would be about as thick as a piece of office paper . Despite being only a few nanometers thick , the bilayer is composed of several distinct chemical regions across its cross @-@ section . These regions and their interactions with the surrounding water have been characterized over the past several decades with x @-@ ray <unk> , neutron scattering and nuclear magnetic resonance techniques . 
 The first region on either side of the bilayer is the hydrophilic headgroup . This portion of the membrane is completely hydrated and is typically around 0 @.@ 8 @-@ 0 @.@ 9 nm thick . In phospholipid bilayers the phosphate group is located within this hydrated region , approximately 0 @.@ 5 nm outside the hydrophobic core . In some cases , the hydrated region can extend much further , for instance in lipids with a large protein or long sugar chain grafted to the head . One common example of such a modification in nature is the lipopolysaccharide coat on a bacterial outer membrane , which helps retain a water layer around the bacterium to prevent dehydration . 
 Next to the hydrated region is an intermediate region that is only partially hydrated . This boundary layer is approximately 0 @.@ 3 nm thick . Within this short distance , the water concentration drops from 2M on the headgroup side to nearly zero on the tail ( core ) side . The hydrophobic core of the bilayer is typically 3 @-@ 4 nm thick , but this value varies with chain length and chemistry . Core thickness also varies significantly with temperature , in particular near a phase transition . 
 = = = Asymmetry = = = 
 In many naturally occurring bilayers , the compositions of the inner and outer membrane leaflets are different . In human red blood cells , the inner ( cytoplasmic ) leaflet is composed mostly of phosphatidylethanolamine , phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylinositol and its phosphorylated derivatives . By contrast , the outer ( extracellular ) leaflet is based on phosphatidylcholine , sphingomyelin and a variety of glycolipids , In some cases , this asymmetry is based on where the lipids are made in the cell and reflects their initial orientation . The biological functions of lipid asymmetry are imperfectly understood , although it is clear that it is used in several different situations . For example , when a cell undergoes apoptosis , the phosphatidylserine — normally localised to the cytoplasmic leaflet — is transferred to the outer surface : There , it is recognised by a macrophage that then actively scavenges the dying cell . 
 Lipid asymmetry arises , at least in part , from the fact that most phospholipids are synthesised and initially inserted into the inner monolayer : those that constitute the outer monolayer are then transported from the inner monolayer by a class of enzymes called flippases . Other lipids , such as sphingomyelin , appear to be synthesised at the external leaflet . <unk> are members of a larger family of lipid transport molecules that also includes floppases , which transfer lipids in the opposite direction , and scramblases , which randomize lipid distribution across lipid bilayers ( as in apoptotic cells ) . In any case , once lipid asymmetry is established , it does not normally dissipate quickly because spontaneous flip @-@ flop of lipids between leaflets is extremely slow . 
 It is possible to mimic this asymmetry in the laboratory in model bilayer systems . Certain types of very small artificial vesicle will automatically make themselves slightly asymmetric , although the mechanism by which this asymmetry is generated is very different from that in cells . By utilizing two different monolayers in Langmuir @-@ Blodgett deposition or a combination of Langmuir @-@ Blodgett and vesicle rupture deposition it is also possible to synthesize an asymmetric planar bilayer . This asymmetry may be lost over time as lipids in supported bilayers can be prone to flip @-@ flop . 
 = = = Phases and phase transitions = = = 
 At a given temperature a lipid bilayer can exist in either a liquid or a gel ( solid ) phase . All lipids have a characteristic temperature at which they transition ( melt ) from the gel to liquid phase . In both phases the lipid molecules are prevented from flip @-@ flopping across the bilayer , but in liquid phase bilayers a given lipid will exchange locations with its neighbor millions of times a second . This random walk exchange allows lipid to diffuse and thus wander across the surface of the membrane . Unlike liquid phase bilayers , the lipids in a gel phase bilayer are locked in place . 
 The phase behavior of lipid bilayers is determined largely by the strength of the attractive Van der Waals interactions between adjacent lipid molecules . Longer @-@ tailed lipids have more area over which to interact , increasing the strength of this interaction and , as a consequence , decreasing the lipid mobility . Thus , at a given temperature , a short @-@ tailed lipid will be more fluid than an otherwise identical long @-@ tailed lipid . Transition temperature can also be affected by the degree of unsaturation of the lipid tails . An unsaturated double bond can produce a kink in the alkane chain , disrupting the lipid packing . This disruption creates extra free space within the bilayer that allows additional flexibility in the adjacent chains . An example of this effect can be noted in everyday life as butter , which has a large percentage saturated fats , is solid at room temperature while vegetable oil , which is mostly unsaturated , is liquid . 
 Most natural membranes are a complex mixture of different lipid molecules . If some of the components are liquid at a given temperature while others are in the gel phase , the two phases can coexist in spatially separated regions , rather like an iceberg floating in the ocean . This phase separation plays a critical role in biochemical phenomena because membrane components such as proteins can partition into one or the other phase and thus be locally concentrated or activated . One particularly important component of many mixed phase systems is cholesterol , which modulates bilayer permeability , mechanical strength , and biochemical interactions . 
 = = = Surface chemistry = = = 
 While lipid tails primarily modulate bilayer phase behavior , it is the headgroup that determines the bilayer surface chemistry . Most natural bilayers are composed primarily of phospholipids , although sphingolipids such as sphingomyelin and sterols such as cholesterol are also important components . Of the phospholipids , the most common headgroup is phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) , accounting for about half the phospholipids in most mammalian cells . PC is a <unk> headgroup , as it has a negative charge on the phosphate group and a positive charge on the amine but , because these local charges balance , no net charge . 
 Other headgroups are also present to varying degrees and can include phosphatidylserine ( PS ) phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) and <unk> ( PG ) . These alternate headgroups often confer specific biological functionality that is highly context @-@ dependent . For instance , PS presence on the extracellular membrane face of erythrocytes is a marker of cell apoptosis , whereas PS in growth plate vesicles is necessary for the nucleation of hydroxyapatite crystals and subsequent bone mineralization . Unlike PC , some of the other headgroups carry a net charge , which can alter the electrostatic interactions of small molecules with the bilayer . 
 = = Biological roles = = 
 = = = Containment and separation = = = 
 The primary role of the lipid bilayer in biology is to separate aqueous compartments from their surroundings . Without some form of barrier delineating “ self ” from “ non @-@ self , ” it is difficult to even define the concept of an organism or of life . This barrier takes the form of a lipid bilayer in all known life forms except for a few species of archaea that utilize a specially adapted lipid monolayer . It has even been proposed that the very first form of life may have been a simple lipid vesicle with virtually its sole biosynthetic capability being the production of more phospholipids . The partitioning ability of the lipid bilayer is based on the fact that hydrophilic molecules cannot easily cross the hydrophobic bilayer core , as discussed in Transport across the bilayer below . The nucleus , mitochondria and chloroplasts have two lipid bilayers , while other sub @-@ cellular structures are surrounded by a single lipid bilayer ( such as the plasma membrane , endoplasmic <unk> , Golgi apparatus and lysosomes ) . See <unk> . 
 Prokaryotes have only one lipid <unk> the cell membrane ( also known as the plasma membrane ) . Many prokaryotes also have a cell wall , but the cell wall is composed of proteins or long chain carbohydrates , not lipids . In contrast , eukaryotes have a range of organelles including the nucleus , mitochondria , lysosomes and endoplasmic reticulum . All of these sub @-@ cellular compartments are surrounded by one or more lipid bilayers and , together , typically comprise the majority of the bilayer area present in the cell . In liver hepatocytes for example , the plasma membrane accounts for only two percent of the total bilayer area of the cell , whereas the endoplasmic reticulum contains more than fifty percent and the mitochondria a further thirty percent . 
 = = = Signaling = = = 
 Probably the most familiar form of cellular signaling is synaptic transmission , whereby a nerve impulse that has reached the end of one neuron is conveyed to an adjacent neuron via the release of neurotransmitters . This transmission is made possible by the action of synaptic vesicles loaded with the neurotransmitters to be released . These vesicles fuse with the cell membrane at the pre @-@ synaptic terminal and release its contents to the exterior of the cell . The contents then diffuse across the synapse to the post @-@ synaptic terminal . 
 Lipid bilayers are also involved in signal transduction through their role as the home of integral membrane proteins . This is an extremely broad and important class of biomolecule . It is estimated that up to a third of the human proteome may be membrane proteins . Some of these proteins are linked to the exterior of the cell membrane . An example of this is the <unk> protein , which identifies cells as “ self ” and thus inhibits their destruction by the immune system . The HIV virus evades the immune system in part by grafting these proteins from the host membrane onto its own surface . Alternatively , some membrane proteins penetrate all the way through the bilayer and serve to relay individual signal events from the outside to the inside of the cell . The most common class of this type of protein is the G protein @-@ coupled receptor ( GPCR ) . GPCRs are responsible for much of the cell ’ s ability to sense its surroundings and , because of this important role , approximately 40 % of all modern drugs are targeted at GPCRs . 
 In addition to protein- and solution @-@ mediated processes , it is also possible for lipid bilayers to participate directly in signaling . A classic example of this is phosphatidylserine @-@ triggered phagocytosis . Normally , phosphatidylserine is asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane and is present only on the interior side . During programmed cell death a protein called a <unk> <unk> this distribution , displaying phosphatidylserine on the extracellular bilayer face . The presence of phosphatidylserine then triggers phagocytosis to remove the dead or dying cell . 
 = = Characterization methods = = 
 The lipid bilayer is a very difficult structure to study because it is so thin and fragile . In spite of these limitations dozens of techniques have been developed over the last seventy years to allow investigations of its structure and function . 
 Electrical measurements are a straightforward way to characterize an important function of a bilayer : its ability to segregate and prevent the flow of ions in solution . By applying a voltage across the bilayer and measuring the resulting current , the resistance of the bilayer is determined . This resistance is typically quite high ( 108 Ohm @-@ cm2 or more ) since the hydrophobic core is impermeable to charged species . The presence of even a few nanometer @-@ scale holes results in a dramatic increase in current . The sensitivity of this system is such that even the activity of single ion channels can be resolved . 
 Electrical measurements do not provide an actual picture like imaging with a microscope can . Lipid bilayers cannot be seen in a traditional microscope because they are too thin . In order to see bilayers , researchers often use fluorescence microscopy . A sample is excited with one wavelength of light and observed in a different wavelength , so that only fluorescent molecules with a matching excitation and emission profile will be seen . Natural lipid bilayers are not fluorescent , so a dye is used that attaches to the desired molecules in the bilayer . Resolution is usually limited to a few hundred nanometers , much smaller than a typical cell but much larger than the thickness of a lipid bilayer . 
 Electron microscopy offers a higher resolution image . In an electron microscope , a beam of focused electrons interacts with the sample rather than a beam of light as in traditional microscopy . In conjunction with rapid freezing techniques , electron microscopy has also been used to study the mechanisms of inter- and intracellular transport , for instance in demonstrating that <unk> vesicles are the means of chemical release at synapses . 
 31P @-@ NMR ( nuclear magnetic resonance ) spectroscopy is widely used for studies of phospholipid bilayers and biological membranes in native conditions . The analysis of 31P @-@ NMR spectra of lipids could provide a wide range of information about lipid bilayer packing , phase transitions ( gel phase , physiological liquid crystal phase , ripple phases , non bilayer phases ) , lipid head group orientation / dynamics , and elastic properties of pure lipid bilayer and as a result of binding of proteins and other biomolecules . 
 A new method to study lipid bilayers is Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . Rather than using a beam of light or particles , a very small sharpened tip scans the surface by making physical contact with the bilayer and moving across it , like a record player needle . AFM is a promising technique because it has the potential to image with nanometer resolution at room temperature and even under water or physiological buffer , conditions necessary for natural bilayer behavior . Utilizing this capability , AFM has been used to examine dynamic bilayer behavior including the formation of transmembrane pores ( holes ) and phase transitions in supported bilayers . Another advantage is that AFM does not require fluorescent or isotopic labeling of the lipids , since the probe tip interacts mechanically with the bilayer surface . Because of this , the same scan can image both lipids and associated proteins , sometimes even with single @-@ molecule resolution . AFM can also probe the mechanical nature of lipid bilayers . 
 Lipid bilayers exhibit high levels of birefringence where the refractive index in the plane of the bilayer differs from that perpendicular by as much as 0 @.@ 1 refractive index units . This has been used to characterise the degree of order and disruption in bilayers using dual polarisation interferometry to understand mechanisms of protein interaction . 
 Lipid bilayers are complicated molecular systems with many degrees of freedom . Thus atomistic simulation of membrane and in particular ab initio calculations of its properties is difficult and computationally expensive . Quantum chemical calculations has recently been successfully performed to estimate dipole and quadrupole moments of lipid membranes . 
 = = Transport across the bilayer = = 
 = = = Passive diffusion = = = 
 Most polar molecules have low solubility in the hydrocarbon core of a lipid bilayer and , as a consequence , have low permeability coefficients across the bilayer . This effect is particularly pronounced for charged species , which have even lower permeability coefficients than neutral polar molecules . <unk> typically have a higher rate of diffusion through bilayers than cations . Compared to ions , water molecules actually have a relatively large permeability through the bilayer , as evidenced by osmotic swelling . When a cell or vesicle with a high interior salt concentration is placed in a solution with a low salt concentration it will swell and eventually burst . Such a result would not be observed unless water was able to pass through the bilayer with relative ease . The anomalously large permeability of water through bilayers is still not completely understood and continues to be the subject of active debate . Small uncharged <unk> molecules diffuse through lipid bilayers many orders of magnitude faster than ions or water . This applies both to fats and organic solvents like chloroform and ether . Regardless of their polar character larger molecules diffuse more slowly across lipid bilayers than small molecules . 
 = = = Ion pumps and channels = = = 
 Two special classes of protein deal with the ionic gradients found across cellular and sub @-@ cellular membranes in <unk> ion channels and ion pumps . Both pumps and channels are integral membrane proteins that pass through the bilayer , but their roles are quite different . Ion pumps are the proteins that build and maintain the chemical gradients by utilizing an external energy source to move ions against the concentration gradient to an area of higher chemical potential . The energy source can be ATP , as is the case for the Na + <unk> + ATPase . Alternatively , the energy source can be another chemical gradient already in place , as in the Ca2 + / Na + antiporter . It is through the action of ion pumps that cells are able to regulate pH via the pumping of protons . 
 In contrast to ion pumps , ion channels do not build chemical gradients but rather dissipate them in order to perform work or send a signal . Probably the most familiar and best studied example is the voltage @-@ gated Na + channel , which allows conduction of an action potential along neurons . All ion pumps have some sort of trigger or “ gating ” mechanism . In the previous example it was electrical bias , but other channels can be activated by binding a molecular agonist or through a conformational change in another nearby protein . 
 = = = Endocytosis and exocytosis = = = 
 Some molecules or particles are too large or too hydrophilic to pass through a lipid bilayer . Other molecules could pass through the bilayer but must be transported rapidly in such large numbers that channel @-@ type transport is impractical . In both cases , these types of cargo can be moved across the cell membrane through fusion or budding of vesicles . When a vesicle is produced inside the cell and fuses with the plasma membrane to release its contents into the extracellular space , this process is known as exocytosis . In the reverse process , a region of the cell membrane will dimple inwards and eventually pinch off , enclosing a portion of the extracellular fluid to transport it into the cell . Endocytosis and exocytosis rely on very different molecular machinery to function , but the two processes are intimately linked and could not work without each other . The primary mechanism of this interdependence is the sheer volume of lipid material involved . In a typical cell , an area of bilayer equivalent to the entire plasma membrane will travel through the endocytosis / exocytosis cycle in about half an hour . If these two processes were not balancing each other , the cell would either balloon outward to an unmanageable size or completely deplete its plasma membrane within a matter of minutes . 
 <unk> in prokaryotes : Membrane vesicular exocytosis , popularly known as membrane vesicle trafficking , a Nobel prize @-@ winning ( year , 2013 ) process , is traditionally regarded as a prerogative of eukaryotic cells . This myth was however broken with the revelation that <unk> , popularly known as bacterial outer membrane vesicles , released by gram @-@ negative microbes , translocate bacterial signal molecules to host or target cells to carry out multiple processes in favour of the secreting microbe e.g. , in host cell invasion and microbe @-@ environment interactions , in general . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is the rapid increase in bilayer permeability induced by the application of a large artificial electric field across the membrane . Experimentally , electroporation is used to introduce hydrophilic molecules into cells . It is a particularly useful technique for large highly charged molecules such as DNA , which would never passively diffuse across the hydrophobic bilayer core . Because of this , electroporation is one of the key methods of transfection as well as bacterial transformation . It has even been proposed that electroporation resulting from lightning strikes could be a mechanism of natural horizontal gene transfer . 
 This increase in permeability primarily affects transport of ions and other hydrated species , indicating that the mechanism is the creation of nm @-@ scale water @-@ filled holes in the membrane . Although electroporation and dielectric breakdown both result from application of an electric field , the mechanisms involved are fundamentally different . In dielectric breakdown the barrier material is ionized , creating a conductive pathway . The material alteration is thus chemical in nature . In contrast , during electroporation the lipid molecules are not chemically altered but simply shift position , opening up a pore that acts as the conductive pathway through the bilayer as it is filled with water . 
 = = Mechanics = = 
 Lipid bilayers are large enough structures to have some of the mechanical properties of liquids or solids . The area compression modulus Ka , bending modulus Kb , and edge energy <formula> , can be used to describe them . Solid lipid bilayers also have a shear modulus , but like any liquid , the shear modulus is zero for fluid bilayers . These mechanical properties affect how the membrane functions . Ka and Kb affect the ability of proteins and small molecules to insert into the bilayer , and bilayer mechanical properties have been shown to alter the function of mechanically activated ion channels . <unk> mechanical properties also govern what types of stress a cell can withstand without tearing . Although lipid bilayers can easily bend , most cannot stretch more than a few percent before rupturing . 
 As discussed in the Structure and organization section , the hydrophobic attraction of lipid tails in water is the primary force holding lipid bilayers together . Thus , the elastic modulus of the bilayer is primarily determined by how much extra area is exposed to water when the lipid molecules are stretched apart . It is not surprising given this understanding of the forces involved that studies have shown that Ka varies strongly with osmotic pressure but only weakly with tail length and unsaturation . Because the forces involved are so small , it is difficult to experimentally determine Ka . Most techniques require sophisticated microscopy and very sensitive measurement equipment . 
 In contrast to Ka , which is a measure of how much energy is needed to stretch the bilayer , Kb is a measure of how much energy is needed to bend or flex the bilayer . Formally , bending modulus is defined as the energy required to deform a membrane from its intrinsic curvature to some other curvature . Intrinsic curvature is defined by the ratio of the diameter of the head group to that of the tail group . For two @-@ tailed PC lipids , this ratio is nearly one so the intrinsic curvature is nearly zero . If a particular lipid has too large a deviation from zero intrinsic curvature it will not form a bilayer and will instead form other phases such as micelles or inverted micelles . Addition of small hydrophilic molecules like sucrose into mixed lipid lamellar liposomes made from <unk> @-@ rich thylakoid membranes destabilises bilayers into micellar phase . Typically , Kb is not measured experimentally but rather is calculated from measurements of Ka and bilayer thickness , since the three parameters are related . 
 <formula> is a measure of how much energy it takes to expose a bilayer edge to water by tearing the bilayer or creating a hole in it . The origin of this energy is the fact that creating such an interface exposes some of the lipid tails to water , but the exact orientation of these border lipids is unknown . There is some evidence that both hydrophobic ( tails straight ) and hydrophilic ( heads curved around ) pores can coexist . 
 = = Fusion = = 
 Fusion is the process by which two lipid bilayers merge , resulting in one connected structure . If this fusion proceeds completely through both leaflets of both bilayers , a water @-@ filled bridge is formed and the solutions contained by the bilayers can mix . Alternatively , if only one leaflet from each bilayer is involved in the fusion process , the bilayers are said to be <unk> . Fusion is involved in many cellular processes , in particular in eukaryotes , since the eukaryotic cell is extensively sub @-@ divided by lipid bilayer membranes . <unk> , fertilization of an egg by sperm and transport of waste products to the <unk> are a few of the many eukaryotic processes that rely on some form of fusion . Even the entry of pathogens can be governed by fusion , as many bilayer @-@ coated viruses have dedicated fusion proteins to gain entry into the host cell . 
 There are four fundamental steps in the fusion process . First , the involved membranes must aggregate , approaching each other to within several nanometers . Second , the two bilayers must come into very close contact ( within a few angstroms ) . To achieve this close contact , the two surfaces must become at least partially dehydrated , as the bound surface water normally present causes bilayers to strongly repel . The presence of ions , in particular divalent cations like magnesium and calcium , strongly affects this step . One of the critical roles of calcium in the body is regulating membrane fusion . Third , a destabilization must form at one point between the two bilayers , locally distorting their structures . The exact nature of this distortion is not known . One theory is that a highly curved " stalk " must form between the two bilayers . Proponents of this theory believe that it explains why phosphatidylethanolamine , a highly curved lipid , promotes fusion . Finally , in the last step of fusion , this point defect grows and the components of the two bilayers mix and diffuse away from the site of contact . 
 The situation is further complicated when considering fusion in vivo since biological fusion is almost always regulated by the action of membrane @-@ associated proteins . The first of these proteins to be studied were the viral fusion proteins , which allow an enveloped virus to insert its genetic material into the host cell ( enveloped viruses are those surrounded by a lipid bilayer ; some others have only a protein coat ) . Eukaryotic cells also use fusion proteins , the best @-@ studied of which are the <unk> . <unk> proteins are used to direct all vesicular intracellular trafficking . Despite years of study , much is still unknown about the function of this protein class . In fact , there is still an active debate regarding whether <unk> are linked to early docking or participate later in the fusion process by facilitating <unk> . 
 In studies of molecular and cellular biology it is often desirable to artificially induce fusion . The addition of polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) causes fusion without significant aggregation or biochemical disruption . This procedure is now used extensively , for example by fusing B @-@ cells with melanoma cells . The resulting “ hybridoma ” from this combination expresses a desired antibody as determined by the B @-@ cell involved , but is immortalized due to the melanoma component . Fusion can also be artificially induced through electroporation in a process known as <unk> . It is believed that this phenomenon results from the energetically active edges formed during electroporation , which can act as the local defect point to nucleate stalk growth between two bilayers . 
 = = Model systems = = 
 Lipid bilayers can be created artificially in the lab to allow researchers to perform experiments that cannot be done with natural bilayers . These synthetic systems are called model lipid bilayers . There are many different types of model bilayers , each having experimental advantages and disadvantages . They can be made with either synthetic or natural lipids . Among the most common model systems are : 
 Black lipid membranes ( BLM ) 
 Supported lipid bilayers ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> Lipid Membranes ( t @-@ BLM ) 
 Vesicles 
 = = Commercial applications = = 
 To date , the most successful commercial application of lipid bilayers has been the use of liposomes for drug delivery , especially for cancer treatment . ( <unk> the term “ liposome ” is in essence synonymous with “ vesicle ” except that vesicle is a general term for the structure whereas liposome refers to only artificial not natural vesicles ) The basic idea of liposomal drug delivery is that the drug is encapsulated in solution inside the liposome then injected into the patient . These drug @-@ loaded liposomes travel through the system until they bind at the target site and rupture , releasing the drug . In theory , liposomes should make an ideal drug delivery system since they can isolate nearly any hydrophilic drug , can be grafted with molecules to target specific tissues and can be relatively non @-@ toxic since the body possesses biochemical pathways for degrading lipids . 
 The first generation of drug delivery liposomes had a simple lipid composition and suffered from several limitations . Circulation in the bloodstream was extremely limited due to both renal clearing and phagocytosis . Refinement of the lipid composition to tune fluidity , surface charge density , and surface hydration resulted in vesicles that adsorb fewer proteins from serum and thus are less readily recognized by the immune system . The most significant advance in this area was the grafting of polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) onto the liposome surface to produce “ stealth ” vesicles , which circulate over long times without immune or renal clearing . 
 The first stealth liposomes were passively targeted at tumor tissues . Because tumors induce rapid and uncontrolled angiogenesis they are especially “ leaky ” and allow liposomes to exit the bloodstream at a much higher rate than normal tissue would . More recently work has been undertaken to graft antibodies or other molecular markers onto the liposome surface in the hope of actively binding them to a specific cell or tissue type . Some examples of this approach are already in clinical trials . 
 Another potential application of lipid bilayers is the field of biosensors . Since the lipid bilayer is the barrier between the interior and exterior of the cell , it is also the site of extensive signal transduction . Researchers over the years have tried to harness this potential to develop a bilayer @-@ based device for clinical diagnosis or bioterrorism detection . Progress has been slow in this area and , although a few companies have developed automated lipid @-@ based detection systems , they are still targeted at the research community . These include <unk> ( now GE Healthcare Life Sciences ) , which offers a disposable chip for utilizing lipid bilayers in studies of binding kinetics and <unk> Inc . , which has developed an automated patch clamping system . Other , more exotic applications are also being pursued such as the use of lipid bilayer membrane pores for DNA sequencing by Oxford <unk> . To date , this technology has not proven commercially viable . 
 A supported lipid bilayer ( <unk> ) as described above has achieved commercial success as a screening technique to measure the permeability of drugs . This parallel artificial membrane permeability assay <unk> technique measures the permeability across specifically formulated lipid cocktail ( s ) found to be highly correlated with Caco @-@ 2 cultures , the gastrointestinal tract , blood – brain barrier and skin . 
 = = History = = 
 By the early twentieth century scientists had come to believe that cells are surrounded by a thin oil @-@ like barrier , but the structural nature of this membrane was not known . Two experiments in 1925 laid the groundwork to fill in this gap . By measuring the capacitance of erythrocyte solutions , Hugo Fricke determined that the cell membrane was 3 @.@ 3 nm thick . 
 Although the results of this experiment were accurate , Fricke misinterpreted the data to mean that the cell membrane is a single molecular layer . Prof. Dr. Evert Gorter ( 1881 – 1954 ) and F. Grendel of Leiden University approached the problem from a different perspective , spreading the erythrocyte lipids as a monolayer on a Langmuir @-@ Blodgett trough . When they compared the area of the monolayer to the surface area of the cells , they found a ratio of two to one . Later analyses showed several errors and incorrect assumptions with this experiment but , serendipitously , these errors canceled out and from this flawed data Gorter and Grendel drew the correct <unk> that the cell membrane is a lipid bilayer . 
 This theory was confirmed through the use of electron microscopy in the late 1950s . Although he did not publish the first electron microscopy study of lipid bilayers J. David Robertson was the first to assert that the two dark electron @-@ dense bands were the headgroups and associated proteins of two apposed lipid monolayers . In this body of work , Robertson put forward the concept of the “ unit membrane . ” This was the first time the bilayer structure had been universally assigned to all cell membranes as well as organelle membranes . 
 Around the same time , the development of model membranes confirmed that the lipid bilayer is a stable structure that can exist independent of proteins . By “ painting ” a solution of lipid in organic solvent across an aperture , Mueller and Rudin were able to create an artificial bilayer and determine that this exhibited lateral fluidity , high electrical resistance and self @-@ healing in response to puncture , all of which are properties of a natural cell membrane . A few years later , Alec <unk> showed that bilayers , in the form of lipid vesicles , could also be formed simply by exposing a dried lipid sample to water . This was an important advance , since it demonstrated that lipid bilayers form spontaneously via self assembly and do not require a patterned support structure . 
 = Pam Ewing = 
 Pamela " Pam " Barnes Ewing is a fictional character from the CBS primetime soap opera , Dallas . Pamela is portrayed by actress Victoria Principal , first appearing on the show in the first episode , entitled " Digger 's Daughter " , which was first broadcast on April 2 , 1978 . Dallas follows the trials of the wealthy Ewing oil family in the city of Dallas , Texas , which Pam has married into . Principal played Pam until the end of the tenth season of Dallas in 1987 , when the character crashes into an oil tanker and her body is severely burned . After this , she is briefly played by actress Margaret Michaels in an attempt to write the character out . Pamela 's storylines in season 1 focus on her relationship with her new husband , Bobby Ewing ( Patrick Duffy ) , and her fight against the considerable suspicion and hostility from within the Ewing family , due to Pamela being a member of the Barnes family . Pamela 's love for Bobby remains a strong character trait throughout her tenure on the show , noted for its similarities to Romeo and Juliet , with two people from hostile families falling in love . 
 In the early years of Dallas , Principal took certain measures in her personal life in order to add depth to her character . She initially was very distant from the cast and they assumed she didn 't like them . Series producer Leonard Katzman confronted her about the issue and she said , " I like everybody . It 's just that I want to feel like an outsider , like Pam Barnes does , being married to a Ewing . " Principal also took to other ways of improving her character , such as taking voice lessons to perfect a Texas accent . Her relationship with Patrick Duffy 's character , Bobby , was a central component to the show , and when Duffy returned to Dallas in 1986 , after being killed off a year earlier , the entire previous year had been written off as Pam 's dream . 
 Principal received positive reviews for her portrayal of Pamela and a Golden Globe nomination in the category of " Best Actress in a Television Series " at the 40th Golden Globe Awards . She was nominated for a Soap Opera Digest award for " Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role on a Prime Time Serial " in 1986 , while also sharing a nomination with Patrick Duffy for " Favorite Super Couple : Prime Time " in 1988 . Hal Erickson of MSN.com made it known that Pamela 's exit from the series was open ended and left the audience hanging . 
 = = Casting and creation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Before the creation of Dallas , series creator David Jacobs originally had quite a different idea of what he envisioned the show to be . He wanted to create a television show based on " family issues and examining relationships at the middle class level " . The Production Company , CBS , initially turned down his original idea , as they wanted something more " glitzy " to put on the air , with wealthier characters . After the success of Dallas , Jacobs ' initial idea would later become the Dallas spin @-@ off Knots Landing . He initially conceived Pamela as the central character of the Texas based serial . The role was initially created specifically for actress Linda Evans to star , and was indefinitely called " The Untitled Linda Evans Project " that was originally set in Indianapolis . He described her character as , " a <unk> lady who marries into a rich Texas family " . After crafting the backstory of the Ewing family , Jacobs began to realize that the show couldn 't be settled simply around the character of Pamela . He wanted it to be based around the entire clan and their lives as wealthy oil people living in Dallas , Texas . Evans was ultimately not offered the part , but ironically would later go on to play <unk> Carrington on Dynasty , a rival show to Dallas . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 After Jacobs decided that Evans would no longer play Pam , he began searching for another actress to play the character . The role was eventually won by then 28 @-@ year @-@ old actress , Victoria Principal . Principal won the role over another finalist , Judith Chapman , who was known famously for her work in daytime television . Shortly after Principal 's role on Fantasy Island , a friend pointed her in the direction of Dallas and " a part in it that was written for you " . Eventually , Principal received a copy of the script " and read it and thought [ my friend ] was absolutely right " . Acting as her own agent , she set up a meeting with the producers of Dallas . Lee Rich , an executive producer in 1979 , recounted : " We had all heard rumors about Victoria . This is a small town . Victoria 's background , her so @-@ called past , was a plus . We felt that she had experienced life and could understand the part . " Jacobs later said , " Victoria , of all the actors , went for the role the most aggressively . And that sort of determination just became part of the character . " Prior to being cast in Dallas , Principal had starred in a few small roles in movies and television specials . These works include Earthquake in 1974 , and Fantasy Island in 1977 . 
 Patrick Duffy , who would play Pamela 's on @-@ screen love , knew the part was ideal for Principal the minute he set his eyes on her . He recalled that one of the finalists for Pamela " was a remarkably talented young actress from New York ... [ who was ] really good . [ Later ] , in walked Victoria Principal with the tightest jeans I 've ever seen and the most unbelievable blouse . I just went , ' Hello , Pam ' . I knew she was going to be Pam Ewing . " Producer Michael <unk> ( Knots Landing and Falcon Crest ) offered insight , " Principal really wanted that role ... and worked very hard to get it . And there 's a humanity about her that 's just winning . And the camera likes her very much . The camera just loves her . That 's real important . " During the pilot filming , Principal became very close with teenaged actress Charlene Tilton , who played Lucy Ewing . Principal explained that " the location shooting was hard on Tilton , who was only seventeen and had never been away from home " . 
 After appearing in ten of the fourteen seasons of Dallas , Principal indicated that she wished to leave the serial to pursue other venues , and chose not to renew her contract . Leonard Katzman , who was the executive producer at the time , was now faced with the show losing one of its main characters . Initially , Principal 's departure was made out to be a simple " snag in contract negotiations " . Lorimar also made notice that the departure was related to a " financial disagreement " , even after Principal 's agent gave notice that she was leaving . A show spokesperson commented , " We were unable to reach an agreement and now the producers are revising scripts without her ... she turned down our last offer . " The Milwaukee Journal noted that Principal was lined up for other venues at the time , included a project serial of her own . However , Principal , saying : 
 " I 've considered [ leaving Dallas ] for two years , and in the last six months , it 's seemed real clear to me . I realized that my job would become my career if I stayed . Some people stay with a series until the end , you know , and afterwards they often have some problems , I think , finding new opportunities . And I wanted a career after Dallas . There 's great sadness in leaving my friends and the show – I was never bored with it – but I 'm not at all ambivalent about this . I 'm realistic about taking care of myself financially . I didn 't want to walk away blindly without plans . My plans are set . I have a project with a network that is ready to go that I can 't talk about yet . It 's a drama mystery . " 
 Principal also reunited with several former cast mates in the Dallas reunion special titled " Dallas Reunion : The Return to Southfork " that was televised in 2004 , marking her first public appearance with them since her exit from the show . 
 = = = Potential return = = = 
 In 2010 , TNT ( sister company to Warner Bros. Television which is the current copyright owner of the series ) announced it was producing a new , updated series of Dallas . The new series is a continuation of the original series , and will primarily center around J.R. Ewing 's son John Ross Ewing III , and Bobby Ewing and Pam 's adopted son Christopher Ewing , though various stars of the original series will be reprising their roles . With the upcoming Dallas continuation set to air in June 2012 , rumors have been swirling that Principal could make a return to the show as Pam . On March 28 , 2012 , Yahoo.com reported that Principal 's return to the show was a definite possibility . 
 They said , " Victoria Principal could be set to make a shock return to legendary drama series Dallas after stars Patrick Duffy and Jesse Metcalfe let slip producers want her in the show 's upcoming reboot . The actress ' character , Pamela Ewing , was written out of the sex @-@ and @-@ scandal series in 1987 , when viewers were told she had only months to live after fleeing the Texan dynasty . " In an added piece , they said : " But the storyline was left open @-@ ended , and it 's now emerged Principal – who is the only surviving member of the show 's original cast not signed up for the relaunch later this year – could be brought back to Dallas in an explosive plot . " Jesse Metcalfe said , " She hasn 't ( come back ) – she hasn 't as yet . But I think for the producers of the show , it 's an open invitation . " 
 The Staff of Yahoo.com said that Principal was " the one major missing piece " of the new Dallas and made notion that a possible return could potentially happen in the future , critically saying : " The drama . The mystery . The intrigue . Specifically , where is Victoria Principal ? " Entertainment Weekly said that Principal was " certainly missed " as original character Pam when reviewing the new series . Morgan Jeffrey of Digital Spy said that Principal was " unlikely " to return to the new series due to lack of interest in the project , but the door would always be open . He said , " She 's indicated that it 's something she 's not interested in . " 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Lineage and personality = = = 
 The character of Pamela was a cornerstone for Dallas ; the lynchpin of the Barnes / Ewing family around which the soap was originally structured . At the beginning of the serial in 1978 , Pamela was the newly married wife of Bobby Ewing , the youngest son of oil baron Jock Ewing and Miss Ellie Ewing . The fictional history of the character has been told via the serial , and the made @-@ for @-@ television movie Dallas : The Early Years , which told the backstory of the Ewing family and the Barnes family . Dallas : The Early Years told the background of the longstanding feud between Jock Ewing and Pamela 's father , Willard " Digger " Barnes , and how Pamela came to be raised . Later on , on Digger 's deathbed , Pamela comes to find that Digger is not her biological father , but that her biological father is in fact Hutch McKinney , who had an affair with her mother Rebecca Barnes while she was married to Digger . Digger caught them together , and Digger ended up shooting Hutch dead in a temper and burying Hutch 's body on Southfork land . Digger then brought up Pamela as if she were his own daughter , becoming her legal father . Pamela 's mother , Rebecca , left Digger and her children behind in mysterious circumstances when Pamela was a year old , giving Digger the impression that she was dead . Pamela and Cliff were both raised by Digger and Digger 's sister , their aunt Maggie . 
 As a member of the Barnes family , Pamela was initially met with suspicion and hostility from the rival Ewing family after she had married Bobby Ewing and moved onto the Southfork Ranch to live with her new husband . The strongest hostility towards Pamela came from Bobby 's older brother , J.R. Ewing , who tried to drive Pamela off Southfork Ranch with methods of bribery and intimidation , as well as trying to con Bobby into believing that Pamela was having an affair with her ex @-@ boyfriend , Ray Krebbs . Principal , who wanted to represent her character 's outsider perception of the family , would portray this with the cast . Leonard Katzman described her as being " the world 's most isolated lady " . When confronted by Katzman about why Principal chose to be isolated from everyone else , he described the situation as : " After a while , I thought , ' Maybe she doesn 't like us ' . I went to see her . She said , ' No , I like everybody . It 's just that I want to feel like an outsider , like Pam Barnes does , being married to a Ewing . ' " Principal also took to other ways of improving her character , such as taking voice lessons to perfect a Texas accent . Fellow actor Patrick Duffy analyzed : 
 " She is enigmatic but I must tell you I never had a bad experience because of her enigma . What it was , she explained this once , is that she did this on purpose . The choice she made as an actress was , in playing the outsider in the Ewing family , she actually maintained somewhat of an outsider position with the cast as social equals . She didn 't do a lot of the hanging out social activities that a lot of us did because we were together so much . So in that sense , she was maybe a few percentage points removed from the swirl that was the social center of our group . At least twice a year Larry Hagman and I would go up to Canada – fishing trips , hunting trips , things like that . Steve Kanaly was included in that group , and we would go up together , and Steve and I would take other trips together . We were a group , and Linda Gray was also a member of that group . Victoria was always slightly outside and didn 't participate in those things . It was her own choice and she felt it was conducive to her playing the part of Pamela . But the times we were together on the set , waiting for scenes to be shot , in the make @-@ up room and everything , it was nothing but convivial . " 
 Victoria Principal has said that she feels Pam changed throughout the course of the series . She commented , " Pam didn ’ t have two parents , her father was a drunkard , and she really had to fight for everything she aspired to and achieved . When Bobby married her , he wasn ’ t marrying milk toast ; she was very , very spirited ; she was always a good person . I always felt Pam was the moral centre of the programme but she was complicated , and she was fiery , she had opinions , and she was not afraid to voice them . But as the years went by , as JR became more and more evil , the writers felt , and I certainly understand why for the benefit of the show , that Pam had to become more and more good . " When asked about whether she had any input on her characters growth , she said : " Once the show achieved extraordinary world wide fame , I don ’ t think any of us had much input . You know the old saying , if it 's not broken , don ’ t fix it ; I really believe that Lorimar Television looked upon it as something that was working and they did not want to deviate from the formula . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Pamela 's marriage to Bobby Ewing is central to understanding her character . The couple produced the opening scene of Dallas when the show first aired in 1978 , with Bobby bringing his new bride home to meet Jock and Miss Ellie Ewing . Their complex relationship has often been compared to that of Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet . When asked about whether or not series creator David Jacobs had this parallel relationship in mind from the start , he said : " Yes , guilty ( laughs ) " . Relations can be made from William Shakespeare 's two feuding families in Romeo and Juliet , the Montagues and the Capulets . These families represent the Barnes and the Ewing feuding families , with Pamela being portrayed as Juliet Capulet and Bobby as Romeo Montague . According to Patrick Duffy , being immediately paired off with Principal was a challenge . He said , " We were in a constant state of competition . We were very territorial in front of the camera , and it was a strain . " However , their off @-@ screen relationship significantly improved in the show 's third season , with Duffy explaining : " I developed an appreciation for her , and I think for the first time she started to trust me . Some of the best scenes on the show were between Victoria and me , and they happened after we got comfortable with each other . " 
 Pamela and Bobby 's relationship changed significantly as the show went on and began to progress . In order to create conflict , the producers brought in actors Priscilla Presley ( Jenna Wade ) and John Beck ( Mark <unk> ) to cause drama for the couple . Eventually , the two characters divorced one another and went their separate ways . After becoming involved with Ewing oil , Bobby tended to put Pam on the backburner with the company coming first . In an interview with People , Principal said : " I wouldn 't put up with the way Pam is treated by Bobby . " She also added , " Our marriage just doesn 't work anymore and I want a divorce . " With the impending couple doomed , Pamela began a newfound relationship with Mark <unk> ( played by John Beck ) . The producers of Dallas were faced with the obstacle of getting the audience to root for a new love interest in Pam 's life . When asked about the reception of his characters relationship with Pamela , Beck commented : " It was always set up that way from the beginning , so it was quite a task and of course they came back together in the long run . I was just hoping for the best . I never got an extraordinary reaction from the public but it was everywhere , so constant recognition . It was pretty amazing but I never saw it the way he sees it but I can see his point of view . I never really looked at it like that . " 
 In 1985 , Patrick Duffy announced his intentions to leave the show which left Pamela and Bobby permanently disconnected from each other . When Duffy initially left Dallas in 1985 , it was assumed that Pamela and Bobby 's relationship had finally ended after a brief reconciliation during that season . However , the actor returned to the show the following season after the ratings began to fall . Leonard Katzman said , " Without Bobby we lost the white knight to J.R. and the Romeo to Victoria Principal 's Juliet . With Patrick back we can return to the family drama that made the show . " The entire previous season was written off as a dream , with Pamela waking up and finding Bobby alive in the shower . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Original Run = = = 
 In the pilot episode of Dallas , Pam and Bobby elope in New Orleans and are married by a Justice of the Peace . After Bobby brings Pam home to Southfork , she is met with great hostility from the Ewing family for being the daughter of their enemy , Digger Barnes . Early on , Bobby 's brother , J.R. Ewing , accuses Pamela of being a spy for her brother , Cliff Barnes , who is building a case against Ewing Oil , claiming that she passed a very important company file to Cliff . Bobby vigorously defends his wife and the family eventually find out that Pam is innocent . Shortly after the pilot episode , Pam becomes pregnant with Bobby 's child . However , she argues with a drunk J.R. and falls from the rafter of a barn , prompting her to miscarry the baby . 
 After her miscarriage , much of the hostility from the family evaporates , with the exception of J.R. He openly despises her and her brother . In 1979 , Pam is told by Digger 's doctor that Digger was a carrier of neurofibromatosis , and that she and Cliff , as his children , were carriers ; as neurofibromatosis is a potentially fatal disease to infants . Ironically , Pam soon discovers she is pregnant again . As before , however , tragedy strikes as a rattlesnake frightens Pam 's horse when she is out riding and throws her , causing a second miscarriage . In 1980 , Pam watches Digger die slowly and painfully as a result of his decades of heavy drinking . On Digger 's deathbed , he tells Pam that she 's not his biological child , but born after an affair her mother had with Hutch McKinney . Overwhelmed by a sense of loss after Digger 's death and deathbed confession , she pushes to find out more about what happened to her mother . She develops a notion – a dream born out of grief – that perhaps her mother isn 't dead after all . Then a private investigator turns up evidence that her mother had not died as Digger had believed , but was alive in Houston . Meanwhile , Bobby has taken over Ewing Oil while J.R. is convalescing after being shot . Pam watches her husband get deeper and deeper into the heart of business in an effort to prove himself , and takes note of Bobby 's instinctive attraction to power , which she realizes might be a danger to their marriage . 
 The baby issue continue to haunt Pam , after learning that she is unlikely to carry a child past the third month of pregnancy . Her depression culminates in near @-@ fatal tragedy : Pam tries to kill herself by jumping off the top of the place of her employment , The Store . However , Bobby stops her but it is clear that Pam needs psychiatric help . She is admitted to a psychiatric hospital where she can get the help she needs . On a surprise visit to Southfork , Pam walks through the front door and sees Bobby with a baby boy in his arms . In soaring spirits , Pam quickly settles into her life as Christopher 's mother , while Bobby handles the adoption proceedings . She and Bobby grow closer during this period . In May 1982 , Bobby finally tells Pam about Jeff Faraday , Kristin Shepard and the fact that J.R. could be Christopher 's father . Pam is shocked that Bobby had kept this from her but doesn 't hesitate to fly to California with him to find the truth , preparing to fight whoever she had to in order to keep her son . As Rebecca , ( Pam 's mother ) , is leaving for Houston on business , the Wentworth jet was involved in a midair collision . Rebecca dies as a result of her injuries . Pam is devastated – and angry – blaming the contest between J.R. and Bobby for her mother 's death . Pam leaves Bobby and they divorce in the fall of 1983 . 
 By 1985 , Bobby and Pam realize that they want to be together . Bobby proposes , Pam accepts and they spend the night together . The next day , Bobby is tragically cut down by a car driven by her half @-@ sister , Katherine Wentworth , and dies hours later , leaving Pam heartbroken . Pam goes on to make television history by dreaming Bobby 's death . Pam awakes and finds Bobby in the shower , alive and well . Pam receives good news at the end of the 1986 – 1987 season finale : she is finally able to conceive a baby , after confirming that there would be no health risks involved . However , she never gets that chance . While calling her husband to tell him the good news , she is in a massive auto accident where she hits an oil tanker and is severely burned in a subsequent fire . While recovering from her burns , she decides to get away from the Ewings and everyone else , including her son , disappear and divorce Bobby for a second time . 
 Pam made a brief appearance in the 12th season premiere , with a different appearance as a result of plastic surgery ( which also doubled as an explanation for Margaret Michaels playing the role , rather than Victoria Principal ) . She tells her brother Cliff that she is happy in her new life and plans to marry her doctor . Later , after Cliff leaves , her doctor asks why she didn 't tell Cliff that she has a terminal disease and only has a year to live . This was the character 's final appearance in the series , although Pam was not immediately declared dead on the show . 
 = = = Dallas ( 2012 TV series ) = = = 
 During the airing of J.R. Ewing 's funeral on March 11 , 2013 , viewers learned that J.R. had been investigating Pam 's disappearance before he died . In the episode " Let Me In " , the Ewings discover Rebecca Wentworth left one @-@ third of Barnes Global to her daughter , Pam , which Christopher would inherit in the event of her death . In the episode " A Call to Arms " , Christopher tries to have his mother declared legally dead so he can inherit her shares of Barnes Global . In the same episode , an agent named Ellis finds a list of deposits made to a Swiss account that mirror the amount in the trust , indicating there is still activity and signaling she remains alive . However , in the episode " Legacies " , Pam was finally declared dead . Her plastic surgeon explains that she had been horribly burned and fled her family for fear of being unattractive . She underwent several surgeries in an attempt to reverse some of the badly scarred tissue left by the oil truck explosion . Unfortunately , she had developed pancreatic cancer . She flew to Abu Dhabi to receive an experimental operational surgery and died on the surgery table . According to Pam 's death certificate , she was born on April 10 , 1950 and died on July 14 , 1989 , making her only thirty @-@ nine years old at the time of her death . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Pamela has been well received by television critics . Principal received a Golden Globe nomination in the category of " Best Actress in a Television Series " at the 40th Golden Globe Awards for her work as Pam . Principal was nominated for a Soap Opera Digest award for " Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role on a Prime Time Serial " in 1986 . She also shared a nomination with Patrick Duffy for " Favorite Super Couple : Prime Time " in 1988 . Amelia Proud of The Daily Mail said , " She became a pin up after landing the role of beautiful Pamela Ewing in the soon @-@ to @-@ be resurrected drama Dallas in 1978 , and 33 years later Victoria Principal is still an arresting sight . The actress , who starred in Dallas for nine years in the Seventies and Eighties , has not joined castmates Larry Hagman , 80 , Patrick Duffy , 62 , and Linda Gray , 71 , in the TNT reboot of the hit show , which premiered in the summer of 2012 . But she certainly looks good enough to return to the fold to play opposite Jesse Metcalfe , 33 , who plays her grown adopted son Christopher . " 
 Pamela crashed into an oil tanker at the end of the tenth season of Dallas . The exit storyline was the subject of notable controversy . It was left open ended after Principal left the show and the audience had no idea where the character was going . Hal Erickson of MSN.com said , " Although Victoria Principal had left Dallas at the end of season ten , by the time the series ' 11th season rolled around , Principal 's character , Pamela Ewing , was still lingering about , swathed in bandages after being seriously injured in a car accident . As if to lead viewers to the conclusion that Pamela would suddenly make a complete recovery in the tradition of her husband Bobby Ewing 's ( Patrick Duffy ) " return from the dead " at the outset of season ten , the ultimate fate of Pamela was left unresolved for several weeks — and further complicated when the poor girl suddenly vanished from her hospital bed . " 
 Patrick Duffy returned to Dallas in 1986 after being absent for an entire season . The whole years worth of episodes was written off entirely as Pam 's dream . The storyline garnered the show a lot of publicity , both good and bad . The Staff of UGO <unk> said : " Soap Operas are known ( and at times hated ) for their ridiculously implausible storylines , and while ' 80s primetime <unk> Dallas is still one of our favorite guilty pleasures , even the great Ewing empire is not immune to the absurd storytelling techniques the genre has become associated with . While your average primetime soap operas don 't usually mingle with the stuff of sci @-@ fi and horror , there 's an incredibly high rate of characters returning from the dead in the genre . Case in point : Bobby Ewing . Presumed dead after being run over by his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Katherine Wentworth , who also happened to be obsessed with him , fans ( and CBS ) had to do without Patrick Duffy , and even worse , ratings , for one whole season . Thus , Larry Hagman , who played Duffy 's onscreen brother and despised oil baron J.R. Ewing , along with network execs , persuaded Duffy to return , making it possible ( we 're talking in soap opera terms here ) , for Bobby Ewing 's character to come back by writing off the ratings nightmare of a season as a dream ... a very bad one . " 
 = Ivan Sratsimir of Bulgaria = 
 Ivan Sratsimir or Ivan Stratsimir ( Bulgarian : Иван <unk> ) was emperor ( tsar ) of Bulgaria in Vidin from 1356 to 1396 . He was born in 1324 or 1325 , and he died in or after 1397 . Despite being the eldest surviving son of Ivan Alexander , Ivan Sratsimir was disinherited in favour of his half @-@ brother Ivan Shishman and proclaimed himself emperor in Vidin . When the Hungarians attacked and occupied his domains , he received assistance from his father and the invaders were driven away . 
 After the death of Ivan Alexander in 1371 Ivan Sratsimir broke off ties with Tarnovo and even placed the archbishop of Vidin under the jurisdiction of the Patriarchate of Constantinople to demonstrate his independence . Due to its geographical position , Vidin was initially safe from attacks by the Ottoman Turks who were ravaging the Balkans to the south and Ivan Sratsimir made no attempts to assist Ivan Shishman in his struggle against the Ottomans . Only after the fall of Tarnovo in 1393 did his policy become more active and he eventually joined the crusade of the Hungarian king Sigismund . However , after the disastrous battle of Nicopolis in 1396 , the Ottomans marched to Vidin and seized it . Ivan Sratsimir was captured and imprisoned in Bursa where he was probably strangled . Although his son Constantine II claimed the title Emperor of Bulgaria and at times controlled some parts of his father 's realm , Ivan Sratsimir is generally regarded by historians as the last ruler of medieval Bulgaria . 
 Sratsimir Hill on Trinity Peninsula in Antarctica is named after him . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Lovech in 1324 or 1325 , Ivan Sratsimir was the second son of Theodora and Ivan Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) , who was despot of Lovech at the time . Ivan Sratsimir was proclaimed co @-@ emperor by his father in 1337 in his early teenage years , along with his brothers Michael Asen IV and Ivan Asen IV . This proved fatal for Bulgaria because the prerogatives of his sons ' authority were not defined , leading to rivalry between the brothers . After his proclamation Ivan Sratsimir was given the rule of Vidin as an <unk> , because his father wanted to have the different regions of the state under the direct rule of his family . 
 In the 1340s Ivan Sratsimir rose in prominence because he was married and already had children , while his eldest brother Michael Asen and his wife did not produce children for ten years . In 1352 Ivan Alexander introduced the title junior emperor in order to secure the smooth and secure transition of the throne and Ivan Sratsimir became known by that title . In the end of 1347 or in the beginning of 1348 , however , Ivan Alexander divorced with his first wife and sent her to a monastery to marry the Jewess Sarah @-@ Theodora . That event spoiled the relations between Ivan Sratsimir and his father and the conflict deepened after the birth of Ivan Shishman in 1350 / 1351 . The conflict climaxed in 1355 – 1356 when the undisputed heir to the throne , Michael Asen IV , perished in battle against the Ottomans . According to the <unk> system , Ivan Sratsimir should have come next in the succession line but since Ivan Shishman was born in the purple , i.e. after his father was crowned , Ivan Alexander and Sarah @-@ Theodora declared Ivan Shishman successor to the throne . A hint of the feud between father and son is the fact that the image of Ivan Sratsimir was not included in the Tetraevangelia of Ivan Alexander where the whole imperial family was pictured , including Ivan Alexander 's son @-@ in @-@ law . That could mean either that Ivan Sratsimir was disinherited and proclaimed himself emperor in Vidin or that he was denied the title junior emperor and given the rule of Vidin as a compensation . 
 = = Emperor in Vidin = = 
 = = = Early reign and Hungarian invasion = = = 
 Ivan Sratsimir was proclaimed emperor in Vidin in 1356 and began to use the title Emperor of Bulgarians and Greeks , as his father . In order to secure the alliance of Wallachia , he married his first cousin Anna , the daughter of the Wallachian voivode Nicholas Alexander , in 1356 or 1357 , a move that was probably arranged with the help of Ivan Sratsimir 's mother Theodora as a reaction to the actions of Ivan Alexander . 
 He ruled with the tacit consent of his father for around ten years until 1365 when the Hungarian king Louis I , who styled himself King of Bulgaria among the other titles , demanded that Ivan Sratsimir acknowledge his suzerainty and become his vassal . When the Bulgarian ruler refused , Louis I marched from Hungary on 1 May 1365 and captured Vidin on 2 June after a brief siege . The rest of the Vidin Tsardom was conquered in the next three months . Ivan Sratsimir and his family were captured and taken to the castle of <unk> in modern Croatia and the region of Vidin was placed under direct Hungarian rule governed through a Ban appointed by the King of Hungary . Ivan Sratsimir spent four years in honorary Hungarian captivity and he and his family were forced to accept Catholicism . The Hungarians also sent Franciscan monks to convert the population of the Vidin Tsardom to Catholicism . Although the Hungarian accounts boasted that the Franciscans converted 200 @,@ 000 people , or a third of the region 's population , this move brought great discontent among the Bulgarian population and eventually failed . That was in fact the first forceful conversion in the country after the Christianization of Bulgaria five centuries earlier . In a contemporary book , a monk wrote : 
 Initially Ivan Alexander , who was still nominally the rightful ruler of Vidin , did not take active measures for its recovery , although his refusal to give safe conduct to the Byzantine emperor John V Palaiologos who was returning to Constantinople from Western Europe was explained by the deterioration of the Bulgarian – Hungarian relations . By 1369 , however , he organised an Orthodox anti @-@ Hungarian coalition for the liberation of Vidin with the participation of the Wallachian voivode Vladislav I Vlaicu and despot Dobrotitsa . The allied campaign was a success and after it was supported by a popular uprising in Vidin against the Catholic clergy and the Hungarian authority , Louis I had to give up his claims and restore Ivan Sratsimir to the throne in Vidin in the autumn of 1369 . According to historian J. Fine , Ivan Sratsimir was allowed to return to Vidin by Louis I as a Hungarian vassal because of his popularity among the population and because Ivan Sratsimir used the Hungarian patronage to assert independence from his father and later to resist his brother in Tarnovo . 
 = = = Reign after 1371 = = = 
 After the death of emperor Ivan Alexander on 17 February 1371 , Ivan Sratsimir broke off the last links that connected Tarnovo and Vidin and began to rule without even nominal acknowledgement to the authorities in Tarnovo . He was since styled , as written in the accounts of the Patriarchate of Constantinople : " How should the Patriarch and the Archbishop write to ruler of Vidin and emperor <unk> ( Sratsimir ) : Most Faithful and <unk> ruler of Vidin the whole of Bulgaria ... " The authority of Ivan Sratsimir was treated as equal to that of Ivan Shishman and the details suggest that he was even presented as a senior ruler . Due to the insufficient information , some early Bulgarian historians such as Konstantin Jireček supported the hypothesis that Ivan Sratsimir and Ivan Shishman were engaged in a military conflict over Sofia but the idea has been dismissed by most modern historians . In fact , despite the rivalry , the brothers scrupulously maintained relations until 1381 and Ivan Sratsimir was even considered as a potential successor by Ivan Shishman . However , J. Fine suggests that immediately after the death of his father , Ivan Sratsimir tried to seize the control over the whole of Bulgaria for himself and even captured and held Sofia for a year or two , which led to permanent hostility between the two brothers and spoiled any chances for a common Bulgarian resistance against the Ottomans . 
 The relations between the two Bulgarian states worsened in 1381 when Ivan Sratsimir broke the connections with the Bulgarian Patriarchate in Tarnovo and instead placed the Archbishopric of Vidin under the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople . That decision was a demonstration of the independence of Vidin from Tarnovo but did not lead to open conflict between the two . The hostility between Ivan Sratsimir and Ivan Shishman remained on the eve of the Ottoman invasion . Most historians agree that in the 1370s and the early 1380s Vidin was still away from the route of the Ottoman campaigns and was not endangered . During and after the massive Ottoman invasion in north @-@ eastern Bulgaria in 1388 , sources suggest that relations between the two brothers were uneasy . As a result of the Ottoman success in the 1388 campaign and the resulting changes of the balance of power , Ivan Sratsimir had to become an Ottoman vassal and to accept an Ottoman garrison in Vidin . Ivan Sratsimir remained inactive while the Ottomans destroyed the remains of the Tarnovo Tsardom – Tarnovo fell in 1393 and Ivan Shishman was killed in 1395 . In 1396 Ivan Sratsimir joined the Christian crusade organised by the Hungarian king Sigismund . When the crusader army reached Vidin the Bulgarian ruler opened the gates and surrendered the Ottoman garrison . The Ottoman garrison of Oryahovo tried to resist but the local Bulgarians managed to capture it . However , the Christian army suffered a heavy defeat on 25 September in the battle of Nicopolis and the victorious Ottoman sultan Bayezid I immediately marched to Vidin and seized it by the end of 1396 or the beginning of 1397 . Ivan Sratsimir was captured and imprisoned in the Ottoman capital Bursa where he was probably strangled . 
 = = Culture , economy and religion = = 
 Along with Tarnovo , during the rule of Ivan Sratsimir Vidin emerged as a major literary center , under the strong influence of the Tarnovo Literary School . Some of the works that have survived from that period include the Tetraevangelia of the Metropolitan <unk> and the Vidin collection from 1360 , ordered by Empress Anna , which contains the hagiographies of thirteen Orthodox saints and a description of the holy sites in Jerusalem . Joasaph of Bdin , who was elected Archbishop of Vidin in 1392 wrote Praising epistle for the movement of St <unk> relics from Tarnovo to Vidin which contained all features of the Tarnovo Literary School . Joasaph also demonstrated great respect to Patriarch Evtimiy of Tarnovo , the most prominent figure in the Bulgarian cultural and literary life in the second half of the 14th century . 
 In the late 1360s the region of Vidin resisted the forceful conversion to Catholicism undertaken by the Hungarian authorities and remained Orthodox . The subjugation of Vidin to the Patriarchate of Constantinople in 1381 led to a conflict with the Patriarchate of Tarnovo but after the fall of Tarnovo and the dissolution of the Bulgarian Patriarchate , Ivan Sratsimir tried to negotiate with the Ottomans to place some of the former eparchies of Tarnovo in his jurisdiction . In 1395 he sent there a delegation led by the heir to the throne Constantine and Joasaph of Bdin to bring the relics of Saint <unk> to Vidin . According to Joasaph the mission was successful and the relics remained in Vidin for the next two centuries . However , he does not mention the diplomatic results . 
 Ivan Sratsimir began to mint his own coinage to show his legitimacy as early as the 1360s . The abundance of coin treasure <unk> found in the territory of the Tsardom of Vidin is an indication of the wealth and the well developed trade in the region during the second half of the 14th century . The Brașov Charter , the only surviving document made by Ivan Sratsimir , grants the merchants of the Transylvanian town of Brașov free access and the right to trade in his realm . 
 = = Family = = 
 Nothing is known about Ivan Stratsimir 's first wife and children apart from their existence . Ivan Sratsimir married for a second time to his first cousin , Anna of Wallachia , a daughter of his uncle Nicholas Alexander of Wallachia , and had at least three children . Dorothea ( <unk> ) , married King Tvrtko I of Bosnia and became Queen of Bosnia while Constantine II succeeded him as Emperor of Bulgaria . Sratsimir also had another daughter , who died young at the court of Elisabeth of Poland . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = Timeline = = 
 1324 or 1325 — Ivan Sratsimir was born 
 1337 — Proclaimed co @-@ emperor along with his brothers 
 1355 — Removed from the succession line in favour of his younger half – brother Ivan Shishman 
 1356 — Proclaimed emperor of Bulgaria in Vidin 
 1365 — Captured by the Hungarians after the conquest of Vidin 
 1369 — Released from captivity and reinstalled as a ruler 
 1371 — Becomes independent from Tarnovo after the death of his father 
 1381 — The Archbishopric of Vidin is subordinated to the Patriarchate of Constantinople 
 1388 — Forced to become an Ottoman vassal 
 1396 — Battle of Nicopolis — the Christian coalition is defeated ; fall of Vidin 
 1397 — Ivan Sratsimir dies in Ottoman captivity 
 = Nassau @-@ class battleship = 
 The Nassau class were a group of four German dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Navy . They were the German response to the introduction of the " all big gun " British HMS Dreadnought . The class was composed of Nassau , Rheinland , Posen , and Westfalen . All four ships were laid down in mid @-@ 1907 , and completed between May and September 1910 . Compared to their British contemporaries , the Nassau @-@ class ships were lighter and had a wider beam . They were two knots slower , because the German ships retained vertical triple @-@ expansion engines as opposed to the high @-@ power turbine engines adopted by the British . The ships also carried smaller main guns — 11 @-@ inch ( 280 mm ) guns rather than the 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted on the British ships . 
 After their commissioning into the German fleet , all four ships served as a unit : the II Division of I Battle Squadron . Two of the ships , Nassau and Posen , took part in the inconclusive Battle of the Gulf of Riga in 1915 , during which they engaged the Russian pre @-@ dreadnought Slava . The Nassau @-@ class ships took part in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 as the II Battle Squadron ; they suffered only a handful of secondary battery hits and limited casualties . At the end of the First World War , the four ships were seized as war prizes by the victorious Allied powers and sold for scrapping . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1906 , the launch of the " all big gun " HMS Dreadnought made all other battleships then in existence obsolete . The First Naval Amendment to the 1900 German Naval Law was passed in 1906 prior to the launch of Dreadnought ; Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz had originally requested six new battleships and six armored cruisers , along with a number of miscellaneous smaller craft . The launch of the revolutionary Dreadnought meant that any future battleships that could compete with her would be significantly more expensive than the older pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . Opposition to budget increases in the Reichstag forced Tirpitz to reduce his request to six armored cruisers — one of which was to have been placed in reserve — and 48 torpedo boats , dropping his request for new battleships completely ; the reduced proposal was voted through on 19 May 1906 . A week after the amendment was passed , funds for two 18 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battleships and a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ ton armored cruiser were allocated to the Navy . Funds were also provided to widen the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal and enlarge dock facilities to accommodate the larger ships . 
 A debate ensued in the Reichsmarineamt ( Naval Office ) over the construction of the new ships . Tirpitz favored following the Royal Navy by building dreadnought battleships and battlecruisers as well . Tirpitz saw it as an opportunity to break Britain 's commitment to the " two power standard " . Tirpitz also intended to use the funds that had been allocated for armored cruisers to build battlecruisers instead , although they were still to be classified as armored cruisers . 
 Nassau and Westfalen were the first dreadnoughts ordered under the 1906 – 07 program ; the armored cruiser Blücher was ordered along with them . The Second Naval Amendment to the 1900 Naval Law was passed on 27 March 1908 ; this amendment included a budget of 1 billion marks , and provisions that reduced the lifespan of battleships from 25 years to 20 . This had the effect of necessitating the replacement of the coastal defense ships of the Siegfried and Oldenburg classes , as well as the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the Brandenburg class . The Sachsen @-@ class ironclads ( first put into service in the late 1870s ) also needed replacement , as they were already obsolete , even under the 25 @-@ year standard . The four Sachsens were to be replaced by the Nassau class . The second pair of ships in the Nassau class , Posen and Rheinland , were ordered under the 1907 – 08 building program . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships were 146 @.@ 1 m ( 479 ft 4 in ) long , 26 @.@ 9 m ( 88 ft 3 in ) wide , and had a draught of 8 @.@ 9 m ( 29 ft 2 in ) . The ships had a length to width ratio of 5 @.@ 45 , which was somewhat " stubby " compared to contemporary designs . To some extent , the greater than normal width was due to the four wing turrets , which necessitated a wider hull . They displaced 18 @,@ 873 tonnes ( 18 @,@ 575 long tons ) with a standard load , and 20 @,@ 535 t ( 20 @,@ 211 long tons ) fully laden . The ships had 19 watertight compartments , with the exception of Nassau , which only had 16 . All four ships had a double bottom for 88 percent of the keel . The ships carried a number of boats , including a picket boat , 3 admiral 's barges , 2 launches , 2 cutters , and 2 dinghies . 
 As designed , the ships did not handle particularly well , even in calm seas , and their motion was quite stiff . The ships experienced severe rolling , due to the weight of the wing turrets . The heavy wing turrets caused the ships to have a large metacentric height , which should have made them very stable gun platforms , but their roll period proved to coincide with that of the average North Sea swell . Bilge keels were later added , which helped to improve the rolling problem . Despite the tendency to roll , the Nassau @-@ class ships were maneuverable and had a small turning radius . They suffered minor speed loss in heavy seas , but up to 70 percent at hard rudder . The roll keels that had been fitted to improve handling caused a portion of the speed loss at hard rudder . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Imperial German Navy was slow to adopt the advanced Parsons turbine engines used in the British Dreadnought , primarily due to the resistance of both Admiral von Tirpitz and the Navy 's construction department . In 1905 , the latter stated that the " use of turbines in heavy warships does not recommend itself . " The Nassau class therefore retained obsolete vertical triple expansion engines rated at 18 @,@ 615 ihp ( 13 @,@ 881 kW ) . Each of the three shafts drove a 3 @-@ bladed screw that was 5 m ( 5 @.@ 46 yd ) in diameter . Designed top speed was 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . On trials , the ships attained 20 to 20 @.@ 2 knots ( 37 @.@ 0 to 37 @.@ 4 km / h ; 23 @.@ 0 to 23 @.@ 2 mph ) on 25 @,@ 885 – 27 @,@ 732 ihp ( 19 @,@ 302 – 20 @,@ 680 kW ) . By comparison , Dreadnought 's steam turbines provided a rated speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Steam was provided by 12 Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers , each of which had 2 fireboxes , for a total of 24 . The machinery was divided into three engine and six boiler rooms . The wing turrets and their magazines further divided the machinery into three separated groups , thereby increasing survivability . The ships carried 2 @,@ 700 tons of coal , and were later modified to carry an additional 160 tons of oil that was to be sprayed on the coal , to increase its burn rate . Electrical power was provided by eight turbo @-@ generators , producing 1 @,@ 280 kW at 225 V. 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The vertical triple expansion engines consumed large amounts of internal space that could otherwise have been used for magazines . Without sufficient magazine capacity to support superfiring centerline turrets , designers were compelled to distribute six main turrets in an unusual hexagonal configuration . Two twin turrets were mounted fore and aft ( one on each end ) , and two were mounted on each flank of the ship . Firing directly forward and aft , the ships could bring 6 guns to bear , and 8 on the broadside ; this was the same theoretical capability as Dreadnought , but the Nassau @-@ class ships required two additional guns to achieve it . It was considered that this arrangement provided a useful reserve of heavy guns that were shielded from enemy fire . 
 Each ship carried twelve 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 45 guns . The wing turrets were Drh LC / 1906 mounts , as were the centerline turrets on the first two ships of the class , Nassau and Westfalen . Posen and Rheinland carried their centerline guns in Drh LC / 1907 turrets , which had a longer trunk than the LC / 1906 design . The Drh LC / 1906 turrets and 11 @-@ inch SK / L45 guns were designed specifically for the new German dreadnoughts in 1907 . Both mountings allowed for elevation up to 20 degrees , but the LC / 1907 mounts could depress an additional two degrees , down to − 8 . The main battery propellant magazines were placed above shell rooms , with the exception of the centerline turrets of Nassau and Westfalen . These guns fired 666 lb shells , with a 57 lb ( 26 kg ) fore propellant charge in silk bags and a 174 lb ( 79 kg ) main charge in a brass case . The guns fired the shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 805 ft / s ( 855 m / s ) , and had a maximum range of 22 @,@ 400 yards ( 20 @,@ 500 m ) . At a range of 13 @,@ 100 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) , the 11 in shells would penetrate up to 7 @.@ 9 in ( 200 mm ) of belt armor . 
 The ships ' secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns , which were mounted in casemates . The guns fired 99 @.@ 9 lb shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ( 835 m / s ) . The guns could be elevated to 19 degrees , which provided a maximum range of 16 @,@ 350 yards ( <unk> m ) . The ships also carried sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns , also in casemates . These guns fired a 22 @-@ lb projectile at 2 @,@ 133 ft / s ( 650 m / s ) , and could be trained up to 25 degrees for a maximum range of 10 @,@ 500 yards ( 9 @,@ 600 m ) . After 1915 , two 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed and replaced by two 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak guns , and between 1916 and 1917 , the remaining twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm casemated guns were removed . These anti @-@ aircraft guns fired a slightly lighter 21 @.@ 2 lb shell at 2 @,@ 510 ft / s ( 765 m / s ) . They could be elevated to 45 degrees and could hit targets 12 @,@ 900 yards ( 11 @,@ 800 m ) away . The Nassau @-@ class ships were also armed with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One tube was mounted in the bow , another in the stern , and two on each broadside , on either ends of the torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Nassau @-@ class ships were equipped with Krupp cemented steel armor . The ships had an armored belt that was 30 cm ( 12 in ) thick at its strongest , where it protected the ship 's vitals in the center , and as thin as 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in less critical areas , such as the bow and stern . Behind the main belt was a torpedo bulkhead 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick ; there was some difficulty mounting the torpedo bulkhead , due to the four wing turrets and their barbettes . The ships ' decks were armored , between 5 @.@ 5 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The forward conning tower had a roof that was 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick , and sides 40 cm ( 16 in ) thick . The aft conning tower was less well protected , with a 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick roof and 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) sides . The main battery turrets had roofs that were 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) thick , and 28 cm ( 11 in ) sides . The casemated secondary battery had 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) worth of armor protection , and 8 cm thick gun shields . The ships were also fitted with anti @-@ torpedo nets , but these were removed after 1916 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Four ships of the class were ordered , under the provisional names Ersatz Bayern , Ersatz Sachsen , Ersatz Württemberg , and Ersatz Baden , as replacements for the four old Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . The first ship of the class , Nassau , was laid down on 22 July 1907 at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven , launched on 7 March 1908 , and commissioned into the fleet on 1 October 1909 . Westfalen was laid down less than a month later , on 12 August 1907 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen . The ship was launched on 1 July 1908 , and commissioned on 16 November 1909 . 
 Rheinland , the third ship of the class , was actually the first to be laid down , on 1 June 1907 in the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin . Construction of Rheinland proceeded slower than Nassau and Westfalen , and so the ship was launched later , on 26 September 1908 . Rheinland joined the fleet on 30 April 1910 . Posen , the last ship of the class , was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel on 11 June 1907 . The ship was not launched until 12 December 1908 , and did not join her sisters until 31 May 1910 . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 The Nassau @-@ class ships operated as a unit in the High Seas Fleet : the II Division of the I Battle Squadron . The ships of the class participated in a number of fleet operations in the North Sea , including the action on 31 May 1916 that resulted in the Battle of Jutland . The ships also saw limited service in the Baltic Sea , including the abortive Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . 
 = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = 
 In August 1915 , the German fleet attempted to clear the Gulf of Riga , in order to facilitate the capture of Riga by the German army . To do so , the German planners intended to drive off or destroy the Russian naval forces in the gulf , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava and a number of gunboats and destroyers , and lay a series of minefields in the northern entrance to the gulf . The fleet that assembled to assault the gulf included the four Nassau @-@ class ships , the four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , and the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz . The eight battleships were to provide cover for the forces engaging the Russian flotilla . The first attempt on 8 August was unsuccessful , as it had taken too long to clear the Russian minefields to allow the minelayer Deutschland to lay a minefield of her own . 
 On 16 August , a second attempt was made to enter the gulf : Nassau and Posen , four light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats breached the defenses to the gulf . On the first day of the assault , the German minesweeper T46 was sunk , as was the destroyer V99 . On 17 August , Nassau and Posen engaged in an artillery duel with Slava , resulting in three hits on the Russian ship that prompted her withdrawal . After three days , the Russian minefields had been cleared , and the flotilla entered the gulf on 19 August , but reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted a German withdrawal from the gulf the following day . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 The ships took part in the inconclusive Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . For the majority of the battle , the I Battle Squadron formed the center of the line of battle , behind Rear Admiral Behncke 's III Battle Squadron , and followed by Rear Admiral Mauve 's elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . Posen served as the division flagship , under the command of Rear Admiral W. Engelhardt . 
 At around midnight on 1 June , Nassau came in contact with the British destroyer Spitfire , and in the confusion , attempted to ram her . Spitfire tried to evade , but could not maneuver away fast enough , and the two ships collided . Nassau fired her forward 11 @-@ inch guns at the destroyer , but they could not depress low enough for Nassau to be able to score a hit . Nonetheless , the blast from the guns destroyed Spitfire 's bridge . At that point , Spitfire was able to disengage from Nassau , and took with her a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 m ) portion of Nassau 's side plating . The collision disabled one of her 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch guns , and left an 11 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 5 m ) gash above the waterline ; this slowed the ship to 15 knots until it could be repaired . At approximately the same time , Posen accidentally rammed the light cruiser Elbing and holed her below the waterline . Elbing was damaged so severely that her engine room was completely flooded and she was unable to move ; the captain of the ship ordered Elbing be scuttled to prevent her capture by the British . 
 Shortly after 01 : 00 , Nassau and Thüringen encountered the British armored cruiser Black Prince . Thüringen opened fire first , and pummeled Black Prince with a total of 27 heavy @-@ caliber shells and 24 shells from her secondary battery . Nassau and Ostfriesland joined in , followed by Friedrich der Grosse . 
 [ Black Prince ] presented a terrible and awe @-@ inspiring spectacle as she drifted down the line blazing furiously until , after several minor detonations , she disappeared below the surface with the whole of her crew in one tremendous explosion . 
 The wreck of the ship was directly in the path of Nassau ; to avoid it , the ship had to steer sharply towards the III Battle Squadron . It was necessary for the ship to steam at full speed astern in order to avoid a collision with Kaiserin . Nassau then fell back into a position between the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Hessen and Hannover . 
 Following the return to German waters , Nassau , Posen , and Westfalen , along with the Helgoland @-@ class battleships Helgoland and Thüringen , took up defensive positions in the Jade roadstead for the night . The Nassau @-@ class ships suffered only a handful of secondary battery hits from the opposing Grand Fleet ; Nassau was hit twice , Westfalen and Rheinland each once , and Posen escaped completely unscathed . Not a single ship of the four was struck by a heavy @-@ caliber shell . 
 = = = Later operations = = = 
 Less than three months after Jutland , Westfalen was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E23 on 19 August 1916 , but suffered minimal damage and was soon repaired . In 1918 , Westfalen and Rheinland were detached from the High Seas Fleet and ordered into the Baltic Sea . Finland was revolting against Russian rule , and the two ships were to aid the Finns in the civil war . On 11 April at approximately 07 : 30 , Rheinland ran aground off the Åland Islands . Approximately 6 @,@ 000 tons of guns , belt armor , and coal were removed in order to lighten her enough to be refloated , which was not accomplished until 9 July . Rheinland was never repaired , and instead saw the remainder of her service as a barracks ship in Kiel . 
 Following the end of the First World War in 1918 , eleven battleships of the König , Kaiser , and Bayern classes and all five battlecruisers , along with a number of light cruisers and destroyers , were interned in Scapa Flow , while their fate was determined in the negotiations over the Treaty of Versailles . The Nassau and Helgoland @-@ class battleships were left in Germany . Following the scuttling of the German fleet in June 1919 , all four ships were allotted to the victorious Allied powers as replacements for the scuttled ships . Nassau was ceded to Japan , Britain received Westfalen and Posen , and Rheinland was sold directly to the breakers at Dordrecht . Between 1920 and 1924 , Westfalen was scrapped at Birkenhead and the remaining ships were scrapped at Dordrecht . 
 = Bootleg recording = 
 A bootleg recording is an audio or video recording of a performance that was not officially released by the artist or under other legal authority . The process of making and distributing such recordings is known as bootlegging . Recordings may be copied and traded among fans of the artist without financial exchange , but some bootleggers have sold recordings for profit , sometimes by adding professional @-@ quality sound engineering and packaging to the raw material . Bootlegs usually consist of either unreleased studio recordings or live performances , with an unpredictable level of quality . 
 The concept of releasing unauthorised performances had been established before the 20th century , but reached new levels of popularity with Bob Dylan 's Great White Wonder , a compilation of studio outtakes and demos released in 1969 using low @-@ priority pressing plants . The following year , the Rolling Stones ' Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be , an audience recording of a late 1969 show , received a positive review in Rolling Stone . Subsequent bootlegs became more sophisticated in packaging , particularly the Trademark of Quality label with William Stout 's cover artwork . Compact disc bootlegs first appeared in the 1980s , and internet distribution became increasingly popular in the 1990s . 
 Changing technologies have impacted on the recording , distribution , and varying profitability of the underground industry . The copyrights for the song and the right to authorise recordings often reside with the artist , according to several international copyright treaties . The recording , trading and sale of bootlegs continues to thrive , however , even as artists and record companies attempt to provide officially @-@ released alternatives to satisfy the demand . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The word " bootleg " originates from the practice of smuggling illicit items in the legs of tall boots , particularly the smuggling of alcohol during the American Prohibition era . The word , over time , has come to refer to any illegal or illicit product . This term has become an umbrella term for illicit , unofficial , or unlicensed recordings , including vinyl LPs , silver CDs , or any other commercially sold media or material . The alternate term <unk> ( an acronym meaning " Recording of <unk> / Independent Origin ) or <unk> ( Video .... ) arose among Pink Floyd collectors , to clarify the recording source and copyright status was hard to determine . 
 Although unofficial and unlicensed recordings had existed before the 1960s , the very first rock bootlegs came in plain sleeves with the title rubber stamped on it . However , they quickly developed into more sophisticated packaging , in order to distinguish the manufacturer from inferior competitors . With today 's packaging and desktop publishing technology , even the layman can create " official " looking CDs . With the advent of the cassette and CD @-@ R , however , some bootlegs are traded privately with no attempt to be manufactured professionally . This is even more evident with the ability to share bootlegs via the Internet . 
 Bootlegs should not be confused with counterfeit or unlicensed recordings , which are merely unauthorised duplicates of officially released recordings , often attempting to resemble the official product as close as possible . Some record companies have considered that any record issued outside of their control , and for which they do not receive payment , to be a counterfeit , which includes bootlegs . However , some bootleggers are keen to stress that the markets for bootleg and counterfeit recordings are different , and a typical consumer for a bootleg will have bought most or all of that artist 's official releases anyway . 
 The most common type is the live bootleg , or audience recording , which is created with sound recording equipment smuggled into a live concert . Many artists and live venues prohibit this form of recording , but from the 1970s onwards the increased availability of portable technology made such bootlegging easier , and the general quality of these recordings has improved over time as consumer equipment becomes sophisticated . A number of bootlegs originated with FM radio broadcasts of live or previously recorded live performances . 
 Some bootlegs consist of private or professional studio recordings distributed without the artist 's involvement , including demos , works @-@ in @-@ progress or discarded material . These might be made from private recordings not meant to be widely shared , or from master recordings stolen or copied from an artist 's home , a recording studio or the offices of a record label , or they may be copied from promotional material issued to music publishers or radio stations , but not for commercial release . A theme of early rock bootlegs was to copy deleted records , such as old singles and B @-@ sides , onto a single LP , as a cheaper alternative to obtaining all the original recordings . Strictly speaking , these were unlicensed recordings , but because the work required to clear all the copyrights and publishing of every track for an official release was considered to be prohibitively expensive , the bootlegs became popular . Some bootlegs , however , did lead to official releases . The Who 's Zoo bootleg , collecting early singles of The Who , inspired the official album Odds And Sods , which beat the bootleggers by issuing unreleased material , while various compilations of mid @-@ 1960s bands inspired the Nuggets series of albums . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 1960s = = = 
 According to enthusiast and author Clinton Heylin , the concept of a bootleg record can be traced back to the days of Shakespeare , where unofficial transcripts of his plays would be published . At that time , society was not particularly interested in who a particular author was , but the " cult of authorship " became established in the 19th century , resulting the first Berne Convention in 1886 to cover copyright . The US did not agree to the original terms , resulting in many " piratical reprints " of sheet music being published there by the end of the century . 
 During the early 20th century , film soundtracks were often bootlegged ; if the officially released soundtrack had been re @-@ recorded with a house orchestra , there would be demand for the original audio recording taken directly from the film . One example was a bootleg of Judy Garland performing Annie Get Your Gun , before Betty Hutton replaced her early in production , but after a full soundtrack had been recorded . The Recording Industry Association of America took a dim view of unauthorised releases and attempted several raids on production . The <unk> @-@ Nichols Home <unk> Guild recorded numerous performances at the Metropolitan Opera House , and openly sold them without paying royalties to the writers and performers . The company was sued by the American Broadcasting Company and Columbia Records ( who held the official rights to the recordings ) , who managed to obtain a court injunction against producing the record . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 The first popular rock music bootleg resulted from Bob Dylan 's activities between largely disappearing from the public eye after his motorcycle accident in 1966 , and the release of John Wesley Harding at the end of 1967 . After a number of artists had hits with Dylan songs that he had not officially recorded and released himself , demand increased for these recordings , particularly when they started airing on local radio in Los Angeles . Through various contacts in the radio industry , a number of pioneering bootleggers managed to buy a reel to reel tape containing a selection of unreleased Dylan songs intended for distribution for music publishers and wondered if it would be possible to manufacture them on an LP . They managed to convince a local pressing plant to press between 1 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 000 copies discreetly , paying in cash and avoiding using real names or addresses . Since the bootleggers could not commercially print a sleeve , due to it attracting too much attention from recording companies , the LP was issued in a plain white cover with Great White Wonder rubber stamped on it . Subsequently , Dylan became one of the most popular artists to be bootlegged with numerous releases . 
 When The Rolling Stones announced their 1969 American tour , their first in the U.S. for several years , an enterprising bootlegger known as " Dub " decided to record some of the shows . He purchased a Sennheiser 805 " shotgun " microphone and a <unk> 4000 reel to reel tape recorder specifically for recording the performances , smuggling them into the venues . The resulting bootleg , Live 'r Than You 'll Ever Be , was released shortly before Christmas 1969 , mere weeks after the tour had finished , and in January 1970 received a rave review in Rolling Stone , who described the sound quality as " superb , full of presence , picking up drums , bass , both guitars and the vocals beautifully ... it is the ultimate Rolling Stones album " . The bootleg sold several tens of thousands of copies , orders of magnitude more than a typical classical or opera bootleg , and its success resulted in the official release of the live album Get Yer Ya @-@ Ya 's Out ! later in the year . " Dub " was one of the founders of the Trade Mark of Quality ( TMOQ or <unk> ) bootleg record label . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 During the 1970s the bootleg industry in the United States expanded rapidly , coinciding with the era of stadium rock or arena rock . Vast numbers of recordings were issued for profit by bootleg labels such as <unk> and <unk> . The large followings of rock artists created a lucrative market for the mass production of unofficial recordings on vinyl , as it became evident that more and more fans were willing to purchase them . In addition , the huge crowds which turned up to these concerts made the effective policing of the audience for the presence of covert recording equipment difficult . Led Zeppelin quickly became a popular target for bootleggers on the strength and frequency of their live concerts ; Live on Blueberry Hill , recorded at the LA Forum in 1970 , was sufficiently successful to incur the wrath of manager Peter Grant . Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band recorded numerous concerts for radio broadcast in the 1970s , which resulted in many Springsteen bootlegs . 
 Some bootleggers noticed rock fans that had grown up with the music in the 1960s wanted rare or unreleased recordings of bands that had split up and looked unlikely to reform . For instance , the release of Golden Eggs , a bootleg of outtakes by The Yardbirds had proven to be so popular that the bootlegger had managed to interview the band 's Keith Relf for the sequel , More Golden Eggs . Archive live performances became popular ; a 1970 release of Dylan 's set with the Hawks ( later to become the Band ) at the Manchester Free Trade Hall in 1966 ( incorrectly assumed to be the Royal Albert Hall for years ) was critically and commercially successful owing to the good sound quality and the concert 's historical importance . 
 In Los Angeles there were a number of record mastering and pressing plants that were not " first in line " to press records for the major labels , usually only getting work when the larger plants were overloaded . These pressing plants were more than happy to generate income by pressing bootlegs of dubious legality . Sometimes they simply hid the bootleg work when record company executives would come around ( in which case the printed label could show the artist and song names ) and other times secrecy required labels with fictitious names . For example , a 1974 Pink Floyd bootleg called Brain Damage was released under the name The Screaming <unk> , which was one of the band 's early names . Because of their ability to get records and covers pressed unquestioned by these pressing plants , bootleggers were able to produce artwork and packaging that a commercial label would be unlikely to issue – perhaps most notoriously the 1962 recording of The Beatles at the Star Club in Hamburg , which was bootlegged as The Beatles vs. the Third Reich ( a parody on an early US album entitled The Beatles vs. the Four Seasons ) , or Elvis ' Greatest Shit , a collection of the least successful of Elvis Presley 's recordings , mostly from film soundtracks . 
 Bootleg collectors in this era generally relied on Hot <unk> , an annual underground magazine listing known bootlegs and information about recent releases . It provided the true information on bootlegs with fictitious labels , and included details on artists and track listings , as well as the source and sound quality of the various recordings . 
 Initially , knowledge of bootlegs and where to purchase them spread by word of mouth . The pioneering bootlegger Rubber Dubber sent copies of his bootleg recordings of live performances to magazines such as Rolling Stone in an attempt to get them reviewed . When Dylan 's record company , Columbia Records objected , Rubber Dubber counteracted he was simply putting fans in touch with the music without the intermediary of a record company . Throughout the 1970s most bootleg records were of poor quality , with many of the album covers consisting of nothing more than cheap photocopies . The packaging became more sophisticated towards the end of the decade and continued into the 1980s . Punk rock saw a brief entry into the bootleg market in the 1970s , particularly the bootleg Spunk , a series of outtakes by The Sex Pistols . The album received a good review from Sounds ' Chas de Whalley , who said it was " an album that no self @-@ respecting rock fan would turn his nose up at . " 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 The 1980s saw the increased use of audio cassettes and videotapes for the dissemination of bootleg recordings , as the affordability of private dubbing equipment made the production of multiple copies significantly easier . Cassettes were also smaller , easier to ship , and could be sold or traded more <unk> than vinyl . Cassette culture and tape trading , propelled by the DIY ethic of the punk subculture , relied on an honour system where people who received tapes from fellow traders made multiple copies to pass on to others within the community . For a while , stalls at major music gatherings such as the Glastonbury Festival sold mass copies of bootleg soundboard recordings of bands who , in many cases , had played only a matter of hours beforehand . However , officials soon began to counteract this illegal activity by making raids on the stalls and , by the end of the 1980s , the number of festival bootlegs had consequently dwindled . 
 One of the most critically acclaimed bootlegs from the 1980s is The Black Album by Prince . The album was to have been a conventional major @-@ label release in late 1987 , but on 1 December , immediately before release , Prince decided to pull the album , requiring 500 @,@ 000 copies to be destroyed . A few advance copies had already shipped , which were used to create bootlegs . This eventually led to the album 's official release . Towards the end of the 1980s , the Ultra Rare Trax series of bootlegs , featuring studio outtakes of the Beatles , showed that digital remastering onto compact disc could produce a high @-@ quality product that was comparable with official studio releases . 
 = = = 1990s – present = = = 
 Following the success of Ultra Rare Trax , the 1990s saw an increased production of bootleg CDs , including reissues of shows that had been recorded decades previously . In particular , companies in Germany and Italy exploited the more relaxed copyright laws in those countries by pressing large numbers of CDs and including catalogs of other titles on the inlays , making it easier for fans to find and order shows direct . Similarly , relaxed copyright laws in Australia meant that the most serious legal challenge to unauthorised releases were made on the grounds of trademark law by Sony Music Entertainment in 1993 . Court findings were in favour of allowing the release of unauthorised recordings clearly marked as " unauthorised " . The updated GATT 1994 agreement soon closed this so @-@ called " protection gap " in all three aforementioned countries effective January 1 , 1995 . 
 By this time , the internet had increased in popularity , and bootleg review sites began to appear . The quality control of bootlegs began to be scrutinised , as a negative review of one could adversely harm sales . Bootlegs began to increase in size , with multi @-@ CD packages being common . In 1999 , a 4 @-@ CD set was released containing three and a half hours of recording sessions for the Beach Boys ' " Good Vibrations " , spanning seven months . 
 The tightening of laws and increased enforcement by police on behalf of the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and other industry groups — often for peripheral issues such as tax evasion — gradually drove the distributors of for @-@ profit vinyl and CD bootlegs further underground . Physical bootlegging largely shifted to countries with laxer copyright laws with the results distributed through existing underground channels , open market sites such as eBay , and other specialised websites , though by the end of the decade , eBay had clamped down on bootlegs . 
 The late 1990s saw an increase in the free trading of digital bootlegs , sharply decreasing the demand for and profitability of physical bootlegs . The rise of audio file formats such as MP3 and Real Audio , combined with the ability to share files between computers via the internet made it simpler for bootleg collectors to exchange recordings . The arrival of Napster in 1999 made it easy to share bootlegs between a large computer network . Older analog recordings were converted to digital format , tracks from bootleg CDs were ripped to computer hard disks , and new material was created with digital recording of various types , and all of these types could now be easily shared . Instead of album @-@ length collections or live recordings of entire shows , fans often now had the option of searching for and downloading bootlegs of individual songs . Artists gave a mixed reaction to bootleg sharing via the internet ; Bob Dylan allowed fans to download archive recordings from his official website , while King Crimson 's Robert Fripp and , infamously , Metallica were strongly critical of the ease in which Napster could circumvent the traditional channels of royalty payments . 
 The rise in popularity of the video sharing website YouTube has caused the site to be a major carrier of bootleg recordings . YouTube 's owner , Google believes that under the " safe @-@ harbor " provision of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act ( DMCA ) , it cannot be held responsible for content , allowing bootleg media to be hosted on it without fear of a lawsuit . As the technology to host videos is open and available , shutting down YouTube may simply mean the content migrates elsewhere . An audience recording of one of David Bowie 's last concerts before he retired from touring in 2004 was uploaded to YouTube and received a positive review in Rolling Stone . In 2010 , YouTube removed a 15 @-@ minute limit on videos , which has allowed entire concerts to be uploaded by fans and bootleggers . 
 = = Copyright = = 
 The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works has protected the copyrights on literary , scientific , and artistic works since 1886 . Article 9 of the Convention states that : Authors of literary and artistic works protected by this Convention shall have the exclusive right of authorising the reproduction of these works , in any manner or form . ... Any sound or visual recording shall be considered as a reproduction for the purposes of this Convention . This means a composer has performing rights and control over how derivative works should be used , and the rights are retained at least 50 years after death , or even longer . Even if a song is a traditional arrangement in the public domain , performing rights can still be violated . Where they exist , performers rights may have a shorter duration than full copyright ; for example , the Rome Convention sets a minimum term of twenty years after the performance . This created a market for bootleg CDs in the late 1980s , containing 1960s recordings . 
 In the US , bootlegs had been a grey area in legality , but the 1976 Copyright Act extended copyright protection to all recordings , including " all misappropriated recordings , both counterfeit and pirate " . This meant bootleggers would take a much greater risk , and several were arrested . Bootlegs have been prohibited by federal law ( 17 USC 1101 ) since the introduction of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act ( <unk> , PL 103 @-@ 465 ) in 1994 , as well as by state law . The federal bootleg statute does not pre @-@ empt state laws , which also apply both prior to and since the passage of the federal bootleg statute . The US v. <unk> case challenged the constitutionality of the federal bootleg statute , and in 2004 , U.S. District Judge Harold Baer Jr. struck down the port banning the sale of bootleg recordings of live music , ruling that the law unfairly grants a seemingly perpetual copyright period to the original performances . In 2007 , Judge Baer 's ruling was overruled , and the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit found that the anti @-@ bootlegging statute was within the power of Congress . 
 = = Official releases = = 
 Record companies have described bootlegs as " grey area , live recordings " , describing them as " semi @-@ condoned " . Studies of bootleg consumers show that they are committed fans of the artist ; a study of Bruce Springsteen fans showed 80 % felt some bootlegs were essential purchases despite owning every official release . Springsteen has said he understands why fans buy bootlegs , but dislikes the market due to the lack of quality control and making profit over pleasing fans . Frank Zappa hated bootlegs and wished to control his recordings , so he created the Beat The Boots boxed sets , each containing eight LPs that were direct copies of existing bootlegs . He set up a hotline for fans to report bootlegs and was frustrated that the FBI were not interested in prosecuting . The first set included As An Am Zappa , in which he can be heard complaining about bootleggers releasing new material before he could . 
 Throughout their career , the Grateful Dead were known to tolerate taping of the live shows . There was a demand from fans to hear the improvisations that resulted from each show , and the concept of taping shows appealed to the band 's general community ethos . They were unique among bands in that their live shows tended not to be pressed and packaged as LPs , but remained in tape form to be shared between tapers . The group were strongly opposed to commercial bootlegging , policing stores that sold them , while the saturation of tapes among fans suppressed any demand for product . In 1985 , the Dead , after years of tolerance , officially endorsed live taping of their shows , and set up dedicated areas that they believed gave the best sound recording quality . Other bands , including Pearl Jam , Phish and the Dave Matthews Band tolerate taping in a similar manner to the Dead , provided no profit is involved . Because of the questionable legality of bootlegs , fans have sometimes simply dubbed a bootleg onto tape and freely passed it onto others . 
 Many recordings first distributed as bootleg albums were later released officially by the copyright holder . Provided the official release matches the quality of the bootleg , demand for the bootleg can be suppressed . One of the first rock bootlegs , containing John Lennon 's performance with the Plastic Ono Band at the 1969 Toronto Rock and Roll Revival , was released officially as Live Peace in Toronto 1969 by the end of the year , effectively killing sales of the bootleg . The release of Bob Dylan 's 1966 Royal Albert Hall concert on Vol . 4 of his Bootleg Series in 1998 included both the acoustic and electric sets , more than any bootleg had done . 
 In 2002 , Dave Matthews Band released Busted Stuff in response to the Internet @-@ fuelled success of The Lillywhite Sessions which they had not intended to release . Queen released 100 bootlegs for sale as downloads on the band 's official website , with profits going to the Mercury Phoenix Trust . Although the recording of concerts by King Crimson and its guitarist Robert Fripp is prohibited , Fripp 's music company Discipline Global Mobile ( DGM ) sells concert recordings as downloads , especially " archival recordings " produced from the recordings from the concerts ' mixing consoles . With an even greater investment of sound engineering , DGM has released " official bootlegs " , which are produced from one or more fan bootlegs . DGM 's reverse engineering of the distribution @-@ networks for bootlegs helped it to make a successful transition to an age of digital distribution , " unique " ( in 2009 ) among music labels . In the 21st century , artists responded to the demand for recordings of live shows by experimenting with the sale of authorized bootlegs made directly from the soundboard , with a superior quality to an audience recording . Metallica , Phish and Pearl Jam have been regularly distributing instant live bootlegs of their concerts . In 2014 , Springsteen announced he would allow fans to purchase a USB stick at concerts , which could be used to download a bootleg of the show . 
 According to a report in Rolling Stone , many artists have now conceded that the volume of bootlegged performances on YouTube in particular is so large that it is counterproductive to enforce it , and they should use it as a marketing tool instead . Music lawyer Josh Grier has said " Most of the artists have kind of conceded to it . " Justin Bieber has embraced the distribution of video clips via Twitter in order to increase his fanbase . 
 = Geology of the Death Valley area = 
 The exposed geology of the Death Valley area presents a diverse and complex set of at least 23 formations of sedimentary units , two major gaps in the geologic record called unconformities , and at least one distinct set of related formations geologists call a group . The oldest rocks in the area that now includes Death Valley National Park are extensively metamorphosed by intense heat and pressure and are at least 1700 million years old . These rocks were intruded by a mass of granite 1400 Ma ( million years ago ) and later uplifted and exposed to nearly 500 million years of erosion . 
 Marine deposition occurred 1200 to 800 Ma , creating thick sequences of conglomerate , mudstone , and carbonate rock topped by stromatolites , and possibly glacial deposits from the hypothesized Snowball Earth event . Rifting thinned huge roughly linear parts of the supercontinent Rodinia enough to allow sea water to invade and divide its landmass into component continents separated by narrow straits . A passive margin developed on the edges of these new seas in the Death Valley region . Carbonate banks formed on this part of the two margins only to be subsided as the continental crust thinned until it broke , giving birth to a new ocean basin . An accretion wedge of clastic sediment then started to accumulate at the base of the submerged precipice , entombing the region 's first known fossils of complex life . These sandy mudflats gave way about 550 Ma to a carbonate platform which lasted for the next 300 million years of Paleozoic time . 
 The passive margin switched to active margin in the early @-@ to @-@ mid Mesozoic when the Farallon Plate under the Pacific Ocean started to dive below the North American Plate , creating a subduction zone ; volcanoes and uplifting mountains were created as a result . Erosion over many millions of years created a relatively featureless plain . Stretching of the crust under western North America started around 16 Ma and is thought to be caused by upwelling from the subducted spreading @-@ zone of the Farallon Plate . This process continues into the present and is thought to be responsible for creating the Basin and Range province . By 2 to 3 million years ago this province had spread to the Death Valley area , ripping it apart and creating Death Valley , Panamint Valley and surrounding ranges . These valleys partially filled with sediment and , during colder periods during the current ice age , with lakes . Lake Manly was the largest of these lakes ; it filled Death Valley during each glacial period from 240 @,@ 000 years ago to 10 @,@ 000 years ago . By 10 @,@ 500 years ago these lakes were increasingly cut off from glacial melt from the Sierra Nevada , starving them of water and concentrating salts and minerals . The desert environment seen today developed after these lakes dried up . 
 = = Early sedimentation = = 
 = = = Proterozoic complex = = = 
 Little is known about the history of the oldest exposed rocks in the area due to extensive metamorphism ; the rock has been pressure @-@ cooked . This somber , gray , almost featureless crystalline complex is composed of originally sedimentary and igneous rocks with large quantities of quartz and feldspar mixed in . The original rocks were transformed to contorted schist and gneiss , making their original parentage almost unrecognizable . Radiometric dating gives an age of 1700 million years for the metamorphism , placing it in the early part of the Proterozoic eon . 
 A mass of granite now in the Panamint Mountains intruded this complex 1400 mya . <unk> dikes and other widely spaced plutons of granite are also in the complex ( a pluton is a large blob of magma deep underground and dikes are projections of that ) . Outcrops can be seen along the front of the Black Mountains in Death Valley and in the Talc and Ibex Hills . When the granite was being intruded , the west coast of North America ran through Eastern California and through an embayment that spread toward the Las Vegas Valley . This embayment , called the Amargosa aulacogen , had highlands north and south of it and was the result of a failed rift . Many thousands of feet of sediment filled the slowly subsiding basin . 
 Next , the metamorphosed Precambrian basement rocks were uplifted and a nearly 500 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ long gap in the geologic record , a major unconformity , affected the region . Geologists do not know what happened to the eroded sediment that must have overlain the complex , but they do know that regional uplift was responsible ; the area was originally below the surface of a shallow sea . 
 = = = Pahrump Group = = = 
 The Pahrump Group of formations were deposited from 1200 to 800 mya in the Amargosa aulacogen . This was after uplift @-@ associated erosion removed whatever rocks covered the <unk> Complex . Pahrump is composed of , from oldest to youngest : 
 Crystal Springs Formation , 
 Beck Spring Dolomite , 
 Kingston Peak Formation . 
 Outcrops of this group can be seen in a highly metamorphosed belt that extends from the Panamint Mountains to the eastern part of the Kingston Range , including an area near the Ashford Mill site . 
 Uplift eventually exposed the crystalline complex to erosion . <unk> conglomerate and mudstone of the lower Crystal Spring Formation were created from muddy debris derived from stream erosion of these uplands . A warm shallow sea spread over the area as the Amargosa aulacogen slowly subsided ; thick sequences of lime @-@ rich ooze with abundant colonies of algae called stromatolites were then laid down . Dolomite and limestone resulted , forming the middle part of the Crystal Spring Formation . The upper part was formed after silt and sand destroyed the algal mat , forming siltstone and sandstone . Laterally extensive diabase sills of molten rock later intruded above and below the carbonate rock layers ; commercial grade talc was formed from thermal decay of carbonate rock at its contact with the lowest sill , which covers hundreds of square miles ( many hundreds of km ² ) . Today the formation is 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) thick . 
 The Death Valley region once again rose above sea level , resulting in erosion . The Amargosa aulacogen then slowly sank beneath the seas ; a sequence of carbonate banks that were topped by algal mats of stromatolites were laid on top of its eroded surface . Eventually these sediments and fossils became the Beck Spring Formation , which is 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) thick . 
 Another round of uplift exposed the Beck Spring rocks and the underlying Crystal Spring to erosion ; subsequent faster subsidence of the Amargosa aulacogen broke these formations into islands in later Proterozoic time . The resulting large sequence of thick conglomerate beds of pebbles and boulders in a sandy and muddy matrix that blanketed basins between higher areas is known as the Kingston Peak Formation . This formation is prominent near Wildrose , Harrisburg Flats , and Butte Valley and is 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) thick . 
 Part of the Kingston Peak resembles glacial till by being poorly sorted and other parts have large boulder @-@ sized <unk> resting in a fine @-@ grained matrix of sandstone and siltstone . Similar deposits are found over North America during the same period , some 700 to 800 mya . Geologists therefore hypothesize that the world at that time was affected by a very severe glaciation , perhaps the most severe in geologic history ( see Snowball Earth ) . The youngest rocks in the Pahrump Group are from basaltic lava flows . 
 = = Crustal thinning and rifting = = 
 A new rift opened that started to break apart the supercontinent Rodinia , which North America was then a part of . A shoreline similar to the present Atlantic Ocean margin of the United States , with coastal lowlands and a wide , shallow shelf but no volcanoes , lay to the east near where Las Vegas now resides . 
 The first formation to be deposited in this setting was the Noonday Dolomite , which was formed from an algal mat @-@ covered carbonate bank . Today it is up to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) thick and is a pale yellowish @-@ gray cliff @-@ former . The area subsided as the continental crust thinned and the new ocean widened ; the carbonate bank soon became covered by thin beds of silt and layers of lime @-@ rich ooze . These sediments in time hardened to become the siltstone and limestone of the Ibex Formation . A good outcrop of both the Noonday and overlying Ibex formations can be seen just east of the Ashford Mill Site . 
 An angular unconformity truncates progressively older ( lower ) parts of the underlying Pahrump Group starting in the southern part of the area and moving north . At its northernmost extent , the unconformity in fact removed all of the Pahrump , and the Noonday rests directly on the Proterozoic Complex . An ancient period of erosion removed that part of the Pahrump due to its being higher ( and thus more exposed ) than the rest of the formation . 
 = = Passive margin formed = = 
 As the incipient ocean widened in the Late Proterozoic and Early Paleozoic , it broke the continental crust in two and a true ocean basin developed to the west . All the earlier formations were thus dissected along a steep front on the two halves of the previous continent . A wedge of clastic sediment then started to accumulate at the base of the two underwater precipices , starting the formation of opposing continental shelves . 
 Three formations developed from sediment that accumulated on the wedge . They are , from oldest to youngest : 
 Johnnie Formation ( <unk> shaly ) , 
 Stirling Quartzite , 
 Wood Canyon Formation , and the 
 Zabriskie Quartzite . 
 Together the Stirling , Wood Canyon , and Zabriskie units are about 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) thick and are made of well @-@ cemented sandstones and conglomerates . They also contain the region 's first known fossils of complex life : Ediacara fauna , trilobites , <unk> , and primitive echinoderm burrows have been found in the Wood Canyon Formation . The very earliest animals are exceedingly rare , occurring well west of Death Valley in lime @-@ rich offshore muds contemporary to the Stirling Quartzite . Good outcrops of these formations are exposed on the north face of <unk> Mountain in the northern Panamint Mountains . 
 The side road to <unk> Point successively traverses the shaly Johnnie Formation , the white Stirling Quartzite , and dark <unk> of the Wood Canyon Formation ; at the Point itself is the great light @-@ colored band of Zabriskie Quartzite dipping away toward Death Valley . Prominent outcrops are located between Death Valley Buttes and Daylight Pass , in upper Echo Canyon , and just west of Mare Spring in Titus Canyon . Before tilting to their present orientation , these four formations were a continuous pile of mud and sand 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) deep that accumulated slowly on the nearshore ocean bottom . 
 = = A carbonate shelf forms = = 
 A carbonate shelf started to develop over the sandy mudflats early in Paleozoic time . Sediment accumulated on the new but slowly subsiding continental shelf all through the Paleozoic and into the Early Mesozoic . Erosion had so subdued nearby parts of the continent that rivers ran clear , no longer supplying abundant sand and silt to the continental shelf . At the time , the Death Valley area was within ten or twenty degrees of the Paleozoic equator . So the combination of a warm sunlit climate and clear mud @-@ free waters promoted prolific production of biotic ( from life ) carbonates . Thick beds of carbonate @-@ rich sediments were periodically interrupted by periods of emergence , creating the ( in order of deposition ) ; 
 Carrara Formation , 
 Bonanza King Formation , 
 <unk> Formation , and the 
 Pogonip Group . 
 These sediments were lithified into limestone and dolomite after they were buried and compacted by yet more sediment . <unk> of these units is the dolomitic Bonanza King Formation , which forms the dark and light banded lower slopes of Pyramid Peak and the gorges of Titus and Grotto Canyons . 
 An intervening period occurred in the Mid Ordovician ( about 450 Ma ) when a sheet of quartz @-@ rich sand blanketed a large part of the continent after the above @-@ mentioned units were laid down . The sand later hardened into sandstone and later still metamorphosed into the 400 @-@ foot ( 100 m ) thick Eureka Quartzite . This great white band of Ordovician rock stands out on the summit of Pyramid Peak , near the Racetrack , and high on the east shoulder of <unk> Mountain . No American source is known for the Eureka sand , which once blanketed a 150 @,@ 000 square miles ( 390 @,@ 000 km2 ) belt from California to Alberta . It may have been swept southward by longshore currents from an eroding sandstone terrain in Canada . 
 Deposition of carbonate sediments resumed and continued into the Triassic . Four formations were deposited during this time ( from oldest to youngest ) ; 
 Ely Springs Dolomite , 
 Hidden Valley Dolomite , 
 Lost Burro Formation , and the 
 Tin Mountain Limestone . 
 The other period of interruption occurred between 350 and 250 Ma when sporadic pulses of mud swept southward into the Death Valley region during the erosion of highlands in north @-@ central Nevada . 
 Although details of geography varied during this immense interval of time , a north @-@ northeasterly trending coastline generally ran from Arizona up through Utah . A marine carbonate platform only tens of feet deep but more than 100 miles ( 160 km ) wide stretched westward to a fringing rim of offshore reefs . Lime @-@ rich mud and sand eroded by storm waves from the reefs and the platform collected on the quieter ocean floor at depths of 100 feet ( 30 m ) or so . The Death Valley area 's carbonates appear to represent all three environments ( down @-@ slope basin , reef , and back @-@ reef platform ) owing to movement through time of the reef @-@ line itself . 
 All told these eight formations and one group are 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) thick and are buried below much of the Cottonwood , Funeral , Grapevine , and Panamint ranges . Good outcrops can be seen in the southern Funeral Mountains outside the park and in Butte Valley within park borders . The Eureka Quartzite appears as a relatively thin , nearly white band with the grayish Pogonip Group below and the almost black Ely Springs Dolomite above . All strata are often vertically displaced by normal faulting . 
 = = Change to active margin and uplift = = 
 The western edge of the North American continent was later pushed against the oceanic plate under the adjacent ocean . An area of great compression called a subduction zone was formed in the early @-@ to @-@ mid Mesozoic , which replaced the quiet , sea @-@ covered continental margin with erupting volcanoes and uplifting mountains . A chain of volcanoes pushed through the continental crust parallel to the deep trench , fed by magma rising from the subducting oceanic plate as it entered the Earth 's hot interior . Thousands of feet ( hundreds of meters ) of lavas erupted , pushing the ocean over 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the west . 
 <unk> forces built up along the entire length of the broad continental shelf . The Sierran Arc , also called the Cordilleran Mesozoic magmatic arc , started to form from heat and pressure generated from the subduction . <unk> forces caused thrust faults to develop and granitic blobs of magma called plutons to rise in the Death Valley region and beyond , most notably creating the Sierra Nevada Batholith to the west . Thrust faulting was so severe that the continental shelf was shortened and some parts of older formations were moved on top of younger rock units . 
 The plutons in the park are Jurassic and Cretaceous aged and are located toward the park 's western margin where they can be seen from unimproved roads . One of these relatively small granitic plutons was emplaced 67 – 87 Ma and spawned one of the more profitable precious metal deposits in the Death Valley area , giving rise to the town and mines of Skidoo . In the Death Valley area these solidified blobs of magma are located under much of the <unk> Mountains and are found in the western end of the Panamint Mountains . <unk> areas can be seen at <unk> Peak in the southern part of the Funeral Mountains . 
 A long period of uplift and erosion was concurrent with and followed the above events , creating a major unconformity . Sediments worn off the Death Valley region were shed both east and west and carried by wind and water ; the eastern sediments ended up in Colorado and are now famous for their dinosaur fossils . No Jurassic to Eocene sedimentary formations exist in the area except for some possibly Jurassic @-@ age volcanic rock around Butte Valley . Large parts of previously deposited formations were removed ; probably by streams that washed the sediment into the Cretaceous Seaway that longitudinally divided North America to the east . 
 = = Development of a plain = = 
 After 150 million years of volcanism , <unk> , metamorphism , and thrust faulting had run their course , the early part of the Cenozoic era ( early Tertiary , 65 – 30 Ma ) was a time of repose ; neither igneous nor sedimentary rocks of this age are known here . A relatively featureless plain was created from erosion over many millions of years . Deposition resumed some 35 Ma in the Oligocene epoch on a flood plain that developed in the area ; sluggish streams migrated laterally over the surface , laying down cobbles , sand , and mud . Outcrops of the resulting conglomerates , sandstone , and mudstone of the Titus Canyon Formation can be observed in road cuts at Daylight Pass on Daylight Pass Road , which becomes State Route 374 a short distance from the pass . Several other similar formations were also laid down . 
 Large volcanic eruptions , originating near the Nevada Test Site , covered the Death Valley area and much of Nevada in thick sequences of silica @-@ rich ash 27 million years ago . The ash has a rhyolitic composition , which is the volcanic equivalent of the plutonic rock granite ; it covered what would later become the Grapevine Mountains in 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) of ash . This ash filled in valleys and depressions ; by 20 million years ago , the region from the Death Valley area across Nevada was a volcanic plain . 
 = = Extension creates the Basin and Range = = 
 Starting around 16 Ma in Miocene time and continuing into the present , a large part of the North American Plate in the region has been under extension by literally being pulled apart . Debate still surrounds the cause of this crustal stretching , but an increasingly popular idea among geologists called the slab gap hypothesis states that the spreading zone of the subducted Farallon Plate is pushing the continent apart . Whatever the cause , the result has been the creation of a large and still @-@ growing region of relatively thin crust ; the region grew an average of 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) per year initially and then slowed to 0 @.@ 3 inches ( 0 @.@ 76 cm ) per year in the last 5 million years . Geologists call this region the Basin and Range Province . 
 <unk> forces causes rock at depth to stretch like silly putty and rock closer to the surface to break along normal faults into <unk> basins called grabens ; small mountain ranges known as horsts run parallel to each other on either side of the graben . Normally the number of horsts and grabens is limited , but in the Basin and Range region there are dozens of horst / graben structures , each roughly north @-@ south trending . A succession of these extend from immediately east of the Sierra Nevada , through almost all of Nevada , and into western Utah and southern Idaho . The crust in the Death Valley region between Lake Mead and the southern Sierra Nevada has been extended by as much as 150 miles ( 240 km ) . 
 The Furnace Creek Fault system , located in what is now the northern part of Death Valley , started to move about 14 Ma and the Southern Death Valley Fault system likely began to move by 12 million years ago . Both fault systems move with a right @-@ lateral offset along strike @-@ slip faults ; these type of faults rub past each other so that a theoretical observer standing on one side facing the other side sees it move right . Both fault systems run parallel to and at the base of the ranges . Very often the same faults move laterally and vertically , simultaneously making them strike @-@ slip and normal ( i.e. oblique @-@ slip ) . These two systems are also offset from each other ; the area between the offset is thus put under enormous oblique tension , which intensifies subsidence there ; Furnace Creek Basin opened in this area and the rest of Death Valley followed in stages . One of the last stages was the formation of Badwater Basin , which occurred by about 4 Ma . Data from gravimeters show that Death Valley 's bedrock floor tilts down toward the east and is deepest under Badwater Basin ; there is 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) of fill under Badwater . By about 2 Ma Death Valley , Panamint Valley and their associated ranges were formed . 
 Much of the extra local stretching in Death Valley that is responsible for its lower depth and wider valley floor is caused by left lateral strike @-@ slip movement along the Garlock Fault south of the park ( the Garlock Fault separates the Sierra Nevada range from the Mojave Desert ) . This particular fault is pulling the Panamint Range westward , causing the Death Valley graben to slip downward along the Furnace Creek Fault system at the foot of the Black Mountains . The rocks that would become the Panamint Range may have been stacked on top of the rocks that would become the Black Mountains and the Cottonwood Mountains . Under this interpretation , as the Black Mountains began to rise , the Panamint / Cottonwood Mountains slid westward off of them along low @-@ angle normal faults , and starting around 6 Ma , the Cottonwood Mountains slid northwest off the top of the Panamint Range . There is also some evidence that the Grapevine Mountains may have slid off the Funeral Mountains . Another interpretation of the evidence is that the Black and Panamint Mountains were once side @-@ by @-@ side and were pulled apart along normal faults . These normal faults , in this view , are steep near the surface but become low angle at depth ; the mountain blocks rotated as they slid to create the tilted mountains seen today . 
 Total movement of the <unk> block between the Garlock and Furnace Creek Faults is 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the northwest , creating Death Valley in the process . A few of the 20 to 25 degree @-@ sloped surfaces along which this mass of 20 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 to 9 @,@ 100 m ) of rock slipped , are exposed in Death Valley . These features are called " <unk> " due to their turtle shell @-@ like appearance . 
 = = Volcanism and valley @-@ fill sedimentation = = 
 Igneous activity associated with the extension occurred from 12 to 4 Ma . Both intrusive ( plutonic / solidified underground ) and extrusive ( volcanic / solidified above ground ) igneous rocks were created . Basaltic magma followed fault lines to the surface and erupted as cinder cones and lava flows . Some volcanic rocks were re @-@ worked by hydrothermal systems to form colorful rocks and concentrated mineral formations , such as boron @-@ rich minerals like borax ; a Pliocene @-@ aged example is the 4 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) -thick Artist Drive Formation . Gold and silver ores were also concentrated by mineralizing fluids from igneous intrusions . Other times , heat from magma migrating close to the surface would superheat overlaying groundwater until it exploded , not unlike an exploding pressure @-@ cooker , creating blowout craters and tuff rings . One example of such a feature is the roughly 2000 @-@ year @-@ old and 800 feet ( 240 m ) deep <unk> Crater ( photo ) in the northern part of the park ; nearby smaller craters may be less than 200 to 300 years old . 
 Sediment filled the subsiding Furnace Creek Basin as the area was pulled apart by Basin and Range extension . The resulting 7 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) -thick Furnace Creek Formation is made of lakebed sediments that consist of saline muds , gravels from nearby mountains and ash from the then @-@ active Black Mountain volcanic field . Boron , which is abundant in this formation , is dissolved by ground water and flows out onto the northern end of the Death Valley playa . Today this formation is most @-@ prominently exposed in the badlands at Zabriskie Point . Additional subsidence of the Furnace Creek Basin was filled by the four @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old Funeral Formation , which consists of 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) of conglomerates , sand , mud and volcanic material . Another smaller basin to the south was filled by the Copper Canyon Formation around the same time . Footprints and fossils of camels , horses , and mammoths are in all three of these Pliocene formations . 
 About 2 – 3 Ma , in the Pleistocene , continental ice sheets expanded from the polar regions of the globe to cover lower latitudes far north of the region , starting a series of cold glacial periods that were interrupted by warmer interglacial periods . <unk> from alpine glaciers on the nearby Sierra Nevada during glacial periods fed rivers that flowed into the valleys of the region year round . Since the topography of the Basin and Range region was largely formed by faulting , not by river erosion , many of the basins have no outlets , meaning they will fill up with water like a bathtub until they overflow into the next basin . So during the cooler and wetter pluvial climates of the glacial periods , much of eastern California , all of Nevada , and western Utah were covered by large lakes separated by linear islands ( the present day ranges ) . 
 Lake Manly was the lake that filled Death Valley during each glacial period from at least 240 @,@ 000 years ago to as late as 10 @,@ 500 years ago ; the lake typically dried up during each interglacial period , such as the current one . Lake Manly was the last in a chain of lakes that were fed by the Amargosa and Mojave Rivers , and possibly also the Owens River ; it was also the lowest point in the Great Basin drainage system . At its height during the Last glacial period some 22 @,@ 000 years ago , water filled Lake Manly to form a body of water that may have been 585 feet ( 178 m ) deep and 90 miles ( 140 km ) long . Much smaller lakes filled parts of Death Valley during interglacials ; the largest of these was 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) deep and lasted from 5000 to 2000 years ago . Panamint Lake filled Panamint Valley to a maximum depth of 900 feet ( 270 m ) ; when it was full , Panamint Lake overflowed into Lake Manly somewhere around the southern end of the Panamint Mountains . 
 Lake Manly and its sister lakes started to dry up about 10 @,@ 000 years ago as the alpine glaciers that fed the rivers that filled the lakes disappeared and the region became increasingly arid . Fish that had migrated into the lake system from the Colorado River started to die off ; the only survivors are the minnow @-@ sized Death Valley pupfish and related species that adapted to living in springs . Ancient weak shorelines called <unk> from Lake Manly can easily be seen on a former island in the lake called Shoreline Butte . 
 Stream gradients increased on flanking mountain ranges as they were uplifted . These swifter moving streams are dry most of the year but have nevertheless cut true river valleys , canyons , and gorges that face Death and Panamint valleys . In this arid environment , alluvial fans form at the mouth of these streams . Very large alluvial fans merged to form continuous alluvial slopes called <unk> along the Panamint Range . The faster uplift along the Black Mountains formed much smaller alluvial fans because older fans are buried under playa sediments before they can grow too large . Slot canyons are often found at the mouths of the streams that feed the fans , and the slot canyons in turn are topped by V @-@ shaped gorges . This forms what looks like a wineglass shape to some people , thus giving them their names , " wineglass canyons " . 
 = = Table of formations = = 
 This table of formations exposed in the Death Valley area lists and describes the exposed formations of the Death Valley National Park and the surrounding area . 
 = = Table of salts = = 
 = Angel Heart = 
 Angel Heart is a 1987 American neo @-@ noir psychological horror film , and an adaptation of William Hjortsberg 's 1978 novel Falling Angel . Written and directed by Alan Parker , the film stars Mickey Rourke , Robert De Niro and Lisa Bonet . The story follows Harry Angel ( Rourke ) , a New York City private investigator hired to solve the disappearance of a man known as Johnny Favorite . Angel 's investigation takes him to New Orleans , where he becomes embroiled in a series of brutal murders . 
 Following publication of the novel , Hjortsberg began developing a screenplay for a film adaptation , but found that no film studio was willing to produce his script . The project resurfaced in 1985 , when producer Elliott Kastner brought the book to Parker 's attention . Parker began work on a new script , and in doing so , made several changes from Hjortsberg 's novel . The independent film studio Carolco Pictures produced Angel Heart with a budget of $ 18 million . Principal photography commenced in March 1986 and concluded in June of that year ; filming took place on location in New York and New Orleans . 
 Before its release , Angel Heart gained controversy for its casting of Bonet ( then known for her role on the family @-@ oriented sitcom The Cosby Show ) and her graphic sex scene with Rourke , which faced censorship issues from the Motion Picture Association of America . Parker was forced to remove ten seconds of sexual content to avoid an " X " rating and secure the " R " rating that the film 's distributor , Tri @-@ Star Pictures , wanted . An unrated version of the film was later released on home video . Angel Heart received mixed reviews and underperformed at the North American box office , grossing $ 17 million during its theatrical run . It has since gained a cult following , with some reviewers calling it one of the best horror films ever made . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1955 , Harry Angel , a New York City private investigator , is hired by Louis Cyphre to track down John Liebling , a crooner known as " Johnny Favorite " who Cyphre had helped become successful . Cyphre stands to benefit from unspecified collateral on Favorite 's death and suspects that a private upstate hospital , where the war invalid Favorite was receiving psychiatric treatment for shell shock , is issuing false reports . Angel goes to the hospital and discovers that a backdated transfer record has recently been added by a physician named Albert Fowler . After Angel breaks into his home , Fowler admits that 12 years ago he was bribed by a man and woman to allow Favorite to leave while maintaining the fiction that he was still a patient at the hospital . Believing that Fowler is still withholding information , Angel locks him in his bedroom . Hours later , he finds the doctor murdered . 
 Unnerved , Angel tells Cyphre that he no longer wants the job , but agrees to continue after Cyphre offers him $ 5 @,@ 000 . He soon discovers that Favorite had a wealthy fiancée named Margaret Krusemark but had also begun a secret love affair with a woman named Evangeline Proudfoot . Angel travels to New Orleans and meets with Margaret , who divulges little information , telling him that Favorite is dead . Angel then discovers that Evangeline is also dead , but is survived by her 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Epiphany Proudfoot , who was conceived during her mother 's love affair with Favorite . When Epiphany is reluctant to speak , Angel tracks down Toots Sweet , a blues guitarist and former Favorite bandmate . After Angel uses force to try to extract details of Favorite 's last @-@ known whereabouts , Toots refers him back to Margaret . The following morning , police detectives inform Angel that Toots has been murdered . Angel returns to Margaret 's home , where he finds her murdered , her heart removed with a ceremonial knife . He is later attacked by enforcers of Ethan Krusemark — a powerful Louisiana patriarch and Margaret 's father — who tell him to leave town . 
 Angel returns to his hotel and finds Epiphany on his doorstep . He invites her into his room , where they have aggressive sexual intercourse , during which Angel has visions of blood dripping from the ceiling and splashing around the room . He later confronts Krusemark in a gumbo hut , where the latter reveals that he and Margaret were the ones who helped Favorite leave the hospital . He also explains that Favorite was actually a powerful magician who sold his soul to Satan in exchange for stardom , but then sought to renege on the bargain . In 1943 , Favorite kidnapped a young soldier and performed a Satanic ritual on the boy , murdering him and eating his still @-@ beating heart in order to hide from the devil . Angel has a panic attack and runs into the bathroom . He returns to find Krusemark drowned in a cauldron of boiling gumbo . 
 Angel goes to Margaret 's home , where he finds a vase containing a clue to the soldier 's identity : a set of dog tags with his name stamped on them . Cyphre then appears , and Angel deduces that " Louis Cyphre " is a homophone for Lucifer . Cyphre confirms that he is the devil and proclaims that he can at long last claim what is his : Favorite 's immortal soul . In a fugue state that Cyphre induces , it is revealed that Angel has murdered Fowler , Toots , the <unk> and Epiphany . 
 A frantic Angel returns to his hotel room , where the police have found Epiphany raped , brutally murdered and wearing Angel 's dog tags . When Angel reveals that Epiphany was his daughter , a detective tells him that he will " burn " for what he has done to her , to which Angel replies , " I know . In Hell . " During the end credits , Angel is seen standing inside an iron Otis elevator which is interminably descending . As the screen fades to black , Cyphre can be heard whispering , " Harry " and " Johnny " , announcing his dominion over both their shared souls . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following publication of his 1978 novel Falling Angel , William Hjortsberg began work on a film adaptation . His friend , production designer Richard Sylbert , took the book 's manuscript to producer Robert Evans . The film rights to the novel had been optioned by Paramount Pictures , with Evans slated to produce the film , John Frankenheimer hired to direct and Hjortsberg acting as screenwriter . Frankenheimer was later replaced by Dick Richards , and Dustin Hoffman was considered for the lead role . After Paramount 's option expired , Hjortsberg discussed the project with Robert Redford and wrote two drafts . Hjortsberg felt that no film studio was willing to produce his script . He reflected , " Even with [ Redford ] behind the script , studio executives weren 't interested . ' Why can 't it have a happy ending ? ' every bigshot demanded . " 
 In 1985 , producer Elliott Kastner met with Alan Parker at Pinewood Studios to discuss a film adaptation of the novel . Parker , who had read the book following its publication , agreed to write the screenplay . He met with Hjortsberg in London before moving to New York , where he wrote most of the script . After completing the first draft in September 1985 , Parker traveled to Rome , Italy , where he brought the script to Mario Kassar and Andrew G. Vajna . The two producers agreed to finance the film through their independent film studio , Carolco Pictures , and Parker was given creative control . Pre @-@ production work began in January 1986 in New York , where Parker selected the creative team , reuniting with several of his past collaborators , including producer Alan Marshall , director of photography Michael <unk> , camera operator Michael Roberts , production designer Brian Morris and editor Gerry <unk> . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Parker made several changes from the novel . He titled his script Angel Heart as he wanted to distance his film adaptation from the source material . While Falling Angel is set entirely in New York City , Parker had the second half of his script take place in New Orleans , based on the novel 's perpetual allusions to voodoo and the occult . He discussed the story setting change to Hjortsberg , who approved of the decision and said that he had considered setting his novel in New Orleans . Angel Heart is set in the year 1955 , whereas in the book , the events take place in 1959 . Parker explained , " The book is set in 1959 and I moved it to 1955 for a small but selfish reason . 1959 was on the way to the 1960 ’ s with its changing attitudes as well as environments . 1955 for me still belonged to the 1940 ’ s — and , because of the historical pause button of World War II , conceivably the 1930 ’ s — so quite simply , setting it in this year allowed me to give an older look to the film . " 
 Other script changes from the novel involved characterization and dialogue . Parker sought to make Harry Angel a character that evoked sympathy . He said , " In the tradition of the down @-@ at @-@ heel <unk> , his phlegmatic surface disguised an intelligence capable of unraveling a complicated , larger @-@ than @-@ life story with a degree of belief and conciseness . Also he had to be attractive to audiences while enlightening them , little by little , along the way . " Parker also established Angel as being born on February 14 — Valentine 's Day — the same date as his own birthday . He explained that " the heart reference seemed to have some resonance " . Parker also wanted to create a realistic depiction of Louis Cyphre , as opposed to the character 's " larger @-@ than @-@ life " personality in the novel . Another script change involved the ending and the identity of the killer . While Angel is framed for the murders ( presumably by Cyphre ) in the novel , Parker established the character as the killer for the film 's ending . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Parker originally wanted Robert De Niro to play the role of Harry Angel , but the actor expressed interest in playing Louis Cyphre . De Niro did not fully commit to the role until after many discussions with Parker . The director reflected , " I had been courting [ De Niro ] to play [ Cyphre ] in Angel Heart for some months and we had met a few times — and he had continued to bombard me with questions examining every dot and comma of my script . I had walked him through the locations we had found , read through the screenplay sitting on the floor of a dank , disused church in Harlem and finally he said ' yes ' . " 
 Jack Nicholson was also considered for the role of Angel . Parker met with Nicholson in Los Angeles to discuss the project . Parker said , " I did my pitch and he was most gracious , although , to be honest , he was quite distracted at the time ... my movie and the possibility of him taking part seemed to slip from his immediate area of concentration and interest . " Parker also met with Mickey Rourke , who expressed a strong interest in playing Angel and secured the leading role after a meeting with Parker in New York . 
 Various actresses auditioned for the role of Epiphany Proudfoot before Lisa Bonet secured the part . Bonet was then known for her role on the family @-@ oriented sitcom The Cosby Show , and her casting in Angel Heart sparked significant controversy . Parker cast Bonet based on the strength of her audition and was unaware of her role on The Cosby Show . On preparing for the role , Bonet said , " I did a lot of meditation and a lot of self @-@ inquiry . I did some research on voodoo . My earnest endeavor was really to let go of all my inhibitions . It was really necessary for me to be able to let go of Lisa and let Epiphany take over . " 
 Parker had difficulty finding an actress for the role of Margaret Krusemark . " Although it 's a small part in the film , the character is omnipresent in the dialogue and [ the actress ] had to have the right balance of class and eccentricity , " he said . " I read many actresses for the part without much success . " Rourke suggested English actress Charlotte Rampling , who secured the role after Parker contacted her to discuss the part . 
 In January 1986 , Parker held an open casting call at a New York nightclub known as The Kamikaze , with more than 1 @,@ 400 people auditioning for various roles . Actress Elizabeth <unk> , who had a small role in Parker 's previous film Birdy was cast as Connie , a journalist who aids Angel in his investigation . Parker held another casting call in New Orleans , where he requested that local musicians audition for possible roles in the film . Clarence " Gatemouth " Brown and Deacon John Moore were among the many musicians who auditioned for roles . Moore was cast as Toots Sweet 's bandmate . Parker then returned to New York , where he auditioned other musicians , including Bo Diddley and Dizzy Gillespie . Blues guitarist Brownie McGhee , who plays Toots Sweet , was cast during the film 's principal photography . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During the casting process , Parker and producer Alan Marshall began scouting locations in New York City . The director looked at Harlem , believing that the neighborhood was " as un @-@ photographed as other parts of New York are over @-@ used . " On January 20 , 1986 , he travelled to New Orleans , where he continued writing the script . Parker looked at unused buildings located on Royal Street that could act as a hotel , and an abandoned house on Magazine Street that would serve as the home of Margaret Krusemark ( Rampling ) . He returned to New York where he looked at Staten Island and Coney Island . Parker 's script required a total of 78 locations in New York and New Orleans . 
 Principal photography began on March 31 , 1986 and concluded on June 20 , 1986 , on a budget of $ 18 million . Filming began in Eldridge Street , Manhattan , New York City , which acted as Harry Angel 's neighbourhood . Production designer Brian Morris and the set decorating team spent two months designing the set prior to filming , hoping to recreate 1950s New York . Because of the warm weather conditions , ice trucks were used to create fake snow . Filming then moved to Alphabet City in Manhattan , where several bar scenes and Angel 's intimate bedroom scene with Connie ( <unk> ) were filmed . 
 The production team then moved to Harlem to film a chase scene set during a procession before moving to Coney Island , where the cast and crew underwent severely cold weather conditions . The location was used to film a scene in which Angel questions a man Izzy ( George Buck ) about the whereabouts of Johnny Favorite , while Izzy 's wife Bo ( Judith Drake ) stands waist deep in the ocean . The original actress who was cast as Bo was injured when she was knocked off her feet by a wave while delivering her first line . The actress refused to reshoot the scene , which led to her being replaced by her stand @-@ in , Drake , who Parker found to be a better actress for the role . 
 Production returned to Manhattan to film the opening credits sequence . Filming then moved to Harlem , New York , where a hospice was used to film a scene involving the character Spider Simpson ( Charles Gordone ) , and many of the hospice 's elderly residents acted as extras for the scene . On April 17 , 1986 , the production team moved to Staten Island to film exterior and interior scenes involving the character Dr. Fowler ( Michael Higgins ) . Filming then moved to Hoboken , New Jersey , which doubled for a scene set in a New Orleans train station . From April 28 to April 29 , the production team returned to Harlem , where Parker filmed Rourke and De Niro 's scene in a Harlem mission . The two actors next filmed a scene at Lanza 's , an Italian restaurant located on the Lower East Side . 
 By May 3 , 1986 , production had moved to New Orleans . In the town of Thibodaux , Louisiana , Parker and his crew discovered an entire plantation workers ' village that would serve as a graveyard . He said , " The graveyard was a dressed set , but much of what we filmed was already there . " An unused Louisiana field was used to create a racetrack where Angel meets the wealthy patriarch Ethan Krusemark ( <unk> ) . On May 13 , the crew encountered some difficulty filming a chase scene involving Angel , as they had to deal with shying horses , trained dogs , gunshots , two hundred chickens , and a horse specially trained to fall on top of Rourke 's stuntman . 
 Production then moved to Magazine Street , where production designer Brian Morris and the art department attempted to recreate 1950s New Orleans . Parker said of the set , " As in New York , we had dressed and clad every single storefront as far as the eye could see in order to be authentic to the period , and drained everything of all primary colours for our monochromatic look . " Filming then moved to Jackson Square where the crew filmed one of the final scenes , in which Angel runs from Margaret 's home . The production then filmed a voodoo ceremony scene choreographed by Louis Falco . Falco , who had previously choreographed Parker 's 1980 film Fame , based the scene on an actual Haitian ceremony . 
 The sex scene involving Rourke and Bonet was filmed in one of the unused buildings located on Royal Street and took four hours to shoot . Parker limited the crew down to himself , cinematographer Michael <unk> , camera operator Michael Roberts and the camera assistant . To make the actors more comfortable , Parker played music during the shoot . Production then moved to a corner of New Orleans , which doubled for flashback sequences set in 1943 Times Square , New York . The crew then discovered an unused bus depot , which was used to film scenes set in Ethan Krusemark 's gumbo hut . Filming then moved to the St. Alphonsus Church , where the crew filmed a dialogue scene between Angel and Cyphre . Production returned to Royal Street in the French Quarter , where the final confrontation between Angel and Cyphre , and the film 's ending were shot . 
 = = = Editing and censorship = = = 
 After filming concluded in June 1986 , Parker spent four months editing the film in Europe , with 400 @,@ 000 feet of film and 1 @,@ 100 different shots . The Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) gave the original cut an " X " rating — a rating widely associated with pornographic films . The board , composed of industry executives and theater owners , expressed concerns over several seconds of the intense sex scene involving Rourke and Bonet , in which Rourke 's buttocks are seen thrusting in a sexual motion . The board voted 6 to 5 to reclassify the film to an " R " rating ; a reclassification required a two @-@ thirds majority vote . 
 The film 's distributor , Tri @-@ Star Pictures , refused to release it with an X rating , as the film would have fewer theaters willing to book it and fewer venues for advertising ; Steve Randall , executive vice @-@ president of marketing for Tri @-@ Star , stated that it was the studio 's " firm policy not to release an X @-@ rated film . " With only a few weeks before the film 's release , the studio was desperate for the less @-@ restrictive R rating , but Parker was reluctant to alter the film . He filed another appeal , in which the board voted 8 to 6 in favor of the X rating . Parker then removed ten seconds of sexual content from the scene . " That scene was very complex , very intricate , and the cutting quite rapid , involving 60 to 80 cuts in the space of about two minutes , " he said . " Eventually , I cut only 10 seconds from the scene , or about 14 feet of film . " On February 24 , 1987 , the film was granted an R rating . Parker later stated that the MPAA 's concerns were " a wasteful , pointless and expensive exercise " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score for Angel Heart was produced and composed by South African composer Trevor Jones , with saxophone solos by British jazz musician Courtney Pine . Parker hired Jones after being impressed by his orchestral score for the 1986 film Runaway Train . Jones viewed a rough cut of Angel Heart prior to scoring the film . He stated , " When I sat in the screening room all by myself and began to see those images , I was shaking like a puppy when the movie ended and when I got out of the room I told [ Parker ] that it was a great picture , but that I didn ’ t understand what exactly he wanted from me . He told me that he expected me to deliver something special to the picture and ... to approach the movie from whenever I chose . " 
 For the score , Jones wanted to explore the concept of evil : " Evil is the greatest of human fears ... I tried to give that feeling to the score using daily ordinary music that would bridge the world of [ Harry Angel ] to that which he 's getting into , the black magic , his search . It was like a psychological journey for me always trying to relate to the fears and emotions of the audience . " He composed the score electronically on a synclavier . Parker chose Glen Gray 's 1937 song " Girl of My Dreams " as a recurring song performed by the unseen character Johnny Favorite . He wanted the song to act as a motif that would haunt viewers as it had haunted Harry Angel . Jones incorporated elements of the song into his score . In addition to Jones 's score , the soundtrack features several blues and R & B performances , including " Honeyman Blues " by Bessie Smith , and " Soul on Fire " by <unk> Baker . Brownie McGhee performed the songs " The Right Key , but the Wrong Keyhole " and " Rainy Rainy Day " , with Lilian <unk> acting as a vocalist . 
 During post @-@ production , Jones mixed the music tracks at Angel Recording Studios , a recording studio built in an abandoned church in Islington , North London , with final mixing taking place at Warner Hollywood Studios in Los Angeles . Parker said , " One of the great advantages of working with contemporary recording techniques is that we can mix onto film in a recording studio with all of the various components and options of modern , multi @-@ track recordings . I 've always been very mistrustful of conventional scoring , whereby a hundred musicians sit in front of the projected film and the conductor strikes up the orchestra . " A motion picture soundtrack album was released by the recording labels Antilles Records and Island Records . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 In North America , Angel Heart opened in wide release on March 6 , 1987 , distributed by Tri @-@ Star Pictures . The film debuted at number four at the weekend box office , garnering ticket sales of $ 3 @,@ 688 @,@ 721 from 815 screens , with an average of $ 4 @,@ 526 per theatre . The film 's overall domestic gross was $ 17 @,@ 185 @,@ 632 , which is below its estimated budget of $ 18 million . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes sampled 23 reviews , and gave Angel Heart a score of 78 % , with an average score of 7 out of 10 . William Hjortsberg , author of Falling Angel , voiced his support of the film adaptation , stating , " [ Alan ] Parker wrote an excellent script and went on to make a memorable film . Casting Robert De Niro as Cyphre was a brilliant touch . " Although initially supportive of Bonet 's decision to appear in the film , Bill Cosby dismissed Angel Heart as " a movie made by white America that cast a black girl , gave her voodoo things to do and have sex " . 
 Initial reactions among film critics were mixed . Vincent Canby of The New York Times praised the cinematography and production design , but criticized Rourke 's performance as being " suitably intense , but to such little effect " . Rita Kempley of the Washington Post wrote that Angel Heart " is over @-@ stylized , and we 're over @-@ stimulated when the soundtrack goes berserk , from a few <unk> @-@ thumps to a visceral , ventricles a @-@ pumping score " . Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Parker 's direction : " There 's no way to separate the occult from the incomprehensible ... Parker simply doesn 't have the gift of making evil seductive , and he edits like a flasher . " Kael also criticized De Niro : " It 's the sort of guest appearance that lazy big actors delight in — they can show up the local talent . " 
 On the syndicated television program Siskel and Ebert and the Movies , Gene Siskel gave Angel Heart a " thumbs down " , while his colleague Roger Ebert praised the film and gave it a " thumbs up " . In his review for the Chicago Tribune , Siskel wrote that " Parker seems more concerned with style and with hiding the film 's big mystery than with pacing . " Siskel also criticized the film 's controversial sex scene for not being " as shocking as the rating board would have you believe . " 
 Ebert , writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , gave the film three and a half stars out of four , writing that " Angel Heart is a thriller and a horror movie , but most of all it 's an exuberant exercise in style , in which Parker and his actors have fun taking it to the limit " . Ian Nathan of Empire called the film " A diabolical treat with Rourke and De Niro in top form . " Almar Haflidason of the BBC wrote , " The movie maintains intrigue at every turn and Rourke is spellbinding . Robert De Niro , Charlotte Rampling , and the assembled cast are all excellent . But this is Mickey Rourke 's movie , and he puts in a mesmerising performance . " Richard Luck , writing for Film4 , concluded in his review , " The book 's so good it deserves a better movie , but Rourke 's performance is such that Angel Heart stands out from the necromancy movie crowd . " 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 While not initially a success with North American audiences , Angel Heart has gained a cult following . Filmmaker Christopher Nolan stated the film was a major influence on his 2000 film Memento . Video game developer Ken Levine stated that Angel Heart was one of several films that inspired the first @-@ person shooter game BioShock Infinite . 
 In 2010 , Wired magazine ranked the film at number 22 on their list of " The 25 Best Horror Films of All Time " , and in 2012 , Mark Hughes , writing for Forbes , ranked Angel Heart at number nine on his list of the " Top 10 Best Cult Classic Horror Movies of All Time " . Den of Geek writer Ryan Lambie ranked the film at number six on his list of " The Top 20 Underappreciated Films of 1987 " , writing that " Parker brings a wonderfully shadowy quality to his noir thriller , which takes in New York and New Orleans . Some viewers may be able to predict where this twisty , murky thriller 's going to take them , but the ride remains one worth taking thanks to the quality of the acting and direction . " Film critic Tim Dirks of the film @-@ review website Filmsite.org added the film to his list of films featuring the " Greatest Film Plot Twists , Film Spoilers and Surprise Endings " , based on two of the film 's major plot twists — Harry Angel being revealed as Johnny Favorite , and Louis Cyphre revealing himself as Lucifer . Screen Rant writer Tim Butters added Robert De Niro 's performance on his list of " One of the 10 Best Movie Depictions of the Devil " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Angel Heart received several awards and nominations following its release . At the 10th Jupiter Awards , Mickey Rourke won a Jupiter Award for Best International Actor for his performances in both Angel Heart and A Prayer for the Dying ( 1987 ) . At the 9th Youth in Film Awards , Lisa Bonet won the Young Artist Award for Best Young Female Superstar in Motion Pictures . At the 15th Saturn Awards , Angel Heart received three Saturn Award nominations , though it failed to win any of the awards . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Angel Heart was released on VHS on September 24 , 1987 by International Video Entertainment ( <unk> ) . The releases included the R @-@ rated theatrical cut , and an uncut version which restored the ten seconds of sexual content that was removed to satisfy the MPAA . Ralph King , senior vice president of <unk> , said , " The scene cut from Angel Heart is both provocative and shocking , but it is by no means pornographic . We 're pleased to give the public the opportunity to see the film as Alan Parker originally meant the film to be viewed . " 
 The film was first released on DVD on June 23 , 1998 by Artisan Entertainment . Special features on the DVD included a theatrical trailer , production notes , a making @-@ of featurette , and information on the cast and crew . The DVD release received criticism for its poor video transfer and shortage of special features . Artisan later released the film on laserdisc on August 18 , 1998 . Lionsgate Home Entertainment re @-@ released Angel Heart with a " Special Edition " DVD on May 18 , 2004 . The Special Edition features additional material , including an introduction and audio commentary by Parker , a scene @-@ specific commentary by Rourke , a video interview with the actor , and the theatrical trailer . Lionsgate released the film on Blu @-@ ray disc on November 24 , 2009 . The Blu @-@ ray presents the film in 1080p high definition , and contains all the additional materials found on the Special Edition DVD . 
 = = Remake = = 
 In 2008 , it was announced that producers Michael De Luca , Alison Rosenzweig and Michael Gaeta were developing a planned remake of Angel Heart that would be produced by De Luca 's production banner Michael De Luca Productions . The producers had optioned the rights to both the film and the novel Falling Angel . De Luca expressed that he was a fan of the novel , stating , " It 's a great blend of genres with a great Faustian bargain , compelling , universal themes and a rare combination of literary and commercial appeal . " 
 = Color Air = 
 Color Air AS was the first Norwegian low @-@ cost airline . It operated from Oslo Airport , Gardermoen in 1998 and 1999 with a fleet of three Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft . Color Air was a brand extension of Color Line , which shared a common owner in the Olav Nils Sunde @-@ controlled Color Group . The airline operated five daily round trips from Oslo to Trondheim and Bergen , four to Ålesund and one to London , in addition to a weekly trip to Alicante . Color Air pioneered the low @-@ cost business model in Norway , with a denser seating , no frills and lack of a frequent flyer program . Tickets were sold only via the Internet , by telephone or in supermarkets ; when bought from travel agents , there was a NOK 200 surcharge . 
 The airline was established in response to the opening of Gardermoen , which would allow any airline sufficient landing slots to compete with the incumbents Braathens and Scandinavian Airlines ( SAS ) . Color Air commenced operations on 1 August 1998 , with the two other airlines moving from Oslo Airport , Fornebu on 8 October . Following the airline 's establishment , a price war broke out between it and the two incumbents . All three increased capacity and dropped prices , giving a 40 % increase in seats on the dominant domestic routes and seat loads of between 30 and 50 percent . After thirteen months and NOK 400 million in losses , Color Air gave up and filed for bankruptcy . The price war cost the three airlines more than NOK 3 billion , and ultimately forced the other two to merge . 
 = = Service = = 
 All flights were based at Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . For the summer routes of 1999 , Color Air operated four daily round trips to Ålesund Airport , Vigra , and five daily round trips to Bergen Airport , Flesland and Trondheim Airport , Værnes . In addition , there was a single daily round trip to London Stansted Airport , and a weekly round trip to Alicante Airport . From each domestic destination , flights were made to correspond with the Color Line <unk> departing from Oslo to Kiel , Germany , and Hirtshals , Denmark . 
 Color Air had only one seating class , offered no on @-@ board beverages and had no frequent flyer program or lounges . Color Air had an agreement for tickets to be sold at the Rimi supermarkets , as well as by phone and Internet . If bought at a travel agency , there was a NOK 200 surcharge . This was because Color Air was not linked to the Amadeus booking system , owing to the costs associated with membership . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The airline had three Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft , built in 1994 . Originally fitted with 136 seats each , they were later reduced to 124 , and then increased to 142 . The aircraft were owned by International Lease Finance Corporation and General Electric Capital , and cost NOK 2 @.@ 25 million per month to lease , plus additional costs per hour . They were British @-@ registered and operated by Air Foyle <unk> , while maintenance was performed by British Midland . Both companies are based in the United Kingdom . Ground handling was carried out by SAS Ground Services in Trondheim , Bergen and Ålesund , and by <unk> in Oslo . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 With Norway joining the European Economic Area , the Norwegian airline market was deregulated from 1 April 1994 . While airlines formerly needed a concession from the Ministry of Transport to fly a particular route , they could now compete freely on any domestic or international routes . Previously the two major airlines Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) and Braathens SAFE each had their own routes , but from 1994 both established themselves on several of the main @-@ haul routes . 
 With increased traffic , there soon became a capacity problem at Oslo Airport , Fornebu , the main hub for both SAS and Braathens . During the peak times during the morning and afternoon rush , there were no excess slots for new airlines . To compensate , the Norwegian Airport Administration was building a new main airport for Eastern Norway , to be located at Gardermoen . A larger terminal and two runways would give ample room for expansion , and entry of new airlines . The new airport opened on 8 October 1998 . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 In January 1998 , Olav Nils Sunde announced that he would establish a low @-@ cost airline following the opening of the new airport . The company would be led by CEO Morten Andersen , who previously had been CEO of Norway Airlines , and the lawyer Stein Øxseth . Sunde would own 92 % of the company through his shipping company Larvik Scandi Line , while Andersen and Øxseth would own 4 % each . The company would be a brand extension of Sunde 's shipping company Color Line . The company aimed at a 15 – 20 % market share , with 1 @.@ 4 million passengers annually . It was the first low @-@ cost airline in Norway . The company launched tickets down to NOK 500 each way , and sold cheap tickets without demanding that the traveler be away during a weekend . Color Air made an agreement with the British airline Air Foyle <unk> to operate a fleet of Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft . 
 Following the announcement to establish Color Air , Braathens SAFE chose to rebrand itself . They launched a new livery , and changed their name to just Braathens . Starting with the company 's first Boeing 737 @-@ 700 delivered on 23 March , Braathens introduced the business class , Braathens Best , that would take up 70 % of the cabin , and the economy class Braathens Back , that would be at the back of the cabin . From 1 April , a new NOK 65 tax was introduced on all domestic flights . Braathens and SAS decided to divide the cross @-@ subsidize the taxes between their routes , something Color Air was not able to do . This was because the tax was only valid for routes within Southern Norway ; Braathens and SAS could therefore tacitly collude to increase the prices to Northern Norway , and thereby subsidize their routes in Southern Norway . Color Air , on the other hand , would be forced to put the full tax on all its departures . While the government had no way to hinder the incumbents from doing this , Gudmund <unk> , Minister of Finance from the Centre Party , encouraged the airlines to not " cheat " , and follow the intentions of the law , even if he admitted that there was nothing the government could do to hinder the airlines from cross @-@ subsidizing . 
 The contract to lease two Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft from 1994 was made with International Lease Finance Corporation in May . Maintenance was outsourced to a British company , after Braathens , which also operated 737 Classic aircraft , had denied Color Air the use of its simulators and technical workshops . For the start @-@ up , Color Air hired 18 pilots , 40 flight attendants and 40 ground employees , in addition to the administration . The company was criticized for only hiring women flight attendants . Braathens operated with an internal pension age of 58 years for its pilots , while SAS had a 60 @-@ year age limit . Due to EEA rules , the judicial age limit was 65 years , so Color Air was able to hire retired SAS and Braathens pilots . These could be paid only NOK 500 @,@ 000 in annual wage , since they received a full pension from their old employers on top of it . The Norwegian Airline Pilots Association stated that this was morally reprehensible , but Color Air was supported by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority , medical experts , and SAS , who all claimed that there were no medical reasons to not let people in their 60s operate aircraft . 
 = = = Start of operation = = = 
 The first aircraft was delivered on 1 August 1998 . While the new airport at Gardermoen would not officially open until 8 October , when also SAS and Braathens would move to the airport , Color Air started flights from Gardermoen to Ålesund Airport , Vigra on 6 August . Flights to Trondheim Airport , Værnes commenced on 8 August , while the Bergen Airport , Flesland @-@ route started 15 August . After a week , very few passengers were traveling with Color Air , with two at the least and twenty @-@ four at the most per departure . Color Air was losing NOK 650 @,@ 000 per week of operation . 
 The pricing scheme was based on tickets for NOK 399 , 499 , 599 and 699 , plus NOK 71 in taxes . At least ten tickets were available at the lowest price per departure , and the first to order were granted the cheapest tickets . Tickets had no restrictions on cancellation , and were not subject to restrictions on return dates . 
 With the opening of Gardermoen , both Braathens and SAS increased the number of flights . Braathens established a route to Haugesund , while SAS started routes to Ålesund and Kristiansand . The number of daily trips from Oslo for SAS increased from 59 to over 80 . In total , the three companies increased their daily round trip from 138 to 200 , and the daily seat capacity from 18 @,@ 000 to 26 @,@ 000 . Ålesund had the largest increase , from seven daily round trips only with Braathens , to seventeen offered by all three companies . On the route to Trondheim , the number of departures had increased from 27 to 39 , with Braathens operating 19 , SAS 16 and Color Air 5 . The increase in seats was profitable for the state ; the new seat tax — which was also applicable to unsold seats — received an annual revenue increase of NOK 110 million . 
 The first plane planned to leave Gardermoen was an SAS aircraft . However , since it was 20 minutes delayed , a Color Air aircraft was instead the first to take off , at 06 : 52 on 8 August 1998 . By the end of October , the airline had between 40 and 50 % cabin load , and the company stated that it needed " slightly more than 50 % " to make a profit . It also announced that it would receive three more aircraft to supplement the two it had in service . Instead of starting a route to Stavanger , the company instead chose to open a route to London Stansted Airport starting 1 December . The airline stated that it did not have sufficient aircraft do make more than two round trips to Stavanger , and that this would be too little to be a credible operator on the route . 
 = = = Price war = = = 
 In November , Color Air changed the conditions tied to purchase of tickets . Reduced price tickets were only available seven days or more before departure , and only full @-@ price tickets could be refunded . At the same time , the maximum price increased to NOK 870 , though all ticket prices were changed to include all taxes , after requirements from the authorities . A new , cheapest ticket was introduced at NOK 345 , including taxes . After the winter settled , the front between Color Air and Braathens grew colder following Braathens ' denying Color Air to use their deicing equipment at Ålesund , resulting in the plane being stuck at the airport . 
 In November , Color Air transported 102 @,@ 544 passengers . From mid @-@ December , the company had a time @-@ limited offer of tickets for NOK 200 . 
 In September , the ownership of Color Air was rearranged . Sunde reallocated his ownership and created Color Group , that would wholly own both Color Line , Scandi Line , Larvik Line and Color Air . Sunde retained a 77 % ownership in the corporation through Larvik Scandi Line . The group was subsequently listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange . In the general meeting held in December , two of the largest owners of Color Line , Vital Forsikring and the Government Pension Fund of Norway , both were opposed to the merger , as they felt the purchased companies were overvalued . Color Air was at the time valuated at NOK 157 million . After a long process between the <unk> shareholders and Color Group , the valuation was adjusted to NOK 108 million . In May , Olav Nils Sunde bought the entire Color Group , and delisted it from the stock exchange following the conflict with the other shareholders . 
 By the end of 1998 , it became clear that Braathens had increased capacity by 20 % , but only achieved a 5 @.@ 2 % ridership increase after the opening of Gardermoen . Similar numbers were applicable for SAS . The business market , in particular the large corporations with divisions in several large cities , were demanding high frequencies on the routes . Color Air could get by with fewer departures because they mainly targeted the leisure segment . In particular , the routes from Oslo to Ålesund and Kristiansand had a very low seat utilization ; to Ålesund there were 1 @.@ 2 million seats annually , but only 345 @,@ 000 passengers , giving a 29 % cabin load . Accumulated cabin load for Color Air was 32 % , with 116 @,@ 176 passengers . In the course of the last quarter of 1998 , Color Air lost NOK 91 million , or NOK 1 million each day . For the whole year , Color Air had an average ticket price of NOK 453 , giving a revenue of NOK 57 million . NOK 45 million was used on taxes , giving NOK 12 million to cover operating costs of NOK 209 million . The company lost NOK 197 million in 1998 . 
 In February 1999 , Braathens announced that they would re @-@ register all their planes in Sweden to avoid having to pay value added tax on catering and fuel . Color Air and SAS , who had their planes registered abroad , had gotten away without paying the taxes , since it only applied to Norway @-@ registered planes . Following this announcement , the Ministry of Finance changed the rules so also foreign @-@ owned planes had to pay the tax . The change in rules cost Color Air NOK 10 million per plane per year . From 1 July 1999 , the seat tax was removed , but replaced by an equivalent tax for each passenger . This made it cheaper to fly an empty plane , but more expensive to fly a full one . Color Air had reduced the number of seats in each plane to avoid the seat tax , but increased them again after the tax was removed . 
 In the first quarter of 1999 , Color Air transported 100 @,@ 472 passengers . This gave a cabin load of 35 % , of which the Trondheim route had 40 % and the Ålesund route 32 % . This gave the airline a deficit of NOK 92 million . SAS lost NOK 22 million , while Braathens had lost NOK 300 million . In comparison , both Braathens and SAS Norway made a NOK 320 million profit in the first quarter of 1998 . 
 On 1 April , Color Air won a two @-@ year contract with Norway Post for all air mail from Oslo to Trondheim and Ålesund . On 10 April , Color Air started a weekly round trip each Saturday to Alicante Airport in Spain . On 12 April , Ove Johan Solem took over as CEO of Color Air . In May , the company increased the cabin load from 38 to 48 % , with ridership increasing from 33 @,@ 978 to 44 @,@ 081 . These numbers also included a change in the number of seats per plane . The following month , 46 @,@ 777 people traveled with the airline . By the end of July , Color Air had lost NOK 350 million . However , in July , Color Air had a cabin load exceeding 50 % , the level Sunde had stated was necessary to make a profit . 
 In September , SAS announced that if Braathens took the first step to reduce capacity between Bergen and Oslo , they would follow immediately to reduce the overcapacity in the combined 37 daily departures . However , Braathens was not willing to reduce . On 15 September , Color Air announced that they would start flying five round trips from Oslo to Stavanger Airport , Sola on 1 October , following the delivery of their fourth aircraft . At the same time , the airline would reduce the number of round trips to Ålesund from four to two . The load factor in August was 43 % , and management stated that 50 % load would not be sufficient to make money . In particular , the company stated that while aircraft were full during the weekends , the company was not succeeding at garnering the necessary business ridership to fill up the planes during the weekdays . To become more attractive , the company changed its fares to two classes : Business Full Flex and Saver No Flex . The company also stated that to attract more business travelers , it was looking for an international partner to conduct codesharing on international routes , and perhaps also introduce a frequent flyer program alone or in cooperation with the partner . 
 = = = Bankruptcy = = = 
 On 27 September 1999 , Color Air terminated all flights and ceased operations . Sunde stated that he regretted having started the airline , and said that he had overestimated the synergies between his ferry company and the airline , but also underestimated the price elasticity for business travel . In particular , the frequent flyer programs that SAS and Braathens had made it difficult to convince corporate travelers to switch to Color Air . Sunde believed that the company would continue to lose money in 2000 . 220 employees lost their jobs , while Color Group estimated it lost NOK 400 million on the airline . There were discussions concerning cooperation with , or a take @-@ over by , British Airways , but these discussions did not lead to an agreement . In total , Color Air flew 430 @,@ 000 passengers , effectively subsidizing each passenger with almost NOK 1000 . The company was not declared bankrupt , as Sunde wanted to insure his good reputation by paying everyone he owed money . While this was about NOK 10 million in airport fees and smaller sums to other parties , the largest creditors were the two aircraft leasing companies , to whom NOK 270 million was owed for the rest of the rental period . The 20 @,@ 000 people who had tickets with Color Air were all <unk> onto Braathens flights . After NOK 170 million in debt was registered by the company , and assets were only worth NOK 17 million , Color Air was declared bankrupt on 10 November 1999 . 
 On the day of the termination , the stock price of Braathens increased by 16 % , while SAS 's increased 3 % . Immediately following the bankruptcy , the two airlines increased their prices . Subsequently , Braathens increased their ticket price by 15 % , but stated that this had nothing to do with the elimination of competition , since the price increase was not on any Oslo routes . In November , Braathens started to remove routes , and announced they would increase prices by 20 % . They also reintroduced the Flag of Norway on the tailplane that since the rebranding had been replaced by a silver , abstract wing . Both Braathens and SAS lost more than NOK 1 billion in 1999 , and the total cost of the price war between the three airlines exceeded NOK 3 billion . 
 = 1996 Football League Second Division play @-@ off Final = 
 The 1996 Football League Second Division play @-@ off Final was a football match played at Wembley Stadium on 26 May 1996 , at the end of the 1995 – 96 English league season to determine the final promoted side from the Second Division . Bradford City beat Notts County 2 – 0 to join Swindon Town and Oxford United in winning promotion to the First Division . It was the 10th Second Division play @-@ off Final and the seventh to be held at Wembley . 
 For Bradford , it was the first time they had played at Wembley in their 93 @-@ year history . City finished sixth during the regular league season only winning a play @-@ off place with a victory on the final day of the season . They came from two goals down during the semi @-@ finals against Blackpool to gain a place in the play @-@ off final . Having been relegated the previous season , Notts County had the chance to win an instant promotion back to the First Division . They finished fourth during the regular season and defeated Crewe Alexandra in the semi @-@ final by drawing the away tie and winning by one @-@ goal in the second leg at home . 
 Bradford took an eighth @-@ minute lead in the final through 19 @-@ year @-@ old Bradford @-@ born Des Hamilton . Notts County only had one chance in the first half before applying more pressure during the early part of the second half . However Bradford 's recent signing Mark Stallard doubled their lead to give them victory and newspaper reporters agreed that Bradford dominated the game . Their manager Chris Kamara had only been in charge for six months before the final . Three years after their victory , Bradford went on to win promotion to the Premier League ; their opponents Notts County were relegated the season after their play @-@ off final defeat and have yet to finish higher since their fourth @-@ place finish in 1996 . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Second Division league champions Swindon Town and runners @-@ up Oxford United took the two automatic promotion spots after recording 92 and 83 points respectively , leaving Blackpool , Notts County , Crewe Alexandra and Bradford City to contest the play @-@ offs for the final promotion place . Bradford City , who appointed rookie manager Chris Kamara in November 1995 , won nine of their last 12 league games and only secured a play @-@ off berth on the final day of the season by defeating Hull City 3 – 2 at Boothferry Park in a game that was delayed because of crowd trouble . They were one point ahead of seventh place Chesterfield , and equal on points with Crewe but behind in goal difference ; they therefore finished sixth . As a result , in the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals Bradford played third @-@ place Blackpool , whose manager Sam Allardyce admitted his side had thrown away an automatic promotion spot ; they finished a solitary point behind Oxford . Bradford had already played Blackpool four times during the season , after being drawn together in the League Cup , with Bradford winning three of the previous encounters . Notts County , who had been relegated the previous season having finished in last place in the First Division , came in fourth position to set up a tie against Crewe Alexandra in the other semi @-@ final . 
 Notts County 's fourth place meant they were away to Crewe Alexandra in the first leg , which finished 2 – 2 at Gresty Road . With home advantage at Meadow Lane three days later , they won 1 – 0 thanks to a goal from Gary Martindale to give them a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . The other semi @-@ final went against home advantage ; City finished sixth so played at their Valley Parade home in the first leg , losing 2 – 0 . However , they overturned the deficit by winning 3 – 0 at Bloomfield Road . Des Hamilton , Carl Shutt and Mark Stallard scored the three goals that also gave them a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . Kamara called it the " best night " of his career , whereas his opposite number Allardyce was sacked . 
 = = Match summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ match = = = 
 City had only appeared in one previous major final when they won the 1911 FA Cup Final before Wembley Stadium had been built . Hence , the play @-@ off final was the club 's first game at Wembley in their 93 @-@ year history . For Notts County , it was the fifth visit to the national stadium since 1990 . The historic occasion for Bradford was reflected in the ticket sales , with City fans outnumbering their opponents nearly three @-@ to @-@ one with 28 @,@ 000 of the crowd of 39 @,@ 972 coming from Bradford . 
 Kamara 's main selection dilemma was in attack where he had to pick a strike partner for Stallard , a player who had joined from Derby County in January for £ 120 @,@ 000 and gone on to score ten goals . Kamara opted for Shutt , who was given only a 50 per cent of playing in the run @-@ up to the match because of a slight knock , with Ian <unk> , a veteran of three play @-@ off finals with his previous club Leicester City , selected as substitute . Captain Eddie <unk> , who overcame a knee problem to return to the side in defence in place of David Brightwell , was the only player not to have played in the second leg against Blackpool . Notts County 's side featured only two of the players that had been relegated the previous season – Tony Agana and Shaun Murphy . Their side also contained Darren Ward , who was selected for the Second Division PFA ( Professional Footballers ' Association ) representative side , and Steve Finnan , on loan from First Division Birmingham City . 
 City 's chairman Geoffrey Richmond was reported to have told his side before the game : " Well boys , you can either play Bury or Manchester City next season – it 's up to you ! " Two times league champions Manchester City had been relegated from the Premier League whereas Bury had been just promoted from the Third Division . Three of the City players , Richard Huxford , Wayne Jacobs and Andy Kiwomya – all Christians – went onto the pitch to pray before the game . 
 <unk> Singh , from Wolverhampton , a former non @-@ league player who turned to officiating after an injury , was chosen as the match referee . He had been overlooked as the referee for the previous year 's First Division play @-@ off Final despite having the top marks in the country and The Independent reported after Singh 's career that his appointment a year on was the highlight of his career . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Bradford opened the scoring after only eight minutes of the match through teenage hometown midfielder Hamilton . A long pass from Huxford down the right flank was headed by Shutt into Hamilton 's path . He beat three defenders and , despite the fact he was stumbling , shot past Notts County goalkeeper Ward , with the ball going in after hitting the crossbar . It had been Bradford 's first shot of the game . Steve Finnan had County 's first chance after 14 minutes but shot straight at Bradford keeper Jonathan Gould . Minutes later , City had two successive chances through Shutt and <unk> , but the first was blocked and the second went wide . During this spell of play , County 's two central defenders Murphy and Gary <unk> both received yellow cards . Just before half @-@ time , Shutt had the chance to double City 's lead but his weak shot hit Ward 's ankles after good work by Kiwomya . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Ian Richardson was booked within a minute of the second half starting for bringing down Kiwomya . Notts County started to come back into the game ; Martindale headed wide , Agana and Richardson both had shots blocked during a goalmouth scramble and Tony Battersby had a shot saved over the crossbar by Jonathan Gould , as County tried to equalise during a 20 @-@ minute spell of pressure . Between County 's chances , Stallard had the opportunity to double City 's lead when he capitalised on a slip from <unk> , but Ward saved his effort . However , City went on to double their advantage on 75 minutes . <unk> , who had replaced the injured Hamilton , flicked on a long pass from Richard Huxford with his first touch . His header went across goal to Stallard who volleyed home . Two minutes after the goal , Martindale fired wide for County after a pass from Agana , and with time running out Finnan 's long @-@ range shot was deflected for a corner , but from the resulting set @-@ piece , Richardson shot over the crossbar . 
 = = = Post @-@ match reaction = = = 
 In his match report for The Independent , Tim Collings wrote that City " played with a width , verve and pace which embarrassed County " and called it " a professional job by a spirited and swift team " . The Sun 's report said that City had " cruised to victory " . The Daily Mirror reported that County had struggled until the second half with their best chance limited to one from 25 yards from goal . Trevor Haylett , The Guardian match reporter , called it an uneven contest , with Bradford never looking back from their early goal . He added Hamilton and Kiwomya , City 's two wingers , maintained their side 's momentum . Haylett reported that County played as a " team of strangers " during the first half . Bradford 's daily newspaper the Telegraph & Argus reported that " apart from a 15 @-@ minute spell midway through the second half when Notts came close to equalising , City were in complete charge of the game " . 
 City 's matchwinner Hamilton and his manager Kamara shared the headlines in the national newspapers . Hamilton said after the game : " To score for my hometown team at Wembley has got to be one of the best feelings ever . " Kamara added : " Now I am hungry for second helpings of success . And I am absolutely convinced I can get it here . We will not look out of place in the First Division because we have so much quality . " County 's manager Colin Murphy told the press : " All credit to Bradford , they won it fair and square . And that does not always happen in football . Bradford are a very experienced side compared to mine . Maybe this came a year too early for my boys . " Jacobs , the Bradford full @-@ back who played 11 years for the club and won a subsequent promotion to the Premier League , said after his career : " I just look back on some amazing times and I was delighted to be part of them . It was a real blessing to my life . To play at Wembley was a dream fulfilled . " 
 The day after the final , City held an open top bus tour and a civic reception at Bradford City Hall . The following day , they hosted a friendly match against Dutch side Feyenoord to celebrate their victory . 
 = = Match details = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The following season , Bradford City 's fate once again went down to the final game of the season . A 3 – 0 victory against Queens Park Rangers ensured they avoided being relegated immediately back to the Second Division . Instead Grimsby Town went down alongside Oldham Athletic and Southend United . In January 1998 , Richmond sacked Kamara and named his assistant Paul Jewell as new manager . Jewell guided City to the Premier League within 16 months , the first time City had been in the top flight in 77 years . 
 Notts County 's fate went in the opposite direction . They were relegated in bottom place the season after the 1996 play @-@ off final defeat , only to win the 1997 – 98 Third Division title and gain instant promotion . However , they have spent every season since in the bottom two divisions . The two clubs did not meet again in league football until January 2008 after City 's fall back down the league structure . 
 Blackpool , whom Bradford had defeated in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , were relegated to the bottom tier in 1999 – 2000 . They won three promotions – all via the play @-@ offs – within the following decade to reach the Premier League themselves for the first time in their history . 
 = Underneath the Tree = 
 " Underneath the Tree " is a song by American recording artist Kelly Clarkson , from her sixth studio album and first Christmas album , Wrapped in Red ( 2013 ) . Written by Clarkson along with Greg Kurstin , who handled its production , it is a Christmas @-@ themed song that sings of gratitude for companionship during the holidays , in which the beloved is being referred as the only present needed " underneath the tree " . Accompanied by various instrumental sounds , the song prominently incorporates a Wall of Sound treatment along with sleigh bells and bell chimes to resonate a holiday atmosphere . " Underneath the Tree " was first released to Adult Contemporary radio stations on November 5 , 2013 , by RCA Records as the lead single from the album . 
 " Underneath the Tree " has been praised by music critics , who considered it as the main highlight of Wrapped in Red and lauded its potential to be a holiday classic . They also <unk> compared it to the 1994 modern Christmas standard " All I Want for Christmas Is You " by Mariah Carey . Three weeks after its release , the song topped the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart and attained a top ten position on the Billboard Holiday 100 chart . It also attained a chart position on the national Billboard Hot 100 chart and became top forty hit in Canada , the Netherlands , South Korea , and the United Kingdom . 
 Filmed by English director Hamish Hamilton , the accompanying music video for the song features a live performance from the television special Kelly Clarkson 's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale at The Venetian Las Vegas . Apart from the television special , Clarkson has also performed it in various televised performances , such as Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and the American singing competition The Voice . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 After recording tracks for her greatest hits compilation , Greatest Hits – Chapter One , Clarkson began discussing with her record label RCA Records about plans for her sixth studio album being a Christmas release in late 2012 , during which she also began to write original Christmas material . Greg Kurstin , whom she had previously collaborated with , was approached by Clarkson to produce the album ; and together , they co @-@ wrote the tracks " Underneath the Tree " and " 4 Carats " . " Underneath the Tree " was produced by Kurstin , who also played most of the instruments , including a mellotron and a Chamberlin , to evoke a Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound treatment — a sound that Billboard and HitFix noticed upon hearing the song . He also had Clarkson provide all the voices in it , including all its backing vocals . She recalled the experience as new , stating , " I 've never had to do anything like this before — doing all my backup vocals , essentially being my own choir . " 
 " Underneath the Tree " is an uptempo big band @-@ style Christmas and pop song written by Clarkson and Kurstin . It is one of the five original songs recorded for Wrapped in Red . According to the sheet notes at Musicnotes published by EMI Music Publishing , the song was written in the key of E ♭ major , in which the vocal range spans from E ♭ 4 to G5 . Apart from the Wall of Sound , various other sounds , such as sleigh bells and bell chimes , are also prominently heard on the song , which features a saxophone solo on the bridge . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On October 18 , 2013 , Clarkson premiered " Underneath the Tree " on her Vevo channel . On November 5 , 2013 , RCA Records released it as a single on Adult Contemporary radio stations in the United States , while also planning to release it on Mainstream Pop stations . It was then released as a digital download in the United Kingdom on November 22 , 2013 , and in the United States on December 9 , 2013 . A digital EP containing remixes of the song was released internationally on December 17 , 2013 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Underneath the Tree " has received critical acclaim from various music critics on its release , who lauded it as main highlight of Wrapped in Red and a prospective Christmas standard . Billboard 's Marisa Fox called it as the album 's " biggest surprise " , and described it as an optimistic tune that has Clarkson powering through Darlene Love @-@ style vocals . While Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times 's described it as a remarkably cheery single . In her review , Christina Vinson of Taste of Country remarked that the track " has everything a Christmas song could want : a jazzy , big band sound , saxophone and bells ringing , all bottled up in an optimistic and catchy holiday track " and said that Clarkson " shines " , as her " strong vocals are needed to offset the snazzy production and chorus . " In his review , Idolator 's Carl Williott wrote that the song " sounds instantly familiar — sleigh bells , laments about a lonely Christmas day , a sax solo — but with a tightly coiled hook and Clarkson ’ s transcendent voice , the whole thing is kind of invigorating . " Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe called it as bouncy , cooing number tailor @-@ made to soundtrack sleigh rides , and named it as the best track on the album . 
 Critics also approvingly compared it to Mariah Carey 's modern Christmas classic " All I Want for Christmas Is You " ( 1994 ) , a track that RCA chief executive Peter Edge described as the song 's inspiration . Williot added that " Underneath the Tree " is strong enough that it could enter the pantheon of modern Christmas staples like Carey 's " All I Want For Christmas Is You " and ' N Sync 's " Merry Christmas , Happy Holidays " . Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV News remarked , " if we may be so bold , it is definitely on par with other impeccable Christmas originals — namely Carey 's " All I Want For Christmas Is You " . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted the similar themes of two songs , and that " Underneath the Tree " is likely to become Clarkson 's very own contemporary standard . Melinda Newman of HitFix wrote , " It 's a finger @-@ popping , bell @-@ ringing pleaser that could achieve that rare feat of becoming a new Christmas standard . That hasn 't happened since Carey 's " All I Want For Christmas " in 1994 ; " while The Independent 's Hugh Montgomery applauded it as having a sass , jingle and a sax solo , saying that it is " a winner on all fronts . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Upon the release of Wrapped in Red , " Underneath the Tree " entered the Billboard Holiday Digital Songs chart as an album cut at number four on the week ending November 16 , 2013 . Following its release as a single , it reached a peak position of number three on the week ending December 28 , 2013 . After being released as a single to Adult Contemporary radio , the song debuted at number 21 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart for the week ending November 23 , 2013 , eventually topping the chart after three weeks , becoming her third Adult Contemporary number one song and her first since " Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) " ( 2012 ) . That same week , it also entered the Billboard Holiday 100 chart at number 34 , making it her second entry at the Holiday Songs after " I 'll Be Home for Christmas " ( 2011 ) . The song entered the chart 's top ten after two weeks at number 10 . On the week ending December 21 , 2013 , the song entered the main Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 92 , and peaked at number 78 on the week ending January 4 , 2013 . Brian Mansfield of USA Today reported that " Underneath the Tree " was radio 's most @-@ played new holiday song of 2013 . 
 Internationally , " Underneath the Tree " became a top forty hit in four countries . After debuting at number 41 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 chart on the week ending December 21 , 2013 , the song reached a peak of number 28 after a week . In the United Kingdom , it debuted on the Official UK Singles Chart at number 79 on the week ending December 14 , 2013 , eventually reaching at number 30 on the week ending December 28 , 2013 . In the Netherlands , " Underneath the Tree " debuted on the Mega Top 50 chart at number 38 on the week ending December 14 , 2013 , and peaked at number 34 on the week ending December 28 , 2013 . That same week , it entered the Mega Single Top 100 at number 85 , and peaked at number 69 . It " Underneath the Tree " entered the Dutch Top 40 chart at number 26 , making it her first top forty hit in that region after four years since " I Do Not Hook Up " peaked at number 19 in 2009 . It then peaked at number 25 after a week . In South Korea , the song debuted at number 2 on the Gaon Singles Chart on the week ending November 9 , 2013 . In Japan , it debuted on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart at number 84 on the week ending January 4 , 2014 , and spend two weeks on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On the eve of Wrapped in Red 's release , RCA Records released an animated lyric video for " Underneath the Tree " , featuring shots of ice skating , a snow @-@ covered town , and copious Christmas trees . The lyric video was released to positive reviews , with Idolator 's Sam Lansky describing it as " a nice visual accompaniment to the song that just lends an extra high @-@ octane Yuletide cheer to its already @-@ effervescent spirit " . Its accompanying music video premiered on December 3 , 2013 on Vevo , featuring a live performance from the stage of her NBC television special Kelly Clarkson 's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale , which was directed by Hamish Hamilton , known for his concert films . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 Clarkson has performed " Underneath the Tree " in various televised performances . She first performed " Underneath the Tree " in a live televised performance on The Today Show on November 26 , 2013 . Apart from being performed from the set of Kelly Clarkson 's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale featured in the song 's accompanying music video , a different live performance was aired during the television special itself , in which Clarkson was accompanied by children while singing it . She also performed the song on the fifth season of the American singing competition The Voice on December 3 , 2013 . On December 5 , 2013 , she then performed it on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download – Single 
 Digital download – Remixes EP 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Produced at Echo Recording Studio , Los Angeles , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits lifted from the Wrapped in Red liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Goshin = 
 Goshin ( Japanese : <unk> , " protector of the spirit " ) is a bonsai created by John Y. Naka . It is a forest planting of eleven Foemina junipers ( Juniperus chinensis ' Foemina ' ) , the earliest of which Naka began training into bonsai in 1948 . Naka donated it to the National Bonsai Foundation in 1984 , to be displayed at the United States National Arboretum ; it has been there ever since . The individual trees represent Naka 's grandchildren . 
 = = History = = 
 Naka began working with the first two of the eleven trees that would ultimately make up Goshin in 1948 ; he created a " two @-@ tree style " composition using two <unk> junipers of equal height . In 1953 , Naka created a " formal upright " style <unk> , during a demonstration for his bonsai class . He also acquired a taller tree ( eventually to become the main , tallest tree of Goshin ) , which was replanted in the ground and gradually thinned and shaped ; it was ready for showing by 1960 . 
 Goshin first took shape as a forest planting around 1964 . Inspired by a forest of Cryptomeria japonica near a shrine in Japan , Naka first combined the four trees he had already developed into a single , 4 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) composition . He soon added three more , to create a seven @-@ tree forest bonsai . Naka also had to modify the pot to ensure adequate drainage — the lack of which caused one of the trees , and its repeated replacements , to die . At the time , Naka had seven grandchildren , each of which was represented by a tree . At the urging of fellow bonsai artists , he named his composition ; he called the bonsai " Goshin " , meaning " protector of the spirit " , in reference to the forest shrine that inspired it . By 1973 , Naka had eleven grandchildren , and he augmented Goshin <unk> . 
 In 1984 , Goshin was displayed at the Philadelphia Flower Show in mid @-@ March , where it was viewed by about 250 @,@ 000 people . At the show 's conclusion , Naka donated Goshin to the National Bonsai Federation ( which he had helped launch in 1976 ) , to be displayed in the new North American Pavilion ( named in his honor ) of the National Bonsai & <unk> Museum at the United States National Arboretum in Washington , D.C. Since 1984 , Goshin has repeatedly graced the covers of prominent bonsai magazines , and it is one of the most widely recognized bonsai . 
 Naka returned frequently to Washington to check in on and supervise maintenance of Goshin , including extensive work in 1999 . Later that year , he created another forest bonsai that is known as Goshin Two . When Naka died in 2004 , one French site published a cartoon captioned ( in translation ) : " John Naka has gone . A whisper of astonishment wanders in between the branches of Goshin . " 
 = Lundomys = 
 Lundomys molitor , also known as Lund 's amphibious rat or the greater marsh rat , is a semiaquatic rat species from southeastern South America . Its distribution is now restricted to Uruguay and nearby Rio Grande do Sul , Brazil , but it previously ranged northward into Minas Gerais , Brazil , and southward into eastern Argentina . The Argentine form may have been distinct from the living form from Brazil and Uruguay . L. molitor is a large rodent , with the head and body length averaging 193 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) , characterized by a long tail , large hindfeet , and long and dense fur . It builds nests above the water , supported by reeds , and it is not currently threatened . 
 Its external morphology is similar to that of Holochilus brasiliensis and over the course of its complex taxonomic history , it has been confused with that species , but other features support its placement in a distinct genus , Lundomys . Within the family Cricetidae and subfamily Sigmodontinae , it is a member of a group of specialized oryzomyine rodents that also includes Holochilus , Noronhomys , Carletonomys , and Pseudoryzomys . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Lundomys molitor was first described in 1887 by Danish zoologist Herluf Winge , who reviewed the materials Peter Wilhelm Lund had collected in the caves of Lagoa Santa , Minas Gerais , Brazil . Winge used four specimens for his description , including two skull fragments and an isolated maxilla ( upper jaw ) from the cave chamber Lapa da <unk> Nr. 5 and a mandible ( lower jaw ) from Lapa da Serra das <unk> , but the latter later turned out to be from a different species , probably <unk> <unk> . Lund named the animal Hesperomys molitor and placed it in the same genus ( Hesperomys ) as what is now Pseudoryzomys simplex and two species of Calomys . Subsequently , it was rarely mentioned in the literature on South American rodents ; those authors who did mention it placed it in either Oryzomys or Calomys . 
 In 1926 , American zoologist Colin Campbell Sanborn collected some rodents in Uruguay , which he identified as Holochilus vulpinus ( currently Holochilus brasiliensis ) in his 1929 report on the collection . When his successor at the Field Museum of Natural History , Philip Hershkovitz , reviewed Holochilus in 1955 , he recognized that the series from Uruguay contained two species , one close to the forms of Holochilus found across much of South America , and another unique to Uruguay and southern Brazil ; he named the latter as a new species , Holochilus magnus . Hershkovitz identified Holochilus as one of the members of a " <unk> " group of American rodents , also including Sigmodon , Reithrodon , and <unk> , on the basis of its flat @-@ crowned molars , which are <unk> ( the crown consists of transverse ridges ) . In 1 @,@ 981 ft ( 604 m ) <unk> was also recognized in the Late Pleistocene of Buenos Aires Province , Argentina , and in 1982 it was recorded from Rio Grande do Sul in southern Brazil . 
 In a 1980 article , Argentine zoologist Elio <unk> recognized the resemblance between Winge 's Hesperomys molitor and Hershkovitz 's Holochilus magnus , and recommended that the former be reclassified as a species of Holochilus , Holochilus molitor . When American zoologists Voss and Carleton restudied Winge 's material in a 1993 paper , they were unable to find any consistent differences between the two and accordingly considered them to pertain to the same species . In addition , they reviewed the differences between this species and other Holochilus and concluded that these were significant enough to place the former in a distinct genus , which they named Lundomys after Lund , who had collected the original material . Since then , the species has been known as Lundomys molitor . 
 In the same paper in which they described Lundomys , Voss and Carleton also , for the first time , diagnosed the tribe Oryzomyini in a phylogenetically valid way . Previously , Oryzomyini had been a somewhat loosely defined group defined among others by a long palate and the presence of a crest known as the mesoloph on the upper molars and mesolophid on the lower molars ; this crest is absent or reduced in Holochilus and Lundomys . Voss and Carleton recognized five synapomorphies for the group , all of which are shared by Lundomys ; the placement in Oryzomyini of Lundomys and of three other genera — Holochilus , Pseudoryzomys , and Zygodontomys — which also lack complete mesoloph ( id ) s has been universally supported since . 
 Voss and Carleton had found some support for a close relationship between Holochilus , Lundomys , and Pseudoryzomys within Oryzomyini . In subsequent years , the related species Holochilus primigenus and Noronhomys vespuccii were discovered , providing additional evidence for this grouping . The allocation of the former , which is similar to Lundomys in features of the dentition , to Holochilus is controversial and placement as a second species of Lundomys has been suggested as an alternative . A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of oryzomyines by Marcelo Weksler , published in 2006 , supported a close relationship among Lundomys , Holochilus , and Pseudoryzomys ; the other species of the group were not included . Data from the sequence of the IRBP gene supported a closer relationship between Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys , with Lundomys more distantly related , but morphological data placed Holochilus and Lundomys closer together , as did the combined analysis of both morphological and <unk> data . Subsequently , Carletonomys cailoi was described as an additional relative of Holochilus and Lundomys . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lundomys molitor is among the largest living oryzomyines , rivaled only by some large forms of Holochilus and Nectomys , but it is substantially smaller than some of the recently extinct Antillean species , such as " Ekbletomys hypenemus " and Megalomys desmarestii . Unlike in Holochilus brasiliensis , which occurs in the same area , the tail is longer than the head and body . It is sparsely haired and dark , and there is no difference in color between the upper and lower side . The coat , which is long , dense , and soft , is yellow – brown at the sides , but becomes darker on the upperparts and lighter on the underparts . The large hindfeet are characterized by conspicuous interdigital webbing , but they lack tufts of hair on the digits and several of the pads are reduced . As in some other semiaquatic oryzomyines , fringes of hair are present along the plantar margins and between some of the digits . The forefeet also lack tufts on the digits and show very long claws , a character unique among oryzomyines . The female has four pairs of teats and the gall bladder is absent , both important characters of oryzomyines . The head and body length is 160 to 230 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 to 9 @.@ 1 in ) , averaging 193 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) , the tail length is 195 to 255 mm ( 7 @.@ 68 to 10 @.@ 04 mm ) , averaging 235 mm ( 9 @.@ 3 in ) , and the length of the hindfoot is 58 to 68 mm ( 2 @.@ 3 to 2 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 62 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . 
 The front part of the skull is notably broad . As in Holochilus , the zygomatic plate , the flattened front portion of the cheek bone , is expansive and produced into a spinous process at the anterior margin . The jugal bone is small , but less reduced than in Holochilus . The interorbital region of the skull is narrow and flanked by high beads . The incisive foramina , which perforate the palate between the incisors and the upper molars , are long , extending between the molars . The palate itself is also long , extending beyond the posterior margin of the maxillary bones , and it is perforated near the third molars by conspicuous posterolateral palatal pits . As in all oryzomyines , the squamosal bone lacks a suspensory process that contacts the tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , but Lundomys is unusual in that the squamosal and the tegmen tympani usually overlap when viewed from the side . In the mandible , the angular and coronoid processes are less well @-@ developed than in Holochilus . The capsular process of the lower incisor , a slight raising of the mandibular bone at the back end of the incisor , near the coronoid process , is small . The two masseteric ridges , to which some of the chewing muscles are attached , are entirely separate , joining only at their anterior edges , which are located below the first molar . 
 The molars are slightly more high @-@ crowned ( hypsodont ) than in most oryzomyines and many of the accessory crests are reduced , but they are sharply distinct from the highly derived , hypsodont molars of Holochilus . The main cusps are located opposite each other and have rounded edges . The enamel folds do not extend past the midlines of the molars . The mesoloph , an accessory crest on the upper molars that is usually well @-@ developed in oryzomyines , is present but short on the first and second upper molar ; it is much more reduced in Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys . The corresponding structure on the lower molars , the mesolophid , is present on the first and second molars in Lundomys , but absent in both Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys . Another accessory crest , the anteroloph , is present , though small , on the first upper molar in Lundomys , but entirely absent in both other genera . As in Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys , the anterior cusp on the first lower molar , the anteroconid , contains a deep pit . Each of the three upper molars has three roots ; unlike in both Holochilus and Pseudoryzomys , the first upper molar lacks an accessory fourth root . The first lower molar has four roots , including two small accessory roots located between larger anterior and posterior roots . The second molar has either two or three roots , with the anterior root split into two smaller roots in some specimens . 
 The karyotype contains 52 chromosomes with a total of 58 major arms ( 2n 
 = 52 , FN = 
 58 ) . The non @-@ sex chromosomes ( autosomes ) are mostly acrocentric , having a long and a short arm , or <unk> , having only one arm , but there are also three large metacentric pairs , which have two major arms , and a small metacentric pair . The Y chromosome is metacentric and the X chromosome is variable , ranging from nearly metacentric to acrocentric in five specimens studied . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Lundomys molitor has been found as a living animal only in Uruguay and nearby Rio Grande do Sul ; records of live specimens from eastern Argentina and Lagoa Santa , Minas Gerais , have not been confirmed . It is rarely encountered and it has been collected in only one location in Rio Grande do Sul , but this may be due to insufficient efforts to locate it , rather than genuine rarity . Its distribution is generally limited to areas with mean winter temperatures over 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) , mean annual temperatures over 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) , annual rainfall over 1 @,@ 100 mm ( 43 in ) , and a long rainy season averaging over 200 days . It is usually found in swamps or near streams . 
 Pleistocene fossils have been found throughout its current range and beyond it . In Uruguay and Rio Grande do Sul , the Lujanian ( Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene ) <unk> Formation has yielded remains of L. molitor , in addition to such other mammals as the extinct saber @-@ toothed cat Smilodon populator and species of Glyptodon , <unk> , and <unk> . The type locality , Lagoa Santa , lies far northeast of the nearest record of live L. molitor ; there , it is known only from three skull fragments from a cave known as Laga da <unk> Nr. 5 . This cave also contains numerous remains of members of the extinct South American megafauna , such as ground sloths , <unk> , gomphotheres , and <unk> , in addition to 16 species of <unk> rodents , but it is not certain that all remains from this cave are from the same age . 
 Remains of Lundomys have been found at six Pleistocene localities in Buenos Aires Province , Argentina , which suggests a warm and humid paleoclimate there . The oldest deposits , at Bajo San José , date to Marine Isotopic Stage 11 , about 420 @,@ 000 to 360 @,@ 000 years ago , younger specimens from other localities are as little as 30 @,@ 000 years old . The younger Argentine Lundomys specimens are subtly distinct from living Lundomys in some features of the first lower molar and may represent a distinct species . One lower first molar of this form has length 3 @.@ 28 mm . Because the Bajo San José material does not contain lower first molars , it is impossible to determine whether this material also pertains to the later Argentine Lundomys form . The morphology of the upper and lower jaw precludes an identification as Holochilus primigenus , a fossil species with molar traits almost identical to those of Lundomys . The length of the upper toothrow of one specimen from this locality is 8 @.@ 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 335 in ) and the length of the upper first molar is 3 @.@ 48 mm ( 0 @.@ 137 in ) , slightly smaller than in living Lundomys , which ranges from 3 @.@ 56 to 3 @.@ 64 mm ( 0 @.@ 140 to 0 @.@ 143 in ) in four specimens 
 = = Natural history = = 
 Lundomys molitor is semiaquatic in habits , spending much of its time in the water , and is active during the night . An excellent swimmer , it is even more specialized for swimming than is Holochilus . It builds a spherical nest among reeds in up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) deep water , usually about 20 cm ( 8 in ) above the water . The material for the nest , which is 25 to 30 cm ( 10 to 12 in ) in diameter and 9 to 11 cm ( about 4 in ) in height , comes from the surrounding reeds . Its wall consists of three layers , surrounding a central chamber , which is connected to the water by a ramp , also composed of reeds . Nests built by members of the related genus Holochilus are similar in many details . Several dissected stomachs contained green plant material , suggesting that it is herbivorous , like Holochilus . A female caught in April was pregnant with three embryos , which were about 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) long . The mites Gigantolaelaps wolffsohni and Amblyomma <unk> have been found on specimens of L. molitor in Uruguay . Other rodents found in association with it include <unk> <unk> , Oligoryzomys nigripes , Reithrodon auritus , Akodon <unk> , Oxymycterus <unk> , and Holochilus brasiliensis . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The species ' conservation status is currently assessed as " least concern " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature , reflecting a relatively wide distribution and the absence of evidence for a decline in populations . Several of the areas where it occurs are protected , but the destruction of its habitat may pose a threat to its continued existence . 
 = Parsifal = 
 Parsifal ( WWV 111 ) is an opera in three acts by Richard Wagner . It is loosely based on Parzival by Wolfram von Eschenbach , a 13th @-@ century epic poem of the Arthurian knight Parzival ( Percival ) and his quest for the Holy Grail ( 12th century ) . 
 Wagner first conceived the work in April 1857 but did not finish it until twenty @-@ five years later . It was Wagner 's last completed opera and in composing it he took advantage of the particular acoustics of his Bayreuth Festspielhaus . Parsifal was first produced at the second Bayreuth Festival in 1882 . The Bayreuth Festival maintained a monopoly on Parsifal productions until 1903 , when the opera was performed at the Metropolitan Opera in New York . 
 Wagner described Parsifal not as an opera , but as " Ein <unk> " ( " A Festival Play for the Consecration of the Stage " ) . At Bayreuth a tradition has arisen that there be no applause after the first act of the opera . 
 Wagner 's spelling of Parsifal instead of the Parzival he had used up to 1877 is informed by an erroneous etymology of the name Percival deriving it from a supposedly Persian origin , Fal Parsi meaning " pure fool " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Wagner first read von Eschenbach 's poem Parzival while taking the waters at Marienbad in 1845 . After encountering Arthur Schopenhauer 's writings in 1854 , Wagner became interested in oriental philosophies , especially Buddhism . Out of this interest came Die Sieger ( The Victors , 1856 ) a sketch Wagner wrote for an opera based on a story from the life of Buddha . The themes which were later explored in Parsifal of self @-@ renouncing , reincarnation , compassion , and even exclusive social groups ( castes in Die Sieger , the Knights of the Grail in Parsifal ) were first introduced in Die Sieger . 
 According to his own account , recorded in his autobiography Mein Leben , Wagner conceived Parsifal on Good Friday morning , April 1857 , in the <unk> ( German : " Asylum " ) , the small cottage on Otto Wesendonck 's estate in the Zürich suburb of Enge , which Wesendonck - a wealthy silk merchant and generous patron of the arts - had placed at Wagner 's disposal , through the good offices of his wife Mathilde Wesendonck . The composer and his wife Minna had moved into the cottage on 28 April : 
 ... on Good Friday I awoke to find the sun shining brightly for the first time in this house : the little garden was radiant with green , the birds sang , and at last I could sit on the roof and enjoy the long @-@ yearned @-@ for peace with its message of promise . Full of this sentiment , I suddenly remembered that the day was Good Friday , and I called to mind the significance this omen had already once assumed for me when I was reading Wolfram 's Parzival . Since the sojourn in Marienbad [ in the summer of 1845 ] , where I had conceived Die Meistersinger and Lohengrin , I had never occupied myself again with that poem ; now its noble possibilities struck me with overwhelming force , and out of my thoughts about Good Friday I rapidly conceived a whole drama , of which I made a rough sketch with a few dashes of the pen , dividing the whole into three acts . 
 However , as his second wife Cosima Wagner later reported on 22 April 1879 , this account had been colored by a certain amount of poetic licence : 
 R [ <unk> ] today recalled the impression which inspired his " Good Friday Music " ; he laughs , saying he had thought to himself , " In fact it is all as far @-@ fetched as my love affairs , for it was not a Good Friday at all - just a pleasant mood in Nature which made me think , ' This is how a Good Friday ought to be ' " . 
 The work may indeed have been conceived at Wesendonck 's cottage in the last week of April 1857 , but Good Friday that year fell on 10 April , when the Wagners were still living at Zeltweg 13 in Zürich . If the prose sketch which Wagner mentions in Mein Leben was accurately dated ( and most of Wagner 's surviving papers are dated ) , it could settle the issue once and for all , but unfortunately it has not survived . 
 Wagner did not resume work on Parsifal for eight years , during which time he completed Tristan und Isolde and began Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg . Then , between 27 and 30 August 1865 , he took up Parsifal again and made a prose draft of the work ; this contains a fairly brief outline of the plot and a considerable amount of detailed commentary on the characters and themes of the drama . But once again the work was dropped and set aside for another eleven and a half years . During this time most of Wagner 's creative energy was devoted to the Ring cycle , which was finally completed in 1874 and given its first full performance at Bayreuth in August 1876 . Only when this gargantuan task had been accomplished did Wagner find the time to concentrate on Parsifal . By 23 February 1877 he had completed a second and more extensive prose draft of the work , and by 19 April of the same year he had transformed this into a verse libretto ( or " poem " , as Wagner liked to call his libretti ) . 
 In September 1877 he began the music by making two complete drafts of the score from beginning to end . The first of these ( known in German as the Gesamtentwurf and in English as either the Preliminary Draft or the First Complete Draft ) was made in pencil on three staves , one for the voices and two for the instruments . The second complete draft ( Orchesterskizze , Orchestral Draft , Short Score or <unk> ) was made in ink and on at least three , but sometimes as many as five , staves . This draft was much more detailed than the first and contained a considerable degree of instrumental elaboration . 
 The second draft was begun on 25 September 1877 , just a few days after the first : at this point in his career Wagner liked to work on both drafts simultaneously , switching back and forth between the two so as not to allow too much time to elapse between his initial setting of the text and the final elaboration of the music . The Gesamtentwurf of Act III was completed on 16 April 1879 and the Orchesterskizze on the 26th of the same month . 
 The full score ( <unk> ) was the final stage in the compositional process . It was made in ink and consisted of a fair copy of the entire opera , with all the voices and instruments properly notated according to standard practice . Wagner composed Parsifal one act at a time , completing the Gesamtentwurf and Orchesterskizze of each act before beginning the Gesamtentwurf of the next act ; but because the Orchesterskizze already embodied all the compositional details of the full score , the actual drafting of the <unk> was regarded by Wagner as little more than a routine task which could be done whenever he found the time . The Prelude of Act I was scored in August 1878 . The rest of the opera was scored between August 1879 and 13 January 1882 . 
 = = Parsifal in performance = = 
 = = = The premiere = = = 
 On 12 November 1880 Wagner conducted a private performance of the Prelude for his patron Ludwig II of Bavaria at the Court Theatre in Munich . The premiere of the entire work was given in the Festspielhaus at Bayreuth on 26 July 1882 under the baton of the Jewish @-@ born German conductor Hermann Levi . Stage designs were by Max Brückner and Paul von <unk> who took their lead from Wagner himself . The Grail hall was based on the interior of Siena Cathedral which Wagner had visited in 1880 , while Klingsor 's magic garden was modelled on those at the Palazzo <unk> in Ravello . In July and August 1882 sixteen performances of the work were given in Bayreuth conducted by Levi and Franz Fischer . The production boasted an orchestra of 107 , a chorus of 135 and 23 soloists ( with the main parts being double cast ) . At the last of these performances , Wagner took the baton from Levi and conducted the final scene of Act 3 from the orchestral interlude to the end . 
 At the first performances of Parsifal problems with the moving scenery during the transition from Scene one to Scene two in Act 1 meant that Wagner 's existing orchestral interlude finished before Parsifal and Gurnemanz arrived at the Hall of the Grail . Engelbert Humperdinck , who was assisting the production , provided a few extra bars of music to cover this gap . In subsequent years this problem was solved and Humperdinck 's additions were not used . 
 = = = The ban on Parsifal outside Bayreuth = = = 
 For the first twenty years of its existence , the only staged performances of Parsifal took place in the Bayreuth Festspielhaus , the venue for which Wagner conceived the work ( except eight private performances for Ludwig II at Munich in 1884 and 1885 ) . Wagner had two reasons for wanting to keep Parsifal exclusively for the Bayreuth stage . Firstly , he wanted to prevent it from degenerating into ' mere amusement ' for an opera @-@ going public . Only at Bayreuth could his last work be presented in the way envisaged by him – a tradition maintained by his wife , Cosima , long after his death . Secondly , he thought that the opera would provide an income for his family after his death if Bayreuth had the monopoly on its performance . 
 The Bayreuth authorities allowed <unk> performances to take place in various countries after Wagner 's death ( London in 1884 , New York City in 1886 , and Amsterdam in 1894 ) but they maintained an embargo on stage performances outside Bayreuth . On 24 December 1903 , after receiving a court ruling that performances in the United States could not be prevented by Bayreuth , the New York Metropolitan Opera staged the complete opera , using many Bayreuth @-@ trained singers . Cosima barred anyone involved in the New York production from working at Bayreuth in future performances . Unauthorized stage performances were also undertaken in Amsterdam in 1905 , 1906 and 1908 . There was a performance in Buenos Aires , in Teatro Coliseo , on June 20 , 1913 under Gino <unk> . 
 Bayreuth lifted its monopoly on Parsifal on 1 January 1914 in the Teatro Comunale di Bologna in Bologna with Giuseppe Borgatti . Some opera houses began their performances at midnight between 31 December 1913 and 1 January . The first authorized performance was staged at the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona : it began at 10 : 30pm Barcelona time , which was an hour behind Bayreuth . Such was the demand for Parsifal that it was presented in more than 50 European opera houses between 1 January and 1 August 1914 . 
 = = = Applause during Parsifal = = = 
 At Bayreuth performances audiences do not applaud at the end of the first act . This tradition is the result of a misunderstanding arising from Wagner 's desire at the premiere to maintain the serious mood of the opera . After much applause following the first and second acts , Wagner spoke to the audience and said that the cast would take no curtain calls until the end of the performance . This confused the audience , who remained silent at the end of the opera until Wagner addressed them again , saying that he did not mean that they could not applaud . After the performance Wagner complained , " Now I don 't know . Did the audience like it or not ? " At subsequent performances some believed that Wagner had wanted no applause until the very end , and there was silence after the first two acts . Eventually it became a Bayreuth tradition that no applause would be heard after the first act , but this was certainly not Wagner 's idea . In fact during the first Bayreuth performances Wagner himself cried " Bravo ! " as the Flowermaidens made their exit in the second act , only to be hissed by other members of the audience . At some theatres other than Bayreuth , applause and curtain calls are normal practice after every act ; at other major theatres , including the Metropolitan Opera in New York , the Bayreuth custom is followed . 
 = = = Post @-@ war performances = = = 
 Parsifal is one of the Wagner operas regularly presented at the Bayreuth Festival to this day . Among the more significant post @-@ war productions was that directed in 1951 by Wieland Wagner , the composer 's grandson . At the first Bayreuth Festival after World War II he presented a radical move away from literal representation of the Hall of the Grail or the <unk> 's bower . Instead , lighting effects and the bare minimum of scenery were used to complement Wagner 's music . This production was heavily influenced by the ideas of the Swiss stage designer , Adolphe Appia . The reaction to this production was extreme : Ernest Newman , Richard Wagner 's biographer described it as " not only the best Parsifal I have ever seen and heard , but one of the three or four most moving spiritual experiences of my life " . Others were appalled that Wagner 's stage directions were being flouted . The conductor of the 1951 production , Hans Knappertsbusch , on being asked how he could conduct such a disgraceful travesty , declared that right up until the dress rehearsal he imagined that the stage decorations were still to come . Knappertsbusch was particularly upset by the omission of the dove which appears over Parsifal 's head at the end of the opera , which he claimed inspired him to give better performances . To placate his conductor Wieland arranged to reinstate the dove , which descended on a string . What Knappertsbusch did not realise was that Wieland had made the length of the string long enough for the conductor to see the dove , but not for the audience . Wieland continued to modify and refine his Bayreuth production of Parsifal until his death in 1966 . Martha <unk> created a " complex , tortured Kundry in Wieland Wagner 's revolutionary production of Parsifal during the festival 's first postwar season , " and would remain the company 's exclusive Kundry for the remainder of the decade . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Place : the castle of Monsalvat in the mountains in the north of Spain , and Klingsor 's magic palace in the south of Spain . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 In a forest near the castle of Monsalvat , home of the Grail and its Knights , Gurnemanz , eldest Knight of the Grail , wakes his young squires and leads them in prayer . He sees Amfortas , King of the Grail Knights , and his entourage approaching . Amfortas has been injured by his own Holy Spear , and the wound will not heal . 
 Scene 1 
 Gurnemanz asks the lead Knight for news of the King 's health . The Knight says the King has suffered during the night and is going early to bathe in the holy lake . The squires ask Gurnemanz to explain how the King 's injury can be healed , but he evades their question and a wild woman – Kundry – bursts in . She gives Gurnemanz a vial of balsam , brought from Arabia , to ease the King 's pain and then collapses , exhausted . 
 Amfortas arrives , borne on a stretcher by Knights of the Grail . He calls out for Gawain , whose attempt at relieving the King 's pain had failed . He is told that Gawain has left again , seeking a better remedy . Raising himself somewhat , the King says going off without leave ( " <unk> ' <unk> ? " ) is the sort of impulsiveness which led himself into Klingsor 's realm and to his downfall . He accepts the potion from Gurnemanz and tries to thank Kundry , but she answers abruptly that thanks will not help and urges him onward to his bath . 
 The procession leaves . The squires eye Kundry with mistrust and question her . After a brief retort , she falls silent . Gurnemanz tells them Kundry has often helped the Grail Knights but that she comes and goes unpredictably . When he asks directly why she does not stay to help , she answers , " I never help ! ( " Ich <unk> nie ! " ) . The squires think she is a witch and sneer that if she does so much , why will she not find the Holy Spear for them ? Gurnemanz reveals that this deed is destined for someone else . He says Amfortas was given guardianship of the Spear , but lost it as he was seduced by an irresistibly attractive woman in Klingsor 's domain . Klingsor grabbed the Spear and stabbed Amfortas . The wound causes Amfortas both suffering and shame , and will never heal on its own . 
 Squires returning from the King 's bath tell Gurnemanz that the balsam has eased the King 's suffering . Gurnemanz 's own squires ask how it is that he knew Klingsor . He solemnly tells them how both the Holy Spear , which pierced the side of the Redeemer on the Cross , and the Holy Grail , which caught the flowing blood , had come to Monsalvat to be guarded by the Knights of the Grail under the rule of Titurel , father of Amfortas . Klingsor had yearned to join the Knights but , unable to keep impure thoughts from his mind , resorted to self @-@ castration , causing him to be expelled from the Order . Klingsor then set himself up in opposition to the realm of the Grail , learning dark arts , claiming the valley domain below and filling it with beautiful Flowermaidens to seduce and enthrall wayward Grail Knights . It was here that Amfortas lost the Holy Spear , kept by Klingsor as he schemes to get hold of the Grail as well . Gurnemanz tells how Amfortas later had a holy vision which told him to wait for a " pure fool , enlightened by compassion " ( " Durch Mitleid <unk> , der reine Tor " ) who will finally heal the wound . 
 At this moment , cries are heard from the Knights ( " Weh ! Weh ! " ) : a flying swan has been shot , and a young man is brought forth , a bow in his hand and a quiver of matching arrows . Gurnemanz speaks sternly to the lad , saying this is a holy place . He asks him outright if he shot the swan , and the lad boasts that if it flies , he can hit it ( " Im Fluge <unk> ' ich was <unk> ! " ) Gurnemanz tells him that the swan is a holy animal , and asks what harm the swan had done him , and shows the youth its lifeless body . Now remorseful , the young man breaks his bow and casts it aside . Gurnemanz asks him why he is here , who his father is , how he found this place and , lastly , his name . To each question the lad replies , " I don 't know . " The elder Knight sends his squires away to help the King and now asks the boy to tell what he does know . The young man says he has a mother , <unk> ( Heart 's Sorrow ) and that he made the bow himself . Kundry has been listening and now tells them that this boy 's father was <unk> , a knight killed in battle , and also how the lad 's mother had forbidden her son to use a sword , fearing that he would meet the same fate as his father . The youth now recalls that upon seeing knights pass through his forest , he had left his home and mother to follow them . Kundry laughs and tells the young man that , as she rode by , she saw <unk> die of grief . Hearing this , the lad first lunges at Kundry but then collapses in grief . Kundry herself is now weary for sleep , but cries out that she must not sleep and wishes that she might never again waken . She disappears into the undergrowth . 
 Gurnemanz knows that the Grail draws only the pious to Monsalvat and invites the boy to observe the Grail rite . The youth does not know what the Grail is , but remarks that as they walk he seems to scarcely move , yet feels as if he is traveling far . Gurnemanz says that in this realm time becomes space ( " Zum Raum wird hier die Zeit " ) . An orchestral interlude leads into Scene Two . 
 Scene 2 
 They arrive at the Hall of the Grail , where the Knights are assembling to receive Holy Communion ( " Zum letzten <unk> " ) . The voice of Titurel is heard , telling his son , Amfortas , to uncover the Grail . Amfortas is wracked with shame and suffering ( " <unk> Erbe , dem ich <unk> " ) . He is the guardian of these holy relics yet has succumbed to temptation and lost the Spear . He declares himself unworthy of his office . He cries out for forgiveness ( " <unk> ! " ) but hears only the promise that he will one day be redeemed by the pure fool . 
 On hearing Amfortas ' cry , the youth appears to suffer with him , clutching at his heart . The knights and Titurel urge Amfortas to reveal the Grail ( " <unk> den Gral " ) , and he finally does . The dark hall is now bathed in the light of the Grail as the Knights eat . Gurnemanz motions to the youth to participate , but he seems entranced and does not . Amfortas does not share in taking communion and , as the ceremony ends , collapses in pain and is carried away . Slowly the hall empties leaving only the young man and Gurnemanz , who asks him if he has understood what he has seen . When the lad cannot answer , Gurnemanz dismisses him as just a fool and sends him out with a warning to hunt geese , if he must , but to leave the swans alone . A voice from high above repeats the promise : " The pure fool , enlightened by compassion " . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 Scene 1 
 Klingsor 's magic castle . Klingsor conjures up Kundry , waking her from her sleep . He calls her by many names : First Sorceress ( <unk> ) , Hell 's Rose ( <unk> ) , Herodias , <unk> and , lastly , Kundry . She is now transformed into an incredibly alluring woman , as when she once seduced Amfortas . She mocks Klingsor 's mutilated condition by sarcastically inquiring if he is chaste ( " Ha ha ! Bist du <unk> ? " ) , but she cannot resist his power . Klingsor observes that Parsifal is approaching and summons his enchanted knights to fight the boy . Klingsor watches as Parsifal overcomes his knights , and they flee . Klingsor wishes destruction on their whole race . 
 Klingsor sees this young man stray into his <unk> garden and calls to Kundry to seek the boy out and seduce him , but when he turns , he sees that Kundry has already left on her mission . 
 Scene 2 
 The triumphant youth finds himself in a wondrous garden , surrounded by beautiful and seductive Flowermaidens . They call to him and entwine themselves about him while chiding him for wounding their lovers ( " Komm , komm , holder Knabe ! " ) . They soon fight and bicker among themselves to win his devotion , to the point that he is about to flee , but then a voice calls out , " Parsifal ! " He now recalls this name is what his mother called him when she appeared in his dreams . The Flowermaidens back away from him and call him a fool as they leave him and Kundry alone . 
 Parsifal wonders if the Garden is a dream and asks how it is that Kundry knows his name . Kundry tells him she learned it from his mother ( " Ich sah das Kind an seiner Mutter Brust " ) , who had loved him and tried to shield him from his father 's fate , the mother he had abandoned and who had finally died of grief . She reveals many parts of Parsifal 's history to him and he is stricken with remorse , blaming himself for his mother 's death . He thinks himself very stupid to have forgotten her . Kundry says this realization is a first sign of understanding and that , with a kiss , she can help him understand his mother 's love . As they kiss Parsifal suddenly recoils in pain and cries out Amfortas ' name : he feels the wounded king 's pain burning in his own side and now understands Amfortas ' passion during the Grail Ceremony ( " Amfortas ! Die <unk> ! Die <unk> ! " ) . Filled with this compassion , Parsifal rejects Kundry 's advances . 
 Furious that her ploy has failed , Kundry tells Parsifal that if he can feel compassion for Amfortas , then he should be able to feel it for her as well . She has been cursed for centuries , unable to rest , because she saw Christ on the cross and laughed at His pains . Now she can never weep , only jeer , and she is enslaved to Klingsor as well . Parsifal rejects her again but then asks her to lead him to Amfortas . She begs him to stay with her for just one hour , and then she will take him to Amfortas . When he still refuses , she curses him to wander without ever finding the Kingdom of the Grail , and finally calls on her master Klingsor to help her . 
 Klingsor appears and throws the Spear at Parsifal , but it stops in midair , above his head . Parsifal takes it and makes the sign of the Cross with it . The castle crumbles and the enchanted garden withers . As Parsifal leaves , he tells Kundry that she knows where she can find him . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 Scene 1 
 The scene is the same as that of the opening of the opera , in the domain of the Grail , but many years later . Gurnemanz is now aged and bent . He hears moaning near his hermit 's hut and discovers Kundry unconscious in the brush , as he had many years before ( " Sie ! Wieder da ! " ) . He revives her using water from the Holy Spring , but she will only speak the word " serve " ( " <unk> " ) . Gurnemanz wonders if there is any significance to her reappearance on this special day . Looking into the forest , he sees a figure approaching , armed and in full armour . The stranger wears a helmet and the hermit cannot see who it is . Gurnemanz queries him and chides him for being armed on sanctified ground and on a holy day , but gets no response . Finally , the apparition removes the helmet and Gurnemanz recognizes the lad who shot the swan , and joyfully sees that he bears the Holy Spear . 
 Parsifal tells of his desire to return to Amfortas ( " Zu ihm , des <unk> Klagen " ) . He relates his long journey , how he wandered for years , unable to find a path back to the Grail . He had often been forced to fight , but never wielded the Spear in battle . Gurnemanz tells him that the curse preventing Parsifal from finding his right path has now been lifted , but that in his absence Amfortas has never unveiled the Grail , and lack of its sustaining properties has caused the death of Titurel . Parsifal is overcome with remorse , blaming himself for this state of affairs . Gurnemanz tells him that today is the day of Titurel 's funeral , and that Parsifal has a great duty to perform . Kundry washes Parsifal 's feet and Gurnemanz anoints him with water from the Holy Spring , recognizing him as the pure fool , now enlightened by compassion , and as the new King of the Knights of the Grail . 
 Parsifal looks about and comments on the beauty of the meadow . Gurnemanz explains that today is Good Friday , when all the world is renewed . Parsifal baptizes the weeping Kundry . Tolling bells are heard in the distance . Gurnemanz says " Midday : the hour has come . My lord , permit your servant to guide you ! " ( Mittag : – Die <unk> ist da : <unk> Herr , dass dich dein Knecht <unk> ) – and all three set off for the castle of the Grail . A dark orchestral interlude ( Mittag ) leads into the solemn gathering of the knights . 
 Scene 2 
 Within the castle of the Grail , Amfortas is brought before the Grail shrine and Titurel 's coffin . He cries out , asking his dead father to grant him rest from his sufferings and expresses the desire to join him in death ( " Mein Vater ! <unk> der Helden ! " ) . The Knights of the Grail passionately urge Amfortas to uncover the Grail again but Amfortas , in a frenzy , says he will never again show the Grail . He commands the Knights , instead , to kill him and end his suffering and the shame he has brought on the Knighthood . At this moment , Parsifal steps forth and says that only one weapon can heal the wound ( " Nur eine <unk> <unk> " ) . He touches Amfortas ' side with the Spear and both heals and absolves him . Parsifal commands the unveiling of the Grail . As all present kneel , Kundry , released from her curse , sinks lifeless to the ground as a white dove descends and hovers above Parsifal . 
 = = Reactions to Parsifal = = 
 Since Parsifal could initially only be seen at the Bayreuth Festival , the first presentation in 1882 was attended by many notable figures . Reaction was varied . Some thought that Parsifal marked a weakening of Wagner 's abilities . The critic Eduard Hanslick gave his opinion that " The Third act may be counted the most unified and the most atmospheric . It is not the richest musically , " going on to note " And Wagner 's creative powers ? For a man of his age and his method they are astounding ... [ but ] It would be foolishness to declare that Wagner 's fantasy , and specifically his musical invention , has retained the freshness and facility of yore . One cannot help but discern sterility and <unk> , together with increasing <unk> . " 
 The conductor Felix Weingartner found that " The Flowermaidens ' costumes showed extraordinary lack of taste , but the singing was incomparable ... When the curtain had been rung down on the final scene and we were walking down the hill , I seemed to hear the words of Goethe ' and you can say you were present . ' The ' Parsifal ' performances of 1882 were artistic events of supreme interest and it is my pride and joy that I participated in them . " 
 Hugo Wolf was a student at the time of the 1882 Festival , yet still managed to find money for tickets to see Parsifal twice . He emerged overwhelmed : " Colossal – Wagner 's most inspired , <unk> creation . " He reiterated this view in a postcard from Bayreuth in 1883 : " Parsifal is without doubt by far the most beautiful and sublime work in the whole field of Art . " Gustav Mahler was also present in 1883 and he wrote to a friend ; " I can hardly describe my present state to you . When I came out of the Festspielhaus , completely spellbound , I understood that the greatest and most painful revelation had just been made to me , and that I would carry it unspoiled for the rest of my life . " Max Reger simply noted that " When I first heard Parsifal at Bayreuth I was fifteen . I cried for two weeks and then became a musician . " Alban Berg described Parsifal in 1909 as " magnificent , overwhelming , " and Jean Sibelius , visiting the Festival in 1894 said " Nothing in the world has made so overwhelming an impression on me . All my innermost heart @-@ strings throbbed ... I cannot begin to tell you how Parsifal has transported me . Everything I do seems so cold and feeble by its <unk> is really something . " Claude Debussy thought the characters and plot ludicrous , but nevertheless in 1903 wrote that musically it was " Incomparable and bewildering , splendid and strong . Parsifal is one of the loveliest monuments of sound ever raised to the serene glory of music . " He was later to write to Ernest Chausson that he had deleted a scene he had just written for his own opera Pelléas et Melisande because he had discovered in the music for it ' the ghost of old Klingsor , alias R. Wagner ' . 
 Some took a more acerbic view of the experience . Mark Twain visited the Festival in 1891 : " I was not able to detect in the vocal parts of Parsifal anything that might with confidence be called rhythm or tune or melody ... Singing ! It does seem the wrong name to apply to it ... In Parsifal there is a hermit named Gurnemanz who stands on the stage in one spot and practices by the hour , while first one and then another of the cast endures what he can of it and then retires to die . " 
 Performance standards may have contributed to such reactions ; George Bernard Shaw commented in 1894 that " The opening performance of Parsifal this season was , from the purely musical point of view , as far as the principal singers were concerned , simply an abomination . The bass howled , the tenor bawled , the baritone sang flat and the soprano , when she condescended to sing at all and did not merely shout her words , screamed ... " 
 Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels was a strong advocate of the work . After hearing it for the first time in 1928 , he described it as " my greatest experience at the opera [ ... ] by the end , I was completely overwhelmed . " 
 = = Criticism and influence = = 
 As Wagner 's last opera , Parsifal has been both influential and controversial . The use of Christian symbols in Parsifal ( the Grail , the Spear , references to the Redeemer ) together with its restriction to Bayreuth for almost 30 years sometimes led to performances being regarded almost as a religious rite . It should be noted , however , that Wagner never actually refers to Jesus Christ by name in the opera , only to " The Redeemer " . In his essay " Religion and Art " Wagner himself described the use of Christian imagery thus : 
 When religion becomes artificial , art has a duty to rescue it . Art can show that the symbols which religions would have us believe literally true are actually figurative . Art can idealize those symbols , and so reveal the profound truths they contain . 
 The critic Eduard Hanslick objected to the religious air surrounding Parsifal even at the premiere : " The question of whether Parsifal should really be withheld from all theatres and limited to ... Bayreuth was naturally on all tongues ... I must state here that the church scenes in Parsifal did not make the offensive impression on me that others and I had been led to expect from reading the libretto . They are religious situations – but for all their earnest dignity they are not in the style of the church , but completely in the style of the opera . Parsifal is an opera , call it a ' stage festival ' or ' <unk> stage festival ' if you will . " 
 = = = Nietzsche = = = 
 Friedrich Nietzsche , who was originally one of Wagner 's champions , chose to use Parsifal as the grounds for his breach with Wagner ; an extended critique of Parsifal opens the third essay ( " What Is the Meaning of Ascetic Ideals ? " ) of On the Genealogy of Morality . In Nietzsche contra Wagner he wrote : 
 Parsifal is a work of perfidy , of vindictiveness , of a secret attempt to poison the presuppositions of life – a bad work . The preaching of chastity remains an incitement to anti @-@ nature : I despise everyone who does not experience Parsifal as an attempted assassination of basic ethics . 
 Despite this attack on the subject matter , he also admitted that the music was sublime : " Moreover , apart from all irrelevant questions ( as to what the use of this music can or ought to be ) and on purely aesthetic grounds ; has Wagner ever done anything better ? " ( Letter to Peter Gast , 1887 ) . 
 = = = Racism debate = = = 
 Some writers see in the opera the promotion of racism or anti @-@ semitism . 
 One line of argument suggests that Parsifal was written in support of the ideas of Arthur de Gobineau who advocated <unk> . Parsifal is proposed as the " pure @-@ blooded " ( i.e. Aryan ) hero who overcomes Klingsor , who is perceived as a Jewish stereotype , particularly since he opposes the quasi @-@ Christian Knights of the Grail . Such claims remain heavily debated , since there is nothing explicit in the libretto to support them . Wagner never mentions such ideas in his many writings , and Cosima Wagner 's diaries , which relate in great detail Wagner 's thoughts over the last 14 years of his life ( including the period covering the composition and first performance of Parsifal ) never mention any such intention . Wagner first met Gobineau very briefly in 1876 , but it was only in 1880 that he read Gobineau 's An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races . However , Wagner had completed the libretto for Parsifal by 1877 , and the original drafts of the story date back to 1857 . Despite this chronological evidence , Gobineau is frequently cited as a major inspiration for Parsifal . 
 The related question of whether the opera contains a specifically anti @-@ Semitic message is also debated . Some of Wagner 's contemporaries and commentators ( e.g. Hans von Wolzogen and Ernest Newman ) who analysed Parsifal at length , make no mention of any anti @-@ Semitic interpretations . However the critics Paul Lindau and Max <unk> , present at Parsifal ' s premiere , noted in their reviews how the work accorded with Wagner 's anti @-@ Jewish sentiments . More recent commentators continue to highlight the perceived anti @-@ Semitic nature of the opera , and find correspondences with anti @-@ Semitic passages found in Wagner 's writings and articles of the period . 
 The conductor of the premiere was Hermann Levi , the court conductor at the Munich Opera . Since King Ludwig was sponsoring the production , much of the orchestra was drawn from the ranks of the Munich Opera , including the conductor . Wagner objected to Parsifal being conducted by a Jew ( Levi 's father was in fact a rabbi ) . Wagner first suggested that Levi should convert to Christianity , which Levi declined to do . Wagner then wrote to King Ludwig that he had decided to accept Levi despite the fact that ( he alleged ) he had received complaints that " of all pieces , this most Christian of works " should be conducted by a Jew . When the King expressed his satisfaction at this , replying that " human beings are basically all brothers " , Wagner wrote to the King that he " regard [ ed ] the Jewish race as the born enemy of pure humanity and everything noble about it " . 
 It has been claimed that Parsifal was denounced as being " ideologically unacceptable " in the Third Reich , and that the Nazis placed a de facto ban on Parsifal . In fact there were 23 performances at the Deutsche Oper in Berlin between 1939 and 1942 . However Parsifal was not performed at the Bayreuth Festival during World War II . 
 = = = Schopenhauer and Parsifal = = = 
 Wagner had been greatly impressed with his reading of Arthur Schopenhauer in 1854 , and this deeply affected his thoughts and practice on music and art . Some writers ( e.g. Bryan Magee ) see Parsifal as Wagner 's last great espousal of <unk> philosophy . Parsifal can heal Amfortas and redeem Kundry because he shows compassion , which Schopenhauer saw as the highest form of human morality . Moreover , he displays compassion in the face of sexual temptation ( Act 2 scene 3 ) . <unk> philosophy also suggests that the only escape from the ever @-@ present temptations of human life is through negation of the Will , and overcoming sexual temptation is in particular a strong form of negation of the Will . When viewed in this light , Parsifal , with its emphasis on Mitleid ( " compassion " ) is a natural follow @-@ on to Tristan und Isolde , where Schopenhauer 's influence is perhaps more obvious , with its focus on Sehnen ( " yearning " ) . Indeed , Wagner originally considered including Parsifal as a character in Act 3 of Tristan , but later rejected the idea . 
 = = Music of Parsifal = = 
 = = = <unk> in Parsifal = = = 
 A leitmotif is a recurring musical theme within a particular piece of music , associated with a particular person , place or idea . Wagner is the composer most often associated with leitmotifs , and Parsifal makes liberal use of them . Wagner did not specifically identify or name leitmotifs in the score of Parsifal ( any more than he did in any other of his scores ) , although his wife Cosima mentions statements he made about some of them in her diary . However , Wagner 's followers ( notably Hans von Wolzogen whose guide to Parsifal was published in 1882 ) named , wrote about and made references to these motifs , and they were highlighted in piano arrangements of the score . Wagner 's own reaction to such naming of motifs in the score was one of disgust : " In the end people believe that such nonsense happens by my suggestion . " 
 The opening prelude introduces two important leitmotifs , generally referred to as the Communion theme and the theme of the Grail . These two , and Parsifal 's own motif , are repeated during the course of the opera . Other characters , especially Klingsor , Amfortas , and " The Voice " , which sings the so @-@ called <unk> ( " Fool 's motive " ) , have their own particular leitmotifs . Wagner uses the Dresden amen to represent the Grail , this motif being a sequence of notes he would have known since his childhood in Dresden . 
 = = = <unk> in Parsifal = = = 
 Many music theorists have used Parsifal to explore difficulties in analyzing the chromaticism of late 19th century music . Theorists such as David Lewin and Richard Cohn have explored the importance of certain pitches and harmonic progressions both in structuring and symbolizing the work . The unusual harmonic progressions in the leitmotifs which structure the piece , as well as the heavy chromaticism of Act II , make it a difficult work to parse musically . 
 = = = Notable excerpts = = = 
 As is common in mature Wagner operas , Parsifal was composed such that each act was a continuous flow of music ; hence there are no free @-@ standing arias in the work . However a number of orchestral excerpts from the opera were arranged by Wagner himself and remain in the concert repertory . The Prelude to Act 1 is frequently performed either alone or in conjunction with an arrangement of the " Good Friday " music which accompanies the second half life Act 3 scene 1 . Kundry 's long solo in Act 2 ( " Ich sah das Kind " ) is occasionally performed in concert , as is Amfortas ' Lament from Act 1 ( " <unk> Erbe " ) . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 The score for Parsifal calls for three flutes , three oboes , one English horn , three clarinets in B @-@ flat and A , one bass clarinet in B @-@ flat and A , three bassoons , one contrabassoon ; four horns in F , three trumpets in F , three trombones , one tuba , two onstage trumpets in F , 4 onstage trombones ; a percussion section that includes four timpani ( requiring two players ) , tenor drum , bells , onstage church bells , one onstage thunder machine ; two harps and strings . Parsifal is one of only two works by Wagner in which he used the contrabassoon . ( The other is the Symphony in C. ) 
 The bells that draw the knights to the Grail ceremony at Monsalvat in Acts 1 and 3 have often proved problematic to stage . For the earlier performances of Parsifal in Bayreuth , Wagner had the Parsifal bell , a piano frame with four strings , constructed as a substitute for church bells . For the first performances , the bells were combined with tam @-@ tam and gongs . However , the bell was used with the tuba , four tam @-@ <unk> tuned to the pitch of the four chime notes and another tam @-@ tam on which a roll is executed by using a drumstick . In modern @-@ day performances , the Parsifal bell has been replaced with tubular bells or synthesizers to produce the desired notes . The thunder machine is used in the moment of the destruction of Klingsor 's castle . 
 The English composer Howard <unk> 's piece " Lento " uses the same instrumentation . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Parsifal was expressly composed for the stage at Bayreuth and many of the most famous recordings of the opera come from live performances on that stage . In the pre @-@ LP era , Karl Muck conducted excerpts from the opera at Bayreuth . These are still considered some of the best performances of the opera on disc . They also contain the only sound evidence of the bells constructed for the work 's premiere , which were melted down for scrap during World War II . 
 Hans Knappertsbusch was the conductor most closely associated with Parsifal at Bayreuth in the post @-@ war years , and the performances under his baton in 1951 marked the re @-@ opening of the Bayreuth Festival after World War II . These historic performances were recorded and are available on the Teldec label in mono sound . Knappertsbusch recorded the opera again for Philips in 1962 in stereo , and this release is often considered to be the classic Parsifal recording . There are also many " unofficial " live recordings from Bayreuth , capturing virtually every Parsifal cast ever conducted by Knappertsbusch . Pierre Boulez ( 1971 ) and James Levine ( 1985 ) have also made recordings of the opera at Bayreuth that were released on Deutsche Grammophon and Philips . The Boulez recording is one of the fastest on record , and the Levine one of the slowest . 
 Amongst other recordings , those conducted by Georg Solti , James Levine ( with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra ) , Herbert von Karajan , and Daniel Barenboim ( the latter two both conducting the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra ) have been widely praised . The Karajan recording was voted " Record of the Year " in the 1981 Gramophone Awards . Also highly regarded is a recording of Parsifal under the baton of Rafael Kubelík originally made for Deutsche Grammophon , now reissued on Arts & Archives . 
 On the Saturday 14 December 2013 broadcast of BBC Radio 3 's CD Review – Building a Library , music critic David Nice surveyed recordings of Parsifal and recommended the recording by the <unk> des <unk> <unk> , Rafael <unk> ( conductor ) , as the best available choice . 
 = = = Filmed versions = = = 
