 In addition to a number of staged performances available on DVD , Parsifal was adapted for the screen by film director Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> . There is also a 1998 documentary directed by Tony Palmer titled : Parsifal – The Search for the Grail . It was recorded in various European theaters , including the Mariinsky Theatre , the Ravello Festival in Siena , and the Bayreuth Festival . It contains extracts from Mr. Palmer 's stage production of Parsifal starring Plácido Domingo , Violeta <unk> , Matti <unk> , Nikolai <unk> , and Anna Netrebko . In also includes interviews with Domingo , Wolfgang Wagner , Robert Gutman , and Karen Armstrong . The film exists in two versions : ( 1 ) a complete version running 116 minutes and officially approved by Domingo , and ( 2 ) an 88 @-@ minute version , with cuts of passages regarded by the German distributor as being too " political " , " uncomfortable " , and " irrelevant " . 
 = = = Score = = = 
 The music score for Parsifal is available online at the International Music Score Library Project . 
 = Warren G. Harding = 
 Warren Gamaliel Harding ( November 2 , 1865 – August 2 , 1923 ) was the 29th President of the United States , serving from March 4 , 1921 until his death . Harding died one of the most popular presidents in history , but the subsequent exposure of scandals that took place under him , such as Teapot Dome , eroded his popular regard , as did revelations of an affair by Nan Britton , one of his mistresses . In historical rankings of the U.S. presidents , Harding is often rated among the worst . 
 Harding was born in Blooming Grove , Ohio . He lived in rural Ohio all his life , except when political service took him elsewhere . He settled in Marion when not yet 20 years old and bought The Marion Star , building it into a successful newspaper . In 1899 , he was elected to the Ohio State Senate and , after four years there , successfully ran for lieutenant governor . He was defeated for governor in 1910 , but was elected to the Senate in 1914 . 
 Harding ran for the Republican nomination for president in 1920 , but he was considered an also @-@ ran with little chance of success . The leading candidates , such as General Leonard Wood , could not gain a majority to secure the nomination , and the convention deadlocked . Harding 's support gradually grew until he was nominated on the tenth ballot . He conducted a front porch campaign , remaining for the most part in Marion and allowing the people to come to him . He won in a landslide over Democrat James M. Cox and Socialist Party candidate Eugene Debs , running on a theme of return to normalcy and becoming the first sitting senator to be elected president . 
 Harding appointed a number of well @-@ regarded figures , including Andrew Mellon at the Treasury , Herbert Hoover at Commerce , and Charles Evans Hughes at the State Department . A major foreign policy achievement came with the Washington Naval Conference of 1921 – 1922 , in which the world 's major naval powers agreed on a naval limitations program that lasted a decade . Two members of his cabinet were implicated in corruption : Interior Secretary Albert Fall and Attorney General Harry Daugherty . The resulting scandals did not fully emerge until after Harding 's death , nor did word of his extramarital affairs , but both greatly damaged his reputation . Harding died of a cerebral hemorrhage caused by heart disease in San Francisco while on a western speaking tour ; he was succeeded by his vice president , Calvin Coolidge . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Harding was born November 2 , 1865 , in Blooming Grove , Ohio . Nicknamed " Winnie " as a small child , Harding was the eldest of eight children born to George Tryon Harding , Sr. ( 1843 – 1928 ; usually known as Tryon ) and Phoebe Elizabeth ( Dickerson ) Harding ( 1843 – 1910 ) . Phoebe was a state @-@ licensed midwife . Tryon farmed and taught school near Mount Gilead , Ohio . Through apprenticeship , study , and a year of medical school , Tryon became a doctor , and started a small practice . Harding 's mother 's ancestors were Dutch , including the well known Van Kirk family . Harding also had ancestors from England , Wales , and Scotland . 
 It was rumored in Blooming Grove that one of Harding 's great @-@ grandmothers was African American . His great @-@ great grandfather Amos Harding claimed that a thief , who had been caught in the act by the family , started the rumor in an attempt at extortion or revenge . Nevertheless , even after Warren Harding 's death in 1923 , African Americans made claims of kinship . This issue was resolved in 2015 , when genetic testing of Harding 's descendants determined , with more than a 95 % percent chance of accuracy , that he lacked sub @-@ Saharan African forbears within four previous generations . The Harding family , who were abolitionists , moved to Caledonia , Ohio , where Tryon acquired The Argus , a local weekly newspaper . At The Argus , Harding , from the age of 11 , learned the basics of the newspaper business . 
 In late 1879 , at the age of 14 , Harding enrolled at Ohio Central College in Iberia , where he proved an adept student . He and a friend put out a small newspaper during their final year at Ohio Central , the Iberia Spectator , intended to appeal to both college and town . During his final year , the Harding family moved to Marion , Ohio , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Caledonia , and when he graduated in 1882 , he joined them there . 
 = = = Editor = = = 
 In Harding 's youth , the majority of the population still lived on farms and in small towns . He would spend much of his life in Marion , a small city in rural Ohio , and would become closely associated with it . When Harding rose to high office , he made clear his love of Marion and its way of life , telling of the many young <unk> who had left and enjoyed success elsewhere , while suggesting that the man , once the " pride of the school " , who had remained behind and become a janitor , was " the happiest one of the lot " . 
 Upon graduating , Harding had stints as a teacher and as an insurance man , and made a brief attempt at studying law . He then raised $ 300 in partnership with others to purchase a failing newspaper , The Marion Star , weakest of the growing city 's three papers , and its only daily . The 18 @-@ year @-@ old Harding used the railroad pass that came with the paper to attend the 1884 Republican National Convention , where he hobnobbed with better @-@ known journalists and supported the presidential nominee , former Secretary of State James G. Blaine . Harding returned from Chicago to find that the paper had been reclaimed by the sheriff . During the election campaign , Harding worked for the Marion Democratic Mirror and was annoyed at having to praise the Democratic presidential nominee , New York Governor Grover Cleveland , who won the election . Afterwards , with the financial aid of his father , the budding newspaperman redeemed the paper . 
 Through the latter years of the 1880s , Warren Harding built the Star . The city of Marion tended to vote Republican ( as did Ohio ) but Marion County was Democratic . Accordingly , Harding adopted a tempered editorial stance , declaring the daily Star nonpartisan , and circulating a weekly edition that was moderate Republican . This policy attracted advertisers , and put the Republican weekly in town out of business . According to his biographer , Andrew Sinclair : 
 The success of Harding with the Star was certainly in the model of Horatio Alger . He started with nothing , and though working , stalling , bluffing , withholding payments , borrowing back wages , boasting , and manipulating , he turned a dying rag into a powerful small @-@ town newspaper . Much of his success had to do with his good looks , affability , enthusiasm , and persistence , but he was also lucky . As Machiavelli once pointed out , cleverness will take a man far , but he cannot do without good fortune . 
 The population of Marion grew from 4 @,@ 000 in 1880 to twice that in 1890 , increasing to 12 @,@ 000 by 1900 . This growth helped the Star , and Harding did his best to promote the city , purchasing stock in many local enterprises . Although a few of these turned out badly , he was in general successful as an investor , leaving an estate of $ 850 @,@ 000 in 1923 . According to Harding biographer and former White House Counsel John Dean , Harding 's " civic influence was that of an activist who used his editorial page to effectively keep his nose — and a prodding voice — in all the town 's public business " . He became an ardent supporter of Governor Joseph B. Foraker , a Republican . 
 Harding first came to know Florence Kling , five years older than himself , as the daughter of a local banker and developer . Amos Kling was a man accustomed to getting his way , but Harding attacked him relentlessly in the paper . Amos involved Florence in all his affairs , taking her to work from the time she could walk . As hard @-@ headed as her father , Florence came into conflict with him after returning from music college . After she eloped with Pete <unk> , and returned to Marion without <unk> , but with an infant called Marshall , Amos agreed to raise the boy , but would not support Florence , who made a living as a piano teacher . One of her students was Harding 's sister Charity . By 1886 , Florence Kling had obtained a divorce , and she and Warren Harding were courting , though who was pursuing whom is uncertain , depending on who later told the story of their romance . 
 A truce between the <unk> was snuffed out by the budding match , as Amos believed that the Hardings had African American blood , and was also offended by Harding 's editorial stances . He started to spread rumors of Harding 's supposed black heritage and encouraged local businessmen to boycott Harding 's business interests . When Harding found out what Kling was doing , he warned Kling " that he would beat the tar out of the little man if he didn 't cease " . The Hardings were married at their new home on Mount Vernon Avenue in Marion , which they had designed together in the Queen Anne style , on July 8 , 1891 . The marriage produced no children . Warren Harding affectionately called his wife " the Duchess " , based on a character in a serial from The New York Sun , in which the Duchess kept a close eye on the Duke and their money , running anything that required efficiency . 
 Florence Harding was deeply involved in her husband 's career , both at the Star and once he entered politics . Exhibiting her father 's determination and business sense , she helped turn the Star into a profitable enterprise through her tight management of the paper 's circulation department . She has been credited with helping Harding achieve more than he might have alone ; some have suggested that she pushed him all the way to the White House . 
 = = = Start in politics = = = 
 Soon after purchasing the Star , Harding turned his attention to politics , supporting Foraker in his first successful bid for governor in 1885 . Foraker was part of the war generation that challenged older Ohio Republicans , such as Senator John Sherman , for control of state politics . Harding , always a party loyalist , supported Foraker in the complex internecine warfare that was Ohio Republican politics . Harding was willing to tolerate Democrats , as necessary to a two @-@ party system , but had only contempt for those who bolted the Republican Party to join third @-@ party movements . He was a delegate to the Republican state convention in 1888 , at the age of 22 , representing Marion County , and would be elected a delegate in most years until becoming president . 
 Harding 's success as an editor took a toll on his health . Five times between 1889 ( when he was 23 ) and 1901 , he spent time at the Battle Creek <unk> for reasons Sinclair described as " fatigue , overstrain , and nervous illnesses " . Dean ties these visits to early occurrences of the heart ailment that would kill Harding in 1923 . During one such absence from Marion , in 1894 , the Star 's business manager quit . Florence Harding took his place . She became her husband 's top assistant at the Star on the business side , maintaining her role until the Hardings moved to Washington in 1915 . Her assistance and competence allowed Warren Harding to travel to make speeches ( his use of the free railroad pass increased greatly after his marriage ) . Florence Harding made sure no cents escaped her — sometimes sending Warren to the bank with a gallon ( 3 @.@ 8 l ) bucket full in each hand — and wrote of her husband , " he does well when he listens to me and poorly when he does not . " 
 In 1892 , Harding traveled to Washington , where he met Democratic Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan , and listened to the " Boy Orator of the Platte " speak on the floor of the House of Representatives . Harding traveled to Chicago 's Columbian Exposition in 1893 . Both visits were without Florence . Democrats generally won Marion County 's offices ; when Harding ran for auditor in 1895 , he lost , but did better than expected . The following year , Harding was one of many orators who spoke across Ohio as part of the campaign of the Republican presidential candidate , that state 's former governor , William McKinley . According to Dean , " while working for McKinley [ Harding ] began making a name for himself through Ohio " . 
 = = Rising politician ( 1897 – 1919 ) = = 
 = = = State senator = = = 
 Harding wished to try again for elective office . Though a longtime admirer of Foraker ( by then a U.S. senator ) , he had been careful to maintain good relations with the party faction led by the state 's other U.S. senator , Mark Hanna , McKinley 's political manager and chairman of the Republican National Committee ( RNC ) . Both Foraker and Hanna supported Harding for state Senate in 1899 ; he gained the Republican nomination , and was easily elected to a two @-@ year term . 
 Harding began his four years as a state senator a political unknown ; he ended them one of the most popular figures in the Ohio Republican Party . He always appeared calm and displayed humility , characteristics that endeared him to fellow Republicans even as he passed them in his political rise . Legislative leaders consulted him on difficult problems . It was usual at that time for state senators in Ohio to serve only one term , but Harding gained renomination in 1901 . After the assassination of McKinley in September ( he was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt ) , much of the appetite for politics was temporarily lost in Ohio . In November , Harding gained a second term , more than doubling his margin of victory to 3 @,@ 563 votes . 
 Like most politicians of his time , Harding accepted that patronage and graft would be used to repay political favors . He had his sister Mary ( who was legally blind ) appointed a teacher at the Ohio School for the Blind , although there were better @-@ qualified candidates , and offered publicity in his newspaper in exchange for free railroad passes for himself and his family . According to Sinclair , " it is doubtful that Harding ever thought there was anything dishonest in accepting the perquisites of position or office . Patronage and favors seemed the normal reward for party service in the days of Hanna . " 
 Soon after Harding 's initial election as senator , he met Harry M. Daugherty , who would take on a major role in his political career . A perennial candidate for office who served two terms in the state House of Representatives in the early 1890s , Daugherty had become a political fixer and lobbyist in the state capital of Columbus . After first meeting and talking with Harding , Daugherty commented , " Gee , what a great looking President he 'd make . " 
 = = = Ohio state leader = = = 
 In early 1903 , Harding announced he would run for Governor of Ohio , prompted by the withdrawal of the leading candidate , Congressman Charles Dick . Hanna and George Cox felt that Harding was not electable due to his work with Foraker — as the Progressive Era commenced , the public was starting to take a dimmer view of the trading of political favors and of bosses such as Cox . Accordingly , they persuaded Cleveland banker Myron T. Herrick , a friend of McKinley 's , to run . Herrick was also better @-@ placed to take votes away from the likely Democratic candidate , reforming Cleveland Mayor Tom L. Johnson . With little chance at the gubernatorial nomination , Harding sought nomination as lieutenant governor , and both Herrick and Harding were nominated by acclamation . Both Foraker and Hanna ( who died of typhoid fever in February 1904 ) campaigned for what was dubbed the Four @-@ H ticket . Herrick and Harding won by overwhelming margins . 
 Once he and Harding were inaugurated , Herrick made ill @-@ advised decisions that turned crucial Republican constituencies against him , alienating farmers by opposing the establishment of an agricultural college . On the other hand , according to Sinclair , " Harding had little to do , and he did it very well " . His responsibility to preside over the state Senate allowed him to increase his growing network of political contacts . Harding and others envisioned a successful gubernatorial run in 1905 , but Herrick refused to stand aside . In early 1905 , Harding announced he would accept nomination as governor if offered , but faced with the anger of leaders such as Cox , Foraker and Dick ( Hanna 's replacement in the Senate ) , announced he would seek no office in 1905 . Herrick was defeated , but his new running mate , Andrew L. Harris , was elected , and succeeded as governor after five months in office on the death of Democrat John M. Pattison . One Republican official wrote to Harding , " Aren 't you sorry Dick wouldn 't let you run for Lieutenant Governor ? " 
 In addition to helping pick a president , Ohio voters in 1908 were to choose the legislators who would decide whether to re @-@ elect Foraker . The senator had quarreled with President Roosevelt over the Brownsville Affair . Though Foraker had little chance of winning , he sought the Republican presidential nomination against his fellow Cincinnatian , Secretary of War William Howard Taft , who was Roosevelt 's chosen successor . On January 6 , 1908 , Harding 's Star endorsed Foraker and upbraided Roosevelt for trying to destroy the senator 's career over a matter of conscience . On the 22nd , Harding in the Star reversed course and declared for Taft , deeming Foraker defeated . According to Sinclair , Harding 's change to Taft " was not ... because he saw the light but because he felt the heat " . Jumping on the Taft bandwagon allowed Harding to survive his patron 's disaster — Foraker failed to gain the presidential nomination , and was defeated for a third term as senator . Also helpful in saving Harding 's career was the fact that he was popular with , and had done favors for , the more progressive forces that now controlled the Ohio Republican Party . 
 Harding sought and gained the 1910 Republican gubernatorial nomination . At that time , the party was deeply divided between progressive and conservative wings , and could not defeat the united Democrats ; he lost the election to incumbent Judson Harmon . Harry Daugherty managed Harding 's campaign , but the defeated candidate did not hold the loss against him . Despite the growing rift between them , both President Taft and former president Roosevelt came to Ohio to campaign for Harding , but their quarrels split the Republican Party and helped assure Harding 's defeat . 
 The party split grew , and in 1912 , Taft and Roosevelt were rivals for the Republican nomination . The 1912 Republican National Convention was bitterly divided . At Taft 's request , Harding gave a speech nominating the president , but the angry delegates were not receptive to Harding 's oratory . Taft was renominated , but Roosevelt supporters bolted the party . Harding , as a loyal Republican , supported Taft . The Republican vote was split between Taft , the party 's official candidate , and Roosevelt , running under the label of the Progressive Party . This allowed the Democratic candidate , New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson , to be elected . 
 = = = U.S. senator = = = 
 = = = = Election of 1914 = = = = 
 Congressman Theodore Burton had been elected in Foraker 's place in 1909 , and announced that he would seek a second term in the 1914 elections . By this time , the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution had been ratified , giving the people the right to elect senators , and Ohio had instituted primary elections for the office . Foraker and former congressman Ralph D. Cole also entered the Republican primary . When Burton withdrew , Foraker became the favorite , but his Old Guard Republicanism was deemed outdated , and Harding was urged to enter the race . Daugherty claimed credit for persuading Harding to run , " I found him like a turtle sunning himself on a log , and I pushed him into the water . " According to Harding biographer Randolph Downes , " he put on a campaign of such sweetness and light as would have won the plaudits of the angels . It was calculated to offend nobody except Democrats . " Although Harding did not attack Foraker , his supporters had no such scruples . Harding won the primary by 12 @,@ 000 votes over Foraker . 
 Harding 's general election opponent was Ohio Attorney General Timothy Hogan , who had risen to statewide office despite widespread prejudice against Roman Catholics in rural areas . In 1914 , the start of World War I and the prospect of a Catholic senator from Ohio increased nativist sentiment . Propaganda sheets with names like The Menace and The Defender contained warnings that Hogan was the vanguard in a plot led by Pope Benedict XV through the Knights of Columbus to control Ohio . Harding did not attack Hogan ( an old friend ) on this or most other issues , but he did not denounce the nativist hatred for his opponent . 
 Harding 's conciliatory campaigning style aided him ; one Harding friend deemed the candidate 's stump speech during the 1914 fall campaign as " a rambling , high @-@ sounding mixture of platitudes , patriotism , and pure nonsense " . Dean notes , " Harding used his oratory to good effect ; it got him elected , making as few enemies as possible in the process . " Harding won by over 100 @,@ 000 votes in a landslide that also swept into office a Republican governor , Frank B. Willis . 
 = = = = Junior senator = = = = 
 When Harding joined the U.S. Senate , the Democrats controlled both houses of Congress , and were led by President Wilson . As a junior senator in the minority , Harding received unimportant committee assignments , but carried out those duties assiduously . He was a safe , conservative , Republican vote . As during his time in the Ohio Senate , Harding came to be widely liked . 
 On two issues , women 's suffrage , and the prohibition of alcohol , where picking the wrong side would have damaged his presidential prospects in 1920 , he prospered by taking nuanced positions . As senator @-@ elect , he indicated that he could not support votes for women until Ohio did . Increased support for suffrage there and among Senate Republicans meant that by the time Congress voted on the issue , Harding was a firm supporter . Harding , who drank , initially voted against banning alcohol . He voted for the Eighteenth Amendment , which imposed Prohibition , after successfully moving to modify it by placing a time limit on ratification , which was expected to kill it . Once it was ratified anyway , Harding voted to override Wilson 's veto of the Volstead Bill , which implemented the amendment , assuring the support of the Anti @-@ Saloon League . 
 Harding , as a politician respected by both Republicans and Progressives , was asked to be temporary chairman of the 1916 Republican National Convention and to deliver the keynote address . He urged delegates to stand as a united party . The convention nominated Justice Charles Evans Hughes . Harding reached out to Roosevelt once the former president declined the 1916 Progressive nomination , a refusal that effectively scuttled that party . In the November 1916 presidential election , despite increasing Republican unity , Hughes was narrowly defeated by Wilson . 
 Harding spoke and voted in favor of the resolution of war requested by Wilson in April 1917 that plunged the United States into World War I. In August , Harding argued for giving Wilson almost dictatorial powers , stating that democracy had little place in time of war . Harding voted for most war legislation , including the Espionage Act of 1917 , which restricted civil liberties , though he opposed the excess profits tax as anti @-@ business . In May 1918 , Harding , less enthusiastic about Wilson , opposed a bill to expand the president 's powers . 
 In the 1918 midterm congressional elections , held just before the armistice , Republicans narrowly took control of the Senate . Harding was appointed to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . Wilson took no senators with him to the Paris Peace Conference , confident that he could force what became the Treaty of Versailles through the Senate by appealing to the people . When he returned with a single treaty establishing both peace and a League of Nations , the country was overwhelmingly on his side . Many senators disliked Article X of the League Covenant , that committed signatories to the defense of any member nation that was attacked , seeing it as forcing the United States to war without the assent of Congress . Harding was one of 39 senators who signed a round @-@ robin letter opposing the League . When Wilson invited the Foreign Relations Committee to the White House to informally discuss the treaty , Harding ably questioned Wilson about Article X ; the president evaded his inquiries . The Senate debated Versailles in September 1919 , and Harding made a major speech against it . By then , Wilson had suffered a stroke while on a speaking tour . With an invalid in the White House and less support in the country , the treaty was defeated . 
 = = Presidential election of 1920 = = 
 = = = Primary campaign = = = 
 With most Progressives having rejoined the Republican Party , their former leader , Theodore Roosevelt , was deemed likely to make a third run for the White House in 1920 , and was the overwhelming favorite for the Republican nomination . These plans ended when Roosevelt suddenly died on January 6 , 1919 . A number of candidates quickly emerged , including General Leonard Wood , Illinois Governor Frank Lowden , California Senator Hiram Johnson , and a host of relatively minor possibilities such as Herbert Hoover ( renowned for his World War I relief work ) , Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge , and General John J. Pershing . 
 Harding , while he wanted to be president , was as much motivated in entering the race by his desire to keep control of Ohio Republican politics , enabling his re @-@ election to the Senate in 1920 . Among those coveting Harding 's seat were former governor Willis ( he had been defeated by James M. Cox in 1916 ) and Colonel William Cooper Procter ( head of Procter & Gamble ) . On December 17 , 1919 , Harding made a low @-@ key announcement of his presidential candidacy . Leading Republicans disliked Wood and Johnson , both of the progressive faction of the party , and Lowden , who had an independent streak , was deemed little better . Harding was far more acceptable to the " Old Guard " leaders of the party . 
 Daugherty , who became Harding 's campaign manager , was sure none of the other candidates could garner a majority . His strategy was to make Harding an acceptable choice to delegates once the leaders faltered . Daugherty established a Harding for President campaign office in Washington ( run by his confidant , Jess Smith ) , and worked to manage a network of Harding friends and supporters , including Frank Scobey of Texas ( clerk of the Ohio State Senate during Harding 's years there ) . Harding worked to shore up his support through incessant letter @-@ writing . Despite the candidate 's work , according to Russell , " without Daugherty 's <unk> efforts , Harding would never have stumbled forward to the nomination " . 
 There were only 16 presidential primary states in 1920 , of which the most crucial to Harding was Ohio . Harding had to have some loyalists at the convention to have any chance of nomination , and the Wood campaign hoped to knock Harding out of the race by taking Ohio . Wood campaigned in the state , and his supporter , Procter , spent large sums ; Harding spoke in the <unk> style he had adopted in 1914 . Harding and Daugherty were so confident of sweeping Ohio 's 48 delegates that the candidate went on to the next state , Indiana , before the April 27 Ohio primary . Harding carried Ohio by only 15 @,@ 000 votes over Wood , taking less than half the total vote , and won only 39 of 48 delegates . In Indiana , Harding finished fourth , with less than ten percent of the vote , and failed to win a single delegate . He was willing to give up and have Daugherty file his nomination papers for the Senate , but Florence Harding grabbed the phone from his hand , " Warren Harding , what are you doing ? Give up ? Not until the convention is over . Think of your friends in Ohio ! " On learning that Daugherty had left the phone line , the future First Lady retorted , " Well , you tell Harry Daugherty for me that we 're in this fight until Hell freezes over . " 
 After he recovered from the shock of the poor results , Harding traveled to Boston , where he delivered a speech that according to Dean , " would resonate throughout the 1920 campaign and history " . There , he stated that " America 's present need is not heroics , but healing ; not nostrums , but normalcy ; not revolution , but restoration " . Dean notes , " Harding , more than the other aspirants , was reading the nation 's pulse correctly . " 
 = = = Convention = = = 
 The 1920 Republican National Convention opened at the Chicago Coliseum on June 8 , 1920 , assembling delegates who were bitterly divided , most recently over the results of a Senate investigation into campaign spending , which had just been released . That report found that Wood had spent $ 1 @.@ 8 million , lending substance to Johnson claims that Wood was trying to buy the presidency . Some of the $ 600 @,@ 000 that Lowden had spent had wound up in the pockets of two convention delegates . Johnson had spent $ 194 @,@ 000 and Harding $ 113 @,@ 000 . Johnson was deemed to be behind the inquiry , and the rage of the Lowden and Wood factions put an end to any possible compromise among the frontrunners . Of the almost 1 @,@ 000 delegates , 27 were women — the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , guaranteeing women the vote , was within one state of ratification , and would pass before the end of August . The convention had no boss , most <unk> delegates voted as they pleased , and with a Democrat in the White House , the party 's leaders could not use patronage to get their way . 
 Reporters deemed Harding unlikely to be nominated due to his poor showing in the primaries , and relegated him to a place among the dark horses . Harding , who like the other candidates was in Chicago supervising his campaign , had finished sixth in the final public opinion poll , behind the three main candidates as well as former justice Hughes and Herbert Hoover , and only slightly ahead of Coolidge . 
 After the convention dealt with other matters , the nominations for president opened on the morning of Friday , June 11 . Harding had asked Willis to place his name in nomination , and the former governor responded with a speech popular among the delegates both for its <unk> and for its brevity in the intense Chicago heat . Reporter Mark Sullivan , who was present , called it a splendid combination of " oratory , grand opera , and hog calling " . Willis concluded , leaning over the podium railing , " Say , boys — and girls too — why not name Warren Harding ? " The laughter and applause that followed created a warm feeling for Harding . 
 Four ballots were taken on the afternoon of June 11 , and they revealed a deadlock . With 493 votes needed to nominate , Wood was the closest with 3141 ⁄ 2 ; Lowdon had <unk> ⁄ 2 . The best Harding had done was 651 ⁄ 2 . Chairman Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts , the Senate Majority Leader , adjourned the convention about 7 p.m. 
 The night of June 11 – 12 , 1920 would become famous in political history as the night of the " smoke @-@ filled room " , in which , legend has it , party elders agreed to force the convention to nominate Harding . Historians have focused on the talks held in the suite of Republican National Committee ( RNC ) Chairman Will Hays at the Blackstone Hotel , at which senators and others came and went , and numerous possible candidates were discussed . Utah Senator Reed Smoot , before his departure early in the evening , backed Harding , telling Hays and the others that as the Democrats were likely to nominate Governor Cox , they should pick Harding to win Ohio . Smoot also told The New York Times that there had been an agreement to nominate Harding , but that it would not be done for several ballots yet . This was not true : a number of participants backed Harding ( others supported his rivals ) , but there was no pact to nominate him , and the senators had little power to enforce any agreement . Two other participants in the smoke @-@ filled room discussions , Kansas Senator Charles Curtis and Colonel George Brinton McClellan Harvey , a close friend of Hays , predicted to the press that Harding would be nominated because of the liabilities of the other candidates . 
 Colonel Harvey 's account of the smoke @-@ filled room had Harding being sent for in the early morning hours , to be informed by Harvey that the Ohioan would be the candidate . Harvey stated he asked if there was anything in Harding 's background that might harm his candidacy , to which the senator , who had had at least one extramarital affair , replied there was not . Harding biographer Charles W. Murray noted that there is no evidence besides Harvey 's word that Harding went to the Hays suite that night , and that other participants denied that Harding was there . Harding was so uncertain of victory that he filed for re @-@ election to the Senate , though Daugherty continued to urge delegates to support him . 
 The reassembled delegates had heard rumors that Harding was the choice of a cabal of senators . Although this was not true , delegates believed it , and sought a way out by voting for Harding . When balloting resumed on the morning of June 12 , Harding gained votes on each of the next four ballots , rising to 1331 ⁄ 2 as the two frontrunners saw little change . Lodge then declared a three @-@ hour recess , to the outrage of Daugherty , who raced to the podium and confronted him , " You cannot defeat this man this way ! The motion was not carried ! You cannot defeat this man ! " Lodge and others used the break to try to stop the Harding momentum and make RNC Chairman Hays the nominee , a scheme Hays refused to have anything to do with . The ninth ballot , after some initial suspense , saw delegation after delegation break for Harding , who took the lead with 3741 ⁄ 2 votes to 249 for Wood and 1211 ⁄ 2 for Lowden ( Johnson had 83 ) . Lowden released his delegates to Harding , and the tenth ballot , held at 6 p.m. , was a mere formality , with Harding finishing with <unk> ⁄ 5 votes to 156 for Wood . The nomination was made unanimous . The delegates , desperate to leave town before they incurred more hotel expenses , then proceeded to the vice presidential nomination . Harding wanted Senator Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin , who was unwilling to run , but before Lenroot 's name could be withdrawn and another man decided on , an Oregon delegate proposed Governor Coolidge , which was met with a roar of approval from the delegates . Coolidge , popular for his role in breaking the Boston police strike of 1919 , was nominated for vice president , receiving two and a fraction votes more than Harding had . James Morgan wrote in The Boston Globe : " The delegates would not listen to remaining in Chicago over Sunday ... the President makers did not have a clean shirt . On such things , Rollo , turns the destiny of nations . " 
 = = = General election campaign = = = 
 The Harding / Coolidge ticket was quickly backed by Republican newspapers , but those of other viewpoints expressed disappointment . The New York World found Harding the least @-@ qualified candidate since James Buchanan , deeming the Ohio senator a " weak and mediocre " man who " never had an original idea " . The Hearst newspapers called Harding " the flag @-@ bearer of a new Senatorial autocracy " . The New York Times described the Republican presidential candidate as " a very respectable Ohio politician of the second class " . 
 The Democratic National Convention opened in San Francisco on June 28 , 1920 , under a shadow cast by Woodrow Wilson , who wished to be nominated for a third term . Delegates were convinced Wilson 's health would not permit him to serve , and looked elsewhere for a candidate . Former Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo was a major contender , but he was Wilson 's son @-@ in @-@ law , and refused to consider a nomination so long as the president wanted it . Many at the convention voted for McAdoo anyway , and a deadlock ensued with Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer . On the 44th ballot , the Democrats nominated Governor Cox for president , with his running mate Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt . As Cox was , when not in politics , a newspaper owner and editor , this placed two Ohio editors against each other for the presidency , and some complained there was no real political choice . Both Cox and Harding were economic conservatives , and were reluctant progressives at best . 
 Harding elected to conduct a front porch campaign , like McKinley in 1896 . Some years earlier , Harding had had his front porch remodeled to resemble McKinley 's , which his neighbors felt signified presidential ambitions . The candidate remained at home in Marion and gave addresses to visiting delegations . In the meantime , Cox and Roosevelt stumped the nation , giving hundreds of speeches . Coolidge spoke in the Northeast , later on in the South , and was not a significant factor in the campaign . 
 In Marion , Harding ran his campaign . As a newspaperman himself , he fell into easy camaraderie with the press covering him , enjoying a relationship few presidents have equaled . His " Return to <unk> " theme was aided by the atmosphere that Marion provided , an orderly place that induced nostalgia in many voters . The front porch campaign allowed Harding to avoid mistakes , and as time dwindled towards the election , his strength grew . The travels of the Democratic candidates eventually caused Harding to make several short speaking tours , but for the most part , he remained in Marion . America had no need for another Wilson , Harding argued , appealing for a president " near the normal " . 
 Harding 's vague oratory irritated some ; McAdoo described a typical Harding speech as " an army of pompous phrases moving over the landscape in search of an idea . Sometimes these meandering words actually capture a straggling thought and bear it triumphantly , a prisoner in their midst , until it died of servitude and over work . " H. L. Mencken concurred , " it reminds me of a string of wet sponges , it reminds me of tattered washing on the line ; it reminds me of stale bean soup , of college yells , of dogs barking idiotically through endless nights . It is so bad that a kind of grandeur creeps into it . It drags itself out of the dark <unk> ... of <unk> , and crawls insanely up the topmost pinnacle of tosh . It is rumble and bumble . It is <unk> and dash . The New York Times took a more positive view of Harding 's speeches , stating that in them the majority of people could find " a reflection of their own indeterminate thoughts " . 
 Wilson had stated that the 1920 election would be a " great and solemn referendum " on the League of Nations , making it difficult for Cox to maneuver on the issue — although Roosevelt strongly supported the League , Cox was less enthusiastic . Harding opposed entry into the League of Nations as negotiated by Wilson , but favored an " association of nations " , based on the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague . This was general enough to satisfy most Republicans , and only a few bolted the party over this issue . By October , Cox had realized there was widespread public opposition to Article X , and stated that reservations to the treaty might be necessary ; this shift allowed Harding to say no more on the subject . 
 The RNC hired Albert Lasker , an advertising executive from Chicago , to publicize Harding , and Lasker unleashed a broad @-@ based advertising campaign that used many now @-@ standard advertising techniques for the first time in a presidential campaign . Lasker 's approach included newsreels and sound recordings . Visitors to Marion had their photographs taken with Senator and Mrs. Harding , and copies were sent to their hometown newspapers . Billboard posters , newspapers and magazines were employed in addition to motion pictures . <unk> were used to make phone calls with scripted dialogues to promote Harding . 
 The rumors that the Hardings were of partially African American blood surfaced again in the last days of the campaign , promoted by Wooster College professor William Estabrook Chancellor . Once these claims became known , reporters filed lengthy stories on them from Marion , which their editors declined to print . The Harding campaign refused to acknowledge or respond to the allegations . 
 By Election Day , November 2 , 1920 , few had any doubts that the Republican ticket would win . Harding received 60 @.@ 2 percent of the popular vote , the highest percentage since the evolution of the two @-@ party system , and 404 electoral votes . Cox received 34 percent of the national vote and 127 electoral votes . Campaigning from a federal prison where he was serving a sentence for opposing the war , Socialist Eugene V. Debs received 3 percent of the national vote . The Republicans greatly increased their majority in each house of Congress . 
 = = President ( 1921 – 1923 ) = = 
 = = = Inauguration and appointments = = = 
 Warren Harding was sworn in as president on March 4 , 1921 , in the presence of his wife and father . Harding preferred a low @-@ key inauguration , without the customary parade , leaving only the swearing @-@ in ceremony and a brief reception at the White House . In his inaugural address he declared , " Our most dangerous tendency is to expect too much from the government and at the same time do too little for it . " 
 After the election , Harding had announced he was going on vacation , and that no decisions about appointments would be made until he returned to Marion in December . He went to Texas , where he fished and played golf with his friend Frank Scobey ( soon to be Director of the Mint ) , then took ship for the Panama Canal Zone . He went to Washington , where he was given a hero 's welcome when Congress opened in early December as the first sitting senator to be elected to the White House . Back in Ohio , he planned to consult the " best minds " of the country on appointments , and they dutifully journeyed to Marion to offer their counsel . 
 Harding chose pro @-@ League Charles Evans Hughes as his Secretary of State , ignoring advice from Senator Lodge and others . After Charles G. Dawes declined the Treasury position , Harding asked Pittsburgh banker Andrew W. Mellon , one of the richest men in the country ; he agreed . Harding appointed Herbert Hoover as United States Secretary of Commerce . RNC Chairman Will Hays was made Postmaster General , then a cabinet post ; he would leave after a year in the position to become chief censor to the motion picture industry . 
 The two Harding cabinet appointees who darkened the reputation of his administration for their involvement in scandal were Harding 's Senate friend , Albert B. Fall of New Mexico , the Interior Secretary , and Daugherty , who became Attorney General . Fall was a Western rancher and former miner , and was pro @-@ development . He was opposed by conservationists such as Gifford Pinchot , who wrote , " it would have been possible to pick a worse man for Secretary of the Interior , but not altogether easy " . The New York Times mocked the Daugherty appointment , stating that rather than select one of the best minds , Harding had been content " to choose merely a best friend " . Eugene P. Trani and David L. Wilson , in their volume on Harding 's presidency , suggest that the appointment made sense then , since Daugherty was " a competent lawyer well @-@ acquainted with the seamy side of politics ... a first @-@ class political troubleshooter and someone Harding could trust " . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = European relations and formally ending the war = = = = 
 Harding made it clear when he appointed Hughes as Secretary of State that the former justice would run foreign policy , a change from Wilson 's close management of international affairs . Hughes had to work within some broad outlines ; after taking office , Harding hardened his stance on the League of Nations , deciding the U.S. would not join even a scaled @-@ down version of the League . With the Treaty of Versailles unratified by the Senate , the U.S. remained technically at war with Germany , Austria , and Hungary . <unk> began with the Knox – Porter Resolution , declaring the U.S. at peace and reserving any rights granted under Versailles . Treaties with Germany , Austria and Hungary , each containing many of the non @-@ League provisions of the Treaty of Versailles , were ratified in 1921 . 
 This still left the question of relations between the U.S. and the League . Hughes ' State Department initially ignored communications from the League , or tried to bypass it through direct communications with member nations . By 1922 , though , the U.S. , through its consul in Geneva , was dealing with the League , and though the U.S. refused to participate in any meeting with political implications , it sent observers to sessions on technical and humanitarian matters . 
 By the time Harding took office , there were calls from foreign governments for reduction of the massive war debt owed to the United States , and the German government sought to reduce the reparations that it was required to pay . The U.S. refused to consider any multilateral settlement . Harding sought passage of a plan proposed by Mellon to give the administration broad authority to reduce war debts in negotiation , but Congress in 1922 passed a more restrictive bill . Hughes negotiated an agreement for Britain to pay off its war debt over 62 years at low interest , effectively reducing the present value of the obligations . This agreement , approved by Congress in 1923 , set a pattern for negotiations with other nations . Talks with Germany on reduction of reparations payments would result in the Dawes Plan of 1924 . 
 A pressing issue not resolved by Wilson was the question of policy towards Bolshevik Russia . The U.S. had been among the nations that had sent troops there after the Russian Revolution . Afterwards , Wilson refused to recognize Russia . Under Harding , Commerce Secretary Hoover , with considerable experience of Russian affairs , took the lead on policy . When famine struck Russia in 1921 , Hoover had the American Relief Administration , which he had headed , negotiate with the Russians to provide aid . Soviet leaders ( the U.S.S.R. was established in 1922 ) hoped in vain that the agreement would lead to recognition . Hoover supported trade with Russia , fearing U.S. companies would be frozen out of the Soviet market , but Hughes opposed this , and the matter was not resolved under Harding 's presidency . 
 = = = = Disarmament = = = = 
 Harding had urged disarmament , and lower defense costs , during the campaign , but it had not been a major issue . He gave a speech to a joint session of Congress in April 1921 , setting out his legislative priorities . Among the few foreign policy matters he mentioned was disarmament , with the president stating that the government could not " be unmindful of the call for reduced expenditure " on defense . 
 Idaho Senator William Borah had proposed a conference at which the major naval powers , the U.S. , Britain , and Japan , would agree to cuts in their fleets . Harding concurred , and after some diplomatic discussions , representatives of nine nations convened in Washington in November 1921 . Most of the diplomats first attended Armistice Day ceremonies at Arlington National Cemetery , where Harding spoke at the entombment of the Unknown Soldier of World War I , whose identity , " took flight with his imperishable soul . We know not whence he came , only that his death marks him with the everlasting glory of an American dying for his country " . 
 Hughes , in his speech at the opening session of the conference on November 12 , 1921 , made the American proposal — the U.S would decommission or not build 30 warships if Great Britain did the same for 19 vessels , and Japan 17 ships . The secretary was generally successful , and agreements were reached on this and other points , including settlements to disputes over islands in the Pacific , and limitations on the use of poison gas . The naval agreement was limited to battleships and to some extent aircraft carriers , and in the end did not prevent rearmament . Nevertheless , Harding and Hughes were widely applauded in the press for their work . Harding had appointed Senator Lodge and the Senate Minority Leader , Alabama 's Oscar Underwood , to the U.S. delegation ; they helped ensure that the treaties made it through the Senate mostly unscathed , though that body added reservations to some of the treaties . 
 The U.S. had acquired over a thousand vessels during World War I , and still owned most of them when Harding took office . Congress had authorized their disposal in 1920 , but the Senate would not confirm Wilson 's nominees to the Shipping Board . Harding appointed Albert Lasker as its chairman ; the advertising executive undertook to run the fleet as profitably as possible until it could be sold . Most ships proved impossible to sell at anything approaching the government 's cost . Lasker recommended a large subsidy to the merchant marine to enable the sales , and Harding repeatedly urged Congress to enact it . Unpopular in the Midwest , the bill passed the House but was defeated by a filibuster in the Senate , and most government ships were eventually scrapped . 
 = = = = Latin America = = = = 
 Intervention in Latin America had been a minor campaign issue ; Harding spoke against Wilson 's decision to send U.S. troops to the Dominican Republic and Haiti , and attacked the Democratic vice presidential candidate , Franklin Roosevelt , for his role in the Haitian intervention . Once Harding was sworn in , Hughes worked to improve relations with Latin American countries who were wary of the American use of the Monroe Doctrine to justify intervention ; at the time of Harding 's inauguration , the U.S. also had troops in Cuba and Nicaragua . The troops stationed in Cuba to protect American interests were withdrawn in 1921 ; U.S. forces remained in the other three nations through Harding 's presidency . In April 1921 , Harding gained the ratification of the Thomson – Urrutia Treaty with Colombia , granting that nation $ 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as settlement for the <unk> Panamanian revolution of 1903 . The Latin American nations were not fully satisfied , as the U.S. refused to renounce interventionism , though Hughes pledged to limit it to nations near the Panama Canal and to make it clear what the U.S. aims were . 
 The U.S. had intervened repeatedly in Mexico under Wilson , and had withdrawn diplomatic recognition , setting conditions for reinstatement . The Mexican government under President Álvaro Obregón wanted recognition before negotiations , but Wilson and his Secretary of State , Bainbridge Colby , refused . Both Hughes and Fall opposed recognition ; Hughes instead sent a draft treaty to the Mexicans in May 1921 , which included pledges to reimburse Americans for losses in Mexico since the 1910 revolution there . Obregón was unwilling to sign a treaty before being recognized , and worked to improve the relationship between American business and Mexico , reaching agreement with creditors , and mounting a public relations campaign in the United States . This had its effect , and by mid @-@ 1922 , Fall was less influential than he had been , lessening the resistance to recognition . The two presidents appointed commissioners to reach a deal , and the U.S. recognized the Obregón government on August 31 , 1923 , just under a month after Harding 's death , substantially on the terms proffered by Mexico . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 = = = = Postwar recession and recovery = = = = 
 When Harding took office on March 4 , 1921 , the nation was in the midst of a postwar economic decline . At the suggestion of its leaders , Harding called a special session of Congress to convene on April 11 . When Harding addressed the joint session the following day , he urged the reduction of income taxes ( raised during the war ) , an increase in tariffs on agricultural goods to protect the American farmer , as well as more wide @-@ ranging reforms , such as support for highways , aviation , and radio . But it was not until May 27 that Congress passed an emergency tariff increase on agricultural products . An act authorizing a Bureau of the Budget followed on June 10 ; Harding appointed Charles Dawes as bureau director with a mandate to cut expenditures . 
 = = = = Mellon 's tax cuts = = = = 
 Treasury Secretary Mellon also recommended to Congress that income tax rates be cut . He asked that the excess profits tax on corporations be abolished . The House Ways and Means Committee endorsed Mellon 's proposals , but some congressmen , who wanted to raise tax rates on corporations , fought the measure . Harding was unsure what side to endorse , telling a friend , " I can 't make a damn thing out of this tax problem . I listen to one side , and they seem right , and then — God ! — I talk to the other side , and they seem just as right . " Harding tried compromise , and gained passage of the bill in the House after the end of the excess profits tax was delayed a year . In the Senate , the tax bill became entangled in efforts to vote World War I veterans a soldier 's bonus . Frustrated by the delays , on July 12 , Harding appeared before the Senate and urged it to pass the tax legislation without the bonus . It was not until November that the bill finally passed , with higher rates than Mellon had proposed . 
 Harding had opposed payment of a bonus to veterans , arguing in his Senate address that much was already being done for them by a grateful nation , and that the bill would " break down our Treasury , from which so much is later on to be expected . " The Senate sent the bonus bill back to committee , but the issue returned when Congress reconvened in December 1921 . A bill providing a bonus , without a means of funding it , was passed by both houses in September 1922 . Harding vetoed it , and the veto was narrowly sustained . A bonus , not payable in cash , was voted to soldiers despite Coolidge 's veto in 1924 . 
 In his first annual message to Congress , Harding sought the power to adjust tariff rates . The passage of the tariff bill in the Senate , and in conference committee became a feeding frenzy of lobbyist interests . Harding , when he enacted the Fordney – <unk> Tariff Act on September 21 , 1922 , made a brief signing statement , praising only that the bill gave him some power to adjust rates . According to Trani and Wilson , the bill was " ill @-@ considered . It wrought havoc in international commerce and made the repayment of war debts more difficult . " 
 Harding ’ s Treasury Secretary , Andrew Mellon , ordered a study which demonstrated historically that , as income tax rates were increased , money was driven underground or abroad . Mellon concluded that lower rates would increase tax revenues . Based on this advice , Harding cut taxes , starting in 1922 . The top marginal rate was reduced annually in four stages from 73 % in 1921 to 25 % in 1925 . Taxes were cut for lower incomes starting in 1923 . The lower rates substantially increased the money flowing to the treasury . They also pushed massive deregulation and federal spending as a share of GDP fell from 6 @.@ 5 % to 3 @.@ 5 % . By late 1922 the economy began to turn around . Unemployment was pared from its 1921 high of 12 % to an average of 3 @.@ 3 % for the remainder of the decade . The misery index which is a combination of unemployment and inflation had its sharpest decline in U.S. history under President Harding . Wages , profits , and productivity all made substantial gains as well real GDP average at over 5 % during the 1920s . Libertarian historian Thomas Woods contends that the tax cuts implemented by President Harding ended the Depression of 1920 – 21 and were responsible for creating a decade @-@ long expansion . Historians Larry <unk> and Michael Allen argue that , " Mellon 's tax policies set the stage for the most amazing growth yet seen in America 's already impressive economy . " 
 = = = = Embracing new technologies = = = = 
 The 1920s were a time of modernization for America . Use of electricity became increasingly common . Mass production of the motor car stimulated other industries , as well , such as highway construction , rubber , steel , and building , as hotels were erected to accommodate the tourists venturing upon the roads . This economic boost helped bring the nation out of the recession . To improve and expand the nation 's highway system , Harding signed the Federal Highway Act of 1921 . From 1921 to 1923 , the federal government spent $ 162 million on America 's highway system , infusing the U.S. economy with a large amount of capital . In 1922 , Harding proclaimed that America was in the age of the " motor car " , which " reflects our standard of living and gauges the speed of our present @-@ day life . " 
 Harding had urged regulation of radio broadcasting in his April 1921 speech to Congress . Commerce Secretary Hoover took charge of this project , and convened a conference of radio broadcasters in 1922 , which led to a voluntary agreement for licensing of radio frequencies through the Commerce Department . Both Harding and Hoover realized something more than an agreement was needed , but Congress was slow to act , not imposing radio regulation until 1927 . 
 Harding also wished to promote aviation , and Hoover again took the lead , convening a national conference on commercial aviation . The discussions focused on safety matters , inspection of airplanes , and licensing of pilots . Harding again promoted legislation but nothing was done until 1926 , when the Air Commerce Act created the Bureau of Aeronautics within Hoover 's Commerce Department . 
 = = = = Business and labor = = = = 
 Harding 's attitude toward business was that government should aid it as much as possible . He was suspicious of organized labor , viewing it as a conspiracy against business . He sought to get them to work together at a conference on unemployment that he called to meet in September 1921 at Hoover 's recommendation . Harding warned in his opening address that no federal money would be available . No important legislation came as a result , though some public works projects were accelerated . 
 Within broad limits , Harding allowed each cabinet secretary to run his department as he saw fit . Hoover expanded the Commerce Department to make it more useful to business . This was consistent with Hoover 's view that the private sector should take the lead in managing the economy . Harding greatly respected his Commerce Secretary , often asked his advice , and backed him to the hilt , calling Hoover " the smartest ' <unk> ' I know " 
 Widespread strikes marked 1922 , as labor sought redress for falling wages and increased unemployment . In April , 500 @,@ 000 coal miners , led by John L. Lewis , struck over wage cuts . Mining executives argued that the industry was seeing hard times ; Lewis accused them of trying to break the union . As the strike became protracted , Harding offered compromise to settle it . As Harding proposed , the miners agreed to return to work , and Congress created a commission to look into their grievances . 
 On July 1 , 1922 , 400 @,@ 000 railroad workers went on strike . Harding proposed a settlement that made some concessions , but management objected . Attorney General Daugherty convinced Judge James H. Wilkerson to issue a sweeping injunction to break up the strike . Although there was public support for the Wilkerson injunction , Harding felt it went too far , and had Daugherty and Wilkerson amend it . The injunction succeeded in ending the strike ; however , tensions remained high between railroad workers and management for years . 
 By 1922 , the eight @-@ hour day had become common in American industry . One exception was in steel mills , where workers labored through a twelve @-@ hour workday , seven days a week . Hoover considered this practice barbaric , and got Harding to convene a conference of steel manufacturers with a view to ending it . The conference established a committee under the leadership of U. S. Steel chairman Elbert Gary , which in early 1923 recommended against ending the practice . Harding sent a letter to Gary deploring the result , which was printed in the press , and public outcry caused the manufacturers to reverse themselves and standardize the eight @-@ hour day . 
 = = = = Civil rights and immigration = = = = 
 Although Harding 's first address to Congress called for passage of anti @-@ lynching legislation , he initially seemed inclined to do no more for African Americans than Republican presidents of the recent past had ; he asked cabinet officers to find places for blacks in their departments . Sinclair suggested that the fact that Harding received two @-@ fifths of the Southern vote in 1920 led him to see political opportunity for his party in the Solid South . On October 26 , 1921 , Harding gave a speech in Birmingham , Alabama , to a segregated audience of 20 @,@ 000 whites and 10 @,@ 000 blacks . Harding , while stating that the social and racial differences between whites and blacks could not be bridged , urged equal political rights for the African American . Many African Americans at that time voted Republican , especially in the Democratic South , and Harding stated he did not mind seeing that support end if the result was a strong two @-@ party system in the South . He was willing to see literacy tests for voting continue , if applied fairly to white and black . " Whether you like it or not , " Harding told his segregated audience , " unless our democracy is a lie , you must stand for that equality . " The white section of the audience listened in silence while the black section cheered . 
 Harding had spoken out against lynching in his April 1921 speech before Congress and supported Congressman Leonidas Dyer 's federal anti @-@ lynching bill , which passed the House of Representatives in January 1922 . When it reached the Senate floor in November 1922 , it was filibustered by Southern Democrats , and Lodge withdrew it so as to allow the ship subsidy bill Harding favored to be debated ( it was likewise filibustered ) . Blacks blamed Harding for the Dyer bill 's defeat ; Harding biographer Robert K. Murray noted that it was hastened to its end by Harding 's desire to have the ship subsidy bill considered . 
 With the public suspicious of immigrants , especially those who might be socialists or communists , Congress passed the Per Centum Act of 1921 , signed by Harding on May 19 , 1921 , as a quick means of restricting immigration . The act reduced the numbers of immigrants to 3 % of those from a given country living in the U.S. , based on the 1910 census . This would , in practice , not restrict immigration from Ireland and Germany , but would bar many Italians and eastern European Jews . Harding and Secretary of Labor James Davis believed that enforcement had to be humane , and at the secretary 's recommendation , Harding allowed almost a thousand <unk> immigrants to remain . Coolidge signed a bill permanently restricting immigration to the U.S. in 1924 . 
 = = = = Debs and political prisoners = = = = 
 Harding 's Socialist opponent in the 1920 election , Eugene Debs , was serving a ten @-@ year sentence in the Atlanta Penitentiary for speaking against the war . Wilson had refused to pardon him before leaving office . Daugherty met with Debs , and was deeply impressed . There was opposition from veterans , including the American Legion , and also from Florence Harding . The president did not feel he could release Debs until the war was officially over , but once the peace treaties were signed commuted Debs ' sentence on December 23 , 1921 . At Harding 's request , Debs visited the president at the White House before going home to Indiana . 
 Harding released 23 other war opponents at the same time as Debs , and continued to review cases and release political prisoners throughout his presidency . Harding defended his prisoner releases as necessary to return the nation to normalcy . 
 = = = = Judicial appointments = = = = 
 Harding appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States . When Chief Justice Edward Douglass White died in May 1921 , Harding was unsure whether to appoint former president Taft or former Utah senator George Sutherland — he had promised seats on the court to both men . After briefly considering awaiting another vacancy and appointing them both , he chose Taft as chief justice . Sutherland was appointed to the court in 1922 , to be followed by two other economic conservatives , Pierce Butler and Edward Terry Sanford , in 1923 . 
 Harding also appointed six judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , 42 judges to the United States district courts , and two judges to the United States Court of Customs Appeals . 
 = = = Final months , death , and funeral = = = 
 = = = = Political setbacks and western tour = = = = 
 Entering the 1922 midterm congressional election campaign , Harding and the Republicans had followed through on many of their campaign promises . But some of the fulfilled pledges , like cutting taxes for the well @-@ off , did not appeal to the electorate . The economy had not returned to normalcy , with unemployment at 11 percent , and organized labor angry over the outcome of the strikes . From 303 Republicans elected to the House in 1920 , the new 68th Congress would see that party fall to a 221 – 213 majority . In the Senate , the Republicans lost eight seats , and had 51 of 96 senators in the new Congress , which Harding did not survive to meet . 
 A month after the election , the lame @-@ duck session of the old 67th Congress met . Harding had come to believe that his early view of the presidency , that it should propose policies , but leave whether to adopt them to Congress , was not enough , and he lobbied Congress , although in vain , to get his ship subsidy bill through . Once Congress left town in early March 1923 , Harding 's popularity in the country began to recover . The economy was improving , and the programs of Harding 's more able cabinet members , such as Hughes , Mellon , and Hoover , were showing results . Most Republicans realized that there was no practical alternative to supporting Harding in 1924 . 
 In the first half of 1923 , Harding did two acts that were later said to indicate foreknowledge of death : he sold the Star ( though undertaking to remain as a contributing editor for ten years after his presidency ) , and made a new will . Harding had long suffered occasional health problems , but when he was not experiencing symptoms he tended to eat , drink , and smoke too much . By 1919 , he was aware he had a heart condition . Stress caused by the presidency and by Florence Harding 's ill @-@ health ( she had a chronic kidney condition ) debilitated him , and he never really recovered from an episode of influenza in January 1923 . After that , Harding , an avid golfer , had difficulty completing a round . In June 1923 , Ohio Senator Willis met with Harding , but brought to the president 's attention only two of the five items he intended to discuss . When asked why , Willis responded , " Warren seemed so tired " . 
 In June 1923 , Harding set out on a journey , which he dubbed the " Voyage of Understanding " . The president planned to cross the country , go north to Alaska Territory , journey south along the West Coast , then travel by Navy ship through the Panama Canal , to Puerto Rico , and to return to Washington at the end of August . Harding loved to travel and had long contemplated a trip to Alaska . The trip would allow him to speak widely across the country , to politic and <unk> in advance of the 1924 campaign , and allow him some rest away from Washington 's oppressive summer heat . 
 Harding 's political advisers had given him a physically demanding schedule , even though the president had ordered it cut back . In Kansas City , Harding spoke on transportation issues ; in Hutchinson , Kansas , agriculture was the theme . In Denver , he spoke on Prohibition , and continued west making a series of speeches not matched by any president until Franklin Roosevelt . Harding had become a supporter of the World Court , and wanted the U.S. to become a member . In addition to making speeches , he visited Yellowstone and Zion National Parks , and dedicated a monument on the Oregon Trail at a celebration organized by venerable pioneer Ezra Meeker and others . 
 On July 5 , Harding embarked on the USS Henderson in Washington state . The first president to visit Alaska , he spent hours watching the dramatic landscapes from the deck of the Henderson . After several stops along the coast , the presidential party left the ship at Seward to take the Alaska Central Railway to McKinley Park and Fairbanks , where he addressed a crowd of 1 @,@ 500 in 94 ° F ( 34 ° C ) heat . The party was to return to Seward by the Richardson Trail but due to Harding 's fatigue , it went by train . 
 On July 26 , 1923 , Harding toured Vancouver , British Columbia as the first sitting American president to visit Canada . Harding visited a golf course , but completed only six holes before being fatigued . After resting , he played the 17th and 18th holes so it would appear he completed the round . He was not successful in hiding his exhaustion ; one reporter deemed him so tired a rest of mere days would not be sufficient to refresh him . 
 In Seattle the next day , Harding kept up his busy schedule , giving a speech to 25 @,@ 000 people at the stadium at the University of Washington . In the final speech he gave , Harding predicted statehood for Alaska . The president rushed through his speech , not waiting for applause by the audience . 
 = = = = Death in San Francisco , funeral , and memorial = = = = 
 Harding went to bed early in the evening of July 27 , 1923 . Later that night , he called for his physician , Charles E. Sawyer , complaining of pain in the upper abdomen . Sawyer thought it was a recurrence of a dietary upset , but Dr. Joel T. Boone suspected a heart problem . The next day , as the train rushed to San Francisco , Harding felt better , and when they arrived on the morning of July 29 , 1923 , Harding insisted on walking from the train to the car , which rushed him to the Palace Hotel where he suffered a relapse . Doctors found that not only was Harding 's heart causing problems , but he also had pneumonia , a serious matter in the days before effective antibiotics . When treated with caffeine and digitalis , Harding seemed to improve . He was pleased when his planned foreign policy address advocating membership in the World Court was released to the press by Hoover and received a favorable reception . By the afternoon of August 2 , 1923 , doctors allowed Harding to sit up in bed . That evening , about 7 : 30 pm , he was listening to his wife read him a flattering article about him from The Saturday Evening Post , " A Calm Review of a Calm Man " . When she paused to plump his pillows , he said , " That 's good , read some more " . As Florence Harding resumed , her husband twisted convulsively and collapsed , and she raced to get the doctors . They attempted stimulants , but were unable to revive him , and President Harding died of a cerebral hemorrhage on August 2 , 1923 , at the age of 57 . 
 Harding 's death came as a great shock to the nation . The president was liked and admired , and the press and public had followed his illness closely , and been reassured by his apparent recovery . Harding was returned to his train in a casket for a journey across the nation followed closely in the newspapers . Nine million people lined the tracks as Harding 's body was taken from San Francisco to Washington , D.C. , and after services there , home to Marion , Ohio , for burial . 
 In Marion , the body of Warren Harding was placed on a horse @-@ drawn hearse , which was followed by President Coolidge and Chief Justice Taft , then by Harding 's wife and father . They followed it through the city , past the Star building where the presses stood silent , and at last to the Marion Cemetery , where the casket was placed in the cemetery 's receiving vault . Harding 's body , along with that of his wife who died in 1924 , rests today in the Harding Tomb , which was dedicated in 1931 by President Hoover . 
 = = = Scandals = = = 
 Harding appointed a number of friends and acquaintances to federal positions . Some served competently , such as Charles E. Sawyer , the Hardings ' personal physician from Marion who attended to them in the White House . Sawyer had alerted Harding to the Veterans ' Bureau scandal . Others proved ineffective in office , such as Daniel R. <unk> , a Marion lawyer whom Harding made Comptroller of the Currency and later a governor of the Federal Reserve Board ; or Harding 's old friend , Director of the Mint , Frank Scobey , whom Trani and Wilson noted " did little damage during his tenure " . Harding 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Heber H. <unk> , superintendent of federal prisons , was unable to root out the drug trade from within the facilities . Others of these associates proved corrupt and were later dubbed the " Ohio Gang " . 
 Most of the scandals that have marred the reputation of Harding 's administration did not emerge until after his death . The Veterans ' Bureau scandal was known to Harding in January 1923 but , according to Trani and Wilson , " the president 's handling of it did him little credit " . Harding allowed the corrupt director of the bureau , Charles R. Forbes , to flee to Europe , though he later returned and served prison time . Harding had learned that Daugherty 's factotum at the Justice Department , Jess Smith , was involved in corruption . The president ordered Daugherty to get Smith out of Washington and removed his name from the upcoming presidential trip to Alaska . Smith committed suicide on May 30 , 1923 . It is uncertain how much Harding knew about Smith 's illicit activities . Murray noted that Harding was not involved in the corruption and did not condone it . 
 Hoover accompanied Harding on the Western trip and later wrote that Harding asked then what Hoover would do if he knew of some great scandal , whether to publicize it or bury it . Hoover replied that Harding should publish and get credit for integrity , and asked for details . Harding stated that it had to do with Smith but , when Hoover enquired as to Daugherty 's possible involvement , Harding refused to answer . 
 = = = = Teapot Dome = = = = 
 The scandal which has likely done the greatest damage to Harding 's reputation is Teapot Dome . Like most of the administration 's scandals , it came to light after Harding 's death , and he was not aware of the illegal aspects . Teapot Dome involved an oil reserve in Wyoming which was one of three set aside for the use of the Navy in a national emergency . There was a longstanding argument that the reserves should be developed ; Wilson 's first Interior Secretary Franklin Knight Lane was an advocate of this position . When the Harding administration took office , Interior Secretary Fall took up Lane 's argument and Harding signed an executive order in May 1921 transferring the reserves from the Navy Department to Interior . This was done with the consent of Navy Secretary Edwin C. Denby . 
 The Interior Department announced in July 1921 that Edward Doheny had been awarded a lease to drill along the edges of naval reserve Elk Hills in California . The announcement attracted little controversy , as the oil would have been lost to wells on adjacent private land . Wyoming Senator John Kendrick had heard from constituents that Teapot Dome had also been leased , but no announcement had been made . The Interior Department refused to provide documentation , so he secured the passage of a Senate resolution compelling disclosure . The department sent a copy of the lease granting drilling rights to Harry Sinclair 's Mammoth Oil Company , along with a statement that there had been no competitive bidding because military preparedness was involved — Mammoth was to build oil tanks for the Navy as part of the deal . This satisfied some people , but some conservationists , such as Gifford Pinchot , Harry A. Slattery , and others , pushed for a full investigation into Fall and his activities . They got Wisconsin Senator Robert M. La Follette Sr. to begin a Senate investigation into the oil leases . La Follette persuaded Democratic Montana Senator Thomas J. Walsh to lead the investigation , and Walsh read through the truckload of material provided by the Interior Department through 1922 into 1923 , including a letter from Harding stating that the transfer and leases had been with his knowledge and approval . 
 Hearings into Teapot Dome began in October 1923 , after Harding 's death . Fall had left office earlier that year , but he denied receiving any money from Sinclair or Doheny ; Sinclair agreed . The following month , Walsh learned that Fall had spent lavishly on expanding and improving his New Mexico ranch . Fall reappeared and stated that the money had come as a loan from Harding 's friend and The Washington Post publisher Edward B. McLean , but McLean denied it when he testified . Doheny told the committee that he had given Fall the money in cash as a personal loan out of regard for their past association , but Fall invoked the Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination when he was compelled to appear again , rather than answer questions . 
 Investigators found that Fall and a relative had received a total of about $ 400 @,@ 000 from Doheny and Sinclair , and that the transfers were contemporaneous with the controversial leases . Fall was ultimately convicted in 1929 for accepting bribes and , in 1931 , became the first U.S. cabinet member to be imprisoned for crimes committed while in office . Sinclair was convicted only of contempt of court for jury tampering . Doheny was brought to trial before a jury in April 1930 for giving the bribe which Fall had been convicted of accepting , but he was acquitted . 
 = = = = Justice Department = = = = 
 Harding 's appointment of Harry M. Daugherty as Attorney General received more criticism than any other . Daugherty 's Ohio lobbying and back room maneuvers were not considered to qualify him for his office . When the scandals broke in 1923 and 1924 , Daugherty 's many enemies were delighted at the prospect of connecting him with the dishonesty , and assumed he had taken part in Teapot Dome , though Fall and Daugherty were not friends . In February 1924 , the Senate voted to investigate the Justice Department , where Daugherty remained Attorney General . 
 Democratic Montana Senator Burton K. Wheeler was on the investigating committee and assumed the role of prosecutor when hearings began on March 12 , 1924 . Jess Smith had engaged in influence peddling before his suicide , conspiring with two other Ohioans , Howard Mannington and Fred A. Caskey , to accept payoffs from alcohol bootleggers to secure either immunity from prosecution or the release of liquor from government warehouses . Mannington and Caskey 's residence became infamous as the Little Green House on K Street . Some witnesses , such as Smith 's divorced wife Roxy Stinson , and corrupt former FBI agent Gaston Means , alleged that Daugherty was personally involved . Coolidge requested Daugherty 's resignation when the Attorney General indicated that he would not allow Wheeler 's committee access to Justice Department records , and Daugherty complied on March 28 , 1924 . 
 The illicit activity that caused Daugherty the most problems was a Smith deal with Colonel Thomas W. Miller , a former Delaware congressman , whom Harding had appointed Alien Property Custodian . Smith and Miller received a payoff of almost half a million dollars for getting a German @-@ owned firm , the American Metal Company , released to new U.S. owners . Smith deposited $ 50 @,@ 000 in a joint account with Daugherty , used for political purposes . Records relating to that account were destroyed by Daugherty and his brother . Miller and Daugherty were indicted for defrauding the government . The first trial , in September 1926 , resulted in a hung jury ; at the second , early in 1927 , Miller was convicted and served prison time , but the jury again hung as to Daugherty . Though charges against Daugherty were then dropped , and he was never convicted of any offense , his refusal to take the stand in his own defense devastated what was left of his reputation . The former Attorney General remained defiant , blaming his troubles on his enemies in the labor movement and on the Communists , and wrote that he had " done nothing that prevents my looking the whole world in the face " . 
 = = = = Veterans ' Bureau = = = = 
 Charles R. Forbes , the energetic director of the Veterans ' Bureau , sought to consolidate control of veterans ' hospitals and their construction in his bureau . At the start of Harding 's presidency , this power was vested in the Treasury Department . The politically @-@ powerful American Legion backed Forbes and denigrated those who opposed him , like Secretary Mellon , and in April 1922 , Harding agreed to transfer control to the Veterans ' Bureau . Forbes ' main task was to ensure that new hospitals were built around the country to help the 300 @,@ 000 wounded World War I veterans . 
 Near the beginning of 1922 , Forbes had met Elias Mortimer , agent for the Thompson @-@ Black Construction Company of St. Louis , which wanted to construct the hospitals . The two men became close , and Mortimer paid for Forbes ' travels through the West , looking at potential hospital sites for the wounded World War I veterans . Forbes was also friendly with Charles F. Hurley , owner of the Hurley @-@ Mason Construction Company of Washington state . Harding had ordered that all contracts be pursuant to public notice , but the three worked out a deal whereby the two companies would get the contracts with the profits divided three ways . Some of the money went to the bureau 's chief counsel , Charles F. Cramer . Forbes defrauded the government in this hospital construction , increasing construction costs from $ 3 @,@ 000 to $ 4 @,@ 000 per bed . A tenth of the inflated construction billings was set aside for the conspirators , with Forbes receiving a third of the take . The graft then spread to land acquisition , with Forbes authorizing the purchase of a San Francisco tract – that was worth less than $ 20 @,@ 000 – for $ 105 @,@ 000 . At least $ 25 @,@ 000 of the resulting financial excess was divided between Forbes and Cramer . 
 Intent on making more money , Forbes in November 1922 began selling valuable hospital supplies under his control in large warehouses at the Perryville Depot in Maryland . The government had stockpiled huge quantities of hospital supplies during the first World War , which Forbes unloaded for a fraction of their cost to the Boston firm of Thompson and Kelly at a time when the Veterans ' Bureau was buying supplies for the hospitals at a much higher price . 
 The check on Forbes ' authority at Perryville was Dr. Sawyer , Harding 's physician and chairman of the Federal Hospitalization Board . Sawyer told Harding that Forbes was selling valuable hospital supplies to an insider contractor . At first Harding did not believe it , but Sawyer secured proof in January 1923 . A shocked Harding , who alternated between rage and despondency over the corruption in his administration , summoned Forbes to the White House and demanded his resignation . Harding did not want an open scandal and allowed Forbes to flee to Europe , from where he resigned on February 15 , 1923 . In spite of Harding 's efforts , gossip about Forbes ' activities resulted in the Senate ordering an investigation two weeks later , and in mid @-@ March , Cramer committed suicide . 
 Mortimer was willing to tell all , as Forbes had had an affair with his wife ( which also broke up the Forbes marriage ) . The construction executive was the star witness at the hearings in late 1923 , after Harding 's death . Forbes returned from Europe to testify , but convinced few , and in 1924 , he and John W. Thompson , of Thompson – Black , were tried in Chicago for conspiracy to defraud the government . Both were convicted and sentenced to two years in prison . Forbes began to serve his sentence in 1926 ; Thompson , who had a bad heart , died that year before commencing his . According to Trani and Wilson , " One of the most troublesome aspects of the Harding presidency was that he appeared to be far more concerned with political liabilities of a scandal than in securing justice . " 
 = = <unk> affairs = = 
 Harding had an extramarital affair with Carrie Fulton Phillips of Marion , which lasted about fifteen years before ending in 1920 . Letters from Harding to Phillips were discovered by Harding biographer Francis Russell in the possession of Marion attorney Donald Williamson while Russell was researching his book in 1963 . Before that , the affair was not generally known . Williamson donated the letters to the Ohio Historical Society . Some there wanted the letters destroyed to preserve what remained of Harding 's reputation . A lawsuit ensued , with Harding 's heirs claiming copyright over the letters . The case was ultimately settled in 1971 , with the letters donated to the Library of Congress . They were sealed until 2014 , but before their opening , historians used copies at Case Western Reserve University and in Russell 's papers at the University of Wyoming . Russell concluded from the letters that Phillips was the love of Harding 's life — " the enticements of his mind and body combined in one person " , but historian Justin P. Coffey in his 2014 review of Harding biographies criticizes him for " obsess [ ing ] over Harding 's sex life " . 
 The allegations of Harding 's other known mistress , Nan Britton , long remained uncertain . In 1927 , Britton , also a <unk> , published The President 's Daughter , alleging that her child Elizabeth Ann <unk> had been fathered by Harding . The book , which was dedicated to " all <unk> mothers " and " their innocent children whose fathers are usually not known to the world " , was sold , like pornography , door @-@ to @-@ door wrapped in brown paper . The late president 's reputation had deteriorated since his death in 1923 , and many believed Britton . The public was tantalized by salacious details such as Britton 's claim that the two had sex in a White House closet , with Secret Service agents posted to ward off intruders . Although part of the public believed her , a jury found against her when she alleged she was <unk> by a refutation of her book . According to Harding family lore , the late President was infertile and could not have fathered a child , having suffered from mumps in childhood ; Britton maintained that Harding had provided child support of $ 500 per month for the daughter he never met , but she had destroyed romantic correspondence from him at his request . 
 Harding 's biographers , writing while Britton 's allegations remained uncertain , differed on their truth ; Russell believed them unquestioningly while Dean , having reviewed Britton 's papers at UCLA , regarded them as unproven . In 2015 , the results of DNA comparisons between members of the Harding and <unk> families conducted by <unk> indicated that Harding was Elizabeth 's father . Sinclair wondered that Harding 's infidelity was held so much against him , given that Grover Cleveland was elected president in 1884 although it was known he had a mistress and may have fathered a son out of wedlock . 
 = = Historical view = = 
 Upon his death , Harding was deeply mourned . He was called a man of peace in many European newspapers ; American journalists praised him lavishly , with some describing him as having given his life for his country . His associates were stunned by his demise ; Daugherty wrote , " I can hardly write about it or allow myself to think about it yet " . Hughes stated , " I cannot realize that our beloved Chief is no longer with us " . 
 <unk> accounts of Harding 's life quickly followed his death , such as Joe Mitchell Chapple 's Life and Times of Warren G. Harding , Our After @-@ War President ( 1924 ) . By then , the scandals were breaking , and the Harding administration soon became a byword for corruption in the view of the public . Works written in the late 1920s helped shape Harding 's historical reputation : Masks in a Pageant by William Allen White mocked and dismissed Harding , as did Samuel Hopkins Adams ' fictionalized account of the Harding administration , <unk> . These books depicted Harding 's time in office as one of great presidential weakness . The publication of Nan Britton 's bestselling book alleging they had had an affair also lowered the late president in public esteem . President Coolidge , not wishing to be further associated with his predecessor , refused to dedicate the Harding Tomb . Hoover , Coolidge 's successor , was similarly reluctant , but with Coolidge in attendance presided over the dedication in 1931 . By that time , with the Great Depression in full swing , Hoover was nearly as discredited as Harding . 
 Adams continued to shape the negative view of Harding with several nonfiction works in the 1930s , culminating with The Incredible Era — The Life and Times of Warren G. Harding ( 1939 ) in which he called his subject " an amiable , well @-@ meaning third @-@ rate Mr. Babbitt , with the equipment of a small @-@ town semi @-@ educated journalist ... It could not work . It did not work . " Dean deems the works of White and Adams " remarkably unbalanced and unfair accounts , exaggerating the negative , assigning responsibility to Harding for all wrongs , and denying him credit for anything done right . Today there is considerable evidence refuting their portrayals of Harding . Yet the myth has persisted . " 
 The opening of Harding 's papers for research in 1964 sparked a small spate of biographies , of which the most controversial was Russell 's The Shadow of Blooming Grove ( 1968 ) , which concluded that the rumors of black ancestry ( the " shadow " of the title ) deeply affected Harding in his formative years , causing both Harding 's conservatism and his desire to get along with everyone . Coffey faults Russell 's methods , and deems the biography " largely critical , though not entirely unsympathetic " . Murray 's The Harding Era ( 1969 ) took a more positive view of the president , and put him in the context of his times . Trani and Wilson faulted him for " a tendency to go overboard " in trying to connect Harding with the successful policies of cabinet officers , and for asserting , without sufficient evidence , that a new , more assertive Harding had emerged by 1923 . 
 More recently , there have been revisionist books on Harding . Robert Ferrell 's The Strange Deaths of President Harding ( 1996 ) , according to Coffey , " spends almost the entire work challenging every story about Harding and concludes that almost everything that is read and taught about his subject is wrong " . In 2004 , John Dean , noted for his involvement in another presidential scandal , Watergate , wrote the Harding volume in " The American Presidents " series of short biographies , edited by Arthur M. Schlesinger , Jr . Coffey deemed that book the most revisionist to date , and faults Dean for glossing over some unfavorable episodes in Harding 's life , like his silence during the 1914 Senate campaign , when his opponent Hogan was being attacked for his faith . 
 Harding has traditionally been ranked as one of the worst presidents . In a 1948 poll conducted by Harvard University , historian Arthur M. Schlesinger , Sr. conducted the first notable survey of scholars ' opinions of the presidents , Harding ranked last among the 29 presidents considered . He has also been last in other polls since , which Ferrell attributes to scholars reading little but sensational accounts of Harding . Murray argued that Harding deserves more credit than historians have given , " he was certainly the equal of a Franklin Pierce , an Andrew Johnson , a Benjamin Harrison , or even a Calvin Coolidge . In concrete accomplishments , his administration was superior to a sizable portion of those in the nation 's history . " Coffey believes " the academic lack of interest in Harding has cost him his reputation , as scholars still rank Harding as nearly dead last among presidents " . 
 Murray argued that Harding sowed the seeds for his administration 's poor standing : 
 In the American system , there is no such thing as an innocent bystander in the White House . If Harding can rightly claim the achievements of a Hughes in State or a Hoover in Commerce , he must also shoulder responsibility for a Daugherty in Justice and a Fall in Interior . Especially must he bear the onus of his lack of punitive action against such men as Forbes and Smith . By his inaction , he forfeited whatever chance he had to maintain the integrity of his position and salvage a favorable image for himself and his administration . As it was , the subsequent popular and scholarly negative verdict was inevitable , if not wholly deserved . 
 = On the Origin of Species = 
 On the Origin of Species , published on 24 November 1859 , is a work of scientific literature by Charles Darwin which is considered to be the foundation of evolutionary biology . Darwin 's book introduced the scientific theory that populations evolve over the course of generations through a process of natural selection . It presented a body of evidence that the diversity of life arose by common descent through a branching pattern of evolution . Darwin included evidence that he had gathered on the Beagle expedition in the 1830s and his subsequent findings from research , correspondence , and experimentation . 
 Various evolutionary ideas had already been proposed to explain new findings in biology . There was growing support for such ideas among dissident anatomists and the general public , but during the first half of the 19th century the English scientific establishment was closely tied to the Church of England , while science was part of natural theology . Ideas about the transmutation of species were controversial as they conflicted with the beliefs that species were unchanging parts of a designed hierarchy and that humans were unique , unrelated to other animals . The political and theological implications were intensely debated , but transmutation was not accepted by the scientific mainstream . 
 The book was written for non @-@ specialist readers and attracted widespread interest upon its publication . As Darwin was an eminent scientist , his findings were taken seriously and the evidence he presented generated scientific , philosophical , and religious discussion . The debate over the book contributed to the campaign by T. H. Huxley and his fellow members of the X Club to <unk> science by promoting scientific naturalism . Within two decades there was widespread scientific agreement that evolution , with a branching pattern of common descent , had occurred , but scientists were slow to give natural selection the significance that Darwin thought appropriate . During " the eclipse of Darwinism " from the 1880s to the 1930s , various other mechanisms of evolution were given more credit . With the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s , Darwin 's concept of evolutionary adaptation through natural selection became central to modern evolutionary theory , and it has now become the unifying concept of the life sciences . 
 = = Summary of Darwin 's theory = = 
 Darwin 's theory of evolution is based on key facts and the inferences drawn from them , which biologist Ernst Mayr summarised as follows : 
 Every species is fertile enough that if all offspring survived to reproduce the population would grow ( fact ) . 
 Despite periodic fluctuations , populations remain roughly the same size ( fact ) . 
 Resources such as food are limited and are relatively stable over time ( fact ) . 
 A struggle for survival ensues ( inference ) . 
 Individuals in a population vary significantly from one another ( fact ) . 
 Much of this variation is heritable ( fact ) . 
 Individuals less suited to the environment are less likely to survive and less likely to reproduce ; individuals more suited to the environment are more likely to survive and more likely to reproduce and leave their heritable traits to future generations , which produces the process of natural selection ( fact ) . 
 This slowly effected process results in populations changing to adapt to their environments , and ultimately , these variations accumulate over time to form new species ( inference ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Developments before Darwin 's theory = = = 
 In later editions of the book , Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle ; the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles . Early Christian Church Fathers and Medieval European scholars interpreted the Genesis creation narrative allegorically rather than as a literal historical account ; organisms were described by their mythological and heraldic significance as well as by their physical form . Nature was widely believed to be unstable and capricious , with monstrous births from union between species , and spontaneous generation of life . 
 The Protestant Reformation inspired a literal interpretation of the Bible , with concepts of creation that conflicted with the findings of an emerging science seeking explanations congruent with the mechanical philosophy of René Descartes and the empiricism of the Baconian method . After the turmoil of the English Civil War , the Royal Society wanted to show that science did not threaten religious and political stability . John Ray developed an influential natural theology of rational order ; in his taxonomy , species were static and fixed , their adaptation and complexity designed by God , and varieties showed minor differences caused by local conditions . In God 's benevolent design , carnivores caused mercifully swift death , but the suffering caused by parasitism was a puzzling problem . The biological classification introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1735 also viewed species as fixed according to the divine plan . In 1766 , Georges Buffon suggested that some similar species , such as horses and asses , or lions , tigers , and leopards , might be varieties descended from a common ancestor . The Ussher chronology of the 1650s had calculated creation at 4004 BC , but by the 1780s geologists assumed a much older world . <unk> thought strata were deposits from shrinking seas , but James Hutton proposed a self @-@ maintaining infinite cycle , anticipating uniformitarianism . 
 Charles Darwin 's grandfather Erasmus Darwin outlined a hypothesis of transmutation of species in the 1790s , and Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck published a more developed theory in 1809 . Both envisaged that spontaneous generation produced simple forms of life that progressively developed greater complexity , adapting to the environment by inheriting changes in adults caused by use or disuse . This process was later called Lamarckism . Lamarck thought there was an inherent progressive tendency driving organisms continuously towards greater complexity , in parallel but separate lineages with no extinction . Geoffroy contended that embryonic development recapitulated transformations of organisms in past eras when the environment acted on embryos , and that animal structures were determined by a constant plan as demonstrated by homologies . Georges Cuvier strongly disputed such ideas , holding that unrelated , fixed species showed similarities that reflected a design for functional needs . His <unk> work in the 1790s had established the reality of extinction , which he explained by local catastrophes , followed by repopulation of the affected areas by other species . 
 In Britain , William Paley 's Natural Theology saw adaptation as evidence of beneficial " design " by the Creator acting through natural laws . All naturalists in the two English universities ( Oxford and Cambridge ) were Church of England clergymen , and science became a search for these laws . Geologists adapted catastrophism to show repeated worldwide annihilation and creation of new fixed species adapted to a changed environment , initially identifying the most recent catastrophe as the biblical flood . Some anatomists such as Robert Grant were influenced by Lamarck and Geoffroy , but most naturalists regarded their ideas of transmutation as a threat to divinely appointed social order . 
 = = = Inception of Darwin 's theory = = = 
 Darwin went to Edinburgh University in 1825 to study medicine . In his second year he neglected his medical studies for natural history and spent four months assisting Robert Grant 's research into marine invertebrates . Grant revealed his enthusiasm for the transmutation of species , but Darwin rejected it . Starting in 1827 , at Cambridge University , Darwin learnt science as natural theology from botanist John Stevens Henslow , and read Paley , John Herschel and Alexander von Humboldt . Filled with zeal for science , he studied <unk> geology with Adam Sedgwick . 
 In December 1831 , he joined the Beagle expedition as a gentleman naturalist and geologist . He read Charles Lyell 's Principles of Geology and from the first stop ashore , at St. Jago , found Lyell 's uniformitarianism a key to the geological history of landscapes . Darwin discovered fossils resembling huge armadillos , and noted the geographical distribution of modern species in hope of finding their " centre of creation " . The three Fuegian missionaries the expedition returned to Tierra del Fuego were friendly and civilised , yet to Darwin their relatives on the island seemed " miserable , degraded savages " , and he no longer saw an unbridgeable gap between humans and animals . As the Beagle neared England in 1836 , he noted that species might not be fixed . 
 Richard Owen showed that fossils of extinct species Darwin found in South America were allied to living species on the same continent . In March 1837 , ornithologist John Gould announced that Darwin 's rhea was a separate species from the previously described rhea ( though their territories overlapped ) , that mockingbirds collected on the Galápagos Islands represented three separate species each unique to a particular island , and that several distinct birds from those islands were all classified as finches . Darwin began speculating , in a series of notebooks , on the possibility that " one species does change into another " to explain these findings , and around July sketched a genealogical branching of a single evolutionary tree , discarding Lamarck 's independent lineages progressing to higher forms . <unk> , Darwin asked questions of fancy pigeon and animal breeders as well as established scientists . At the zoo he had his first sight of an ape , and was profoundly impressed by how human the orangutan seemed . 
 In late September 1838 , he started reading Thomas Malthus 's An Essay on the Principle of Population with its statistical argument that human populations , if unrestrained , breed beyond their means and struggle to survive . Darwin related this to the struggle for existence among wildlife and botanist de Candolle 's " warring of the species " in plants ; he immediately envisioned " a force like a hundred thousand wedges " pushing well @-@ adapted variations into " gaps in the economy of nature " , so that the survivors would pass on their form and abilities , and unfavourable variations would be destroyed . By December 1838 , he had noted a similarity between the act of breeders selecting traits and a Malthusian Nature selecting among variants thrown up by " chance " so that " every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected " . 
 Darwin now had the framework of his theory of natural selection " by which to work " , but he was fully occupied with his career as a geologist and held off writing a sketch of his theory until his book on The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs was completed in May 1842 . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 Darwin continued to research and extensively revise his theory while focusing on his main work of publishing the scientific results of the Beagle voyage . He tentatively wrote of his ideas to Lyell in January 1842 ; then in June he roughed out a 35 @-@ page " Pencil Sketch " of his theory . Darwin began correspondence about his theorising with the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker in January 1844 , and by July had rounded out his " sketch " into a 230 @-@ page " Essay " , to be expanded with his research results and published if he died prematurely . 
 In November 1844 , the anonymously published popular science book Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , written by Scottish journalist Robert Chambers , widened public interest in the concept of transmutation of species . Vestiges used evidence from the fossil record and embryology to support the claim that living things had progressed from the simple to the more complex over time . But it proposed a linear progression rather than the branching common descent theory behind Darwin 's work in progress , and it ignored adaptation . Darwin read it soon after publication , and scorned its amateurish geology and zoology , but he carefully reviewed his own arguments after leading scientists , including Adam Sedgwick , attacked its morality and scientific errors . Vestiges had significant influence on public opinion , and the intense debate helped to pave the way for the acceptance of the more scientifically sophisticated Origin by moving evolutionary speculation into the mainstream . While few naturalists were willing to consider transmutation , Herbert Spencer became an active proponent of Lamarckism and progressive development in the 1850s . 
 Hooker was persuaded to take away a copy of the " Essay " in January 1847 , and eventually sent a page of notes giving Darwin much needed feedback . Reminded of his lack of expertise in taxonomy , Darwin began an eight @-@ year study of barnacles , becoming the leading expert on their classification . Using his theory , he discovered homologies showing that slightly changed body parts served different functions to meet new conditions , and he found an intermediate stage in the evolution of distinct sexes . 
 Darwin 's barnacle studies convinced him that variation arose constantly and not just in response to changed circumstances . In 1854 , he completed the last part of his Beagle @-@ related writing and began working full @-@ time on evolution . His thinking changed from the view that species formed in isolated populations only , as on islands , to an emphasis on speciation without isolation ; that is , he saw increasing specialisation within large stable populations as continuously exploiting new ecological niches . He conducted empirical research focusing on difficulties with his theory . He studied the developmental and anatomical differences between different breeds of many domestic animals , became actively involved in fancy pigeon breeding , and experimented ( with the help of his son Francis ) on ways that plant seeds and animals might disperse across oceans to colonise distant islands . By 1856 , his theory was much more sophisticated , with a mass of supporting evidence . 
 = = Publication = = 
 = = = Events leading to publication = = = 
 An 1855 paper on the " introduction " of species , written by Alfred Russel Wallace , claimed that patterns in the geographical distribution of living and fossil species could be explained if every new species always came into existence near an already existing , closely related species . Charles Lyell recognised the implications of Wallace 's paper and its possible connection to Darwin 's work , although Darwin did not , and in a letter written on 1 – 2 May 1856 Lyell urged Darwin to publish his theory to establish priority . Darwin was torn between the desire to set out a full and convincing account and the pressure to quickly produce a short paper . He met Lyell , and in correspondence with Joseph Dalton Hooker affirmed that he did not want to expose his ideas to review by an editor as would have been required to publish in an academic journal . He began a " sketch " account on 14 May 1856 , and by July had decided to produce a full technical treatise on species . His theory including the principle of divergence was complete by 5 September 1857 when he sent Asa Gray a brief but detailed abstract of his ideas . 
 Darwin was hard at work on his " big book " on Natural Selection , when on 18 June 1858 he received a parcel from Wallace , who stayed on the Maluku Islands ( Ternate and Gilolo ) . It enclosed twenty pages describing an evolutionary mechanism , a response to Darwin 's recent encouragement , with a request to send it on to Lyell if Darwin thought it worthwhile . The mechanism was similar to Darwin 's own theory . Darwin wrote to Lyell that " your words have come true with a vengeance , ... forestalled " and he would " of course , at once write and offer to send [ it ] to any journal " that Wallace chose , adding that " all my originality , whatever it may amount to , will be smashed " . Lyell and Hooker agreed that a joint publication putting together Wallace 's pages with extracts from Darwin 's 1844 Essay and his 1857 letter to Gray should be presented at the Linnean Society , and on 1 July 1858 , the papers entitled On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties ; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection , by Wallace and Darwin respectively , were read out but drew little reaction . While Darwin considered Wallace 's idea to be identical to his concept of natural selection , historians have pointed out differences . Darwin described natural selection as being analogous to the artificial selection practised by animal breeders , and emphasised competition between individuals ; Wallace drew no comparison to selective breeding , and focused on ecological pressures that kept different varieties adapted to local conditions . Some historians have suggested that Wallace was actually discussing group selection rather than selection acting on individual variation . 
 After the meeting , Darwin decided to write " an abstract of my whole work " . He started work on 20 July 1858 , while on holiday at Sandown , and wrote parts of it from memory . Lyell discussed arrangements with publisher John Murray III , of the publishing house John Murray , who responded immediately to Darwin 's letter of 31 March 1859 with an agreement to publish the book without even seeing the manuscript , and an offer to Darwin of 2 ⁄ 3 of the profits . ( eventually Murray paid £ 180 to Darwin for the 1st edition and by Darwin 's death in 1882 the book was in its 6th edition , earning Darwin nearly £ 3000 . ) 
 = = = = Choice of title = = = = 
 Darwin had initially decided to call his book An abstract of an Essay on the Origin of Species and Varieties Through natural selection , but with Murray 's persuasion it was eventually changed to the snappier title : On the Origin of Species , with the title page adding by Means of Natural Selection , or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life . 
 Here and elsewhere in the book , Darwin used the term " races " interchangeably with " varieties " , with the meaning of varieties within a species . Thus , he discussed " the several races , for instance , of the cabbage " and " the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic animals and plants " . There are very few references to human races , and Darwin avoided explaining this topic which was then controversial in debates over slavery and imperialism , but in Difficulties for the theory he indicated that the principle of sexual selection could also apply to " the races of man " . 
 = = = Time taken to publish = = = 
 Darwin had his basic theory of natural selection " by which to work " by December 1838 , yet almost twenty years later , when Wallace 's letter arrived on 18 June 1858 , Darwin was still not ready to publish his theory . It was long thought that Darwin avoided or delayed making his ideas public for personal reasons . Reasons suggested have included fear of religious persecution or social disgrace if his views were revealed , and concern about upsetting his clergymen naturalist friends or his pious wife Emma . Charles Darwin 's illness caused repeated delays . His paper on Glen Roy had proved embarrassingly wrong , and he may have wanted to be sure he was correct . David Quammen has suggested all these factors may have contributed , and notes Darwin 's large output of books and busy family life during that time . 
 A more recent study by science historian John van <unk> has determined that the idea that Darwin delayed publication only dates back to the 1940s , and Darwin 's contemporaries thought the time he took was reasonable . Darwin always finished one book before starting another . While he was researching , he told many people about his interest in transmutation without causing outrage . He firmly intended to publish , but it was not until September 1854 that he could work on it full @-@ time . His estimate that writing his " big book " would take five years was optimistic . 
 = = = Publication and subsequent editions = = = 
 On the Origin of Species was first published on Thursday 24 November 1859 , priced at fifteen shillings with a first printing of 1250 copies . The book had been offered to booksellers at Murray 's autumn sale on Tuesday 22 November , and all available copies had been taken up immediately . In total , 1 @,@ 250 copies were printed but after deducting presentation and review copies , and five for Stationers ' Hall copyright , around 1 @,@ 170 copies were available for sale . Significantly , 500 were taken by Mudie 's Library , ensuring that the book promptly reached a large number of subscribers to the library . The second edition of 3 @,@ 000 copies was quickly brought out on 7 January 1860 , and incorporated numerous corrections as well as a response to religious objections by the addition of a new epigraph on page ii , a quotation from Charles Kingsley , and the phrase " by the Creator " added to the closing sentence . During Darwin 's lifetime the book went through six editions , with cumulative changes and revisions to deal with counter @-@ arguments raised . The third edition came out in 1861 , with a number of sentences rewritten or added and an introductory appendix , An Historical Sketch of the Recent Progress of Opinion on the Origin of Species , while the fourth in 1866 had further revisions . The fifth edition , published on 10 February 1869 , incorporated more changes and for the first time included the phrase " survival of the fittest " , which had been coined by the philosopher Herbert Spencer in his Principles of Biology ( 1864 ) . 
 In January 1871 , George Jackson Mivart 's On the Genesis of Species listed detailed arguments against natural selection , and claimed it included false metaphysics . Darwin made extensive revisions to the sixth edition of the Origin ( this was the first edition in which he used the word " evolution " which had commonly been associated with embryological development , though all editions concluded with the word " evolved " ) , and added a new chapter VII , Miscellaneous objections , to address Mivart 's arguments . 
 The sixth edition was published by Murray on 19 February 1872 as The Origin of Species , with " On " dropped from the title . Darwin had told Murray of working men in Lancashire clubbing together to buy the 5th edition at fifteen shillings and wanted it made more widely available ; the price was halved to 7s 6d by printing in a smaller font . It includes a glossary compiled by W.S. Dallas . Book sales increased from 60 to 250 per month . 
 = = = Publication outside Great Britain = = = 
 In the United States , botanist Asa Gray an American colleague of Darwin negotiated with a Boston publisher for publication of an authorised American version , but learnt that two New York publishing firms were already planning to exploit the absence of international copyright to print Origin . Darwin was delighted by the popularity of the book , and asked Gray to keep any profits . Gray managed to negotiate a 5 % royalty with Appleton 's of New York , who got their edition out in mid January 1860 , and the other two withdrew . In a May letter , Darwin mentioned a print run of 2 @,@ 500 copies , but it is not clear if this referred to the first printing only as there were four that year . 
 The book was widely translated in Darwin 's lifetime , but problems arose with translating concepts and metaphors , and some translations were biased by the translator 's own agenda . Darwin distributed presentation copies in France and Germany , hoping that suitable applicants would come forward , as translators were expected to make their own arrangements with a local publisher . He welcomed the distinguished elderly naturalist and geologist Heinrich Georg Bronn , but the German translation published in 1860 imposed Bronn 's own ideas , adding controversial themes that Darwin had deliberately omitted . Bronn translated " favoured races " as " perfected races " , and added essays on issues including the origin of life , as well as a final chapter on religious implications partly inspired by Bronn 's adherence to Naturphilosophie . In 1862 , Bronn produced a second edition based on the third English edition and Darwin 's suggested additions , but then died of a heart attack . Darwin corresponded closely with Julius Victor Carus , who published an improved translation in 1867 . Darwin 's attempts to find a translator in France fell through , and the translation by Clémence Royer published in 1862 added an introduction praising Darwin 's ideas as an alternative to religious revelation and promoting ideas anticipating social Darwinism and eugenics , as well as numerous explanatory notes giving her own answers to doubts that Darwin expressed . Darwin corresponded with Royer about a second edition published in 1866 and a third in 1870 , but he had difficulty getting her to remove her notes and was troubled by these editions . He remained unsatisfied until a translation by Edmond Barbier was published in 1876 . A Dutch translation by Tiberius Cornelis Winkler was published in 1860 . By 1864 , additional translations had appeared in Italian and Russian . In Darwin 's lifetime , Origin was published in Swedish in 1871 , Danish in 1872 , Polish in 1873 , Hungarian in 1873 – 1874 , Spanish in 1877 and Serbian in 1878 . By 1977 , it had appeared in an additional 18 languages . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Title pages and introduction = = = 
 Page ii contains quotations by William Whewell and Francis Bacon on the theology of natural laws , harmonising science and religion in accordance with Isaac Newton 's belief in a rational God who established a law @-@ abiding cosmos . In the second edition , Darwin added an epigraph from Joseph Butler affirming that God could work through scientific laws as much as through miracles , in a nod to the religious concerns of his oldest friends . The Introduction establishes Darwin 's credentials as a naturalist and author , then refers to John Herschel 's letter suggesting that the origin of species " would be found to be a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process " : 
 WHEN on board HMS Beagle , as naturalist , I was much struck with certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America , and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent . These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species — that mystery of mysteries , as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers . 
 Darwin refers specifically to the distribution of the species rheas , and to that of the Galápagos tortoises and mockingbirds . He mentions his years of work on his theory , and the arrival of Wallace at the same conclusion , which led him to " publish this Abstract " of his incomplete work . He outlines his ideas , and sets out the essence of his theory : 
 As many more individuals of each species are born than can possibly survive ; and as , consequently , there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence , it follows that any being , if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself , under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life , will have a better chance of surviving , and thus be naturally selected . From the strong principle of inheritance , any selected variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form . 
 Starting with the third edition , Darwin prefaced the introduction with a sketch of the historical development of evolutionary ideas . In that sketch he acknowledged that Patrick Matthew had , unknown to Wallace or himself , anticipated the concept of natural selection in an appendix to a book published in 1831 ; in the fourth edition he mentioned that William Charles Wells had done so as early as 1813 . 
 = = = Variation under domestication and under nature = = = 
 Chapter I covers animal husbandry and plant breeding , going back to ancient Egypt . Darwin discusses contemporary opinions on the origins of different breeds under cultivation to argue that many have been produced from common ancestors by selective breeding . As an illustration of artificial selection , he describes fancy pigeon breeding , noting that " [ t ] he diversity of the breeds is something astonishing " , yet all were descended from one species of rock pigeon . Darwin saw two distinct kinds of variation : ( 1 ) rare abrupt changes he called " sports " or " monstrosities " ( example : <unk> sheep with short legs ) , and ( 2 ) ubiquitous small differences ( example : slightly shorter or longer bill of pigeons ) . Both types of hereditary changes can be used by breeders . However , for Darwin the small changes were most important in evolution . 
 In Chapter II , Darwin specifies that the distinction between species and varieties is arbitrary , with experts disagreeing and changing their decisions when new forms were found . He concludes that " a well @-@ marked variety may be justly called an incipient species " and that " species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties " . He argues for the ubiquity of variation in nature . Historians have noted that naturalists had long been aware that the individuals of a species differed from one another , but had generally considered such variations to be limited and unimportant deviations from the archetype of each species , that archetype being a fixed ideal in the mind of God . Darwin and Wallace made variation among individuals of the same species central to understanding the natural world . 
 = = = Struggle for existence , natural selection , and divergence = = = 
 In Chapter III , Darwin asks how varieties " which I have called incipient species " become distinct species , and in answer introduces the key concept he calls " natural selection " ; in the fifth edition he adds , " But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer , of the Survival of the Fittest , is more accurate , and is sometimes equally convenient . " 
 Owing to this struggle for life , any variation , however slight and from whatever cause proceeding , if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of any species , in its infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to external nature , will tend to the preservation of that individual , and will generally be inherited by its offspring ... I have called this principle , by which each slight variation , if useful , is preserved , by the term of Natural Selection , in order to mark its relation to man 's power of selection . 
 He notes that both A. P. de Candolle and Charles Lyell had stated that all organisms are exposed to severe competition . Darwin emphasizes that he used the phrase " struggle for existence " in " a large and metaphorical sense , including dependence of one being on another " ; he gives examples ranging from plants struggling against drought to plants competing for birds to eat their fruit and disseminate their seeds . He describes the struggle resulting from population growth : " It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms . " He discusses checks to such increase including complex ecological interdependencies , and notes that competition is most severe between closely related forms " which fill nearly the same place in the economy of nature " . 
 Chapter IV details natural selection under the " infinitely complex and close @-@ fitting ... mutual relations of all organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of life " . Darwin takes as an example a country where a change in conditions led to extinction of some species , immigration of others and , where suitable variations occurred , descendants of some species became adapted to new conditions . He remarks that the artificial selection practised by animal breeders frequently produced sharp divergence in character between breeds , and suggests that natural selection might do the same , saying : 
 But how , it may be asked , can any analogous principle apply in nature ? I believe it can and does apply most efficiently , from the simple circumstance that the more diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure , constitution , and habits , by so much will they be better enabled to seize on many and widely diversified places in the polity of nature , and so be enabled to increase in numbers . 
 Historians have remarked that here Darwin anticipated the modern concept of an ecological niche . He did not suggest that every favourable variation must be selected , nor that the favoured animals were better or higher , but merely more adapted to their surroundings . 
 Darwin proposes sexual selection , driven by competition between males for mates , to explain sexually dimorphic features such as lion manes , deer antlers , peacock tails , bird songs , and the bright plumage of some male birds . He analysed sexual selection more fully in The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex ( 1871 ) . Natural selection was expected to work very slowly in forming new species , but given the effectiveness of artificial selection , he could " see no limit to the amount of change , to the beauty and infinite complexity of the <unk> between all organic beings , one with another and with their physical conditions of life , which may be effected in the long course of time by nature 's power of selection " . Using a tree diagram and calculations , he indicates the " divergence of character " from original species into new species and genera . He describes branches falling off as extinction occurred , while new branches formed in " the great Tree of life ... with its ever branching and beautiful ramifications " . 
 = = = Variation and heredity = = = 
 In Darwin 's time there was no agreed @-@ upon model of heredity ; in Chapter I Darwin admitted , " The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown . " He accepted a version of the inheritance of acquired characteristics ( which after Darwin 's death came to be called Lamarckism ) , and Chapter V discusses what he called the effects of use and disuse ; he wrote that he thought " there can be little doubt that use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges certain parts , and disuse diminishes them ; and that such modifications are inherited " , and that this also applied in nature . Darwin stated that some changes that were commonly attributed to use and disuse , such as the loss of functional wings in some island dwelling insects , might be produced by natural selection . In later editions of Origin , Darwin expanded the role attributed to the inheritance of acquired characteristics . Darwin also admitted ignorance of the source of inheritable variations , but speculated they might be produced by environmental factors . However , one thing was clear : whatever the exact nature and causes of new variations , Darwin knew from observation and experiment that breeders were able to select such variations and produce huge differences in many generations of selection . The observation that selection works in domestic animals is not destroyed by lack of understanding of the underlying hereditary mechanism . 
 Breeding of animals and plants showed related varieties varying in similar ways , or tending to revert to an ancestral form , and similar patterns of variation in distinct species were explained by Darwin as demonstrating common descent . He recounted how Lord Morton 's mare apparently demonstrated telegony , offspring inheriting characteristics of a previous mate of the female parent , and accepted this process as increasing the variation available for natural selection . 
 More detail was given in Darwin 's 1868 book on The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication , which tried to explain heredity through his hypothesis of pangenesis . Although Darwin had privately questioned blending inheritance , he struggled with the theoretical difficulty that novel individual variations would tend to blend into a population . However , inherited variation could be seen , and Darwin 's concept of selection working on a population with a range of small variations was workable . It was not until the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s that a model of heredity became completely integrated with a model of variation . This modern evolutionary synthesis had been dubbed Neo Darwinian Evolution because it encompasses Charles Darwin 's theories of evolution with Gregor Mendel 's theories of genetic inheritance . 
 = = = Difficulties for the theory = = = 
 Chapter VI begins by saying the next three chapters will address possible objections to the theory , the first being that often no intermediate forms between closely related species are found , though the theory implies such forms must have existed . As Darwin noted , " Firstly , why , if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations , do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms ? Why is not all nature in confusion , instead of the species being , as we see them , well defined ? " Darwin attributed this to the competition between different forms , combined with the small number of individuals of intermediate forms , often leading to extinction of such forms . This difficulty can be referred to as the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in habitat space . 
 Another difficulty , related to the first one , is the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in time . Darwin commented that by the theory of natural selection " innumerable transitional forms must have existed , " and wondered " why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth ? " ( for further discussion of these difficulties , see Speciation # Darwin 's Dilemma and Bernstein et al. and <unk> ) 
 The chapter then deals with whether natural selection could produce complex specialised structures , and the behaviours to use them , when it would be difficult to imagine how intermediate forms could be functional . Darwin said : 
 Secondly , is it possible that an animal having , for instance , the structure and habits of a bat , could have been formed by the modification of some animal with wholly different habits ? Can we believe that natural selection could produce , on the one hand , organs of trifling importance , such as the tail of a giraffe , which serves as a fly @-@ flapper , and , on the other hand , organs of such wonderful structure , as the eye , of which we hardly as yet fully understand the inimitable perfection ? 
 His answer was that in many cases animals exist with intermediate structures that are functional . He presented flying squirrels , and flying lemurs as examples of how bats might have evolved from non @-@ flying ancestors . He discussed various simple eyes found in invertebrates , starting with nothing more than an optic nerve coated with pigment , as examples of how the vertebrate eye could have evolved . Darwin concludes : " If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed , which could not possibly have been formed by numerous , successive , slight modifications , my theory would absolutely break down . But I can find out no such case . " 
 In a section on " organs of little apparent importance " , Darwin discusses the difficulty of explaining various seemingly trivial traits with no evident adaptive function , and outlines some possibilities such as correlation with useful features . He accepts that we " are profoundly ignorant of the causes producing slight and unimportant variations " which distinguish domesticated breeds of animals , and human races . He suggests that sexual selection might explain these variations : 
 I might have adduced for this same purpose the differences between the races of man , which are so strongly marked ; I may add that some little light can apparently be thrown on the origin of these differences , chiefly through sexual selection of a particular kind , but without here entering on copious details my reasoning would appear frivolous . 
 Chapter VII ( of the first edition ) addresses the evolution of instincts . His examples included two he had investigated experimentally : slave @-@ making ants and the construction of hexagonal cells by honey bees . Darwin noted that some species of slave @-@ making ants were more dependent on slaves than others , and he observed that many ant species will collect and store the pupae of other species as food . He thought it reasonable that species with an extreme dependency on slave workers had evolved in incremental steps . He suggested that bees that make hexagonal cells evolved in steps from bees that made round cells , under pressure from natural selection to economise wax . Darwin concluded : 
 Finally , it may not be a logical deduction , but to my imagination it is far more satisfactory to look at such instincts as the young cuckoo ejecting its foster @-@ brothers , — ants making slaves , — the <unk> of <unk> feeding within the live bodies of caterpillars , — not as specially endowed or created instincts , but as small consequences of one general law , leading to the advancement of all organic beings , namely , multiply , vary , let the strongest live and the weakest die . 
 Chapter VIII addresses the idea that species had special characteristics that prevented hybrids from being fertile in order to preserve separately created species . Darwin said that , far from being constant , the difficulty in producing hybrids of related species , and the viability and fertility of the hybrids , varied greatly , especially among plants . Sometimes what were widely considered to be separate species produced fertile hybrid offspring freely , and in other cases what were considered to be mere varieties of the same species could only be crossed with difficulty . Darwin concluded : " Finally , then , the facts briefly given in this chapter do not seem to me opposed to , but even rather to support the view , that there is no fundamental distinction between species and varieties . " 
 In the sixth edition Darwin inserted a new chapter VII ( renumbering the subsequent chapters ) to respond to criticisms of earlier editions , including the objection that many features of organisms were not adaptive and could not have been produced by natural selection . He said some such features could have been by @-@ products of adaptive changes to other features , and that often features seemed non @-@ adaptive because their function was unknown , as shown by his book on Fertilisation of Orchids that explained how their elaborate structures facilitated pollination by insects . Much of the chapter responds to George Jackson Mivart 's criticisms , including his claim that features such as baleen filters in whales , flatfish with both eyes on one side and the camouflage of stick insects could not have evolved through natural selection because intermediate stages would not have been adaptive . Darwin proposed scenarios for the incremental evolution of each feature . 
 = = = Geologic record = = = 
 Chapter IX deals with the fact that the geologic record appears to show forms of life suddenly arising , without the innumerable transitional fossils expected from gradual changes . Darwin borrowed Charles Lyell 's argument in Principles of Geology that the record is extremely imperfect as fossilisation is a very rare occurrence , spread over vast periods of time ; since few areas had been geologically explored , there could only be fragmentary knowledge of geological formations , and fossil collections were very poor . Evolved local varieties which migrated into a wider area would seem to be the sudden appearance of a new species . Darwin did not expect to be able to reconstruct evolutionary history , but continuing discoveries gave him well founded hope that new finds would occasionally reveal transitional forms . To show that there had been enough time for natural selection to work slowly , he again cited Principles of Geology and other observations based on sedimentation and erosion , including an estimate that erosion of The Weald had taken 300 million years . The initial appearance of entire groups of well developed organisms in the oldest fossil @-@ bearing layers , now known as the Cambrian explosion , posed a problem . Darwin had no doubt that earlier seas had swarmed with living creatures , but stated that he had no satisfactory explanation for the lack of fossils . Fossil evidence of pre @-@ Cambrian life has since been found , extending the history of life back for billions of years . 
 Chapter X examines whether patterns in the fossil record are better explained by common descent and branching evolution through natural selection , than by the individual creation of fixed species . Darwin expected species to change slowly , but not at the same rate – some organisms such as Lingula were unchanged since the earliest fossils . The pace of natural selection would depend on variability and change in the environment . This distanced his theory from Lamarckian laws of inevitable progress . It has been argued that this anticipated the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis , but other scholars have preferred to emphasise Darwin 's commitment to gradualism . He cited Richard Owen 's findings that the earliest members of a class were a few simple and generalised species with characteristics intermediate between modern forms , and were followed by increasingly diverse and specialised forms , matching the branching of common descent from an ancestor . Patterns of extinction matched his theory , with related groups of species having a continued existence until extinction , then not reappearing . Recently extinct species were more similar to living species than those from earlier eras , and as he had seen in South America , and William Clift had shown in Australia , fossils from recent geological periods resembled species still living in the same area . 
 = = = Geographic distribution = = = 
 Chapter XI deals with evidence from biogeography , starting with the observation that differences in flora and fauna from separate regions cannot be explained by environmental differences alone ; South America , Africa , and Australia all have regions with similar climates at similar latitudes , but those regions have very different plants and animals . The species found in one area of a continent are more closely allied with species found in other regions of that same continent than to species found on other continents . Darwin noted that barriers to migration played an important role in the differences between the species of different regions . The coastal sea life of the Atlantic and Pacific sides of Central America had almost no species in common even though the Isthmus of Panama was only a few miles wide . His explanation was a combination of migration and descent with modification . He went on to say : " On this principle of inheritance with modification , we can understand how it is that sections of genera , whole genera , and even families are confined to the same areas , as is so commonly and notoriously the case . " Darwin explained how a volcanic island formed a few hundred miles from a continent might be colonised by a few species from that continent . These species would become modified over time , but would still be related to species found on the continent , and Darwin observed that this was a common pattern . Darwin discussed ways that species could be dispersed across oceans to colonise islands , many of which he had investigated experimentally . 
 Chapter XII continues the discussion of biogeography . After a brief discussion of freshwater species , it returns to oceanic islands and their peculiarities ; for example on some islands roles played by mammals on continents were played by other animals such as flightless birds or reptiles . The summary of both chapters says : 
 ... I think all the grand leading facts of geographical distribution are explicable on the theory of migration ( generally of the more dominant forms of life ) , together with subsequent modification and the multiplication of new forms . We can thus understand the high importance of barriers , whether of land or water , which separate our several zoological and botanical provinces . We can thus understand the localisation of sub @-@ genera , genera , and families ; and how it is that under different latitudes , for instance in South America , the inhabitants of the plains and mountains , of the forests , marshes , and deserts , are in so mysterious a manner linked together by affinity , and are likewise linked to the extinct beings which formerly inhabited the same continent ... On these same principles , we can understand , as I have endeavoured to show , why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants , but of these a great number should be endemic or peculiar ; ... 
 = = = Classification , morphology , embryology , rudimentary organs = = = 
 Chapter XIII starts by observing that classification depends on species being grouped together in a multilevel system of groups and sub groups based on varying degrees of resemblance . After discussing classification issues , Darwin concludes : 
 All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification are explained , if I do not greatly deceive myself , on the view that the natural system is founded on descent with modification ; that the characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between any two or more species , are those which have been inherited from a common parent , and , in so far , all true classification is genealogical ; that community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been unconsciously seeking , ... 
 Darwin discusses morphology , including the importance of homologous structures . He says , " What can be more curious than that the hand of a man , formed for grasping , that of a mole for digging , the leg of the horse , the paddle of the porpoise , and the wing of the bat , should all be constructed on the same pattern , and should include the same bones , in the same relative positions ? " This made no sense under doctrines of independent creation of species , as even Richard Owen had admitted , but the " explanation is manifest on the theory of the natural selection of successive slight modifications " showing common descent . He notes that animals of the same class often have extremely similar embryos . Darwin discusses rudimentary organs , such as the wings of flightless birds and the rudiments of pelvis and leg bones found in some snakes . He remarks that some rudimentary organs , such as teeth in baleen whales , are found only in embryonic stages . These factors also supported his theory of descent with modification . 
 = = = Concluding remarks = = = 
 The final chapter " Recapitulation and Conclusion " reviews points from earlier chapters , and Darwin concludes by hoping that his theory might produce revolutionary changes in many fields of natural history . He suggests that psychology will be put on a new foundation and implies the relevance of his theory to the first appearance of humanity with the sentence that " Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history . " Darwin ends with a passage that became well known and much quoted : 
 It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank , clothed with many plants of many kinds , with birds singing on the bushes , with various insects flitting about , and with worms crawling through the damp earth , and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms , so different from each other , and dependent on each other in so complex a manner , have all been produced by laws acting around us ... Thus , from the war of nature , from famine and death , the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving , namely , the production of the higher animals , directly follows . There is grandeur in this view of life , with its several powers , having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one ; and that , whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity , from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been , and are being , evolved . 
 As discussed under religious attitudes , Darwin added the phrase " by the Creator " from the 1860 second edition onwards , so that the ultimate sentence began " There is grandeur in this view of life , with its several powers , having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one " . 
 = = Structure and style = = 
 = = = Nature and structure of Darwin 's argument = = = 
 Darwin 's aims were twofold : to show that species had not been separately created , and to show that natural selection had been the chief agent of change . He knew that his readers were already familiar with the concept of transmutation of species from Vestiges , and his introduction ridicules that work as failing to provide a viable mechanism . Therefore , the first four chapters lay out his case that selection in nature , caused by the struggle for existence , is analogous to the selection of variations under domestication , and that the accumulation of adaptive variations provides a scientifically testable mechanism for evolutionary speciation . 
 Later chapters provide evidence that evolution has occurred , supporting the idea of branching , adaptive evolution without directly proving that selection is the mechanism . Darwin presents supporting facts drawn from many disciplines , showing that his theory could explain a myriad of observations from many fields of natural history that were inexplicable under the alternate concept that species had been individually created . The structure of Darwin 's argument showed the influence of John Herschel , whose philosophy of science maintained that a mechanism could be called a vera causa ( true cause ) if three things could be demonstrated : its existence in nature , its ability to produce the effects of interest , and its ability to explain a wide range of observations . 
 = = = Literary style = = = 
 The Examiner review of 3 December 1859 commented , " Much of Mr. Darwin 's volume is what ordinary readers would call ' tough reading ; ' that is , writing which to comprehend requires concentrated attention and some preparation for the task . All , however , is by no means of this description , and many parts of the book abound in information , easy to comprehend and both instructive and entertaining . " 
 While the book was readable enough to sell , its dryness ensured that it was seen as aimed at specialist scientists and could not be dismissed as mere journalism or imaginative fiction . Unlike the still @-@ popular Vestiges , it avoided the narrative style of the historical novel and cosmological speculation , though the closing sentence clearly hinted at cosmic progression . Darwin had long been immersed in the literary forms and practices of specialist science , and made effective use of his skills in structuring arguments . David Quammen has described the book as written in everyday language for a wide audience , but noted that Darwin 's literary style was uneven : in some places he used convoluted sentences that are difficult to read , while in other places his writing was beautiful . Quammen advised that later editions were weakened by Darwin making concessions and adding details to address his critics , and recommended the first edition . James T. Costa said that because the book was an abstract produced in haste in response to Wallace 's essay , it was more approachable than the big book on natural selection Darwin had been working on , which would have been encumbered by scholarly footnotes and much more technical detail . He added that some parts of Origin are dense , but other parts are almost lyrical , and the case studies and observations are presented in a narrative style unusual in serious scientific books , which broadened its audience . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book aroused international interest and a widespread debate , with no sharp line between scientific issues and ideological , social and religious implications . Much of the initial reaction was hostile , but Darwin had to be taken seriously as a prominent and respected name in science . There was much less controversy than had greeted the 1844 publication Vestiges of Creation , which had been rejected by scientists , but had influenced a wide public readership into believing that nature and human society were governed by natural laws . The Origin of Species as a book of wide general interest became associated with ideas of social reform . Its proponents made full use of a surge in the publication of review journals , and it was given more popular attention than almost any other scientific work , though it failed to match the continuing sales of Vestiges . Darwin 's book legitimised scientific discussion of evolutionary mechanisms , and the newly coined term Darwinism was used to cover the whole range of evolutionism , not just his own ideas . By the mid @-@ 1870s , evolutionism was triumphant . 
 While Darwin had been somewhat coy about human origins , not identifying any explicit conclusion on the matter in his book , he had dropped enough hints about human ’ s animal ancestry for the inference to be made , and the first review claimed it made a creed of the " men from monkeys " idea from Vestiges . Human evolution became central to the debate and was strongly argued by Huxley who featured it in his popular " working @-@ men 's lectures " . Darwin did not publish his own views on this until 1871 . 
 The naturalism of natural selection conflicted with presumptions of purpose in nature and while this could be reconciled by theistic evolution , other mechanisms implying more progress or purpose were more acceptable . Herbert Spencer had already incorporated Lamarckism into his popular philosophy of progressive free market human society . He popularised the terms evolution and survival of the fittest , and many thought Spencer was central to evolutionary thinking . 
 = = = Impact on the scientific community = = = 
 Scientific readers were already aware of arguments that species changed through processes that were subject to laws of nature , but the transmutational ideas of Lamarck and the vague " law of development " of Vestiges had not found scientific favour . Darwin presented natural selection as a scientifically testable mechanism while accepting that other mechanisms such as inheritance of acquired characters were possible . His strategy established that evolution through natural laws was worthy of scientific study , and by 1875 , most scientists accepted that evolution occurred but few thought natural selection was significant . Darwin 's scientific method was also disputed , with his proponents favouring the empiricism of John Stuart Mill 's A System of Logic , while opponents held to the idealist school of William Whewell 's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences , in which investigation could begin with the intuitive truth that species were fixed objects created by design . Early support for Darwin 's ideas came from the findings of field naturalists studying biogeography and ecology , including Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1860 , and Asa Gray in 1862 . Henry Walter Bates presented research in 1861 that explained insect mimicry using natural selection . Alfred Russel Wallace discussed evidence from his Malay archipelago research , including an 1864 paper with an evolutionary explanation for the Wallace line . 
 Evolution had less obvious applications to anatomy and morphology , and at first had little impact on the research of the anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley . Despite this , Huxley strongly supported Darwin on evolution ; though he called for experiments to show whether natural selection could form new species , and questioned if Darwin 's gradualism was sufficient without sudden leaps to cause speciation . Huxley wanted science to be secular , without religious interference , and his article in the April 1860 Westminster Review promoted scientific naturalism over natural theology , praising Darwin for " extending the domination of Science over regions of thought into which she has , as yet , hardly penetrated " and coining the term " Darwinism " as part of his efforts to <unk> and professionalise science . Huxley gained influence , and initiated the X Club , which used the journal Nature to promote evolution and naturalism , shaping much of late Victorian science . Later , the German morphologist Ernst Haeckel would convince Huxley that comparative anatomy and palaeontology could be used to reconstruct evolutionary genealogies . 
 The leading naturalist in Britain was the anatomist Richard Owen , an idealist who had shifted to the view in the 1850s that the history of life was the gradual unfolding of a divine plan . Owen 's review of the Origin in the April 1860 Edinburgh Review bitterly attacked Huxley , Hooker and Darwin , but also signalled acceptance of a kind of evolution as a teleological plan in a continuous " ordained becoming " , with new species appearing by natural birth . Others that rejected natural selection , but supported " creation by birth " , included the Duke of Argyll who explained beauty in plumage by design . Since 1858 , Huxley had emphasised anatomical similarities between apes and humans , contesting Owen 's view that humans were a separate sub @-@ class . Their disagreement over human origins came to the fore at the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting featuring the legendary 1860 Oxford evolution debate . In two years of acrimonious public dispute that Charles Kingsley satirised as the " Great Hippocampus Question " and parodied in The Water @-@ Babies as the " great hippopotamus test " , Huxley showed that Owen was incorrect in asserting that ape brains lacked a structure present in human brains . Others , including Charles Lyell and Alfred Russel Wallace , thought that humans shared a common ancestor with apes , but higher mental faculties could not have evolved through a purely material process . Darwin published his own explanation in the Descent of Man ( 1871 ) . 
 = = = = Impact outside Great Britain = = = = 
 Evolutionary ideas , although not natural selection , were accepted by German biologists accustomed to ideas of homology in morphology from Goethe 's Metamorphosis of Plants and from their long tradition of comparative anatomy . Bronn 's alterations in his German translation added to the misgivings of conservatives , but enthused political radicals . Ernst Haeckel was particularly ardent , aiming to synthesise Darwin 's ideas with those of Lamarck and Goethe while still reflecting the spirit of Naturphilosophie . Their ambitious programme to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life was joined by Huxley and supported by discoveries in palaeontology . Haeckel used embryology extensively in his recapitulation theory , which embodied a progressive , almost linear model of evolution . Darwin was cautious about such histories , and had already noted that von Baer 's laws of embryology supported his idea of complex branching . 
 Asa Gray promoted and defended Origin against those American naturalists with an idealist approach , notably Louis Agassiz who viewed every species as a distinct fixed unit in the mind of the Creator , classifying as species what others considered merely varieties . Edward Drinker Cope and Alpheus Hyatt reconciled this view with evolutionism in a form of neo @-@ Lamarckism involving recapitulation theory . 
 French @-@ speaking naturalists in several countries showed appreciation of the much modified French translation by Clémence Royer , but Darwin 's ideas had little impact in France , where any scientists supporting evolutionary ideas opted for a form of Lamarckism . The intelligentsia in Russia had accepted the general phenomenon of evolution for several years before Darwin had published his theory , and scientists were quick to take it into account , although the Malthusian aspects were felt to be relatively unimportant . The political economy of struggle was criticised as a British stereotype by Karl Marx and by Leo Tolstoy , who had the character Levin in his novel Anna Karenina voice sharp criticism of the morality of Darwin 's views . 
 = = = = Challenges to natural selection = = = = 
 There were serious scientific objections to the process of natural selection as the key mechanism of evolution , including Karl von Nägeli 's insistence that a trivial characteristic with no adaptive advantage could not be developed by selection . Darwin conceded that these could be linked to adaptive characteristics . His estimate that the age of the Earth allowed gradual evolution was disputed by William Thomson ( later awarded the title Lord Kelvin ) , who calculated that it had cooled in less than 100 million years . Darwin accepted blending inheritance , but <unk> Jenkin calculated that as it mixed traits , natural selection could not accumulate useful traits . Darwin tried to meet these objections in the 5th edition . Mivart supported directed evolution , and compiled scientific and religious objections to natural selection . In response , Darwin made considerable changes to the sixth edition . The problems of the age of the Earth and heredity were only resolved in the 20th century . 
 By the mid @-@ 1870s , most scientists accepted evolution , but relegated natural selection to a minor role as they believed evolution was purposeful and progressive . The range of evolutionary theories during " the eclipse of Darwinism " included forms of " saltationism " in which new species were thought to arise through " jumps " rather than gradual adaptation , forms of orthogenesis claiming that species had an inherent tendency to change in a particular direction , and forms of neo @-@ Lamarckism in which inheritance of acquired characteristics led to progress . The minority view of August Weismann , that natural selection was the only mechanism , was called neo @-@ Darwinism . It was thought that the rediscovery of Mendelian inheritance invalidated Darwin 's views . 
 = = = Impact on economic and political debates = = = 
 While some , like Spencer , used analogy from natural selection as an argument against government intervention in the economy to benefit the poor , others , including Alfred Russel Wallace , argued that action was needed to correct social and economic inequities to level the playing field before natural selection could improve humanity further . Some political commentaries , including Walter Bagehot 's Physics and Politics ( 1872 ) , attempted to extend the idea of natural selection to competition between nations and between human races . Such ideas were incorporated into what was already an ongoing effort by some working in anthropology to provide scientific evidence for the superiority of Caucasians over non white races and justify European imperialism . Historians write that most such political and economic commentators had only a superficial understanding of Darwin 's scientific theory , and were as strongly influenced by other concepts about social progress and evolution , such as the Lamarckian ideas of Spencer and Haeckel , as they were by Darwin 's work . Darwin objected to his ideas being used to justify military aggression and unethical business practices as he believed morality was part of fitness in humans , and he opposed <unk> , the idea that human races were fundamentally distinct and did not share a recent common ancestry . 
 = = = Religious attitudes = = = 
 The book produced a wide range of religious responses at a time of changing ideas and increasing secularisation . The issues raised were complex and there was a large middle ground . Developments in geology meant that there was little opposition based on a literal reading of Genesis , but defence of the argument from design and natural theology was central to debates over the book in the English @-@ speaking world . 
 Natural theology was not a unified doctrine , and while some such as Louis Agassiz were strongly opposed to the ideas in the book , others sought a reconciliation in which evolution was seen as purposeful . In the Church of England , some liberal clergymen interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God 's design , with the cleric Charles Kingsley seeing it as " just as noble a conception of Deity " . In the second edition of January 1860 , Darwin quoted Kingsley as " a celebrated cleric " , and added the phrase " by the Creator " to the closing sentence , which from then on read " life , with its several powers , having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one " . While some commentators have taken this as a concession to religion that Darwin later regretted , Darwin 's view at the time was of God creating life through the laws of nature , and even in the first edition there are several references to " creation " . 
 Baden Powell praised " Mr Darwin 's masterly volume [ supporting ] the grand principle of the self @-@ evolving powers of nature " . In America , Asa Gray argued that evolution is the secondary effect , or modus operandi , of the first cause , design , and published a pamphlet defending the book in terms of theistic evolution , Natural Selection is not inconsistent with Natural Theology . Theistic evolution became a popular compromise , and St. George Jackson Mivart was among those accepting evolution but attacking Darwin 's naturalistic mechanism . Eventually it was realised that supernatural intervention could not be a scientific explanation , and naturalistic mechanisms such as neo @-@ Lamarckism were favoured over natural selection as being more compatible with purpose . 
 Even though the book did not explicitly spell out Darwin ’ s beliefs about human origins , it had dropped a number of hints about human ’ s animal ancestry and quickly became central to the debate , as mental and moral qualities were seen as spiritual aspects of the immaterial soul , and it was believed that animals did not have spiritual qualities . This conflict could be reconciled by supposing there was some supernatural intervention on the path leading to humans , or viewing evolution as a purposeful and progressive ascent to mankind 's position at the head of nature . While many conservative theologians accepted evolution , Charles Hodge argued in his 1874 critique " What is Darwinism ? " that " Darwinism " , defined narrowly as including rejection of design , was atheism though he accepted that Asa Gray did not reject design . Asa Gray responded that this charge misrepresented Darwin 's text . By the early 20th century , four noted authors of The Fundamentals were explicitly open to the possibility that God created through evolution , but fundamentalism inspired the American creation – evolution controversy that began in the 1920s . Some conservative Roman Catholic writers and influential Jesuits opposed evolution in the late 19th and early 20th century , but other Catholic writers , starting with Mivart , pointed out that early Church Fathers had not interpreted Genesis literally in this area . The Vatican stated its official position in a 1950 papal encyclical , which held that evolution was not inconsistent with Catholic teaching . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Various alternative evolutionary mechanisms favoured during " the eclipse of Darwinism " became untenable as more was learned about inheritance and mutation . The full significance of natural selection was at last accepted in the 1930s and 1940s as part of the modern evolutionary synthesis . During that synthesis biologists and statisticians , including R. A. Fisher , Sewall Wright and J.B.S. Haldane , merged Darwinian selection with a statistical understanding of Mendelian genetics . 
 Modern evolutionary theory continues to develop . Darwin 's theory of evolution by natural selection , with its tree @-@ like model of branching common descent , has become the unifying theory of the life sciences . The theory explains the diversity of living organisms and their adaptation to the environment . It makes sense of the geologic record , biogeography , parallels in embryonic development , biological homologies , <unk> , cladistics , phylogenetics and other fields , with unrivalled explanatory power ; it has also become essential to applied sciences such as medicine and agriculture . Despite the scientific consensus , a religion @-@ based political controversy has developed over how evolution is taught in schools , especially in the United States . 
 Interest in Darwin 's writings continues , and scholars have generated an extensive literature , the Darwin Industry , about his life and work . The text of Origin itself has been subject to much analysis including a variorum , detailing the changes made in every edition , first published in 1959 , and a concordance , an exhaustive external index published in 1981 . Worldwide commemorations of the 150th anniversary of the publication of On the Origin of Species and the bicentenary of Darwin 's birth were scheduled for 2009 . They celebrated the ideas which " over the last 150 years have revolutionised our understanding of nature and our place within it " . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Carpenter , William Benjamin ( 1859 ) , " Darwin on the Origin of Species " , National Review , vol . 10 no . December 1859 , pp. 188 – 214 . Published anonymously . 
 Gray , Asa ( 1860 ) , " ( Review of ) The Origin of Species " , Athenaeum ( 1710 : 4 August 1860 ) : 161 . Extract from Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 4 ( 1860 ) : 411 – 415 . 
 Huxley , Thomas Henry ( 1859 ) , " Time and Life : Mr Darwin 's Origin of Species " , Macmillan 's Magazine 1 : 142 – 148 . 
 Huxley , Thomas Henry ( 1859 ) , " Darwin on the Origin of Species " , The Times ( 26 December 1859 ) : 8 – 9 . Published anonymously . 
 Jenkin , <unk> ( 1867 ) , " ( Review of ) The Origin of Species " , North British Review 46 ( June 1867 ) : 277 – 318 . Published anonymously . 
 Murray , Andrew ( 1860 ) , " On Mr Darwin 's Theory of the Origin of Species " , Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 4 : 274 – 291 . 
 Owen , Richard ( 1860 ) , " Review of Darwin 's Origin of Species " , Edinburgh Review 3 ( April 1860 ) : 487 – 532 . Published anonymously . 
 Wilberforce , Samuel ( 1860 ) , " ( Review of ) On the Origin of Species , by means of Natural Selection ; or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life " , Quarterly Review 108 ( 215 : July 1860 ) : 225 – 264 . Published anonymously . 
 For further reviews , see Darwin Online : Reviews & Responses to Darwin , Darwin Online , 10 March 2009 , retrieved 18 June 2009 
 = Antara ( news agency ) = 
 Antara is an Indonesian news agency organized as a private company under the Ministry of State @-@ owned Enterprises . It is the country 's national news agency , supplying news reports to the many domestic media organization . It is the only organization authorized to distribute news material created by foreign news agencies . 
 The news agency was founded in 1937 , when the country was still a colony in the Dutch Empire , by independence activists dissatisfied with the lack of local coverage by the Dutch @-@ owned Aneta news agency . Antara 's operation was absorbed into the Dōmei Tsushin news network following invasion by the Japanese in 1942 . Its staff played a key role in the broadcast of Indonesia 's proclamation of independence and assumed control of the Dōmei facilities in the region at the end of the war . The agency remained under private management until it was placed under the control of the presidency in the 1960s when the government shifted its focus from decolonization to nation @-@ building . Antara became an institution through which the state could promote its policies . 
 Following a wave of political reforms in the late 1990s , Antara began to produce its reporting independently of the government and was reorganized as a state @-@ owned enterprise in 2007 . However , media scholars argue that a lengthy relationship with the government makes it difficult for the agency to become an unbiased news organization . Antara celebrated its 75th anniversary on 13 December 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Antara was established on 13 December 1937 in Batavia ( later Jakarta ) , the colonial capital of the Dutch East Indies . Prior to its establishment , Dominique Willem <unk> had founded Aneta , the Indies ' first news agency . A number of Dutch and indigenous firms were also in existence but did not achieve similar stature . As a Dutch agency , however , Aneta rarely included local news in its coverage . This led to dissatisfaction among independence activists Soemanang <unk> and Albert <unk> Sipahoetar , who eventually decided to form a separate news agency . 
 Soemanang had been working at the <unk> Timoer newspaper , while Sipahoetar was an employee for a Dutch advertisement agency . The latter was also an acquaintance of Adam Malik , who had left Medan after Dutch authorities attempted to imprison him for political activism . The three met at Soemanang 's residence with author Armijn Pane to discuss the establishment of the news agency . Soemanang named the agency Antara based on <unk> , a weekly magazine he had previously established in Bogor . He became its editor @-@ in @-@ chief , while Sipahoetar became a senior editor . Antara 's first news bulletin reporting its own establishment , was reprinted in the newspapers <unk> Kita on 14 December 1937 and <unk> the following day . Sanusi Pane , Armijn Pane 's older brother and <unk> 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief , and <unk> Kita editor @-@ in @-@ chief <unk> <unk> were appointed to the agency 's board of directors . 
 The agency 's leadership was later reorganized . Soemanang became Antara 's managing editor , and while Malik became his deputy . Malik , twenty years old at the time , was credited with keeping the agency alive in its early years by building a base of supporters in the emerging indigenous middle class . After Soemanang left Antara in 1938 to become the director of the <unk> Rakjat network of schools , Sipahoetar was promoted to editor @-@ in @-@ chief , and <unk> <unk> became the agency 's deputy editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Sipahoetar was later elevated to managing editor , but left the agency in 1939 because of an illness . Alwi <unk> Osman , an employee of the Indies ' Ministry of Justice , briefly succeeded him as managing editor before being replaced by <unk> <unk> . 
 When Japanese forces took control of the Indies in 1942 , the empire 's Dōmei Tsushin news agency established a branch office in Jakarta . Antara was renamed Yashima on 29 May , and it was eventually absorbed by the Dōmei news network three months later . Press activity flourished as Dōmei opened offices in major cities throughout Java . When Indonesia 's independence was proclaimed on 17 August 1945 , Adam Malik obtained a copy of the text and dictated it by telephone to his colleagues at the agency . The resulting news bulletin slipped past Japanese censors and was broadcast throughout Dōmei 's newswire network . Dōmei officials attempted to retract the bulletin , but a courier was able to deliver a copy of the proclamation using the agency 's name to the <unk> <unk> radio station in midst of the confusion . Antara assumed control of Dōmei 's local network when the Japanese surrendered to Allied forces weeks later and reopened under private management on 3 September . 
 Antara 's leading journalists soon saw a need for the agency to establish additional branches outside Jakarta . <unk> , a former editor at Dōmei , opened one of these offices in British Singapore in February 1946 . The branch received no funding from the newly formed Indonesian government and was housed in a three @-@ story building in Raffles Place . Its goal was to " break the Dutch or Allied monopoly on news about Indonesia " , especially when local British authorities did not recognize Indonesia as an independent government . 
 = = = National news agency = = = 
 After the Dutch relinquished all of their possessions in the Indies in 1962 , the Indonesian government began mobilizing the mass media in its efforts to build a unified nation . President Sukarno released an executive decree which reorganized Antara as the National News Agency Institute ( Lembaga Kantor Berita Nasional , or <unk> ) under increased government control . Within three weeks of its reorganization on 24 September , Antara merged with three other existing news agencies : the Indonesian Press Bureau ( PIA ) , the Asian Press Board ( APB ) , and the Indonesian National Press and Publicity Service ( <unk> ) . 
 Antara received financial assistance from the government and was placed directly under the president 's control , giving him the authority to appoint the agency 's managing director and editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Antara 's position in the structure of government resulted in confusion over its ownership and control , as well as shifting editorial views in the coming decades . As Sukarno pursued increasingly leftist policies , the conservative media accused Antara for its " explicitly partisan " reporting . Following his removal from office , the subsequent government also used the agency to further its policies , prompting criticism from the liberal media . 
 An abortive coup in 1965 , blamed on the Communist Party of Indonesia and its allies , left Antara under military command . Nearly one @-@ third of its editorial staff were dismissed , and many journalists sympathetic to the Communist Party were killed in the subsequent anti @-@ communist purge . After Suharto assumed the presidency in the following year , the agency produced many of its news reports based on official government sources . Independent news outlets published stories on politically sensitive topics only if they had been reported by Antara in order to avoid sanctions should the stories be found offensive by government leaders . Although the government released a decree affirming freedom of the press , news publishers had to obtain a Permit To Publish ( Surat <unk> <unk> ) from the Ministry of Information and a Permit To Print ( Surat <unk> <unk> ) from the military security authority Kopkamtib . This ensured the suppression of publications with militant views . 
 Suharto resigned his presidency in 1998 , and licensing requirements for media organizations were lifted the following September as the number of authorized publications surged from 289 to over 2 @,@ 000 in the span of 16 months . Antara attempted to reinvent its image into that of an independent news agency amid the wave of political reforms , but there were allegations of continued bias toward the policies of Suharto 's successor B. J. Habibie . President Abdurrahman Wahid later sacked the agency 's managing director , Parni Hadi , and accused him of " dominating the news agency and trying to turn Antara into his private company " . Hadi 's replacement , appointed to the post without any journalism experience , was specifically tasked to make the agency more independent . 
 In 2007 , Antara was removed from the control of the presidency and reorganized as a private state @-@ owned enterprise . It had experienced financial losses in recent years and sought a Rp 450 billion ( US $ 50 million ) bailout from the government in the following year in order to modernize the agency 's business capabilities with the goal of becoming an independent business entity . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Antara is a state @-@ owned enterprise ( Badan <unk> <unk> Negara ) under the Ministry of State @-@ owned Enterprises . It was previously under direct presidential authority since 1962 and within the administrative structure of the State Secretariat , which provided for its subsidies , since 1977 . The news agency was also responsible to Ministry of Information which coordinated press activities . David Hill of Murdoch University points out that under the Suharto government Antara 's Supervisory Council at one point included the deputy chief of the State Intelligence Coordinating Agency , indicating military interest in regulating the press . Antara 's status as a government entity had come into question as restrictions on press activity were lifted . Article 9 of the Law of the Republic of Indonesia No. 40 of 1999 stipulates that news organizations must operate as a " legal entity " , which directly contradicted Antara 's status as an institute according to former executive editor A. J. <unk> . 
 Government subsidy accounted for 11 percent of Antara 's operational costs in 1987 – 88 . This figure had fallen to 1 percent by 2002 , with an additional 25 percent of income coming from the sale of its wire services to domestic news organizations . A 1972 decree by the Ministry of Information stipulates that Antara is the only news organization permitted to distribute news material from foreign news agencies . This results in an effective monopoly that provides the largest source of the agency 's revenues . Some government officials have called for an end to this practice , but Angela Romano and Blythe Senior of Queensland University of Technology point out that such a decision will " undermine Antara 's entire operating structure " and compromise the agency 's financial stability . The Jakarta Post reported in 2000 that some 70 domestic news organizations were subscribed to the agency 's wire service . 
 = = Public response and opinion = = 
 Antara 's legacy as a news organization is the documentation of Indonesia 's decolonization process and formative years as a nation . Antara became an alternative news source for the fledgling Indonesian press which could not afford the services of its rival Aneta , and nationalist interpretations in its reporting contrasted that of the Dutch news agency . Despite these advances , political scientist Oey Hong Lee observed that the overall impact of Antara 's reporting remained limited while Aneta continued to exist , " reflecting on the weakness of the nationalist press " and with " [ Antara 's ] predominantly home @-@ based news coverage finding its way only into more nationalist minded newspapers and progressive Chinese press organs " . 
 Hill argues that journalists and guerrilla soldiers were equally important in winning the Indonesian National Revolution . Antara and nationalist newspapers , which were largely unrestricted under the postwar transitional Allied administration , engaged in a war of propaganda in order to gain international recognition of an independent Indonesia . On the occasion of the agency 's 69th anniversary , President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono stated , " Antara made immense contributions in documenting the nation 's struggle during the period of revolution , such that its role must not be forgotten . " 
 The Indonesian Armed Forces , whose growing sociopolitical involvement in the 1950s resulted in a " triangular power structure " with President Sukarno and the Communist Party of Indonesia , grew wary of Antara 's leftist leaning under government management . It countered by establishing the Armed Forces Information Centre ( Pusat <unk> Angkatan <unk> , <unk> ) in 1965 to disseminate the policies and views of the Armed Forces . A consortium of newspapers also sought to establish an unaffiliated news agency in 1966 when it formed the KNI Foundation ( <unk> <unk> Nasional Indonesia ) , but staff and resources were limited compared to Antara , which received government funding . Both agencies had ceased operations by 2001 . 
 Romano and Senior argue that Antara 's relationship with the government puts the agency at risk of engaging in self @-@ censorship in recent years . Internal reforms immediately after 1998 did not completely eliminate the culture of cronyism that had come to characterize the relationship between the government and the press . The two note , however , that Antara journalists were given greater rights to affiliate and organize into unions than their peers in other news organizations . 
 = Rowland Egerton @-@ Warburton = 
 Rowland Eyles Egerton @-@ Warburton DL ( 14 September 1804 – 6 December 1891 ) was a landowner from the Egerton family in Cheshire , England . He was a devout Anglican in the high church tradition and a local benefactor . He paid for the restoration of his parish church and for the building of two new churches in villages on his estates . He also built cottages and farm buildings in the villages . 
 Through his mother 's line he inherited the Arley and Warburton estates in Cheshire . He is best remembered for rebuilding Arley Hall and its chapel dedicated to St Mary , and for helping to create the picturesque appearance of the village of Great Budworth . He and his wife designed extensive new formal gardens to the southeast of the hall , which included one of the earliest herbaceous borders in Britain . The hall and gardens are still owned by his family , but are open to the public . 
 Egerton @-@ Warburton 's main hobby was hunting . He was a keen member , and later the president , of the nearby Tarporley Hunt Club . He also wrote poetry , the subject matter of which reflected his interests in hunting and in the countryside . Some of his rhymes are to be found on signposts in the grounds of the hall . 
 = = Early life = = 
 He was born Rowland Egerton in 1804 at <unk> Bank , <unk> , Cheshire , the eldest son of Rev. Rowland Egerton BA and his wife , Emma . His father was the seventh son of Philip Egerton who became the 9th baronet of Egerton and Oulton on the death of his elder brother in 1825 . His maternal grandmother ( also called Emma ) was the youngest sister of Sir Peter Warburton , 5th baronet of Arley , who had no children . Sir Peter died in 1813 and in his will he left the estates of Warburton and Arley to Rowland junior , who was at that time still a minor . His father added the name " Warburton " by royal licence in the same year . Egerton @-@ Warburton was educated at Eton College , and although he was admitted to Corpus Christi College , Oxford in 1823 , there is no evidence that he was awarded a degree . After his time in Oxford he went on a Grand Tour , and returned to the life of a squire at Arley Hall , having gained control of the estates on achieving his age of majority in 1825 . 
 = = <unk> and benefactor = = 
 Egerton @-@ Warburton managed the Arley estate from 1825 until his death in 1891 . During this time the estate was profitable and he was able to enjoy a larger income than his predecessors . He was a high church Anglican and a supporter of the Oxford Movement , having been influenced by Keble , Pusey and Newman . He regularly attended choral Matins in the chapel at Arley Hall , and on hunt days he wore his hunting colours . He took little interest in politics , in which respect he is regarded as having been " passive " . 
 In the 1850s he paid for the restoration of his local parish church of St Mary and All Saints at Great Budworth , where he encouraged a more Anglo @-@ Catholic style of worship . He paid for the building of new churches in two villages on his estates . In the village of Warburton he paid for the new church of St Werburgh . This was built in 1883 – 85 to a design by John Douglas of Chester , at which time Egerton @-@ Warburton 's nephew , Rev. Geoffrey Egerton @-@ Warburton , was the incumbent . This church replaced the old church in Warburton , also dedicated to St Werburgh , as the parish church . The old church still exists on another site in the village . In the village of Appleton Thorn , 3 @.@ 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the north of Arley Hall , he paid for St Cross church , which was built in 1886 – 87 to a design by Edmund Kirby of Liverpool . 
 Egerton @-@ Warburton also paid for the construction of secular buildings in villages on his estates , many of which were designed by John Douglas . In Great Budworth he had a " campaign to restore the village and render it picturesque in Victorian eyes " . He restored many of the cottages in the village and built new ones to blend with them . In 1875 the George and Dragon , a simple three @-@ bay Georgian inn in the village , was remodelled by adding ribbed chimneys , moulded brick mullions , an elliptical @-@ headed doorway and a steep pyramid @-@ shaped turret . The village has changed little since then and it remains " one of Cheshire 's most charming villages " . In 1873 he paid for the building of a cottage in Arley Green and founded Arley School in the village . In Warburton , he paid for a school in 1871 – 72 , a church hall in 1889 , and a post office in 1893 . Features in the style of Douglas were added to the timber @-@ framed Bent Farm , which stands opposite the new church , in 1880 . He also built the public road from Arley Hall to Appleton Thorn . 
 = = Fox hunter and poet = = 
 Egerton @-@ Warburton was a keen fox hunter and rode with the Tarporley Hunt Club , of which he became a member in 1825 and its president in 1838 . When he retired from hunting in 1873 , he was made an honorary member of the club . His friend , the Bishop of Oxford , Samuel Wilberforce , described him as being " equally at home in the hunting field and the parish church " . He was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant of Cheshire in 1825 , was an officer in the Royal Cheshire Militia and in the Cheshire Yeomanry , served as a Justice of the Peace , and was High Sheriff of Cheshire for 1833 . 
 His poetry , usually on the subjects of hunting and country life , was light @-@ hearted and popular . In 1834 he published his Hunting Songs , which ran to eight editions . Titles of the songs include " A Good Merry Gallop for Me ! " and " Farmer Dobbin " . His nine @-@ stanza poem " <unk> <unk> " is considered to be his best work . He created signposts on his estate with rhyming inscriptions , some of which are still present . He also published more serious documents about the cattle plague of 1747 – 49 . Lord Halifax referred to him as " a perfect combination , a good churchman , a good landlord , a keen sportsman , and a man of literary tastes " . In his 1885 book Hunting , the Duke of Beaufort described Warburton as ' that Homer of the hunting @-@ field ' . 
 He also wrote a couplet as an epitaph for the headstone of Copenhagen , the war horse ridden at the Battle of Waterloo by Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington . The couplet , " God 's humbler instrument , though meaner clay , should share the glory of that glorious day , " was written at the request of the 2nd Duke , when he erected a tombstone for his father 's famous horse on his grave at Strathfield Saye . The first Duke would have approved of the choice of poet , since he , like Egerton @-@ Warburton , was a keen sportsman , and in fact , the Duke had often hunted on Copenhagen when the two of them were in the Peninsula . 
 = = Rebuilding of Arley Hall = = 
 When Egerton @-@ Warburton took over the estate , the hall was " dilapidated and swarming with rats " , and so he decided to replace it completely . He took great interest in the design of the new house and chapel , and his ideas reflected respectively his artistic and his religious values . In respect of the house , he was influenced by the spirit of the Romantic movement . He also wanted the new house to reflect his ancient lineage : " to suggest something of the pity of the Middle Ages as well as the grandeur of Elizabethan England " . He therefore rejected the neoclassical style of architecture , which was fashionable at the time , and chose instead to build a house in what is now known as Jacobethan style . He also wanted it to incorporate modern technology and materials in its construction , and he did not want it to be too expensive . He commissioned a young local architect , George Latham from Nantwich , and worked closely with him in the design . Latham suggested that the final cost would be in the region of £ 5 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 000 ( £ 400 thousand – £ 480 thousand today ) . It was agreed that every architectural feature of the house should have an exact model in an existing Elizabethan building . Egerton @-@ Warburton and Latham travelled together and visited such buildings to study these features . 
 The first phase of building started in 1832 , and the east , north and west wings of the old house were demolished . Most of the new building in this phase consisted of servants ' quarters and utility rooms . A drawing room , grand staircase and hall were built but they were left unfinished . Modern plumbing was fitted , the structure of the house was raised on arches to reduce the effect of damp , and the spaces under the arches were ventilated and warmed by a patent device . This phase was completed in 1835 at a cost of about £ 13 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 15 million today ) . Egerton @-@ Warburton then took a break , partly to raise the money needed for the completion of the house , and also to work on the designs of the remaining rooms . The second and final phase was built between 1840 and 1845 . The south front was demolished and the building , much of which is present today , was finished . The final cost of the house came to about £ 30 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 68 million today ) . 
 In designing the chapel , he again broke away from the classical style of architecture . Having been influenced by the Oxford Movement , he decided that it should be designed in Gothic style . He commissioned the nationally famous architect Anthony Salvin to design a Gothic Revival chapel , which was completed and consecrated in 1845 . In 1856 – 57 , a north aisle and porch were added to a design by George Street . 
 When Egerton @-@ Warburton took over the estate , the gardens were mainly to the east of the hall , but with his wife , Mary , he designed new gardens . These were developed to the southwest of the hall between 1840 and 1860 . They implemented their designs apparently without any professional help , and the present gardens are largely the result of their planning . The herbaceous border was one of the first of its type to have been created in England . Items they planted which are still present include the yew finials in the herbaceous border , which were planted in 1856 , and the holly oak cylinders in the Ilex Walk , which were also planted in the 1850s . 
 = = Family and later life = = 
 Egerton @-@ Warburton was the eldest child of ten ; he had four brothers and five sisters . His younger brother , James Francis , who was born in 1807 , graduated MA and became the rector of Warburton . Henry William was born in 1808 , and became a major in the 47th ( Lancashire ) Regiment of Foot . Peter , born in 1813 , worked with the East India Company before moving to Australia , where he achieved some notoriety as an explorer . The youngest brother , George Edward was born in 1819 . He also emigrated and established a farm in Western Australia . Egerton @-@ Warburton 's sisters were Emma ( born 1805 ) , Frances Mary ( 1809 ) , Maria Sybilla ( 1812 ) , Charlotte ( 1815 ) , and Sophia ( 1816 ) . 
 On 7 April 1831 Egerton @-@ Warburton married Mary Brooke , the eldest daughter of Sir Richard Brooke , 6th baronet of Norton Priory . They had three children , Mary Alice , Piers ( later MP for Mid Cheshire ) , and Mary . His wife died in 1881 and his younger daughter and her family moved in to live with him . By 1874 he was suffering from glaucoma , and soon afterwards became blind . He continued to take walks , led on a leather strap by his gardener . He had a path , Furlong Walk , constructed from the terrace at the hall with wire to guide him . His health began to fail from 1888 and he died in 1891 at the age of 87 . He was buried in the family vault at Great Budworth church . His estate amounted to a little over £ 51 @,@ 670 ( £ 5 @.@ 09 million today ) . 
 = 2015 Austrian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Austrian Grand Prix ( formally known as the Formula 1 Grosser Preis von Österreich 2015 ) was a Formula One motor race held on 21 June 2015 at the Red Bull Ring in Spielberg , Austria . The race was the eighth round of the 2015 season , and marked the 29th running of the Austrian Grand Prix . 
 Mercedes driver Nico Rosberg entered as the defending race winner , while his teammate , Lewis Hamilton , entered with a seventeen @-@ point lead over him in the Drivers ' Championship standings . Mercedes were leading rivals Ferrari by 105 points in the Constructors ' standings . 
 Hamilton started from pole position , but was overtaken by Rosberg at the first corner . Rosberg held the lead for the remainder of the race , barring brief periods during pit stops , and won by over three seconds . Hamilton remained ahead of Williams 's Felipe Massa to claim the runner @-@ up position . Ferrari driver Sebastian Vettel had been holding third position for much of the first half of the race , but a delay due to a stuck wheel nut during his pit stop dropped him into fourth place . Former World Champions Kimi Räikkönen and Fernando Alonso were eliminated on the first lap , after Räikkönen lost control of his Ferrari at the second turn and collided with Alonso . The two came to rest against the safety barrier , with Alonso 's McLaren atop the Ferrari . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Having just nine turns , the fewest on the Formula One calendar , the circuit offers very few low @-@ speed sections and gave teams an opportunity to push their power units to their potential . As in the previous year 's event , and for the third straight event overall , the yellow @-@ banded soft compound tyre were the prime dry selection while the red @-@ banded supersoft compound were the option dry selection . Pirelli also supplied two wet weather compounds : the green @-@ banded intermediate compound and the blue @-@ banded full wet compound . 
 Going into the race , Lewis Hamilton was leading teammate Nico Rosberg by 17 points , having won the previous race in Canada . Mercedes were leading Ferrari by more than 100 points in the Constructors ' standings . After introducing an engine update at the previous round in Canada , Ferrari were considered the most likely contenders for favorites Mercedes . Several other teams introduced updates to their cars as well , including Williams and McLaren . 
 = = = = Supporting programme = = = = 
 As part of the Grand Prix programme , a Legends Parade was held before the race , with a group of eight Formula One drivers from the 1980s set to present cars , mostly from Formula One 's first turbo era . Participating were local favorite Gerhard Berger ( 1988 Ferrari F1 / 87 / 88C ) , former McLaren teammates Niki Lauda ( 1984 McLaren MP4 / 2 ) and Alain Prost ( 1985 McLaren MP4 / 2B ) , Nelson Piquet ( 1983 Brabham BT52 ) , Jean Alesi ( 1995 Sauber C14 ) , Pierluigi Martini ( 1986 Minardi <unk> ) , Riccardo Patrese ( 1984 Renault <unk> ) and Christian Danner ( 1987 <unk> 871 ) . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice session were held , two one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . At the first session , both Mercedes drivers were fastest , with Nico Rosberg being three @-@ tenths of a second faster than teammate Lewis Hamilton . The Ferrari of Kimi Räikkönen was the only other car to come inside one second of the Mercedes . The other Ferrari of Sebastian Vettel set the slowest lap time , as a gearbox problem prevented him from driving more than four laps . The McLaren of Fernando Alonso suffered from gearbox issues as well , but the Spaniard was able to get back on track for the later part of the session . The team had brought a new aerodynamics package to Spielberg , which was tested by Alonso in free practice , who described it as " an improvement to the car " . 
 After his problems in the first session , Vettel was fastest in the second session on Friday afternoon . Nico Rosberg was second , about a tenth of a second behind , but did not set any timed laps in the last twenty minutes as his car was losing gearbox oil . Lewis Hamilton meanwhile struggled on the super @-@ soft tyres , making several errors that left him fifth . Both Lotus cars made it into the top ten , with Pastor Maldonado and Romain Grosjean in fourth and seventh respectively . Max Verstappen 's Toro Rosso was the fastest Renault @-@ powered car in eighth position , while the McLarens once again had to stop their session early . 
 Vettel was again fastest in third practice on Saturday morning , narrowly ahead of Hamilton 's Mercedes . Before all drivers were able to set times on the super @-@ soft tyres , Fernando Alonso coming to a stop on the start / finish straight brought out a red flag , halting the session . When practice resumed , rain had started to fall , preventing the drivers from improving on their times . Only Force India 's Sergio Pérez set a lap on the faster tyre compound , ending up fourth in the session . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , Kimi Räikkönen was eliminated due to a failure in communication , which meant he did not have enough time left for another fast lap at the end of the session . With the track still damp when qualifying began , times improved with every passing lap , with the drivers being able to switch from intermediate to slick tyres at the end of the first session . While the two Manors once again qualified at the end of the grid , Jenson Button was also eliminated in Q1 , leaving him with time penalties in the race , not being able to take the full extent of his 25 @-@ place grid penalty . 
 A dry track during Q2 saw the two Mercedes drivers fastest , Rosberg four @-@ tenths of a second faster than Hamilton . Fernando Alonso failed to make it into Q3 , the seventh time that season . He had missed the last part of qualifying seven times over the entire course of his Ferrari stint in the five previous seasons . Daniel Ricciardo was eliminated in 14th place , meaning that he - like Button - was unable to take the full extent of his ten @-@ place grid penalty . 
 The top ten contested the third part of qualifying . Romain Grosjean was unable to post a lap time after having problem with his brake @-@ by @-@ wire system . At the beginning of the session , both Mercedes drivers set two fast laps . After the first time around , Rosberg was ahead of Hamilton , but the World Champion improved on his second lap , being two @-@ tenths of a second faster than his teammate . During their final flying laps at the end of the session , both drivers spun on different parts of the track , Hamilton in turn one and Rosberg in the final corner , meaning the order remained , with Hamilton taking the 45th pole position of his career , drawing level with Sebastian Vettel , who qualified third . Last year 's pole sitter Felipe Massa followed in fourth , while Le Mans winner Nico Hülkenberg finished fifth , ahead of the second Williams of Valtteri Bottas . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start of the race , Rosberg got off the line well and overtook teammate Hamilton for the lead going into turn one . Coming out of the following turn , Kimi Räikkönen was caught out by heavy wheelspin on his harder tyre compound going side by side and swept to the outside of the track , crashing into Fernando Alonso 's McLaren , who was lifted on top of the Ferrari . Both drivers were able to walk away unharmed from the incident . The collision brought out the safety car . At the end of the lap , Daniil Kvyat made a pit stop to replace a damaged front wing , while Will Stevens retired from the race with an oil leak . When the safety car came back into the pits on the end of lap six , Rosberg was able to defend his lead against Hamilton and quickly built a gap , leading him by 2 @.@ 3 seconds by lap eleven . Lap twelve saw the second McLaren of Jenson Button retiring with an intake system sensor failure . 
 On lap 16 , Valtteri Bottas reclaimed sixth position from Max Verstappen , a position he had lost at the start , while Hamilton started to close the gap to Rosberg in front . The German however reacted and extended his lead back to four seconds by lap 27 . Meanwhile , Bottas went past Le Mans winner Nico Hülkenberg for fifth place on lap 26 , but an earlier pit stop brought the German back out in front of the Williams . For speeding in the pit lane , Carlos Sainz , Jr. was handed a five @-@ second time penalty , which was not to be applied since the Spaniard retired on lap 34 due to a technical problem . Prior to the pit stops at the front of the field , Lewis Hamilton was able to reduce the gap to 2 @.@ 2 seconds by lap 32 . When Rosberg pitted one lap later , Hamilton led the race . Having thereby led a lap in seventeen consecutive races , Hamilton equalled a 45 @-@ year @-@ old record set by Jackie Stewart , who had led at least one lap each between the 1968 United States Grand Prix and the 1970 Belgian Grand Prix . 
 Hamilton pitted on lap 35 , coming out behind his teammate , driving over the white pit exit line in the process . This handed him a five @-@ second time penalty to be added to his finishing time . Sebastian Vettel came in two laps later , being stationary for more than 13 seconds due to a problem with the <unk> of his rear right tyre and came out behind Felipe Massa in fourth place . Meanwhile , Romain Grosjean retired with gearbox issues . Vettel closed the gap to Massa in the last podium position , but was eventually unable to pass the Brazilian , handing Massa his first podium finish of 2015 . Toward the end of the race , Pastor Maldonado was racing Max Verstappen for seventh place . Going past the start / finish straight , Maldonado almost lost the rear of his car coming out of the Toro Rosso 's slipstream , while Verstappen locked up going into turn one , handing the position to the Lotus driver . Rosberg , who complained about vibrations in his front tyres during the last laps , crossed the finish line three seconds ahead of teammate Hamilton , taking his third victory of the season and the second consecutive one at Spielberg , reducing his championship gap to ten points . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interview , conducted by Gerhard Berger , Rosberg expressed his satisfaction with the victory , saying : " The start made the race . It was a great start and I managed to defend in the first couple of corners and then I really just tried to push flat out this time . I was really happy with the car and happy to see the gap open up to Lewis , so it really worked out perfectly today . " Meanwhile , Lewis Hamilton conceded that his teammate had done a " fantastic job , " stating that " [ a ] t the end of the day , he was quicker during the race . " Speaking about his start at the post @-@ race press conference , Hamilton explained that his car suffered from a lot of wheelspin , which made him get off the line slowly . Meanwhile , third placed Felipe Massa told the press that his team had " managed to get the opportunities , which it was a mistake of another team , " adding that the changes made to the car were " definitely positive . " 
 When asked about the necessity of closed cockpits following the first lap accident between Alonso and Räikkönen , Rosberg and Massa stated that improvements to safety should be made in this area , while Hamilton said he had no opinion on the matter . Alonso stated that he was " scared " after the collision and was visibly concerned for his rival 's safety upon checking on the condition of Räikkönen , and relieved that the accident left his former teammate uninjured . The race stewards decided not to take any disciplinary actions concerning the crash . 
 Following their battle for seventh place towards the end of the race , Pastor Maldonado accused Max Verstappen of " not respecting the rules , " though he went on to concede that it was great to be allowed to race on the limits by the stewards . The Dutchman in turn stated : " It 's quite funny that Pastor said that . It 's the only thing I say about it , it 's quite funny . " After suffering from multiple problems during and race and being unable to place any of their cars in the points , Sauber team principal Monisha Kaltenborn said the team needed to recover from a " really horrifying race . " 
 It was the fifth one @-@ two finish for Mercedes that season and Massa 's first podium appearance since Abu Dhabi the year before . The victory moved Rosberg closer to his teammate in the Drivers ' Championship , now ten points behind . It was his eleventh career victory , putting him level with Jacques Villeneuve , Rubens Barrichello and third placed Felipe Massa , who became only the eighth driver in the history of the sport to achieve more than 1 @,@ 000 championship points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Williams extended their lead to Red Bull to 74 points , while Force India moved up to fifth after their second double @-@ points finish of the season . In a weekend that the official Formula One website described as " a new low " for McLaren , Fernando Alonso retired from the fourth consecutive race , something that had never happened to him in his career . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Daniil Kvyat received a ten @-@ place grid penalty for exceeding the allowed internal combustion engine allocation . ^ 2 – Daniel Ricciardo received a ten @-@ place grid penalty for exceeding the allowed internal combustion engine allocation . ^ 3 – Fernando Alonso received a ten- and two five @-@ place grid penalties for exceeding the allowed allocation of three of his power unit components , as well as a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unauthorized gearbox change . ^ 4 – Jenson Button received a ten- and three five @-@ place grid penalties for exceeding the allowed allocation of four of his power unit components . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Lewis Hamilton received a 5 @-@ second time penalty for crossing the white line on pit exit . ^ 2 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. received a 5 @-@ second time penalty for speeding in the pit @-@ lane . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = The Great Wife Hope = 
 " The Great Wife Hope " is the third episode of The Simpsons ' twenty @-@ first season . Originally broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on October 11 , 2009 , it sees the men of Springfield taking immense interest in a new combat sport called mixed martial arts ( MMA ) . Marge is appalled by the violent sport and demands that the creator put a stop to it , but he agrees only if she will fight him in a match and win the match . 
 " The Great Wife Hope " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Matthew Faughnan . Former Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) champion Chuck Liddell guest starred in it as himself . The episode featured multiple cultural references to fighting moves and positions , along with a single reference to professional wrestling promotion owner Vince McMahon . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics , particularly towards the final scene . It received a 4 @.@ 3 / 7 Nielsen rating with adults ages 18 – 49 , behind all other programs aimed at that demographic in its timeslot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The men of Springfield become obsessed with a violent new string of mixed martial arts ( MMA ) competitions called " Ultimate Punch Kick and Choke Championships " ( <unk> ) . Bart begins to fight in small MMA matches of his own at the playground of Springfield Elementary School . While he and Nelson are fighting in one match , Marge sees him and is disgusted by the violent nature of the entire sport . She and a group of concerned women begin protesting the sport in front of the MMA stadium . Marge decides to go on stage before a match begins and demands that everyone cease the sport entirely . Chet Englebrit , creator of the sport , agrees with Marge but only if she can fight him and win . 
 Marge begins to train for the event , practicing rhythmic gymnastics . However , the family believes that her methods are unsuitable for the extreme task at hand and get her professional help . She learns boxing from <unk> Tatum , wrestling from former Yale wrestler Mr. Burns , jujitsu and Judo from Akira , and bullying from Jimbo , Dolph and Kearney . Now fully trained , she enters the ring ( after the announcer introduces her as one of his " Moms I 'd Like to Fight " ) with Englebrit and is immediately knocked to the ground . Bart wants to stand up for his mother and runs into the stadium to take her place , but is thoroughly thrashed by Englebrit . Marge witnesses this and effectively beats Englebrit , winning their bet . Marge pulls down the ring 's microphone and begins to give a speech about the demise of the violent sport . She realizes , however , that everyone has already left the building to watch a drunken brawl in the parking lot . 
 Bart and his sister , Lisa , enter the empty ring and decide to settle their lifelong feud then and there . As they approach each other to throw a punch , the credits begin , but the scene immediately returns to depict Lisa easily punching Bart to the ground . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 " The Great Wife Hope " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Matthew Faughnan . The writers of The Simpsons had a vast amount of knowledge and appreciation for mixed martial arts and included multiple references and themes of the sport throughout the episode . Former Ultimate Fighter champion Chuck Liddell guest starred as himself , signing photographs for fans , including Bart , at a cost of $ 25 . Liddell commented that being a guest star was " very cool " and that the recording sessions were " easy " . 
 The episode is a satire of the combat sport of mixed martial arts . Throughout the episode , characters perform multiple fighting moves and positions . For example , Bart puts Nelson in a triangle choke at the playground when the two are fighting , while Marge takes out Englebrit with a flying armbar . Marge explains in the beginning of the episode that she found out about a creative new sport called " Crazy Bowling " by typing in " girls having fun " — after ignoring several thousand pages of porn — into the search engine Google . Also , H.R. Pufnstuf is parodied as <unk> on Ice , because Englebrit 's assistant claims the next day , <unk> on Ice will need the space . 
 Marge claims that the word Ultimate makes everything worse , though Otto Mann protests that it does not affect the popular sport Ultimate Frisbee . Englebrit carries similar traits to the professional wrestling promoter Vince McMahon . Marge initially tries to train for the match by performing rhythmic gymnastics . She practices boxing with a character named <unk> Tatum , who is a parody of renowned boxer Mike Tyson . 
 The episode references two boxing films : the 1979 film Rocky II ( the final scene between Bart and Lisa parodies the final scene of the film between Rocky Balboa and Apollo Creed ) and the 1967 play and 1970 film adaptation The Great White Hope , whose title is parodied by the Simpson episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Great Wife Hope " originally aired in the United States on October 11 , 2009 , at 8 : 00 p.m. eastern time on the Fox network . It bore a parental rating of TV @-@ PG for suggestive dialogue ( D ) , offensive language ( L ) , and graphic violence ( V ) . In this initial broadcast , it received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 3 / 7 , totaling 7 @.@ 5 million viewers in the 18 @-@ 19 demographic . The episode ranked the lowest in the 8 : 00 p.m. timeslot for the demographic , behind 60 Minutes and The Amazing Race on CBS , Sunday Night Football on NBC , Extreme Makeover : Home Edition on ABC , and fellow Fox animated sitcom The Cleveland Show , which followed it . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . IGN reporter Robert Canning gave the episode a 7 @.@ 7 / 10 rating ( " Good " ) , commenting that " what really made me enjoy ' The Great Wife Hope ' were the peripheral bits , characters and jokes outside the main storyline . There were many , and they were funny . " Canning wrote that the weakest part about the episode was the underdevelopment of Englebrit , but that " there were plenty of other things squeezed in around this bout to make the episode an enjoyable watch " — these included Ralph Wiggum being used as a bell for Bart and Nelson 's fight , Nelson wanting to be an event planner , and Carl 's line about not knowing all African Americans in the world simply because he is one himself . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club , giving the episode a " B " , wrote that it had " some amusing detours along the way " . He compared " The Great Wife Hope " positively to season two 's " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " , writing that Marge 's attempts to bring down the MMA sport is the parallel to her trying to bring The Itchy & Scratchy Show off the air due to its severe cartoon violence in the latter episode . The staff of the website <unk> said the episode was a sign that MMA had " truly made it " and fans of the sport could appreciate the writer 's knowledge on the topic . 
 Among more negative reviews include Jason Hughes of TV Squad , who commented that several jokes in the episode did not work , such as the reveal that Krusty the Clown has been sleeping with Sideshow Mel 's wife for several years , though he did enjoy most of the other jokes and applauded the development of Nelson 's character . 
 Dana White , president of Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) , told reporters that he did not like the episode . He added , " People like the [ mixed martial arts ] media always try to tell me that we 're mainstream . [ ... ] Did you see that Simpsons episode ? Chuck Liddell signs an autograph for somebody , and he says , ' That will be $ 45 , please ' . The sport isn 't like that at all . Then the promoter of the show fights Marge Simpson in the octagon , sucker @-@ punches her in the face , and then says , ' You 're the only woman I 've ever hit that I didn 't love ' . That 's the way mainstream looks at us and thinks of us , and I know that . " 
 The final scene in the episode , featuring Bart and Lisa fighting in the arena , has received overwhelmingly positive remarks from reviewers . Canning wrote that it was " a classic moment for the series [ ... ] This almost felt like a moment that could have closed out the series . " Hughes commented that it was " the best moment of the night " as it " would have been a typical ending " if it had not added the twist preceding the credits . Melissa and Randall Baker of TV Guide magazine said that the scene was a moment of " girl power " , as Lisa knocks out Bart easily with one punch . 
 = Since I Left You = 
 Since I Left You is the debut studio album by Australian electronic music group The Avalanches , released on 27 November 2000 . It was issued on Modular Recordings and produced by The Avalanches ' members Robbie Chater and Darren Seltmann ( under the pseudonym Bobbydazzler ) . The album uses sampling extensively , containing an estimated 3 @,@ 500 samples from various genres of music . The album was created in two separate near @-@ identical studios by Chater and Seltmann , exchanging audio mixes of records they sampled . 
 After the album 's positive reception in Australia , the duo considered an international release – its date was held back until 2001 in both the United Kingdom and North America and appeared in slightly altered forms . The delay and changes occurred so that the group could obtain permission to use the samples or use replacements . Five singles were released on the album , " Electricity " , " Frontier Psychiatrist " , " Since I Left You " , " Radio " and " A Different Feeling " . The group promoted the album by organizing headlining tours in Australia , Europe and the United States . 
 Since I Left You was issued to favourable reception , it peaked in the top 30 on the ARIA Albums Chart , number 12 in Norway , number eight on the UK Album Charts and , in the United States , at number ten on the Top Electronic Albums chart and in the top 40 on the Top Heatseekers chart . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2001 it won in three categories : Breakthrough Artist – Album and Best Dance Release , Producer of the Year for Bobbydazzler . The Avalanches won a fourth award , Breakthrough Artist – Single for " Frontier Psychiatrist " . Since I Left You became one of the best reviewed albums of the 2000s . In October 2010 , it was listed at No. 10 in the book , 100 Best Australian Albums . 
 = = Production = = 
 Since I Left You is the debut studio album by The Avalanches . They started recording in 1999 and had used the working title of Pablo 's Cruise . The duo primarily worked with a Yamaha Promix 01 and Akai <unk> samplers . The band 's members , Darren Seltmann and Robbie Chater , spent hours sampling music from vinyl records to create the songs on the album : Chater estimates that there are over 3 @,@ 500 samples . After sampling and arranging , the pair would swap their tapes , listen to each other 's ideas and expand on whatever they had heard . Despite working separately , both Chater and Seltmann had nearly identical studio set @-@ ups . 
 Initially , Seltmann and Chater were not planning for an international release . They were not concerned with copyright restrictions and so did not keep a list of which tracks were being sampled . According to Chater they " were really unorganised and were just sampling on the fly as tracks progressed ... We had no idea the record would get such a wide @-@ scale release so we saw no need to keep track of what we were using – we were definitely guilty of harbouring a ' No @-@ one 's going to listen to it anyway ' sort of attitude . " The sources spanned many different styles of music and sampled artists include : Françoise Hardy , Blowfly , Sérgio Mendes , Raekwon , Wayne and Shuster and Madonna . Seltmann felt that " [ t ] he more rejected and unwanted the record that a sample comes from , the more appealing it is , I guess it 's almost a reaction to rare record finding , but occasionally things like ' Holiday ' come up " . He described how making sample tapes for each other created some samples which were intended as " funny samples " that they had no original intention to get clearance for . In particular , Madonna 's song " ' Holiday ' was one of those where we put something together , ended it with ' Holiday ' and all had a big laugh . It ended up where we couldn 't live without it so I guess we just had to make that one work " . Later , Seltmann and Chater had a few problems when trying to clear all the samples . One sample that had to be removed was from Rodgers and Hammerstein in the intro that featured harps and girls singing . After checking clearances , " [ t ] he album is slightly different to its original form in that it had a whole new introduction , which apparently was really recognisable , so we had to take that off straight away " . The group played their songs to flatmates to get input on which tracks were worth including on the album . " Electricity " was the first song the group felt that worked ; it was a last @-@ minute addition to the album as The Avalanches felt the song " still sounds good " . In early 2000 , Seltmann ( as Dazzler ) and Chater ( as Bobby C ) finished production on the album , using the pseudonym Bobbydazzler . It had received the official title , Since I Left You in March 2000 . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Since I Left You was originally developed to be a concept album . Chater described its initial theme as a love story , " an international search for love from country to country . The idea of a guy following a girl around the world and always being one port behind . And that was just because we had all these records from all over the world , and we 'd like to use all that stuff . " The concept album idea was abandoned when the group felt they should not make their themes too obvious . The album 's sound was in response to dance music at that time , that Chater felt was " about big drums , big production : think of a record like the Chemical Brothers " Block Rockin ' Beats " , with those amazing drums , and how huge those records sounded " . The Avalanches felt their early music could not compare to that sound and desired a recording with less bass that was influenced by 1960s music such as The Beach Boys and Phil Spector . 
 = = Release = = 
 As Since I Left You was being recorded , The Avalanches had trouble choosing songs to be released as singles , finding them not sounding as good outside the context of the album . On 13 September 1999 they issued " Electricity " as a four @-@ track 12 " vinyl single in Australia ( on Modular Recordings ) and as a two @-@ track 7 " vinyl single in the United Kingdom ( on Rex Records ) . Chater felt that Modular was very patient with the group releasing the record . On 21 August 2000 , the next single for the album was " Frontier Psychiatrist " which was issued by Modular in Australia in both a four @-@ track and two @-@ track version . The initial release date for Since I Left You was going to be 11 September ; however , it was delayed due to issues with sample clearance . On 27 November the album was issued in Australia with plans to have a world release in early 2001 . The later release date outside Australia was due to additional sample clearances needed for international markets . To celebrate the album 's release in Melbourne , the group had a boat cruise party through Port Phillip Bay . In February 2001 they released the album 's title track in Australia and followed in July 2001 with " Radio " . 
 In April Since I Left You was released in the UK through XL Records with the album selling far more copies than the label 's original target amount . On 28 April , it entered the UK Album Charts , which peaked at number eight and remained in the chart for 25 weeks . In late March , the single " Since I Left You " was issued in the UK and entered the charts at number 16 on 7 April 2001 . On 6 November , Since I Left You was released in the United States by Sire Records . The album charted on the US Top Electronic Albums , peaking at number ten , and on the Top Heatseekers chart , peaking at number 31 . 
 In July 2011 , a deluxe re @-@ issue of Since I Left You was announced that would include the original album as well as a bonus disc containing b @-@ sides , demo tracks and remixes of songs from the original album by artists including El <unk> , MF Doom , Black Dice and The Avalanches themselves . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To promote Since I Left You The Avalanches organised their first Australian head @-@ lining tour in October 2000 planning to head to all the capital cities . All dates on the tour were sold out . In their Brisbane show , Seltmann broke his leg in an on @-@ stage collision with bass guitarist and singer , Tony Di <unk> . In January – February 2001 , The Avalanches toured with the Big Day Out festival in Australia , visiting four capital cities . While on tour in Europe , Seltmann broke his other leg , thereafter the rest of the tour 's shows were DJ sets . The British dance music magazine Muzik awarded The Avalanches as best live act . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Seltmann and Chater did not initially think that Since I Left You would receive much attention . However , the album garnered widespread critical acclaim from the music industry . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , it received an average score of 89 , based on 21 reviews . It became one of the best reviewed albums of 2001 , as well as being the highest rated dance album on that site . The album peaked in the top 30 on the ARIA Albums Chart and number 12 in Norway on the VG @-@ lista Top 40 Albums Chart . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2001 , The Avalanches won four awards from nine nominations , including Breakthrough Artist – Album , Best Dance Release and Producer of the Year ( for Chater and Seltmann aka Bobbydazzler ) for Since I Left You . The fourth award win was for the related single , " Frontier Psychiatrist " as Breakthrough Artist – Single . 
 Christian Ward of NME hailed it as " a joyous , kaleidoscopic masterpiece of sun @-@ kissed disco @-@ pop " , while Andy Kellman of AllMusic called it one of the most intimate and emotional dance records that is not vocal @-@ based . Marc Savlov of The Austin Chronicle found the album as surprising as " Primal Scream 's life @-@ changing <unk> was a decade ago . It 's downright shocking how fun this is " . Pitchfork Media 's Matt LeMay credited the Avalanches for developing a " unique context " for the songs without compromising their original " distinct flavor " and said that the album " sounds like nothing else " because of how the samples are employed rather than their quality or volume . Q magazine 's Gareth Grundy remarked that its clever music is delivered as engagingly as " more conventional dance sounds " and that the album " finally fulfils sampling 's original promise " of producing new , extraordinary sounds from artfully appropriated pieces of existing songs . Amy Bell of Drowned in Sound praised it as one of the year 's best albums . 
 Robert Christgau of The Village Voice was less enthusiastic and said that the Avalanches deliver " the long @-@ promised new @-@ songs @-@ from @-@ old @-@ songs trick , in which <unk> samples are stitched together until they mesh into compelling music that never existed before . Unfortunately , the music in question is string @-@ section disco . " Stylus Magazine 's Tyler Martin felt that the tracks lack innovation , nuance , and rhythmic complexity , but that several of them are exceptional . The website later placed the album at number 16 on their list of top 50 albums from 2000 to 2005 . In a retrospective review for The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Michaelangelo Matos praised the Avalanches ' balance of " the familiar and obscure " through their sampling techniques and their " playful , airy grooves " , as well as the album 's " surprisingly resonant emotional core " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Since I Left You was placed in some year @-@ end polls . Pitchfork Media placed Since I Left You at number three in their top twenty albums of 2001 poll and number 10 on their list of top 200 albums of the 2000s , declaring the album " a masterpiece of mood @-@ setting that riffs off an ideal where getting on an airplane and landing in another corner of the world was the most exotic thing a person could do . " Q listed it as one of the best 50 albums of 2001 . The album was voted the 11th best album of the year in The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics poll for 2001 . In 2008 , the Australian newspaper The Age assembled a panel of experts ranging from its own critics and music journalists to musicians , broadcasters , record shop owners and band managers to pick a list of definitive fifty Australian albums . Since I Left You was included on this list with Chris Johnston declaring the album to be " a beautiful piece of musical art made entirely from samples . " Since I Left You was placed at number six on The Daily Telegraph 's list of " 50 most influential Australian albums ever " . Resident Advisor declared it to be the seventh best album of the decade . 
 On Slant Magazine 's " Best of the Aughts " list , the album was placed at number six out of one @-@ hundred . Reflecting on the album 's reception , Chater felt it was well received because " It 's light @-@ hearted and fun to listen to and there is depth there as well . There are some sadder moments that I think has made it resonate and made it last . It does sound like a 23 year old kid in his bedroom making a record to me , but you can hear that innocence and joy in the discovery of finding all those sounds . So that was kind of infectious for people . " In October 2010 , it was listed at No. 10 in the book , 100 Best Australian Albums . Philip Sherburne , writing for Rhapsody , said that " along with DJ Shadow 's Endtroducing , this is one of <unk> music 's greatest LPs . " The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits according to album notes and AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = William Bruce ( architect ) = 
 Sir William Bruce of Kinross , 1st Baronet ( c . 1630 – 1 January 1710 ) was a Scottish gentleman @-@ architect , " the effective founder of classical architecture in Scotland , " as Howard Colvin observes . As a key figure in introducing the Palladian style into Scotland , he has been compared to the pioneering English architects Inigo Jones and Christopher Wren , and to the contemporaneous <unk> of French style in English domestic architecture , Hugh May and Sir Roger Pratt . 
 Bruce was a merchant in Rotterdam during the 1650s , and played a role in the Restoration of Charles II in 1659 . He carried messages between the exiled king and General Monck , and his loyalty to the king was rewarded with lucrative official appointments , including that of Surveyor General of the King 's Works in Scotland , effectively making Bruce the " king 's architect " . His patrons included John Maitland , 1st Duke of Lauderdale , the most powerful man in Scotland at that time , and Bruce rose to become a member of Parliament , and briefly sat on the Scottish Privy Council . 
 Despite his lack of technical expertise , Bruce became the most prominent architect of his time in Scotland . He worked with competent masons and professional builders , to whom he imparted a classical vocabulary ; thus his influence was carried far beyond his own aristocratic circle . Beginning in the 1660s , Bruce built and remodelled a number of country houses , including Thirlestane Castle for the Duke of Lauderdale , and Prestonfield House . Among his most significant work was his own Palladian mansion at Kinross , built on the Loch Leven estate which he had purchased in 1675 . As the king 's architect he undertook the rebuilding of the Royal Palace of Holyroodhouse in the 1670s , which gave the palace its present appearance . After the death of Charles II Bruce lost political favour , and later , following the accession of William and Mary , he was imprisoned more than once as a suspected Jacobite . However , he managed to continue his architectural work , often providing his services to others with Jacobite sympathies . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Little is known of William Bruce 's youth , and his date of birth is unrecorded . He was probably born at <unk> in western Fife , in around 1630 , the second son of Robert Bruce of <unk> and Katherine Preston . He may have attended St Andrews University in 1637 – 1638 , which would suggest that his birth date was as early as 1625 . The Bruces were a well @-@ connected Episcopalian family , strongly loyal to the king , and descended from Thomas Bruce a cousin of King Robert II , who had been granted lands in Clackmannan and Fife . Bruce 's first cousin Edward Bruce was created Earl of Kincardine in 1643 . 
 Letters in the Earl of Kincardine 's papers show that William Bruce was in exile in Rotterdam during the 1650s with his cousin , Alexander Bruce , brother of the Earl of Kincardine . As Episcopalians , William and Alexander would have sought refuge from the Puritan Commonwealth established by Oliver Cromwell . In Rotterdam , they were in contact with Sir Robert Moray , a soldier and natural philosopher close to Charles II , who then resided at Maastricht . William Bruce was a merchant , based in the Scottish community in Rotterdam , but travelling widely . He owned a ship with Alexander Bruce and John Hamilton of Grange , and was involved in the trade of wine , coal and timber between Norway , France , England , Scotland and the Low Countries . He is recorded as having a house and a mistress in La Rochelle . He may have had a son Normand by this mistress , since in 1672 he figures as a witness to the baptism at Holyrood of a William Bruce , son of Normand Bruce , mason . Moreover , the marriage record of Normand Bruce states that he was employed at Balcaskie . In 1658 , William and Alexander travelled together from Bremen overland to Maastricht to meet Moray . Alexander Bruce and Moray were founder members of the Royal Society in 1660 , and it is likely that architecture featured in their discussions , particularly the new town hall in Maastricht that Moray had recently advised on . 
 In 1659 , Bruce acted as a messenger between General Monck , Cromwell 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief in Scotland , and the exiled King Charles II . A passport survives , issued to Bruce by Monck in September 1659 , and giving him permission to remain in Scotland until his " returne to Holland , " and it appears that the messages he brought from Charles persuaded Monck to march his army to London , a decisive event in the Restoration . The nature of their communications is not known , although it would appear that Moray selected him for the task . Sir Robert Douglas stated that Bruce " painted the distress and distractions " of Scotland before the General , and suggested to him " the glory that would be acquired in restoring the royal family . " 
 = = Political career = = 
 Following the restoration , William Bruce was appointed Clerk to the Bills in 1660 , and Clerk of Supply to the Lords in Council in 1665 . Both were lucrative positions , involving collection of fees , from Parliament in the first case , and from petitioners to the Court of Session in the latter . Meanwhile , Sir Robert Moray had established himself as a courtier and scientist at Whitehall , London , and employed Bruce as a trusted messenger between Whitehall and the Duke of Lauderdale , Secretary for Scotland . 
 Moray later served on the Treasury Commission for Scotland , as did Alexander Bruce , now Earl of Kincardine . Bruce reported to this Commission as a revenue collector , and benefited from the patronage of its members . The Commission had responsibility for the King 's Works , and in 1667 Bruce was appointed Superintendent and Overseer of the Royal Palaces in Scotland . Four years later he was made Surveyor General of the King 's Works in Scotland , with a salary of £ 3600 Scots ( £ 300 Sterling , or £ 44 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , for the purpose of rebuilding Holyroodhouse . In March 1671 , Bruce was part of a syndicate which bought the rights to collect taxes over a five @-@ year period , paying £ 26 @,@ 000 Sterling ( £ 3 @.@ 8 million in 2016 ) for the privilege . As such , it would appear that Bruce was not only the architect of Holyroodhouse , but one of the principal financiers of the £ 21 @,@ 000 project . 
 As a key figure of the Restoration administration , William Bruce became close to other Stuart loyalists , who included such powerful patrons as the Duke of Lauderdale , Lord <unk> , and the Earl of Rothes . In 1667 , he undertook his first building work for Lord Rothes , overseeing the extensions to Leslie House , and later worked on several of Lauderdale 's properties , concurrently with Holyroodhouse . In 1668 he was created a Baronet of Nova Scotia . 
 From 1669 to 1674 Bruce sat in the Scottish Parliament as shire commissioner for Fife , and from 1681 to 1682 as a shire commissioner for Kinross . From April 1685 to May 1686 he reached the peak of his political career , as a member of the Privy Council of Scotland . But , in 1674 , he became embroiled in factional rivalry between his patron Lauderdale , and his rivals the Duke of Hamilton and the Earl of Tweeddale . His actions , which apparently included passing information to Hamilton , invoked the fury of the Duchess of Lauderdale , who tried to persuade her husband to deprive Bruce of his offices . Bruce survived , although his relationship with his patron was damaged . Lauderdale described him as " the bitterest factionalist partie man of his quality in all Scotland " . This breakdown resulted in Bruce 's eventual dismissal as Surveyor General of the King 's Works , on the false pretext that Holyroodhouse was finished . 
 Bruce 's earnings from his offices had made him a wealthy man , even by the standards of his patrons . This wealth allowed him to purchase the Balcaskie estate in 1665 , and to extend the house and gardens . In 1675 he purchased the larger estate of Loch Leven , Kinross , from the Earl of Morton , which brought him the hereditary sheriffdom of Kinross @-@ shire . In the late 1670s Bruce took on his first architectural projects for entirely new houses . 
 Following the accession of James VII in 1685 , Bruce gradually fell from favour , and was distrusted by the new regime . After the Revolution of 1688 , and the accession of William of Orange as King , he was once again at odds with his Protestant rulers , and he refused to take up his seat in Parliament . As a staunch Episcopalian , Bruce was considered a potential Jacobite threat . In 1693 he was briefly imprisoned in Stirling Castle for refusing to appear before the Privy Council . He was incarcerated again at Stirling in 1694 , and from 1696 in Edinburgh Castle . Bruce was expelled from parliament in 1702 , his seat passing to his son John Bruce . Despite these imprisonments , he continued his architectural work , indeed the 1690s and 1700s were his most prolific years . Bruce was imprisoned at Edinburgh Castle again in 1708 and was only released a short time before his death , at the beginning of 1710 . He was buried in the family plot at Kinross Kirk , the ruins of which still stand beside Kinross House . 
 Bruce 's surviving account books show purchases of books on music , painting and horticulture , as well as numerous foreign @-@ language works , suggesting that William Bruce was a learned man . He studied horticulture extensively , and applied his knowledge of the subject in his own gardens at Kinross . He was a friend of James Sutherland of the Edinburgh Botanic Garden , and may have known John Evelyn and other English horticulturalists . 
 = = Family = = 
 Around 1660 William Bruce married Mary Halkett , daughter of Sir James Halkett of <unk> , Bt . They had two surviving children : 
 Sir John Bruce , 2nd Baronet of Kinross , ( before 1671 – 19 March 1710 ) married Christian Leslie , widow of the Marquess of Montrose and daughter of the Duke of Rothes . He left no issue . 
 Anne , upon whom Sir William had entailed his estates if her brother failed to leave issue . She married twice , with issue to both husbands . 
 After the death of his first wife , Sir William Bruce married Magdalen Scott , widow of an Edinburgh merchant called George Clerk , in 1700 . They had no issue . Magdalen lived until 1752 , and gained a reputation as a Jacobite , establishing a Jacobite cell at her home in Leith Citadel . 
 = = Architectural works = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The Netherlands provided William Bruce with many of his influences . He was in the Low Countries at a time when Italian Classicism was the height of fashion , and similarities have been observed between Bruce 's work , particularly Holyroodhouse , and such buildings as the Amsterdam City Hall ( 1648 – 65 ) , the work of Jacob van Campen , and Maastricht 's City Hall ( 1659 – 64 ) , by Pieter Post . Alexander Bruce had married a Dutch woman with family ties to the House of Orange , and it seems likely that he provided links to the Dutch artisans who worked on some of Bruce 's projects . 
 Bruce was certainly familiar with northern France , and in 1663 he made a further " foreign journey " at the behest of Lauderdale , although his itinerary is unknown . Whether by visit or through studying engravings , he knew several notable French houses including Vaux @-@ le @-@ Vicomte , Blérancourt , and the Chateau de <unk> , the last the work of French architect François Mansart . These modern French designs , incorporating features then unknown in Scotland , such as the double @-@ pile of major rooms in two enfilades , ranged back @-@ to @-@ back , were also influential on Bruce 's designs . 
 English influence is also visible in his work . His country houses took the compact Anglo @-@ Dutch type as their model , as introduced into England by Hugh May and Sir Roger Pratt , but with Continental detailing , such as the rustication on the facade at <unk> . Roger Pratt 's Coleshill House of 1660 is often cited as a model for Bruce 's Kinross House . Konrad <unk> concludes that Bruce employed an " international style " , which was fashionable in France , Holland , and England , and that he was pivotal in disseminating this style in Scotland . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Bruce 's early work involved advising clients and rebuilding existing houses , rather than designing new buildings from scratch . Panmure House and Leslie House ( seat of the Earl of Rothes ) had been projects of the king 's master mason John Mylne . At Panmure , although Bruce has been credited with the design in the past , the works were overseen by Alexander Nisbet , although Bruce did design the gates and gate piers . At Leslie , Bruce oversaw the works after Mylne 's death , and probably made his own amendments . Panmure was demolished in the 1950s , and only a small part of Leslie House remains standing , following a fire in the 18th century . Bruce later advised the Duke of Queensberry regarding his plans for Drumlanrig Castle . 
 Bruce also worked on his own property at Balcaskie , Fife , which he bought in 1665 , and which does survive intact , although with later alterations . He doubled the L @-@ plan house to a near @-@ symmetrical U @-@ plan , and may have built the curving wing @-@ walls and linking pavilions . Gifford , however , attributes these to a later building phase . The curving walls , a form later seen at Hopetoun , were a new innovation if Bruce did carry them out , possibly inspired by the work of the Italian Gian Lorenzo Bernini . In the gardens he laid out parterres and stepped " Italian " terraces , with a vista leading the eye to the Bass Rock , all inspired by French baroque gardens such as Vaux @-@ le @-@ Vicomte . Internally , Bruce created a new layout of rooms , and it was for his continental @-@ inspired internal planning , as much as his exterior design , that he was sought after as an architect . 
 In 1670 the Duke of Lauderdale commissioned Bruce to remodel Thirlestane Castle , his 16th @-@ century tower house in the Border country . Bruce , working with King 's master mason Robert Mylne , extended the building with new corner pavilions and a new entrance , and re @-@ planned the interior . Lauderdale continued to employ Bruce , often working closely with Lord <unk> , Lauderdale 's brother , during the 1670s , on his homes at Brunstane near Edinburgh , and Lethington ( later renamed <unk> ) , as well as commissioning a design for new gates at his English property , Ham House , near London , in 1671 . At Ham Bruce may have had further involvement with the remodelling works going on there , under the direction of the English architect William Samwell . While engaged at Thirlestane , Bruce also designed the nearby Lauder Kirk , his only complete church . One of very few 17th century cruciform @-@ plan churches in Scotland , it may have been inspired by François Mansart 's similar church at <unk> in France . 
 = = = Holyroodhouse = = = 
 William Bruce 's appointment as Surveyor General of the King 's Works in Scotland was made chiefly for the purpose of rebuilding the palace of Holyroodhouse . Aside from this project , he only carried out minor repairs to Edinburgh and Stirling Castles , and to the fortifications on the Bass Rock . Charles I had intended to extend and rebuild Holyroodhouse , and plans had been drawn up in the 1630s . Nothing was done however , and in 1650 the palace was burnt out , destroying all but the west range . Bruce was contracted to design and oversee the works , with Robert Mylne acting as contractor . Bruce 's plans were drawn up by Mylne , as Bruce himself apparently lacked the technical skills of architectural drawing . 
 Charles II criticised Bruce 's initial plans for the internal layout , and an improved scheme was eventually approved . Construction began in July 1671 , and by 1674 much of the work was complete . Bruce built a second gothic tower to mirror the existing one built by James V between 1528 and 1532 , and created the courtyard block in a restrained classical style . A second phase of work started in 1676 , when the Duke of Lauderdale ordered Bruce to demolish and rebuild the main west façade , resulting by 1679 in the screen wall , topped by a carved imperial crown , which forms the main entrance . 
 Also in 1676 , Bruce drew up plans for the completion of Heriot 's Hospital in Edinburgh , which had been started in the 1620s . His design , for the central tower of the south façade , was eventually executed in 1693 . 
 = = = Country houses = = = 
 His first commission for a new building was for the construction of Dunkeld House , and came from the Earl of Atholl in 1676 . The house had been badly damaged in 1654 , during the civil war , and Bruce was given the task of building its replacement . ( The house was later demolished ) . Another early full @-@ scale commission was for <unk> House ( 1679 ) , which burned down in 1957 . 
 In 1675 , Bruce bought the estate of Loch Leven from the Earl of Morton . The estate included an old manor near Kinross , as well as the ruins of Loch Leven Castle , famous as the jail of Mary , Queen of Scots . After carrying out repairs on the old manor , and beginning to lay out the gardens , Bruce began work on his new home , Kinross House , in 1686 , employing master mason Thomas Bauchop . The Palladian building bears some resemblance to Roger Pratt 's Coleshill House of 1660 ( demolished ) , but with features Bruce derived from French sources . These features , ultimately classical and Italian in origin , include the rusticated basement stonework , and the giant order of corinthian pilasters , the latter possibly deriving from Bernini 's first designs for the Louvre . Following Bruce 's fall from favour , he found himself increasingly in debt , which delayed the completion of the house until 1693 . Kinross was one of the earliest Palladian @-@ style country houses in Scotland , and was recognised as one of the finest buildings in the country ; Daniel Defoe described it as " the most beautiful and regular piece of Architecture in Scotland " , and Thomas Pennant called Kinross " the first good house of regular architecture in North Britain " . 
 Despite William Bruce 's fall from political favour , and his intermittent imprisonment , he continued to practice . During the 1690s he completed Hill of <unk> ( 1696 ) , <unk> ( 1697 – 99 ) in Fife , and Craigiehall ( 1699 ) near Edinburgh . The latter , built for the Marquess of Annandale , still stands , and is used as the British Army 's Scottish headquarters . From 1698 he was working on a new house for the young Charles Hope , later first Earl of Hopetoun . Hopetoun House , near Edinburgh , was completed in 1702 , and represents Bruce 's grandest country house design . The master mason was again Thomas Bauchop , and the inspiration was again Anglo @-@ Dutch , with French rustication . The bulk of Bruce 's work is now obscured by 18th century remodelling , carried out by William Adam . Bruce was commissioned again by Hopetoun in 1708 , to build a private aisle at Abercorn Kirk . The Hopetoun Loft overlooks the interior of the kirk , and connects to a retiring room with an oval " squint " giving a view of the pulpit . 
 In 1702 Bruce was commissioned by the burgesses of Stirling to design a new tolbooth for the town . Bruce provided only sketch plans , which were executed by local masons between 1703 and 1705 . Bruce 's last country houses were Harden House ( now known as <unk> House ) , built for the Scotts in the Borders , and his smallest house , <unk> in Midlothian . His final work , in around 1710 , was for Nairne House , for the Jacobite Lord Nairne . The house was not completed until two years after Bruce 's death , and the extent of his involvement is unclear . Nairne House was demolished in 1760 , although the cupola was retained and installed on the roof of the King James VI Hospital in nearby Perth . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Daniel Defoe called Bruce " the Kit Wren of North Britain " , for his role as the effective founder of classical architecture in that country , Gifford suggests he is more comparable to Hugh May and Roger Pratt in his achievements . Like May and Pratt , he popularised a style of country house amongst the nobility , encouraging the move away from the traditional " tower house " , which came to be perceived as increasingly anachronistic , towards a more continental , leisure @-@ oriented architecture . Sir John Clerk of Penicuik named Bruce as " the chief introducer of architecture in this country " , while to Colen Campbell , compiler of Vitruvius Britannicus , he was " justly esteem 'd the best Architect of his time in that Kingdom " . His work was a major influence on the design of country houses in the 18th century , an influence which was spread through the masons and draughtsmen he worked with , including Mylne and Bauchop , James Smith , and Alexander Edward . At Kinross his deliberate alignment of the main vista on the ruins of Lochleven Castle suggested to Howard Colvin " that Bruce , like Vanbrugh , has a place in the prehistory of the picturesque " . 
 = Wipeout 2097 = 
 Wipeout 2097 ( stylised wipE 'out " 2097 ; released as Wipeout XL in North America ) is a 1996 futuristic racing game developed and published by Psygnosis . It is the second instalment released in the Wipeout series , and is the direct sequel of the original game released the previous year . It was originally released in 1996 for the PlayStation and Microsoft Windows , and in 1997 for the Sega Saturn . It was later ported by Digital Images to the Amiga in 1999 and by <unk> to Mac OS in 2002 . 
 Whereas the original game introduced the F3600 anti @-@ gravity racing league in the year 2052 , Wipeout 2097 is set over four decades later and introduces the player to the much faster , more competitive , and more dangerous <unk> AG racing league . The game introduced a new damage interface , various new weapons and tracks . The Sega Saturn version supported analogue control by using its 3D Control Pad , whereas the PlayStation version supported analogue control only through using the optional <unk> twist controller . 
 The game received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised the game for its unique blend of trance music and designer logos and cited that Wipeout 2097 was the beginning of a new trend in gaming to tap into popular culture and other arts . IGN ranked the game as the 13th best PlayStation game of all time in 2002 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay did not differ much from the previous title . Aside from the different circuits and new weapons , the fundamental aspects were kept . Pilots would race each other or computer @-@ controlled A.I. opponents , to finish in the highest position possible . To help them achieve this end , weapons were provided . 
 Though the crafts move at very high straight @-@ line speeds , Wipeout takes its inspiration from Formula 1 breakthroughs by aspiring for even greater turning speeds . Using the Formula 1 parallel , rather than using aerodynamics to increase wheel grip by down @-@ force for faster turning speeds , Wipeout uses a fictionalised method of air braking for ever greater turning force . Just moving a craft left or right alone is very responsive , but by applying an air @-@ brake in the direction of movement , players zip around very tight turns at near top speed , including those greater than 90 degrees . By applying an air @-@ brake , the turn starts out gradually but as it continues , change in direction increases sharply . Where necessary , the player may also use dual air @-@ brakes for rapid deceleration , typically used if the pilot has flown off the racing line in tight corners and needs to steady . The player can also take on damage from enemy fire and be blown up , but the ship can be " recharged " to health at the pit stop in exchange for a precious few seconds of the race . 
 Aside from the usual tactical aspects of racing , Wipeout 2097 ( unlike its predecessor ) offered the chance to eliminate other players from the competition through the use of weapons . Each craft had a shield energy quota , and when this quota reached zero — either from damage sustained from weapon attacks , or impact from other craft or the edges of the circuit — the craft would blow up . The craft would also blow up if a certain time limit was not reached , though this only applied to human players . The biggest weapon introduced in 2097 was the Quake Disruptor , which has been a series hall mark ever since . This weapon cause a quake to thrust a destructive wave down the track that dunks the crafts it smash into . 
 The aim of the game remains the same from its predecessor ; complete various and increasingly difficult challenges to move on to the next race . Changing the difficulty level is simply that of upping the top speed of the craft , through four different classes ( Vector , Venom , Rapier , <unk> ) . The number of laps needed to complete a race also increased with each new class . Multiplayer mode carries over from its predecessor , offering the use of a competitive two @-@ player split screen throughout all tracks , and a four @-@ player option for Windows 95 versions . 
 Victory in the challenge modes was the game 's ultimate accomplishment . These modes are similar to a championship where players have to race every track to become champion ; however , rather than tallying up points , Challenge mode took a very single player @-@ centric approach by only allowing progress to the next track by winning the current track ( not coming first meant it had to be repeated ) . Players could lose the mode by losing all three lives , which are lost by finishing a race in worse than third position . By winning all the races , the player is crowned champion and given access to faster modes , new tracks and ultimately the Piranha craft . 
 = = Development = = 
 As with the first instalment , Wipeout 2097 was developed by Liverpudlian developer Psygnosis and the promotional art was designed by Sheffield @-@ based The Designers Republic . The development cycle ran seven months . To cater for the increase in Wipeout players , an easier learning curve was introduced whilst keeping the difficulty at top end for the experienced gamers . 
 An entire nightclub tour was initiated in conjunction with Red Bull energy drink , which was featured prominently throughout the game , before the drink actually gained popularity in the American market . 
 The game was first unveiled in the form of a pre @-@ alpha demo at the May 1996 Electronic Entertainment Expo . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Similar to the first game , new music was mostly recorded from Psygnosis 's in @-@ house music team , CoLD SToRAGE , for versions released outside the PlayStation . The songs of the PlayStation , Sega Saturn and the Windows and Mac versions could also be listened to by inserting the CD into a CD player ( and skipping the first track ) . The soundtrack was also released as an audio CD , though with a different artist and track listing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received considerable praise for its technically challenging racing and fusion of popular culture elements . Many critics praised the unique blend of techno music and designer logos in one cohesive futuristic racing universe as the beginning of a new trend in gaming to tap into popular culture and other arts , which was made possible by the new storage space of the time . 
 Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot praised the newly improved graphics and innovation the game offered , saying that the game " redefined the whole ' racing ' generation , but [ XL ] took it to the next level " . Gerstmann also cited that the game improved on the gameplay , noting that the original had " everything but the gameplay " . IGN gave similar praise , especially with its new options and new in @-@ game physics , making the gameplay " more enjoyable " , stating that " [ <unk> XL ] marks the return of the popular futuristic racer to the PlayStation " . In 1996 , Next Generation ranked Wipeout 2097 as the 32nd top game of all time for how " playing linked Wipeout comes close to gaming at its very best " , noting that the game could have been a technology demonstration for PlayStation . Edge gave both the PlayStation and Sega Saturn versions a score of 8 out of 10 , praising similar remarks of its improved graphics and its gameplay . 
 In 1997 , The Official PlayStation Magazine named it as the fifth top PlayStation game yet . In IGN 's top 25 PlayStation games of all time list it ranked 13th , noted for being often considered the PlayStation 's best racing game of its time and was chosen ahead of others in the series because Wipeout 2097 was " the one they preferred to keep coming back to " . It ranks as the third best PlayStation game at GameRankings with an average review score of 94 @.@ 75 % from ten different sources . 
 = 2008 Hungarian Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Hungarian Grand Prix ( formally the Formula 1 ING Magyar Nagydíj 2008 ) was a Formula One motor race held on 3 August 2008 , at the Hungaroring in Mogyoród , near Budapest , Hungary . It was the 11th race of the 2008 Formula One season . Contested over 70 laps , the race was won by Heikki Kovalainen for the McLaren team , from a second position start . Timo Glock finished second in a Toyota car , with Kimi Räikkönen third in a Ferrari . It was Kovalainen 's first Formula One victory , which made him the sport 's 100th driver to win a World Championship race , and it was Glock 's first podium finish . 
 The majority of the race consisted of a duel between Lewis Hamilton and Felipe Massa , who drove for McLaren and Ferrari , respectively . Hamilton started from pole position but was beaten at the first corner by Massa , who passed him around the outside . The two championship rivals began a battle for the lead that was resolved when Hamilton sustained a punctured tyre just over halfway through the race , giving Massa a lead of more than 20 seconds over Kovalainen . The Ferrari 's engine , however , failed with three laps remaining , allowing the McLaren driver to win . Räikkönen set the race 's fastest lap in the other Ferrari , but was hampered by a poor qualifying performance and was stuck behind Fernando Alonso ( Renault ) and Glock in turn for almost all of the race . 
 As a consequence of the race , Hamilton extended his lead in the World Drivers ' Championship to five points over Räikkönen , with Massa a further three behind . Robert Kubica , who finished eighth after finding his BMW Sauber car uncompetitive at the Hungaroring , slipped to 13 points behind Hamilton , ahead of teammate Nick Heidfeld and Kovalainen . In the World Constructors ' Championship , McLaren passed BMW Sauber for second position , 11 points behind Ferrari . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , Honda , Force India @-@ Ferrari , BMW Sauber , Toyota , Red Bull @-@ Renault , Williams @-@ Toyota and Toro Rosso @-@ Ferrari . Before the race , Ferrari was in the lead of the Constructors ' Championship with 105 points , 16 ahead of BMW Sauber and a further three in front of McLaren . Vying for fourth place were Toyota , Red Bull and Renault , all within two points of each other but more than 60 points behind McLaren . In the Drivers ' Championship , Lewis Hamilton ( McLaren ) led with 58 points , ahead of Ferrari teammates Felipe Massa and Kimi Räikkönen , who were on 54 and 51 points respectively . BMW drivers Robert Kubica ( 48 ) and Nick Heidfeld ( 41 ) were fourth and fifth in the championship , followed by Heikki Kovalainen , who had scored 28 points in the second McLaren . 
 Following the German Grand Prix on July 20 , the teams conducted testing sessions at the Jerez circuit from July 22 – 25 . Each team was limited to 30 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 19 @,@ 000 mi ) of testing during the 2008 calendar year , a reduction compared with previous seasons . Sebastian Vettel ( Toro Rosso ) set the fastest time of the first and second days , while Mark Webber ( Red Bull ) topped the third day 's running , and Heikki Kovalainen was fastest on the final day of testing . Several teams tested using Bridgestone slick tyres , as preparation for the switch from grooved to slick tyres for the 2009 season , and BMW Sauber tested a Kinetic Energy Recovery System , also for the following year . Among the other teams , Force India 's test driver , Vitantonio Liuzzi , tested the team 's new " seamless @-@ shift " gearbox ahead of the system 's race début later in the year , while Timo Glock of Toyota took part after a heavy crash at the German Grand Prix . 
 In the week leading up to the race , a meeting between the teams at Ferrari 's headquarters in Maranello resulted in the formation of a new representative body , the Formula One Teams Association ( FOTA ) , which was led by Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo . McLaren team principal Ron Dennis said the establishment of FOTA was intended to encourage greater co @-@ operation between the teams , particularly in framing new sporting and technical regulations , and to act as a counterweight to the sport 's existing governing body , the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) and the company responsible for its commercial management , Formula One Management ( FOM ) . 
 On July 31 , the day before the event 's first free practice sessions took place , McLaren confirmed the team would retain Kovalainen for 2009 alongside Hamilton , while the organisers of the Hungarian Grand Prix signed a deal with Bernie Ecclestone , the president of FOM , to continue hosting the race until 2016 . 
 Several teams made technical changes to their cars for the Grand Prix . Ferrari altered the <unk> chassis 's cooling system and bodywork following high brake wear and engine water temperatures at the German Grand Prix . McLaren and Force India introduced revised aerodynamic packages for their MP4 @-@ 23 and <unk> chassis , aimed at increasing the amount of downforce , and therefore grip , produced by the bodywork . Force India also brought its seamless @-@ shift gearbox to the event . Ferrari , Honda and Toyota also débuted raised engine covers , nicknamed " shark @-@ fins " for the way they stretched toward the rear wing , and Honda introduced a new rear suspension package . 
 The sport 's sole tyre supplier , Bridgestone , provided two specifications of grooved dry tyres for the race , designated Soft ( also referred to as the " prime " tyre ) and Super Soft ( also referred to as the " option " tyre ) . The Super Soft compound was distinguished by a white stripe in one of the tyre 's grooves . As was the case for all of the 2008 Grands Prix , the rules stipulated that all cars should use both types of tyre during the course of the race , and each driver was limited to seven sets of dry tyres for the weekend . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday from 10 : 00 to 11 : 30 and 14 : 00 to 15 : 30 local time , and a third on Saturday morning between 11 : 00 and 12 : 00 . The first practice session took place in dry conditions . The ambient temperature was between 27 – 28 ° C ( 81 – 82 ° F ) , and the track temperature ranged from 31 – 34 ° C ( 88 – 93 ° F ) during the hour @-@ long period . Massa set the session 's fastest time with a lap of 1 minute and 20 @.@ 981 seconds , almost four @-@ tenths of a second ahead of his teammate Räikkönen . The two McLaren drivers were third and fourth , Kovalainen ahead of Hamilton . Fernando Alonso and Nelson Piquet Jr. set the fifth and eighth @-@ fastest times respectively for Renault ; they were separated by Glock and Kubica . Their teammates , Heidfeld and Toyota driver Jarno Trulli , completed the top ten . Vettel 's Toro Rosso car was afflicted by a hydraulics problem ; this restricted him to completing only four timed laps , and he was slowest overall . 
 The second practice session was held in similar weather to the first ; the only difference was a slightly higher peak track temperature of 37 ° C ( 99 ° F ) . During this session , Hamilton set the quickest lap time of the day , a 1 : 20 @.@ 554 ; Kovalainen finished with the third @-@ fastest time . The Renault drivers were again quick — Piquet in second and Alonso fourth — although the team 's Executive Director of Engineering , Pat Symonds , admitted both cars were running with slightly lower fuel loads than normal , improving their performance . Räikkönen and Massa slipped to fifth and sixth respectively , their best times one @-@ thousandth of a second apart . They were ahead of Heidfeld , Kubica , Trulli and Williams driver Nico Rosberg . Vettel 's car was still suffering from the hydraulics problem and he completed just five laps , again setting the slowest time of the session . 
 Saturday 's weather was again dry for the third and final practice session , with ambient temperature between 27 – 29 ° C ( 81 – 84 ° F ) and track temperature from 32 – 36 ° C ( 90 – 97 ° F ) . Hamilton again set the fastest time , a 1 : 20 @.@ 228 , quicker than his best on Friday . This put him immediately ahead of Massa , Glock , Kovalainen and Piquet . Heidfeld was much happier with the setup of his car and set the sixth @-@ fastest time , but Kubica suffered a mechanical problem that restricted him to 18th position . Vettel had a trouble @-@ free session and set the eighth @-@ fastest time , one position behind teammate Sébastien Bourdais . Räikkönen and Rosberg completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session was divided into three parts . In the first 20 @-@ minute period , cars finishing 16th or lower were eliminated . The second qualifying period lasted 15 minutes , at the end of which the fastest 10 cars went into the final period to determine their grid positions for the race . Cars failing to make the final period were allowed to be refuelled before the race , but those competing in it were not and carried more fuel than they had done in the earlier qualifying sessions to see them through the first part of the race . The session was held in dry weather slightly hotter than any of the free practice sessions ; the ambient temperature ranged between 30 and 31 ° C ( 86 and 88 ° F ) , while track temperature ranged between 38 and 41 ° C ( 100 and 106 ° F ) . 
 Hamilton set the fastest time in the first and final parts of the session , which clinched him pole position with a lap of 1 : 20 @.@ 899 . Although he was pleased with the handling of his McLaren — he said that he had never been more comfortable in the car — he believed that he could have recorded a faster lap , as he made a slight mistake going into Turn Five . Hamilton was joined on the front row by his teammate Kovalainen , who recorded a lap time 0 @.@ 241 seconds slower and was fuelled for an additional two laps in the race . Massa set the session 's fastest time of 1 : 19 @.@ 068 during its second part , but was delayed by other cars , which prevented him from heating his tyres sufficiently to achieve the maximum grip possible . He dropped to third overall in the final part of qualifying . Räikkönen was on a heavier fuel load than his teammate but made a mistake on his final flying lap that restricted him to sixth place . That left him behind Kubica and Glock on the grid . Kubica achieved his competitive time despite handling problems , which led him to describe his lap as his best so far of the season , while Glock recorded the best qualifying result of his career thus far . Alonso qualified in seventh position with Piquet in tenth on a heavy fuel load ; the Renault teammates were split by Webber and Trulli . As the Soft tyres were expected to perform better in the race than the Super Softs , the McLaren drivers ' use of one fewer set of the Soft tyres than their Ferrari counterparts during the qualifying session suggested Hamilton and Kovalainen might have had a tyre performance advantage in the race . This was because the Soft tyre was the fastest tyre choice over the course of a single lap , despite the theoretical performance advantage of the Super Soft ; Ferrari used one more set of Soft tyres than McLaren before realising this was the case . 
 Vettel was the fastest driver not to advance into the final session , qualifying 11th ; his best time of 1 : 20 @.@ 131 was just over a second slower than Massa 's pace in the second session . His teammate , Bourdais , set the 14th @-@ fastest lap , but was penalised five positions on the grid for impeding Heidfeld during the first part of qualifying , a delay which limited the BMW Sauber driver to the 16th @-@ fastest time . The Toro Rosso drivers were split before Bourdais ' penalty by Jenson Button — who found his Honda 's revised suspension a significant improvement — and David Coulthard , who believed the Hungaroring did not suit the handling characteristics of his Red Bull RB4 chassis . Rosberg made it into the second part of qualifying , but did not complete any laps thereafter after his Williams car developed a hydraulics problem . Kazuki Nakajima ( Williams ) , Rubens Barrichello ( Honda ) and Force India drivers Giancarlo Fisichella and Adrian Sutil failed to advance beyond the first part of qualifying , and thus completed the final rows of the grid . In the first part of qualifying ( the only section in which all drivers took part ) , the entire field was covered by just under three seconds . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race took place in the afternoon from 14 : 00 local time , in dry and sunny weather , with an ambient temperature of between 30 and 31 ° C ( 86 and 88 ° F ) , and a track temperature ranging from 40 to 43 ° C ( 104 to 109 ° F ) . The race @-@ day attendance was 84 @,@ 000 . As usual , the race was broadcast worldwide , with the " World Feed " coverage being produced by FOM . Every driver except Coulthard started on the Soft compound tyres . Massa made a good start on his only remaining new set of Soft tyres , moving ahead of Kovalainen from the grid and drawing alongside Hamilton into the first corner . Hamilton held the inside line for the turn , but Massa braked later than the McLaren driver and passed him around the outside . Behind the leading three in the run down to the first corner , Glock moved ahead of Kubica , while Alonso overtook Räikkönen . Barrichello made the best start in the field , moving from 17th to 13th place at the end of the first lap , while Vettel made a poor start and lost four places over the same distance . At the completion of the first lap , Massa led from Hamilton , Kovalainen , Glock , Kubica , Alonso , Räikkönen , Webber , Trulli , Piquet , Coulthard , Heidfeld , Barrichello , Button , Vettel , Bourdais , Rosberg , Nakajima , Fisichella and Sutil . 
 Massa and Hamilton immediately began to pull clear of Kovalainen . On lap 3 , Button overtook his teammate Barrichello for 13th position , but both Honda drivers were stuck behind Heidfeld , who was carrying a heavier fuel load than them . As the race progressed , Massa began to open a small lead over Hamilton , who put his McLaren into a " fuel @-@ saving mode " , attempting to jump ahead of Massa later in the race by making a pit stop after the Ferrari driver . In addition , the high track temperature was to the Ferrari chassis 's advantage , as it was easier on its tyres than the McLaren and was able to run them at an operating temperature of up to 10 ° C ( 18 ° F ) lower , resulting in less tyre wear . By lap 18 , Massa had a lead of 3 @.@ 5 seconds over Hamilton , who in turn was almost 8 seconds ahead of Kovalainen . Glock was a further 3 seconds behind the second McLaren driver , but was drawing ahead of Kubica in fifth , who was finding his BMW Sauber difficult to drive in race conditions with a lack of grip and stability under braking , and was holding up a group of cars behind him . 
 Massa , Kubica and Webber were the first three drivers to make pit stops by coming in on lap 18 . The McLaren mechanics timed Massa 's stop to estimate the amount of fuel he received , and when Hamilton made his own first stop on the next lap , they fuelled him to run for three laps longer than the Ferrari in the second stint of the race . Kovalainen took over the lead of the race for two laps before his pit stop on lap 21 returned it to Massa . Piquet was the last of the leading runners to make a pit stop , on lap 25 , allowing him to jump ahead of Kubica , Trulli and Webber . Further down the order , Vettel made an unscheduled pit stop on lap 20 and retired two laps later with an overheating engine . By the end of lap 26 , all of the leading drivers on two @-@ stop strategies had taken their pit stops . The race order was Massa leading from Hamilton , Kovalainen , Glock , Coulthard ( who was yet to pit ) , Alonso , Räikkönen , Piquet , Trulli , Kubica , Webber , Heidfeld , Button , Barrichello , Bourdais , Rosberg , Nakajima , Fisichella and Sutil . 
 Hamilton rejoined the race following his first pit stop 2 @.@ 6 seconds behind Massa , and needed to stay within approximately 3 @.@ 5 seconds of the Ferrari driver to gain track position after the second round of pit stops . Massa began to pull away again , easing the gap open to 4 seconds by lap 32 , while Hamilton locked his front @-@ left wheel as he tried to keep up with the Ferrari , flat @-@ spotting the tyre in the process . The two continued to set fastest laps as they pulled away from the rest of the field . On lap 29 , Coulthard made his first pit stop , dropping to 12th place as a result . Button , Barrichello , Bourdais , Rosberg , Nakajima , Fisichella and Sutil also made their first pit stops at this stage of the race . Three of these drivers experienced delays during their pit stops which dropped them down the running order : Barrichello and Bourdais suffered flash fires , while Rosberg 's fuel hose jammed , losing him time . 
 At the front of the field , Massa continued to pull away gradually from Hamilton ; the gap between the two had risen to 5 seconds by the end of lap 40 . On the following lap , Hamilton 's front @-@ left tyre deflated approaching Turn Two ; the resultant slow lap back to the pit lane and stop for a replacement tyre dropped him to tenth place . Massa now had a 23 @-@ second lead over Kovalainen and slowed his pace accordingly , adjusting the performance of the engine to place it under less mechanical stress . He made his final pit stop on lap 44 , allowing Kovalainen to take the lead until his own stop four laps later , handing Massa back his lead . On lap 41 , Heidfeld made his only pit stop , dropping from 11th to 12th position . In the following laps , the other drivers made their second stops , except Nakajima , who switched to a one @-@ stop strategy at his first visit to his pit box . Behind the leading trio of Massa , Kovalainen and Glock , Räikkönen moved ahead of Alonso despite running off the road just before his pit stop ; after he exited the pit lane , Piquet fended off Trulli as they battled for position . The pit stop sequence allowed Hamilton to move back up the order , to sixth place behind Alonso . Further back , Bourdais suffered another flash fire on lap 45 , and made another visit to the pit lane one lap later to have fire extinguisher foam cleaned off his helmet visor . Rosberg was the final scheduled driver to make a pit stop , on lap 58 . The majority of the drivers ran with Soft tyres for the first two stints of the race , then switched to the Super Soft compound for the final stint . 
 At the conclusion of lap 59 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the running order was Massa leading from Kovalainen , Glock , Räikkönen , Alonso , Hamilton , Piquet , Trulli , Kubica , Webber , Heidfeld , Coulthard , Button , Nakajima , Rosberg , Fisichella , Sutil , Barrichello and Bourdais . Running in clean air without a car immediately in front of him for the first time , Räikkönen set the fastest lap of the race at 1 : 21 @.@ 195 , on lap 61 , as he closed the nine @-@ second gap to Glock at a rate of one second per lap . Hamilton caught Alonso at a similar rate , but his rear Super Soft tyres began to overheat and he was unable to make any further impression after closing the gap to 1 @.@ 5 seconds . On lap 62 , Sutil suffered a puncture caused by a brake failure and became the second retirement of the race . In the closing laps , Kovalainen reduced his deficit to Massa to 15 seconds , but the Ferrari driver appeared to be in command of the race . However , as Massa started lap 68 , his engine failed without warning , forcing him to retire from the lead with three laps remaining . Kovalainen was thus promoted into the lead , which he held to take the first victory of his Formula One career in a time of 1 ' 37 : 27 @.@ 067 , at an average speed of 117 @.@ 309 miles per hour ( 188 @.@ 791 km / h ) . Kovalainen was the 100th driver to win a Formula One World Championship race . Glock likewise claimed the best result of his career , and first podium finish , with second position . Räikkönen took the final place on the podium despite a failure in his car 's rear suspension during the final few laps . Alonso and Piquet finished on either side of Hamilton , who was in fifth position , leading Symonds to describe the race as his team 's best of the year so far . Trulli finished seventh , ahead of Kubica , who was extremely disappointed with the uncompetitive performance of his car at the Grand Prix closest to his home country of Poland . His teammate , Heidfeld , finished in tenth place between the two Red Bull drivers , both of whom were also disappointed by their team 's performance . Button , Nakajima , Rosberg and Fisichella filled the next places , a lap behind the leader , while Barrichello was two laps down in 16th position after the delay at his first pit stop . Massa was classified in 17th place , ahead of Bourdais , who was the final finisher . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Although Kovalainen was delighted with his first Formula One victory , he attributed much of the credit for his win to luck . After the race he said , " I feel a bit sorry for Felipe and Lewis . They both drove great races , but I know how it feels when things go wrong — I 've had a few similar moments this year . I tried to put pressure on Felipe , especially during the last stint . I felt something might happen if I did that , you never know , but I still found it hard to believe when I saw his Ferrari on fire . " As of 2016 , the race remains Kovalainen 's only Formula One win . Glock was pleased with second position and spoke of how he had dedicated extra training to improve his race starts . He said he had focussed on not making any mistakes in the closing laps as Räikkönen closed , instead of maintaining the gap . Räikkönen described his race as " frustrating and boring " due to the amount of time he spent stuck behind slower cars . 
 The podium finishers were overshadowed in the media by coverage of the ill fortune of both the weekend 's pace @-@ setters , Hamilton and Massa . Massa in particular was praised for his performance . The Ferrari team principal , Stefano Domenicali , said it was , " the best race of his career . It was fantastic the way he managed the race . " Journalist Mark Hughes described it as " almost certainly his best race to date " , and colleague Simon Arron termed it as " one of the finest afternoons of his F1 career " . Both drew attention to his controlled aggression at the first corner of the race , followed by his relentless , mistake @-@ free pace . Arron , in particular , noted that Massa 's first @-@ corner passing move was more typical of Hamilton 's attacking style than his own , and was a " defining moment " in Massa 's championship campaign . Hamilton himself later expressed surprise that Massa had been able to overtake him in such a manner , and warned his rival that " it won 't happen again " . Hughes described the Grand Prix as " a throwback race " , in that the leaders had suffered from unreliability , and the winner had not been in contention on speed alone ; It was a situation reminiscent of earlier times in the sport , when the cars were generally less reliable . 
 Bridgestone director of motorsport Hirohide Hamashima said Hamilton 's puncture was probably caused by debris , although as a result of the damage the tyre had sustained , the precise nature of the failure was impossible to determine . He also stated that Hamilton 's tyre was more vulnerable to debris damage because he had flat @-@ spotted it earlier in the race . Massa said he had no prior indication of his engine failure . The problem was later traced to a connecting rod failure caused by an impurity in the component material . An identical problem caused Räikkönen to retire from the following race , the 2008 European Grand Prix . 
 As a consequence of the race , Hamilton extended his lead in the Drivers ' Championship to five points ahead of Räikkönen , who moved ahead of Massa in the standings . Kubica maintained fourth place ; Kovalainen 's win moved him to within three points of Heidfeld in fifth . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari continued to lead , but McLaren jumped ahead of BMW Sauber for second position . Behind Toyota , Renault moved ahead of Red Bull . Despite his increased lead , Hamilton acknowledged that he expected the Ferrari drivers to be formidable opponents in the season 's seven remaining races . After the eventual conclusion of the championship in Hamilton 's favour by one point , the Hungarian Grand Prix was highlighted as one of Massa 's most obvious lost opportunities in his bid to win the title . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 ^ 1 Sébastien Bourdais was penalised five places on the grid for impeding Nick Heidfeld during first qualifying . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Skipsea Castle = 
 Skipsea Castle is a Norman motte and bailey castle near the village of Skipsea , East Riding of Yorkshire , England . Built around 1086 by Drogo de la <unk> , it was designed to secure the newly conquered region , defend against any potential Danish invasion and control the trade route across the region leading to the North Sea . The motte and the bailey were separated by Skipsea Mere , an artificial lake that was linked to the sea during the medieval period via a navigable channel . The village of Skipsea grew up beside the castle church , and the fortified town of Skipsea Brough was built alongside the castle around 1160 to capitalise on the potential trade . 
 In 1221 the castle 's owner , William de Forz , the Count of Aumale , rebelled against Henry III ; the fortification was captured by royalist forces and the King ordered it to be destroyed . The remains of the castle had little value by the end of the 14th century and Skipsea Brough failed to attract many inhabitants . The castle passed into the control of the state in the early 20th century and various archaeological investigations were carried out between 1987 and 2001 . In the 21st century , Skipsea Castle is managed by English Heritage and open to visitors . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th – 12th centuries = = = 
 Skipsea Castle was built around 1086 by Drogo de <unk> , a Flemish mercenary and the first Lord of Holderness , following the Norman conquest of England and the Harrying of the North . The region was on the frontier of Norman power and the lordship was intended to protect central Yorkshire against potential Danish raids across the North Sea . Skipsea formed the administrative centre of Drogo 's huge estates , which stretched from the Humber to Bridlington , as well as serving as his caput , or principal residence . 
 The name " Skipsea " has Scandinavian roots and meant a lake that was navigable by ships . In the medieval period the site was an inland harbour , connected via a navigable channel to the North Sea , which in the 21st century is only around 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . The surrounding region was referred to as an " island " during this period , due to the surrounding estuary and flood plains . The site of the castle was strategically important , as it lay on the main trading route through the marshes and was accessible by the sea ; the castle had military and economic functions , being designed both to control the newly conquered Norman lands and to manage trade in and out of the inland harbour . 
 The castle took the form of a motte and bailey design , and a dam was probably constructed to turn the surrounding marshy , low @-@ lying land into an artificial lake , called Skipsea Mere , in turn connected the channel leading to the sea . The complex had its own private harbour , and probably a boat yard and a fresh @-@ water fishery . By the end of the 11th century a church had been built to the east of the castle across the mere , and the village of Skipsea soon grew up alongside the church . Drogo settled 10 knights on lands near the castle in an arrangement known as a <unk> or castle @-@ guard system , under which the knights helped to guard the castle in return for their estates , and one of them probably built his own smaller fortification at nearby Aldborough . 
 After the suspicious death of his wife Drogo fled England , and the castle was reassigned by William the Conqueror to Odo , the Count of Aumale . In 1096 it passed to Arnulf de Montgomery , but returned to the <unk> in 1102 , who held it until 1221 . Trade initially flourished and as a result William le Gros founded the fortified town of Skipsea Brough along the <unk> just south of the castle , probably around 1160 . The town was intended to bring in valuable revenue to the earls , but would also have helped to defend the castle on its most vulnerable , overlooked side . The castle @-@ guard system lapsed , with the surrounding estates paying their rents in cash instead . 
 = = = 13th – 14th centuries = = = 
 After around 1200 the castle declined in importance : it was poorly situated , the threat of Danish raids had now passed , and so the nearby manor of <unk> became the new administrative centre for the lordship instead . In January 1220 William de Forz , the Count of Aumale by marriage , rebelled against Henry III ; part of their dispute involved the ownership of the estate of Driffield , 11 miles ( 18 km ) away from Skipsea Castle , which Henry had seized the previous year , but William had been in disagreement with Henry 's policies for several years before . 
 William was promptly excommunicated and Henry moved quickly to suppress the revolt . The barons in the north were ordered to besiege William 's castles , including Skipsea , and William shortly surrendered himself to the King and was ultimately pardoned . Following the rebellion , Henry ordered Skipsea Castle to be destroyed , although it is uncertain to what extent this order was actually carried out . William passed on the castle to his own son , another William , but on the death of his son 's widow , Isabella , it passed to the Crown in 1293 . 
 Skipsea Mere was drained in the second half of the 14th century and by 1397 the castle was considered worthless : the 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of land around it became used for pasturing animals . The counts of Aumale used the manor house at nearby <unk> when they visited the area . Probably because of its poor location , the town of Skipsea Brough also proved unsuccessful as a commercial site . There were only three burgesses in the town paying rent in 1260 , and by the late 14th century the town was largely abandoned ; in 1377 there were only 95 people registered for the poll tax in the two settlements of Skipsea and Skipsea Brough combined . 
 = = = 15th – 21st centuries = = = 
 Further drainage of the mere occurred around 1720 and its land was reclaimed for farming . The ground remained marshy and still occasionally flooded at the start of the 20th century . In 1911 the castle was placed into the guardianship of the Commissioners of Works and Public Buildings , later passing into the control of the government heritage agency English Heritage . Archaeological surveys of the site were carried out in 1987 , 1988 , 1992 and 2001 . 
 The castle is protected as a Scheduled Monument under UK law and the remaining earthworks generally well preserved , but between 2010 and 2014 English Heritage expressed concerns about its condition and the impact of drainage , and the consequent drying out of the land , on the castle 's earthworks . Only a handful of buildings survive in the castle 's planned town of Skipsea Brough . 
 = = Architecture and landscape = = 
 Skipsea Castle was a motte and bailey design , with the two parts of the fortification divided by Skipsea Mere . The mere surrounded the motte ; the south @-@ east corner of the mere was cut off by two causeways to the south and east of the motte . Eels were recorded being caught in the lake during the 13th century , and the south @-@ eastern corner may have formed a fresh @-@ water fishery . A curved channel , approximately 25 by 200 metres ( 82 by 656 ft ) in size and ultimately leading to the North Sea , flowed around down the south @-@ west side of the motte , giving boats access to wharves along the inside of the bailey , and concluded in a possible boat yard at the eastern end of the channel . There may have been an additional inland harbour just to the west of the bailey , but archaeologists are divided on this issue . 
 The motte , constructed from sand and gravel , was deliberately built on a natural glacial mound , making it appear unusually large . It is 100 metres ( 330 ft ) in diameter and 11 metres ( 36 ft ) high , with a 0 @.@ 25 acres ( 0 @.@ 10 ha ) of space on the top , protected around the base by a 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) high bank and a ditch up to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) wide , although when first built these would have been taller and deeper than today . There was a timber keep on the motte , and possibly a stone gatehouse at the south @-@ east corner , leading onto the earthwork causeway that crossed the mere south to link the motte with the bailey . The eastern causeway linked the motte with the church in Skipsea village . 
 The bailey was approximately 300 by 100 metres ( 980 by 330 ft ) , covering an area of around 8 @.@ 25 acres ( 3 @.@ 34 ha ) , curving around the west and south side of the castle . Its earthworks were built from clay , with a rampart up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high , protected by a 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) wide ditch , originally up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) deep . The main entrance to the bailey was positioned on the southern side , and was known as Bail Gate and guarded by a gatehouse , with a subsidiary entrance on the north side , linked by a path . A break in the earthworks , now called Scotch Gap , was cut out during the 13th @-@ century destruction of the castle , and the bank has been damaged in other ways from the installation of drainage works . 
 = East and West Blockhouses = 
 The East and West Blockhouses were Device Forts built by King Henry VIII in 1539 to protect the harbour of Milford Haven in Wales . The two blockhouses were positioned on either side of the Milford Haven Waterway in the villages of Angle and Dale respectively , overlooking the sea . The East Blockhouse was never completed , but the remains were reused as a defensive site in the Second World War . The West Blockhouse was described by contemporaries as forming a round tower with gunports , but it was demolished when West Blockhouse Fort was built on the same site in the 19th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 The two blockhouses were built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and with France and the Empire in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon , and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England now appeared certain . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . Soon afterwards work began on the East Blockhouse in the village of Angle . Angle overlooked the mouth of Milford Haven harbour in Pembrokeshire ; another fortification , the West Blockhouse , was built just across the other side of the Milford Haven Waterway at Dale . 
 The East Blockhouse was constructed on a narrow headland 35 metres ( 115 ft ) above the sea ; the Elizabethan historian George Owen described the building as having been intended to be a " <unk> <unk> " , and the physical remains in the 20th century comprised a 7 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 0 metres ( 24 @.@ 0 by 13 @.@ 1 ft ) stone building , with a stone enclosure to the north and a subsidiary building 15 metres ( 49 ft ) away from the main site on the south @-@ east side . The construction work was never completed and by 1546 the walls had begun to collapse . According to Owen , the West Blockhouse was a round tower , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter , with eight gunports . 
 = = Later use = = 
 After peace was achieved with France in 1558 , military attention shifted towards the Spanish threat to the increasingly prosperous south @-@ west side of England . Tensions with Spain grew and invasion appeared likely in 1589 , resulting in royal permission being given to reuse the stonework from the East Blockhouse for new coastal defences , but this work was not carried out . The fort continued to decay until the 20th century . With the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , the East Blockhouse was adapted for use by the British military . The interior was cleared out and a shed was built in one corner . A slit trench was dug on the north side of the building , a rifle embrasure formed on the east side of the building , and a machine @-@ gun position was dug out and protected with sandbags outside it . 
 Land erosion has damaged the East Blockhouse site ; the north wall collapsed before 1975 , and between 2010 and 2011 there was another major landslip . An archaeological survey of the blockhouse , funded by the Welsh heritage agency Cadw , took place in 2011 . The East Blockhouse is the only such defensive structure to survive in Wales and is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 The West Blockhouse was demolished in the 19th century , when West Blockhouse Fort was built on the same site , and there are no visible remains . 
 = En Primera Fila = 
 En Primera Fila ( Front Row ) is the third live album by Venezuelan recording artist Franco De Vita . It was released by Sony Music on May 31 , 2011 , after a three @-@ year gap since the release of De Vita 's last studio album . De Vita worked as producer with David Cabrera . The album is part of the live albums series entitled Primera Fila , promoted by the record label and including De Vita 's greatest hits on re @-@ worked versions and new songs . 
 The album features collaborations by several performers , including Leonel García , Alejandra Guzmán , Debi Nova , Gilberto Santa Rosa , and Noel <unk> , among others . En Primera Fila entered the top five in Mexico and the United States . The first single , " Tan Sólo Tú " , performed by De Vita and Guzmán , reached Top 20 at the Billboard Top Latin Songs . <unk> , a DVD documentary about the recording sessions , is included on the standard edition of the album . De Vita was awarded the Best Male Pop Vocal Album at the 12th Latin Grammy Awards for En Primera Fila . 
 = = Background = = 
 After selling 12 million copies of his albums and composing for various artists , including Ricky Martin and Chayanne , Franco De Vita recorded En Primera Fila as a part of the concert series promoted by the label Sony Music entitled Primera Fila , which has a concept of record live performances by Latin American performers before a small audience in an intimate setting , resemblant to MTV Unplugged . About Primera Fila De Vita said , " The project was good for me , since I wanted to refresh many songs , some of them composed and recorded 25 years ago to incorporate a current sound and change some things . But the songs remains the same . " De Vita became the fourth performer to record under this format , following Vicente Fernández , Thalía , and <unk> . The album is De Vita 's third live album , following En Vivo <unk> 16 ( 1992 ) and Mil y Una Historias en Vivo ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 En Primera Fila was recorded from January 20 – 21 , 2011 , at the <unk> Studios in Miami , Florida , United States . De Vita was supported by a band of 15 members and was joined on stage by a handful of guest performers . Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Santiago Cruz helped with the song " <unk> y <unk> " , Gilberto Santa Rosa added vocals to " Te Veo Venir Soledad " , Soledad <unk> performed on " No Se <unk> " , Alejandra Guzmán on " Tan Sólo Tú " , and Debi Nova on " Si Quieres Decir Adiós " . For the track " Si La Ves " , De Vita was accompanied by the members of the dissolved band Sin Bandera , Leonel García and Noel <unk> , who performed on the original version of the song . " I tried to give to the songs a different look , dress them differently . I did not change the lyrics or the melody , only the instrumental part , " De Vita recalled about the recording session . According to De Vita , Guzmán had the most complicated song on the album , the lead single . De Vita and Guzmán recorded the track twice , with Guzmán standing beside De Vita 's piano . For " Te Veo Venir Soledad " , De Vita and Santa Rosa tried to play a <unk> , in order to Santa Rosa to improvise . The singer tried to keep the musical arrangements fresh and modern , without changing the songs too much . " I did not wanted people to feel that the songs were changed , " De Vita declared . 
 = = Repertoire = = 
 About the songs to be included on the album , De Vita revealed that his idea was to include well @-@ known songs that were more than three years old and refresh them with new arrangements . " The first challenge was to choose the songs , and the second to make that sound different ... but not too much " , De Vita said . Sixteen previous songs by the singer are included : " Un Buen Perdedor " , from his debut album of 1984 ; and " Aquí Estás Otra Vez " , from <unk> ( 1986 ) ; " Louis " and " Te Amo " , from Al Norte del Sur ( 1989 ) ; " No Basta " , the lead single from <unk> ( 1990 ) ; " Y Te Pienso " and " <unk> y <unk> " , from Voces a mi <unk> ( 1993 ) ; " Si Quieres Decir Adios " and the title track from the 1993 album Fuera de Este Mundo ; and " Si Tú No Estás " and " Te Veo Venir Soledad " , selected from Nada es Igual ( 1999 ) . The most represented album on the setlist is Stop ( 2005 ) with four songs : " Si La Ves " , " Dónde Está el Amor " , " No Me <unk> " , and " Tú de Qué Vas " . " No Se <unk> " is the only song selected from the 2008 album Simplemente La Verdad . Two songs were previously unreleased . De Vita chose Mexican singer Alejandra Guzmán to record the lead single " Tan Sólo Tú " , since he thought she was " perfect " for the song . " Mira Más Allá " is the other new song included . De Vita also stated his intention to record a sequel to Primera Fila ; since many songs in his repertoire were left out , " I would like to include Shakira on a ballad ... Ricky Martin was considered for this album too , but could not make it in time . " Two years later , Vuelve en Primera Fila was announced to be the follow @-@ up album which was released on November 12 , 2013 in Latin America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mariano Prunes of Allmusic gave the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . He described it as an opportunity to showcase De Vita 's craftsmanship , while the singer " effortlessly dabble in pop , rock , ballads , and salsa . " De Vita earned two Latin Grammy Awards for his work on En Primera Fila : Best Male Pop Vocal Album and Best Long Form Music Video for the recording of the live presentation , which was shared with Diego Alvarez and Vicente Solís ; while the album was nominated for Album of the Year , which it lost to Entren Los Que Quieran by Calle 13 . The first single , " Tan Sólo Tú " received nominations for Record of the Year and Best Short Form Music Video , losing the first to " Latinoamérica " , and the second to " Calma Pueblo " , both by Calle 13 . The album also received a nomination for the Mexican Oye ! Awards for Male Pop Album of the Year , while " Tan Sólo Tú " was nominated for Pop Song of the Year . De Vita lost the first award to Cristian Castro for Viva el Príncipe , and the second to Mexican band Zoé for " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 The album debuted at number four and peaked at number two on the Mexican Albums Chart . En Primera Fila earned a double platinum certification in Mexico by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas . In the United States , the album debuted and peaked at number three in the Billboard Latin Albums , becoming De Vita 's second top ten album and highest placement on the chart , after Stop peaked at number seven in 2005 . On the Latin Pop Albums chart , En Primera Fila was the first number @-@ one album for De Vita and his seventh top ten hit . The album was certified Gold ( Latin field ) by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Tan Sólo Tú " , performed by De Vita and Alejandra Guzmán , was selected as the lead single from the album and also as the main theme for the Argentinian series Los <unk> . De Vita also recorded a cameo for the series . The track peaked at number 15 in the Billboard Latin Songs and at number three in the Latin Pop Songs charts in the United States . In Mexico , the song peaked at number four on the Mexican Singles Chart . " Si Quieres Decir Adiós " was released as the second single . The song features singer @-@ songwriter Debi Nova and peaked at number 26 in the Latin Pop Songs chart in the United States . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To promote En Primera Fila , De Vita launched the " Mira Más Allá Tour " , where he had scheduled performances in Ecuador ( Guayaquil and Quito ) ; Venezuela ( Puerto La Cruz , Valencia , Caracas , Maracaibo and San Cristóbal ) ; for the show held in Caracas at the Generalissimo Francisco de Miranda Air Base De Vita was joined by Panamanian singer @-@ songwriter Rubén Blades and the Simón Bolivar Symphony and they gathered more than 100 @,@ 000 people ; De Vita also visited Mexico ( Guadalajara , Puebla , Tijuana ) , with the presentation in Guadalajara , held at the <unk> Auditorium , being joined by Leonel García on the song " Si la Ves " , and also performing " <unk> en Mi Vida " , a single from García 's former band Sin Bandera . In the United States the singer performed at the Radio City Music Hall and was accompanied by Spanish singer Natalia Jiménez , Leonel García and La India . Following this presentation De Vita visited Boston and Washington to finally arrive to Argentina to perform at the Gran Rex . De Vita also performed along Alejandra Guzmán at the 12th Latin Grammy Awards the single " Tan Sólo Tú " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Franco De Vita ( except where noted ) . 
 All songs written and composed by Franco De Vita ( except where noted ) . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 This information adapted from Allmusic . 
 = Maryland Route 198 = 
 Maryland Route 198 ( MD 198 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The highway runs 14 @.@ 14 miles ( 22 @.@ 76 km ) from MD 650 near Spencerville east to the entrance of Fort George G. Meade beyond its junction with MD 32 . MD 198 connects Laurel in far northern Prince George 's County with the northeastern Montgomery County communities of Spencerville and Burtonsville and Maryland City and Fort Meade in western Anne Arundel County . The highway is a four @-@ to @-@ six @-@ lane divided highway between U.S. Route 29 ( US 29 ) in Burtonsville and the Baltimore – Washington Parkway in Maryland City . 
 MD 198 was constructed from US 1 in Laurel west toward Burtonsville in the early 1920s and completed in the late 1920s . Another section was built in Spencerville in the late 1920s ; the two segments were connected in the mid @-@ 1950s . The Laurel – Fort Meade road was built as MD 602 for military access purposes in the mid @-@ 1940s , replacing the original highway between the two locations , MD 216 . MD 198 was relocated through Laurel and extended east along MD 602 to Fort Meade in the early 1960s . The first divided highway portion of the highway was part of a relocation at the Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) interchange in the early 1970s . The divided highway was extended west to Burtonsville in the mid @-@ 1980s and through Maryland City in the late 1980s . MD 198 's eastern end was extended to MD 32 in the early 1990s and then moved again for its interchange with that highway in the early 2000s . The Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSHA ) plans to expand the remaining two @-@ lane portions of MD 198 to a divided highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 198 begins at a four @-@ legged intersection with MD 650 ( New Hampshire Avenue ) west of Spencerville . The west leg of the intersection is county @-@ maintained Norbeck Road , which leads west to MD 28 . MD 198 heads east as two @-@ lane Spencerville Road through an intersection with Good Hope Road and passes through the village of Spencerville . At the western edge of Burtonsville , the highway expands to a four @-@ lane undivided highway and has a three @-@ way intersection with Old Columbia Pike and takes on that name . MD 198 expands to a six @-@ lane divided highway just west of its three @-@ quarter diamond interchange with US 29 ( Columbia Pike ) . Access from southbound US 29 to MD 198 is provided via Columbia Pike , a bypassed segment of US 29 that intersects MD 198 opposite the ramp from MD 198 to southbound US 29 . 
 MD 198 continues east as Sandy Spring Road , which drops to four lanes as the road leaves Burtonsville . The route crosses the Montgomery – Prince George 's county line and temporarily expands to six lanes between the intersection with Old Gunpowder Road and Bond Mill Road and the state highway 's junction with I @-@ 95 in West Laurel . The junction is a cloverleaf interchange with a flyover ramp from westbound MD 198 to southbound I @-@ 95 . MD 198 again becomes six lanes at the east end of the interchange where the highway enters the city of Laurel . At Ninth Street , the state highway splits into a one @-@ way pair that uses Gorman Avenue eastbound and Talbott Avenue westbound . MD 198 meets the southern end of MD 216 ( Seventh Street ) and intersects US 1 , which comprises a one @-@ way pair that uses Washington Boulevard southbound and Second Street northbound . East of US 1 , Gorman and Talbott Avenues come together to form Fort Meade Road , a six @-@ lane divided highway that crosses CSX 's Capital Subdivision , which carries MARC 's Camden Line . 
 MD 198 curves northeast and meets the northern end of MD 197 ( Laurel Bowie Road ) before crossing the Patuxent River , where the route leaves the city of Laurel and enters Anne Arundel County . The highway , now named Laurel Fort Meade Road , passes one of the main entrances to Laurel Park Racecourse and passes through Maryland City . MD 198 drops to four lanes at its partial cloverleaf interchange with the Baltimore – Washington Parkway ( unsigned MD 295 ) and then becomes a two @-@ lane road a short distance east of the interchange . The state highway crosses the Little Patuxent River , then curves southeast and expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway as it parallels MD 32 ( Patuxent Freeway ) . At the entrance to Tipton Airport , MD 198 curves north and meets MD 32 at a dumbbell interchange . The highway passes through an S @-@ curve then reaches its northern terminus at an entrance to Fort Meade . The road continues into the military installation as Mapes Road . 
 MD 198 is a part of the National Highway System for its entire length . The highway is an intermodal connector between I @-@ 95 and US 1 . The remainder of the highway is a National Highway System principal arterial . 
 = = History = = 
 The first segment of MD 198 was built as a 15 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) concrete road from US 1 west to <unk> Road by 1921 ; the two roads intersected at the site of the modern I @-@ 95 interchange . The concrete road was extended west to the Montgomery – Prince George 's county line in 1923 . In Laurel , MD 198 originally followed Montgomery Street and the piece of Sandy Spring Road north of modern MD 198 from Montgomery Street to the I @-@ 95 interchange . A separate segment of MD 198 was built as a macadam road from MD 27 ( later US 29 , now MD 650 ) to a point east of Good Hope Road in 1929 and 1930 . In addition , the first segment of the state highway was extended as a 20 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) macadam road from the county line to the western Old Columbia Pike intersection in Burtonsville ; the macadam road continued south along Old Columbia Pike , which was then designated MD 196 . MD 198 was widened with a pair of 3 @.@ 5 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) bituminous shoulders from the county line east to Laurel between 1938 and 1940 . There remained a gap in MD 198 between Spencerville and Burtonsville until the intervening county road was brought into state maintenance in 1956 . 
 The original route connecting Laurel and Fort Meade was MD 216 . That highway was built between 1934 and 1939 along a course generally north of modern MD 198 . Modern MD 198 was constructed as MD 602 as a military access project during World War II . The first segment of the new highway , from US 1 to MD 216 near Brock Bridge Road in what is now Maryland City , was started in 1943 and completed in 1944 . This segment included a bridge across the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad ( now CSX ) in Laurel and a bridge across the Patuxent River . The remainder of MD 602 , from near Brock Bridge Road to the entrance to Fort Meade near the Little Patuxent River , was completed by 1946 . When MD 602 was completed , MD 216 was truncated at US 1 . 
 MD 198 was widened to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) on Montgomery Street in Laurel in 1948 . When the US 1 Laurel Bypass — today the northbound lanes of the U.S. Highway on Second Street — was completed , the highway was extended east one block on Montgomery Street to the new bypass in 1950 and 1951 . In 1963 , MD 198 was removed from Montgomery Avenue and placed on its Gorman – Talbott one @-@ way pair through Laurel in 1963 . That same year , A new piece of highway was created from Van Dusen Road to Ninth Street to connect the one @-@ way pair with Sandy Spring Road . That same year , MD 198 was extended over the course of MD 602 to Fort Meade . The first portion of MD 198 to become a divided highway was along a new alignment from Sweitzer Lane to Van Dusen Road . This highway was built concurrent with I @-@ 95 and the I @-@ 95 – MD 198 interchange in 1970 and 1971 . 
 The MD 198 divided highway was extended west from Sweitzer Lane to what was then US 29 in 1985 . That same year , the state highway was expanded to a divided highway from US 1 to the Patuxent River . MD 198 was rebuilt as a divided highway from the Patuxent River to just west of the Baltimore – Washington Parkway in 1987 . The divided highway was extended through the parkway interchange in 1991 . As part of the construction , the original five @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange had a loop ramp added from the northbound parkway to westbound MD 198 . That same year , MD 198 was extended east from the Little Patuxent River to newly constructed MD 32 in Fort Meade . The state highway 's western terminus was relocated from an acute intersection with MD 650 to an orthogonal intersection in 1997 . The west leg of the intersection became operational when the extended Norbeck Road , a county highway connecting the ends of MD 28 and MD 198 , opened in 2004 . MD 198 's eastern end was extended along its current course when the MD 198 – MD 32 dumbbell interchange was completed in 2002 . The MD 198 – US 29 interchange opened in 2005 . 
 MDSHA has conducted a study on the east – west corridor between the MD 28 – MD 97 intersection at Norbeck and the I @-@ 95 – MD 198 interchange , a corridor that forms the most direct route from Laurel to Rockville . Plans for the MD 198 portion of the corridor call for expanding the route to a four @-@ lane divided highway from MD 650 to US 29 and widening the highway to six lanes from the Montgomery – Prince George 's County line to west of I @-@ 95 . The proposals also include adding a center turn lane to MD 198 between Old Columbia Pike and the Columbia Pike intersection and constructing roundabouts at Good Hope Road , Thompson Road , and Peach Orchard Road in Spencerville . MDSHA has also conducted a study concerning MD 198 between the Baltimore – Washington Parkway and Fort Meade . Proposed improvements are associated with the Base Realignment and Closure process that has greatly increased activity at Fort Meade . The preferred alternative that came out of the study was to expand MD 198 from the Baltimore – Washington Parkway to MD 32 to a four @-@ lane divided highway and to construct a flyover ramp from westbound MD 32 to westbound MD 198 to supplement the existing dumbbell interchange . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD 198A is the designation for Old MD 198 , which runs 0 @.@ 07 miles ( 0 @.@ 11 km ) from MD 650 east to a dead end adjacent to MD 198 near Spencerville . MD 198A is the old alignment of MD 198 before the highway 's western terminus was relocated to its present intersection in 1997 . MD 198A was assigned to the stub in 2007 . 
 = Blah Blah Blah ( Kesha song ) = 
 " Blah Blah Blah " is a song by American recording artist Kesha from her debut album , Animal ( 2010 ) . Produced by Benny Blanco , and co @-@ written by Kesha , Blanco , Neon Hitch and Sean Foreman , it was released as the album 's second single on February 19 , 2010 , and features 3OH ! 3 . Initial writing of the song took place when Kesha , Blanco , Hitch and Foreman were discussing which sex talked more and which one was more " obnoxious . " The song is a midtempo electropop song that speaks of men in the same way that they have talked about women in the music industry . The lyrics depict a woman who would rather have sex than listen to a man speak and features blatant come @-@ ons throughout the song . 
 The single achieved commercial success by reaching the top five in Australia and Canada , whilst charting within the top ten in the United States and New Zealand . The song became Kesha 's second top ten single in Australia , Canada and the United States . It has gone on to sell over two million copies in the United States as well as being certified two times platinum in Canada . 
 The music video for " Blah Blah Blah " was directed by Brendan Malloy . The video follows similar suit to the song 's lyrics . It depicts Kesha getting hit on by a variety of different men and she continually rejects them . Kesha and 3OH ! 3 performed the song on ninth season of American Idol to promote the single . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Blah Blah Blah " was written by Kesha alongside Neon Hitch , Sean Foreman and Benny Blanco who also produced the song . Kesha said that the song originated from a discussion they had in the studio on the politics of female @-@ male relationships which Kesha later explained , " The song came about when the people that wrote it — me , Benny Blanco , Neon Hitch and [ 3OH ! 3 's ] Sean Foreman — all got in a room , and they were talking about how chicks talk too much , " [ ... ] " And me and Neon were like , ' No , no , no , guys talk too much , " [ ... ] " So , we had this war of who were more obnoxious , chicks or dudes . And the song kind of came around from that conversation . I think I make a pretty fair point both in this video and in the song , that dudes are way more annoying . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Blah Blah Blah " is a midtempo electropop song ; the song utilizes synthesizers and drum machines in its production . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing , the single is set in compound time with a moderate beat rate of 120 beats per minute . It is written in the key of D minor and Kesha 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of D3 to the note of D5 . Lyrically , " Blah Blah Blah " depicts a woman who would rather have sex than listen to a man speak as the singer finds talkative men annoying ; blatant come @-@ ons such as " show me where your dick 's at " and " I wanna be naked " leave this literal meaning unambiguous . Kesha herself has been frank about this straightforward interpretation of the lyrics . The lyrics have been interpreted as a shot at the way men objectify women by speaking about them the way that they do in the music industry . " Andrew Burgess of MusicOMH felt that the line " I don 't really care where you live at , just turn around boy , let me hit that . Don 't be a little bitch with your chit @-@ chat ; just show me where your dick 's at " was a way of belittling her male peers . Fraser McAlpine of BBC noted that it was cultural progress that a woman can now " sing a song [ ... ] as dirty [ ... ] as her male peers " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Fraser McAlpine of the BBC was impressed with the song saying " it 's a sign of cultural progress that a modern pop lass can sing a song which is exactly as dirty as the kind of song her male peers would risk . " He compared Kesha 's vocal delivery to that of Eminem , he also compared the hook , " you tah @-@ tah @-@ <unk> ' that Blah Blah Blah " to " Bad Romance " by Lady Gaga , stating that the song was a " rural , farm @-@ girl spin " of it . Jim Farber of the New York Daily News stated that the track " could become the ' whatever ' anthem of the season . " It was described by the Winnipeg Free Press as a " hard pop @-@ hop cut with pogo @-@ worthy beats . " Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix thought that Kesha " intone [ d ] in a lusty , disturbingly carefree tone " on the song . 
 Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times said that " Blah Blah Blah " was one of those " moments on Animal that are nearly as experimental as an Animal Collective record , but instead of some wistful , Brian Wilson @-@ loving artiste at the song 's center , there 's this girl , rolling her eyes and snapping her gum . " Melanie Bertoldi from Billboard magazine also thought that the verse by 3OH ! 3 " severely slow [ ed ] down the momentum and never quite gel [ ed ] with Kesha 's catty , aggressive delivery , " but praised the song for its " danceability " . Andrew Burgess of MusicOMH said that while " 3OH ! 3 makes a lame attempt to assert the case for male equality [ on the song ] , Kesha comes off as so infectiously dominating , it 's hard to take [ 3OH ! 3 ] seriously . " Mayer Nissim of Digital Spy gave the song two out of five stars , stating that it was not as catchy as her debut , slamming the lyrics for being " thick " and adding that she failed to deliver on many lines , calling them " faux @-@ outrageous , faux @-@ feminist trash " . Melinda Newman of HitFix criticized the song , calling 3OH ! 3 " slumming " and " wretched . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Blah Blah Blah " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at position seven , and on the Hot Digital Songs chart at number two , selling a total of 206 @,@ 000 downloads , both chartings would become the songs ' peaks . On Billboard 's Pop chart , the song reached a peak of eleven . The song has received Platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units and as of February 2011 , the song has sold more than two million digital copies in the United States <unk> as of June 2011 , the song has sold 2 @,@ 132 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In Canada , " Blah Blah Blah " debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at position three , which became its peak . In March 2010 the single was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales of 160 @,@ 000 units . 
 In Australia , " Blah Blah Blah " entered the Australian chart at position seven on the week of January 24 , 2010 . The following week the song moved to position four , where it held the spot for three consecutive weeks . On the song 's fifth week on the chart , it reached its peak at position three where it held the spot for one week . The song was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 70 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , the song debuted and peaked at position seven . It later went on to receive gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . " Blah Blah Blah " made its debut onto the UK Singles Chart at number eleven on the issue dated February 7 , 2010 with sales of 27 @,@ 161 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the song was directed by Brendan Malloy . It premiered on February 23 , 2010 , on Vevo . Both members of 3OH ! 3 make an appearance in the video . Kesha told MTV that the video primarily involves men ( described as " <unk> " ) hitting on Kesha , while she declines their advances . " At one point , " Kesha says " I get to be strapped to this harness and bouncing around everywhere , and it was really cool [ ... ] The whole concept of the video was a bunch of douche @-@ y guys <unk> on me as usual , and me making them eat their <unk> or other various items " . Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard said that the clip was " thoroughly entertaining " . 
 In the first scene , outside of a club , Kesha is hit on by comedian Bret Ernst . He tries to convince Kesha that they would make a good couple , meanwhile Kesha texts someone , describing the man as a " major <unk> " . The next scene has Kesha at a bar playing pool near a man , where she duct @-@ tapes him , later pulling down his pants , after describing him as a " tool bag " in a text message . In an arcade , Kesha pushes a man away who is making conversation with her . The third suitor attempts to serenade Kesha with a guitar , to which Kesha replies by stuffing paper in his mouth . In the final sequence , a man tries to talk to Kesha in a bowling alley . She loses interest when his toupée falls off his head and she shoves the hairpiece into his mouth , in vein of the previous arcade scene . The video ends with Kesha and 3OH ! 3 singing and dancing together in the bowling lanes . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was first performed live for MTV Push , a program broadcast by MTV Networks worldwide . It was also performed on January 18 , 2010 , at MuchOnDemand , broadcast on Canadian cable music channel , MuchMusic . Kesha performed for the first time a heavily censored version of the song on the ninth season of American Idol with 3OH ! 3 on March 17 , 2010 . In the United Kingdom , Kesha made two appearances to perform the song . The first was on February 18 , 2010 , Alan Carr : Chatty Man . It was followed by a performance on breakfast television show GMTV , on February 19 . She also performed the song in a set for BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend , as well as Willkommen Bei Mario Barth Live in Germany and So You Think You Can Dance in Australia . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Kesha Sebert , Benny Blanco , Neon Hitch , Sean Foreman 
 Production – Benny Blanco 
 Instruments and programming – Benny Blanco 
 Recording – Benny Blanco 
 Engineering – Benny Blanco 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
