 = = Radio date and release history = = 
 = HMS Unicorn ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Unicorn was an aircraft repair ship and light aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy in the late 1930s . She was completed during World War II and provided air cover over the amphibious landing at Salerno , Italy in September 1943 . The ship was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean at the end of the year . Unicorn supported the aircraft carriers of the fleet on their operations until the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) was formed in November 1944 . She was transferred to Australia in early 1945 to support the BPF 's operations during Operation Iceberg , the Allied invasion of Okinawa in May . To shorten the time required to replenish the BPF 's carriers , the ship was based in the Admiralty Islands and in the Philippine Islands until the Japanese surrender in August . Unicorn was decommissioned and placed in reserve when she returned to the UK in January 1946 . 
 The ship was recommissioned in 1949 to support the light carrier of the Far East Fleet , as the Eastern Fleet had been redesignated after the end of World War II . She was unloading aircraft and equipment in Singapore in June 1950 when the Korean War began . She spent most of the war ferrying aircraft , troops , stores and equipment in support of Commonwealth operations in Korea . Unicorn supported other carriers during operations in Korea , but she became the only aircraft carrier to conduct a shore bombardment with her guns during wartime when she attacked North Korean observers on the coast during the war . The ship returned to the UK after the end of the war and was again placed in reserve . She was listed for disposal in 1958 and sold for scrap in 1959 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Abyssinia Crisis of 1934 – 35 demonstrated to the Admiralty that it needed a depot ship to support the aircraft carriers in active service , just like submarine and destroyer tenders supported those types . Such a ship would be able to perform a wider range of aircraft repair and maintenance tasks than aircraft carriers and on the full range of aircraft operated by the Royal Navy , including amphibians . Admiral Reginald Henderson , Controller of the Navy was instrumental for gaining approval for the ship and ensuring that she had a complete flight deck that would allow her to land , service and launch aircraft on active operations . She was the first ship built in any navy that could " carry out the full range of aircraft maintenance and repair work in addition to the ability to operate aircraft from the flight deck " . In practice , Unicorn proved the value of the concept and two similar support ships , Perseus and Pioneer were converted into aircraft maintenance ships by modifying light aircraft carriers still under construction . 
 Unicorn had an overall length of 640 feet ( 195 @.@ 1 m ) , a beam of 90 feet 3 inches ( 27 @.@ 5 m ) , and a draught of 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) at deep load . She was somewhat overweight as completed and displaced 16 @,@ 510 long tons ( 16 @,@ 770 t ) at standard load rather than her designed 14 @,@ 750 long tons ( 14 @,@ 990 t ) . Each of the ship 's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) propeller . Steam was supplied by six Admiralty three @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers operating at a pressure of 400 psi ( 2 @,@ 758 kPa ; 28 kgf / cm2 ) . The turbines were designed for a total of 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave Unicorn a speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . The ship carried 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 In order to land aircraft aboard , Unicorn was designed with a full @-@ length , 600 @-@ foot ( 180 m ) -long flight deck with arresting gear . She was also fitted with a catapult capable of launching a 14 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 6 @,@ 400 kg ) aircraft to a speed of 66 knots ( 122 km / h ; 76 mph ) . The ship had two hangars , each 16 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 03 m ) high . Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by two aircraft lifts ( elevators ) ; the forward lift measured 33 by 45 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m × 13 @.@ 7 m ) and the rear one 24 by 46 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m × 14 @.@ 0 m ) . Unicorn could carry about 36 operational aircraft . Bulk petrol storage consisted of 36 @,@ 500 imperial gallons ( 166 @,@ 000 l ; 43 @,@ 800 US gal ) . During wartime , the ship 's crew totaled 1200 . The ship carried a self @-@ propelled lighter under the rear of the flight deck to allow unflyable aircraft to be transferred between ships or to shore facilities . This lighter was lowered flush with the upper hangar deck so that an aircraft could be rolled onto to it or an aircraft could be lifted onto it once the lighter was in the water . 
 Unicorn was armed with four twin mounts for the 45 @-@ calibre QF 4 @-@ inch Mk XVI dual purpose gun . This mounting could elevate from − 10 to + 80 ° . The Mk XVI gun fired about 12 35 @-@ pound ( 16 kg ) high @-@ explosive shells per minute at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 660 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) . Against surface targets it had a range of 19 @,@ 850 yards ( 18 @,@ 150 m ) and a maximum ceiling of 39 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) , but an effective anti @-@ aircraft range of much less . She was also equipped with four quadruple mounts for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk VIII gun ( " pom @-@ pom " ) . These gun mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 80 ° . The Mk VIII 2 @-@ pounder gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 0 @.@ 91 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 41 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . Close @-@ range air defence was provided by twelve 20 mm Oerlikon autocannon , in two twin mounts and eight single ones . The Oerlikon fired a 0 @.@ 272 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 123 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 750 ft / s ( 840 m / s ) . It had a rate of fire of 465 – 480 rounds per minute and a maximum range of 4 @,@ 800 yards ( 4 @,@ 400 m ) . 
 The ship was equipped with two HACS ( High Angle Control System ) directors on her island and each " pom @-@ pom " mount had its own director as well . Unicorn was the first ship to mount a Type 281B early @-@ warning radar , and each HACS director was fitted with a Type 285 gunnery radar . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Unicorn was ordered on 14 April 1939 , and laid down at Harland and Wolff in Belfast , Northern Ireland on 29 June . Her construction was delayed several times in favour of higher priority projects and she was not launched until 20 November 1941 . The ship was completed on 12 March 1943 . In order to accelerate the ship 's completion , the Admiralty decided in 1942 that she would not be equipped with her full suite of maintenance and repair equipment . Excluding her armament , Unicorn cost £ 2 @,@ 531 @,@ 000 . 
 Whilst working up , 818 and 824 Squadrons flew aboard in April 1943 . 818 Squadron had nine Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers and 824 Squadron had six . 887 Squadron , with nine Supermarine Seafire IIC fighters was also embarked during this time . In late May , Unicorn escorted Convoy <unk> 15 to Gibraltar while carrying a number of Royal Air Force Bristol Beaufighters that she off @-@ loaded there . She escorted the returning convoy back to the Clyde in early June . Together with the aircraft carrier Illustrious , the ship made a sweep towards the Norwegian coast as part of Operation Governor , a diversion for the Allied landings in Sicily in early July . For this operation , 887 Squadron was replaced by 800 Squadron with Hawker Sea Hurricanes . 
 Unicorn was assigned to Force V , a flotilla of British carriers , commanded by Admiral Philip Vian , intended to provide air cover to Operation Avalanche , the Allied landings at Salerno . In preparation for this mission , the ship disembarked all of her Swordfish , except for a small detachment of three from 818 Squadron for self @-@ defence , and the Sea Hurricanes of 800 Squadron . They were replaced by Seafires of 809 and 897 Squadrons . Each of the Seafire squadrons had 10 aircraft , for a total of 33 . Unicorn joined the escort carriers of Force V in August at Gibraltar before they moved forward to the Central Mediterranean for intensive training prior to the commencement of the amphibious landing on 9 September . 
 The ship 's Seafires flew 75 sorties on the first day of operations and 60 on 10 September , but the Seafire was not well suited to carrier landings in low wind conditions and many were damaged in landing accidents . 44 sorties were flown on 11 September and only 18 on 12 September , even though Unicorn 's mechanics had managed to repair ten Seafires over the previous night . The fighter shortage grew so acute during the operation that fighters from the carriers Illustrious and Formidable , intended to provide distant cover against an attempt by the Italian fleet to interfere with the invasion , staged forward to Unicorn in order to provide air cover over the landings . By 12 September , the situation had improved so that 887 Squadron was able to fly off six Seafires to a temporary airfield ashore . 
 The ship returned to the UK on 20 September with a full load of damaged Seafires , in addition to her own aircraft , that were off @-@ loaded at Glasgow to be repaired . Afterwards , she was refitted by her builders and reconfigured for her designed role as an aircraft repair ship . 
 = = = In the Far East = = = 
 At the end of December 1943 , Unicorn joined Illustrious , the battlecruiser Renown and the battleships Queen Elizabeth and Valiant , the other reinforcements for the Eastern Fleet . Only four Swordfish from 818 Squadron were carried aboard at this time . The ship delivered a consignment of aircraft to Royal Navy Air Station Cochin , India , on 27 January 1944 before arriving at Trincomalee , Ceylon on 2 February . In addition to her repair duties , the ship was often used for deck @-@ landing practice . She was given a brief refit in Bombay during May . On 23 August , 818 Squadron was transferred to Atheling and later disbanded . On 7 November , 817 Squadron flew aboard to provide anti @-@ submarine protection with its Fairey Barracudas as Unicorn was ordered to Durban , South Africa . There she was to be modified with separate workshops and additional equipment to accommodate American engines which used different screw threads and electrical fittings . 
 That same month , Unicorn was transferred to the newly formed BPF . She left Durban on 1 January 1945 and arrived at Colombo , Ceylon where she conducted deck @-@ landing practice for pilots new to the BPF . The ship loaded 82 aircraft and 120 engines later in the month for transport to Australia , emptying the available stocks of the Eastern Fleet , and departed for Sydney on 29 January . Unicorn arrived on 12 February and disembarked her stored aircraft . She sailed for Manus Island , in the Admiralty Islands , on 28 February to support the BPF 's training before the opening stages of Operation Iceberg . The ship arrived at San Pedro Bay , Philippines on 27 March which was to serve as the BPF 's intermediate replenishment base while it supported Operation Iceberg . 
 The BPF was tasked to attack Japanese airfields in the Sakishima Islands and Formosa before and during the early stages of the invasion of Okinawa . Unicorn was primarily engaged in preparing aircraft for issue to the operational squadrons aboard the fleet carriers during this time , rather than repair them , but she did repair , modify or service 105 aircraft in March – May 1945 . The ship sailed for Australia on 22 May and arrived in Sydney on 1 June . She sailed for Brisbane on 6 June to have her bottom cleaned and to load more replacement aircraft . Unicorn arrived at Manus on 22 July to prepare for operations off Japan . She was still there when Japan surrendered on 15 August . The ship began to ferry aircraft , equipment and men back to Australia after the surrender , a task which ended on 6 November , when she arrived at Sydney . Unicorn departed for home in December 1945 and arrived in Plymouth in January 1946 . She was decommissioned and placed in reserve . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 In 1949 , Unicorn was reactivated for service in the Far East , in support of the carrier Triumph . She sailed from HMNB Devonport on 22 September with a cargo of Seafires and Fireflies . When the Korean War broke out in June 1950 , the ship was disembarking aircraft , equipment and her maintenance personnel at RAF Sembawang , Singapore in preparation to return home and then to reserve . The Admiralty ordered her to be used as a replenishment carrier to ferry replacement aircraft and supplies to the Royal Navy and Commonwealth aircraft carriers operating in Korean waters . Unicorn left Singapore on 11 July and arrived at Sasebo , Japan on 20 July and transferred seven Seafires and five Fireflies to Triumph . In August , the ship ferried the 1st Battalion of the Middlesex Regiment and the Headquarters of the 27th Brigade from Hong Kong to Pusan , arriving on 29 August . She delivered supplies to Sasebo before returning to Singapore to begin a refit . 
 Unicorn resumed her duties in December , carrying about 400 troops in addition to the usual aircraft , stores and equipment . She was used by pilots for deck @-@ landing practice en route . In March , she ferried the Gloster Meteor jet fighters of No. 77 Squadron RAAF to Iwakuni , Japan . The ship remained there for the next three months so she could be used as an accommodation ship . Afterwards , Unicorn resumed her role as a ferry carrier . Whilst transiting the Shimonoseki Strait on 2 October , she destroyed the overhead power cables stretching between Honshu and Kyushu as they were sagging lower than normal due to a heavy snowfall . On 21 November , Unicorn and the carrier Warrior exchanged crews at Singapore and the ship began a refit shortly afterwards . After her refit was completed on 20 January 1952 , she returned to her ferry duties . In April , she was " adopted " by the Middlesex Regiment ( possibly one of only three ships to be honoured by an Army regiment ) . During operations by Ocean in July , the ship acted as a spare flight deck to allow for damaged aircraft to land without disrupting the strike operations . She arrived back at Singapore on 27 July to load more replacement aircraft , including Meteors , and sailed on 9 August for Japan . During September , Unicorn borrowed four of Ocean 's Hawker Sea Fury fighters to fly combat air patrols over the fleet whilst the latter ship conducted strike operations . She was docked for maintenance in October , and embarked the First Sea Lord , Admiral Rhoderick McGrigor and the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Far East Station for a tour of Commonwealth forces in Japan . At one point , Unicorn became the only aircraft carrier to conduct a shore bombardment during wartime when she engaged North Korean coastwatchers at <unk> Point . 
 The ship returned to Singapore for another refit on 15 December and did not leave Singapore until 17 July 1953 . On 26 July , en route for Japan , Unicorn received a distress call from SS <unk> , saying that she was under attack by pirates . The carrier closed on the freighter 's position at high speed and the pirates abandoned their prize when Unicorn circled the freighter with all guns bearing at less than 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . The Korean Armistice Agreement came into effect the following day , but the ship accompanied Ocean on two patrols on 30 July and 25 – 29 August to monitor North Korean compliance with the terms of the armistice . She sailed for home on 15 October and arrived at Devonport on 17 November , where she returned to reserve . 
 = = = Disposal = = = 
 In 1951 , Unicorn was considered for modernization to make her capable of operating modern , heavier jet aircraft . This would have required fitting of a steam catapult , reinforcing her flight deck to handle heavier aircraft and moving and enlarging her forward lift to make room for the new catapult and larger aircraft . A new crane would also have been necessary to handle the heavier aircraft . The Director of Naval Construction proposed to combine both of her hangars into a single one to eliminate problems with hangar height , but this was rejected because of the excessive cost . This reconstruction would have begun in July 1954 , but the entire scheme was cancelled in November 1952 because providing existing carriers with angled flight decks was much more important . 
 The ship was reduced to extended reserve in March 1957 and placed on the disposal list in 1958 . Unicorn was sold for scrap in June 1959 and arrived at Dalmuir on 15 June to begin the process . Her hull was broken up at Troon in 1960 . 
 = Arms of Canada = 
 The Arms of Canada ( French : <unk> du Canada ) , also known as the Royal Coat of Arms of Canada or formally as the Arms of Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada ( French : <unk> de Sa <unk> la Reine du chef du Canada ) , is , since 1921 , the official coat of arms of the Canadian monarch and thus also of Canada . It is closely modelled after the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom with French and distinctive Canadian elements replacing or added to those derived from the British version . 
 The maple leaves in the shield , blazoned " proper " , were originally drawn vert ( green ) but were redrawn gules ( red ) in 1957 and a circlet of the Order of Canada was added to the arms for limited use in 1987 . The shield design forms the monarch 's royal standard and is also found on the Canadian Red Ensign . The Flag of the Governor General of Canada , which formerly used the shield over the Union Flag , now uses the crest of the arms on a blue field . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to Confederation in 1867 , the Royal Arms of the United Kingdom served in Canada as the symbol of royal authority . Arms had not been granted to any of the colonies in British North America , apart from 17th @-@ century grants to Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . The year after Confederation , arms were granted by Royal Warrant on 6 May to Ontario , Quebec , Nova Scotia ( that Nova Scotia had been granted arms was forgotten , and it took until 1929 for the historic arms granted in the 17th century to be reinstated ) and New Brunswick . In the Royal Warrant of 1868 , Queen Victoria authorized the four arms of the first provinces to be quartered for use on the Great Seal of Canada and while this was not done for the first Great Seal , it is through this reference it became the de facto arms for Canada until 1921 . That is why it was in this form Canada was represented on the first Red Ensign carried by Canadian troops at Vimy Ridge in 1917 . 
 A shield of arms first quartered and then , over time , as more provinces and territories joined Canada , marshalled with the arms of the new members of Confederation emerged through popular and even Canadian governmental usage . This eventually resulted in a shield with nine quarterings , an arrangement that had never been approved by the monarch . 
 Nine quarterings on a shield was considered too complex for a national symbol and by 1915 a push had begun to design a new coat of arms for Canada . A committee was formed in 1919 to pursue the issue , eventually agreeing that the elements of the new arms would reference the Royal Arms of England , Ireland , Scotland , and France , with maple leaves representing Canada , though there was at the time no consensus on how the leaves were to be used . The decision was settled by 1920 , and the committee conferred with the College of Arms in London , only to face resistance to the use of the Royal Arms from the Garter King of Arms . After some manoeuvring , including the personal intervention of Winston Churchill , the new arms of Canada were eventually formally requested by an Order in Council on 30 April 1921 and adopted on 21 November of the same year by proclamation of King George V as the Arms or Ensigns Armorial of the Dominion of Canada . The new layout closely reflected the arms of the United Kingdom with the addition of maple leaves in the base and the reference to the French royal arms in the fourth quarter . The proclamation also established red and white as the national colours of Canada . 
 In 1931 , with the passage of the Statute of Westminster , Canada and other Dominions became fully sovereign from the United Kingdom . This had the effect of elevating the Canadian coat of arms , which had been granted as deputed arms for particular uses in a colony , to the status of the royal arms of the King in right of the country , for general purposes throughout the country . They thus replaced the British coat of arms , which had previously been arms of general purpose throughout the British Empire , in court rooms and on government buildings to represent the ruling monarch . This change can be seen in the Great Seal of Canada of George VI , where the royal arms of Canada replaced the British arms , and is even more evident in the Great Seal of Canada for Elizabeth II , where the title has been redefined as Queen of Canada . These are the coat of arms of the Queen of Canada . 
 By 1957 , the arms were redrawn by Alan Beddoe so as to have red leaves and to change the royal crown from one of a Tudor design to one more resembling St. Edward 's Crown , as preferred by Queen Elizabeth II . To mark the 1982 patriation of the Canadian constitution , which finally ended the last vestiges of British authority over Canada , a McGill University student named Bruce Hicks proposed to Secretary of State Gerald Regan that the motto of the Order of Canada be placed around the shield in order to bring these royal arms into line with other royal arms , many of which have been displayed in Canada during French , Scottish , and English colonisation , where those countries ' highest national order of honour appears around the shield of the arms ( the British arms displayed the Order of the Garter ) , the Scottish royal arms the Order of the Thistle , and the royalist arms of the French Regime the Order of the Holy Spirit and Order of Saint Michael ) . While unsuccessful in this first attempt , Hicks continued his campaign and was joined by a number of other amateur and professional heraldists . As a journalist in the parliamentary press gallery in Ottawa in the late 1980s and early 90s , Hicks strategically recast the change as something worth doing to commemorate the 25th Anniversary of the Order of Canada in 1992 , an idea that was endorsed by the Advisory Committee on the Order of Canada . 
 It took until 1994 for the Queen to approve the new design for general use , though the Canadian Heraldic Authority began to allow for its limited use beginning in 1987 , where the arms were used to represent Her Majesty personally on letters patent granting new arms for distinguished Canadians . These letters patent carried the shield from the royal arms along with the annulus behind the shield bearing the motto of the Order of Canada — <unk> meliorem patriam . As soon as royal approval was forthcoming , the full achievement was redesigned for use by the federal government within the Federal Identity Program . The present design of the arms of Canada was drawn by Cathy <unk> @-@ Sabourin , Fraser Herald at the Canadian Heraldic Authority . 
 In June 2008 , Member of Parliament Pat Martin introduced a motion into the House of Commons calling on the government to amend the coat of arms to incorporate symbols representing Canada 's First Nations , Inuit , and Métis peoples . 
 = = = Armorial evolution = = = 
 = = Use = = 
 The arms of Canada are the arms of the sovereign and signify national sovereignty and ownership . They are used as a mark of authority by various government agencies and representatives , including the prime minister and Cabinet , and most courts , including the Supreme Court , as well as the Canadian Armed Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police . It is also present on all pre @-@ polymer denominations of Canadian banknotes ( in fact , the way the arms were printed on each bill is a security feature ) , as well as the 50 ¢ coin , and on the cover of Canadian passports . Since 1962 , a banner of the arms , defaced with a variant of the Queen 's cypher , has formed the Royal Standard of Canada , for use by the sovereign in her capacity as monarch of Canada . In the Canadian Armed Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police , the most senior non @-@ commissioned ranks wear the 1957 version of the coat of arms as a badge of rank , representing the fact that they have received the Queen 's warrant ( as opposed to the Queen 's commission for officers ) . The revised 1957 and 1994 Arms of Canada are both protected official government symbols used to represent the state under the Federal Identity Program . 
 The full achievement of the coat of arms has been used by the Canadian government on occasion on a plain red flag , such as in 1967 for the country 's centennial celebrations . 
 It is also used on a flag in its full achievement in military ceremonies , such as Canadian Armed Forces Tattoo performances . 
 The personal flag of the Governor General has , since 1981 , featured the crest of the royal arms of Canada on a blue background . 
 In response to a new campaign by Bruce Hicks for the Canadian Parliament to have a distinct heraldic symbols along the lines of the portcullis ( variations of which are used by the Commons and Lords in the British Parliament ) , a proposal that was supported by Speakers of the House of Commons John Fraser and Gilbert Parent , a Commons committee was eventually struck following a motion by MP Derek Lee , before which Hicks and Robert Watt , the first Chief Herald of Canada , were called as the only two expert witnesses , though Senator Serge Joyal joined the committee ex @-@ officio on behalf of the Senate . Commons ' Speaker Peter Milliken then asked the Canadian Heraldic Authority to authorize such a symbol and , on 15 February 2008 , the Governor General authorized the House of Commons to begin using a badge of the shield of the royal arms superimposed on the ceremonial mace assigned to the House of Commons as a symbol of the royal authority under which it operates . Following the Commons example , the Senate then requested and obtained on 15 April 2008 a similar badge for itself with the shield of the royal arms surmounted on the mace assigned to the Senate . 
 = = Blazon = = 
 The heraldic blazon of Canada 's coat of arms is : 
 <unk> in <unk> the first and second divisions containing the quarterly coat following , namely , 1st , gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or , 2nd , Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory @-@ counter @-@ flory gules , 3rd , azure a harp Or stringed argent , 4th , azure , three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis Or , and the third division argent three maple leaves conjoined on one stem proper . And upon a royal helmet mantled argent doubled gules the crest , that is to say , on a wreath of the colours argent and gules a lion passant guardant Or imperially crowned proper and holding in the dexter paw a maple leaf gules . And for supporters on the dexter a lion rampant Or holding a lance argent , point Or , flying therefrom to the dexter the Union Flag , and on the sinister a unicorn argent armed crined and unguled Or , gorged with a coronet composed of crosses @-@ <unk> and fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis a chain affixed thereto reflexed of the last , and holding a like lance flying therefrom to the sinister a banner azure charged with three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis Or ; the whole ensigned with the Imperial Crown proper and below the shield upon a wreath composed of roses , thistles , shamrocks and lillies a scroll azure inscribed with the motto A mari usque ad mare . 
 The circlet of the Order of Canada was added around the shield for limited use in 1987 , and for general use in 1994 . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 = = Legal = = 
 As the Royal Arms are personal to the sovereign they cannot be used without consent . The coat of arms " as designed in 1921 and revised in 1957 ... ( and ) in 1994 " are " protected under the Trade @-@ marks Act and the Copyright Act and cannot be used or reproduced without authorization " . Further , " Marks and designs similar to the official symbols are pursued as a copyright or trade @-@ mark infringement " . The Trade @-@ marks Act further states that " No person shall adopt in connection with a business , as a trade @-@ mark or otherwise , any mark consisting of , or so nearly resembling as to be likely to be mistaken for ... the arms , crest or flag adopted and used at any time by Canada " . In addition , under Crown copyright , " permission is always required when the work is being revised , adapted , or translated regardless if the purpose of the reproduction is for personal or public non @-@ commercial distribution " . 
 = Treehouse of Horror V = 
 " Treehouse of Horror V " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season and the fifth episode in the Treehouse of Horror series . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 30 , 1994 , and features three short stories titled The Shinning , Time and Punishment , and Nightmare Cafeteria . The episode was directed by Jim Reardon and written by Greg Daniels , Dan McGrath , David Cohen and Bob Kushell . 
 In The Shinning the Simpsons are hired as caretakers at Mr. Burns ' mansion . Deprived of television and beer , Homer becomes insane and attempts to murder the family ; after finding a portable TV set , he returns to normal . In Time and Punishment , Homer repeatedly travels back in time and alters the future ; upon failing to restore the future , he eventually settles for a reality close to his own . In Nightmare Cafeteria , Principal Skinner begins using students in detention as cafeteria food ; just as Bart and Lisa are about to be slaughtered , Bart discovers it is only a dream ( but is then attacked by fog which turns people inside out ) . 
 David Mirkin deliberately placed more graphic violence in the episode due to complaints about excessive violence in the show . The episode features James Earl Jones as the voice of an alternate timeline Maggie ( his second appearance in a Simpsons Halloween episode ) , and a recurring joke where Groundskeeper Willie is struck in the back with an axe in every tale when trying to help someone . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 Marge warns that the episode is frightening and should not be viewed by children . During the warning , she is informed that it is so scary that Congress will not let them view the episode . However , Bart interrupts the warning with a radio transmission and the episode begins . 
 = = = The Shinning = = = 
 In a parody of The Shining , The Simpsons are employed as caretakers at Mr. Burns ' mansion . Burns cuts the cable television wire and steals the beer , thinking this will ensure hard work from the family . While there , Groundskeeper Willie discovers that Bart has the power to read his thoughts and that if Homer goes insane , he should use this to call him . The deprivation of his two favorite things causes Homer to go insane and a ghostly Moe informs Homer he must kill his family in order to get a beer . Marge discovers that Homer has covered the walls with the repetitive phrasing " No TV and no beer make Homer go crazy " , and confronts Homer with a baseball bat , but Homer , after seeing his reflection in a mirror , trips and falls unconscious . Marge locks him in the pantry until he has calmed down and makes some chili for dinner . Later on , Homer has calmed down and happily eats , but Moe reminds him of their deal through the pantry door . When he refuses to comply , Moe shows up with his gang of ghouls and carries Homer out much to his dismay . While Marge and the children are enjoying dinner , Homer begins pursuing the family with an axe and Bart uses his powers to call Willie , who immediately runs to the family 's rescue , abandoning his portable television in the snow in the process . Homer kills him by striking him in the back with the axe . Homer pursues his family outside but as he is about to kill them , Lisa discovers Willie 's abandoned television . Homer 's insanity gradually decreases and the family freezes in the snow as they are watching . With the family unable to change the channel when the Tony Awards begin , Homer 's insanity resurfaces . 
 = = = Time and Punishment = = = 
 In a parody of A Sound of Thunder , while attempting to fix a broken toaster , Homer accidentally turns it into a time machine . It transports him to prehistoric times where he realizes he must be careful because if he affects anything in the past , it could change the future . After <unk> a mosquito , he returns to the present to find a dystopia where Ned Flanders is a dictator of the world . Homer travels back in time again attempting to set things right ; however , he accidentally kills a walking fish , and after returning to the present he finds Bart and Lisa are giants , narrowly avoiding being crushed by them . He then sneezes and infects the dinosaurs with a cold virus while defending himself from a Tyrannosaurus Rex , which proceeds to cause their extinction . He is initially pleased with the results in the present ; amongst other perks , the family is now extremely wealthy and Patty and Selma have died , but is horrified upon discovering that donuts do not exist in this timeline and flees , only seconds before donuts begin raining from the sky . In another world , Willie attempts to help Homer , but is again struck in the back with an axe , this time by a James Earl Jones @-@ voiced Maggie . When Homer returns to the prehistoric times again , he furiously smashes everything in sight with a baseball bat . After several more trips back and forth in time , Homer eventually arrives in a reality that appears normal ; he finds humans eating with lizard @-@ like tongues , but finally decides that it is " close enough " . 
 = = = Nightmare Cafeteria = = = 
 In a parody of Soylent Green , Principal Skinner is concerned that the detention hall is becoming overcrowded and as a result of the latest budget cut , Lunchlady Doris has been reduced to serving " Grade F " meat in the cafeteria . Skinner discovers a common solution : eating misbehaving children . Jimbo Jones is the first student to be killed , who is served as " Sloppy Jimbo " , followed by Üter , who is then served as " <unk> " . Bart and Lisa finally discover what Principal Skinner and Lunchlady Doris are doing , but one by one , the kids are " sent to detention " where they are caged and butchered . The kids turn to Marge , who tells them that they must stand up for themselves . Eventually Bart , Lisa , and Milhouse are among the only students remaining and attempt to escape . Skinner and Doris corner them on a ledge above a giant blender . Willie attempts to help the students escape , but is once again struck in the back with an axe , this time by Skinner . Milhouse , Bart , and Lisa fall to their demise . 
 Bart wakes up from the nightmare to find his family beside his bed . Marge assures him he has nothing to be afraid of , but a green fog seeps in through the window and the Simpsons are turned inside out . They , along with Willie , perform a musical number over the end credits , but Bart is dragged away by Santa 's Little Helper . 
 = = Production = = 
 David Mirkin attempted to put " as much blood and guts " into the episode as he could . This was because Mirkin was disappointed by complaints from Congress regarding the amount of violence in the show and their attempts for it to be censored . He later called it " the most [ ... ] disturbing Halloween show ever " . The opening sequence , in which Marge states the episode could not be shown and plays some live action stock footage , was also in reaction to this . Mirkin said he thinks Halloween shows can be " scary as well as fun " . 
 This episode marked the end of the tradition of featuring humorous tombstones in the title sequence of Halloween episodes . The title sequence of this episode featured a tombstone reading " Amusing Tombstones " , which was a sign that the writers could no longer devise ideas to use as humorous tombstone messages . Similar sequences were featured as introductions in all four preceding Treehouse of Horror episodes , but have not been featured since this episode . 
 The staff also decided against the traditional continuation of featuring wrap @-@ around segments that were featured before each story in the preceding Treehouse of Horror episodes , to allow more time for the main stories . 
 The first segment , The Shinning , was inspired by the film The Shining , and is basically a parody of that film . The film 's director , Stanley Kubrick , had been a big influence on Mirkin , and was " one of the main reason [ he ] wanted to be a director " . Coincidentally , series creator Matt Groening admitted that he had not seen The Shining and most of the references to the film were entirely lost on him . 
 Matt Groening originally pitched the idea that Homer would travel through time in Time and Punishment . His original idea was that the time @-@ travel would be the result of Homer simply jamming his hand in the toaster , but it was rejected by the other writers . Scenes where Homer is in the past were written so that he is there for the time it takes to toast a slice of bread . Mirkin gave Peabody and Sherman cameo appearance in this segment , which was due to the show Rocky and His Friends being a major influence on The Simpsons . 
 The first time Homer travels back in time , he was originally supposed to state " I 'm the first non @-@ fictional character to travel backwards through time " . The line was later changed from " non @-@ fictional " to " non @-@ Brazilian " . Groening was confused as to the reason for the change , since he liked the original so much . In fact , he did not even understand what the new line implied . 
 In the scene where the Simpsons ' house transforms into numerous objects , one of the original designs included the house made entirely of squirrels . The layout artist who designed it worked on the drawings for more than two days , but ultimately it was cut . To ensure their work did not go to waste , some staff members have used the drawings on Christmas cards and other studio @-@ related notices . 
 In another deleted scene involving an alternate Simpsons future , the Simpsons had a teenage son named Roy . Groening said that " somebody from outside the show " originally suggested the idea . The joke was later used as a sub @-@ plot for the episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " , although Roy was a lodger in that episode , rather than a son . 
 Nightmare Cafeteria was the first Simpsons story to be written by David X. Cohen . He wrote the final scene where a nightmarish fog turns the family " inside out " . This was inspired by a thriller featured on the radio show Lights Out called " The Dark " , which frightened Cohen as a child . A dance number was added immediately afterwards in order to end the show on a lighter note . He also cut two scenes from this segment featuring Sherri and Terri being cooked as " <unk> " steak with a " Sherry " sauce and Homer regaling Lisa about his dream of eating Milhouse . Regardless , a book from this scene was featured in this segment . As a result of this scene being cut , Homer does not appear in the third segment , something Cohen thought never happened before . The " grade F meat " joke was written by Mirkin , inspired by his cousin once seeing a box of hot dogs labeled " grade C , approved for human consumption " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The voice over in the pre @-@ title sequence is a reference to The Outer Limits . The first segment The Shinning is a parody of the Stephen King novel The Shining and the Stanley Kubrick film of the same name . The basic plot of the segment is the same as the novel and there are also many references to specific moments from the film , such as the blood coming out of the elevator and Homer breaking though a door with an axe and yelling " Here 's Johnny " . 
 The title of the second segment Time and Punishment is a reference to the Fyodor Dostoyevsky novel Crime and Punishment and the plot , where Homer causes major changes in the future by killing animals in the past , is a parody of the Ray Bradbury short story " A Sound of Thunder " . Peabody and Sherman from the animated series The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show , make an appearance during Homer 's time traveling sequence and when , as a side effect of Homer 's antics in the past , Kang and Kodos ' heads are unexpectedly replaced with those of Peabody and Sherman . The dinosaur scenes are reminiscent of Jurassic Park , and the floor morphing into a television screen is a reference to similar scenes in both Terminator 2 : Judgment Day and Time Bandits . The title of the third segment Nightmare Cafeteria , is a reference to the television series Nightmare Cafe . The song sung over the end credits is based on the song " One " from the musical A Chorus Line , while the concept of the family being turned inside out by a mysterious fog comes from an episode of the radio show Lights Out called " The Dark " . The performance of the final dance number is stylized after the song 's performance on The Brady Bunch Hour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Treehouse of Horror V " finished 27th in ratings for the week of October 24 – 30 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills 90210 . 
 The episode is often considered one of the best Simpsons Halloween episodes ever . It finished ninth on a list by the magazine Entertainment Weekly of its top 25 Simpsons episodes . In it , The Shinning segment was described as " a parody [ ... ] with such detail [ and ] comic timing " and that it " ranks with the great [ ... ] spoofs of all time " , and the Time and Punishment segment as " one of the most beautifully random moments in [ The ] Simpsons history " , but also said that the Nightmare Cafeteria segment " doesn 't shine as brilliantly " . It ranked fifth on AskMen.com 's " Top 10 : Simpsons Episodes " list . The list stated that the episode " offers three completely different tales , [ ... ] boasting a potent combination of wit and humor " that , " the laughs never end " and that it " does a great job of incorporating Halloween @-@ themed stories with the standard Simpsons charm " . IGN called the episode " the funniest Treehouse of Horror to date " . In 2006 , they also named it the best episode of the sixth season . Adam Finley of the weblog TV Squad called it " possibly one of the best Halloween episodes ever " . Michael Passman said the episode " is largely regarded as the best , but a weak final third holds it back " . 
 The Shinning is particularly the highest @-@ praised segment . As well as Entertainment Weekly 's praise , IGN voted it first on their list of the best segments in the Treehouse of Horror series , with Time and Punishment coming fourth . It came ninth on the blog Noise to Signal 's , list of " The Ten Best Treehouse of Horror Vignettes " . Adam Finley of TV Squad contemplating that it " could [ ... ] be the best Treehouse of Horror segment ever " as well as praising the opening of Time and Punishment . When putting together the perfect Treehouse of Horror episode , Michael Passman of Michigan Daily included The Shinning as " a shoo @-@ in " . Empire named " No TV And No Beer Make Homer Go Crazy " the sixth best film parody in the show 's history . 
 Alf Clausen 's musical score for this episode received an Emmy Award nomination for " Outstanding Dramatic Underscore - Series " in 1995 . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood called it " Another fine entry to the Treehouse canon " . 
 James Earl Jones ' guest appearance in this episode , as well as in " Treehouse of Horror " and " Das Bus " , was listed seventh on IGN 's " Top 25 Simpsons Guest Appearances " list . Jones ranked 25th on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . Matt Groening said that this line is among his favorite lines in the show . David Mirkin said that Homer 's line " Oh I wish , I wish I hadn 't killed that fish " is one of his favorites in the show , and that the alternate future in which the family are rich " breaks [ his ] heart every time " . Homer 's line " close enough " from " Time and Punishment " was later used in the Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode " Moebius " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Time and Punishment was later referenced in DC Comic 's Booster Gold comic series , where Booster Gold explains the butterfly effect by asking if anyone had seen the episode where Homer stepped on a butterfly and it began raining donuts , only to wish it were raining donuts where he was . 
 = Lydia Hart = 
 Lydia Hart is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , a long @-@ running serial drama about life in a fictional suburb of Chester . The character is no longer part of current storylines . She was played by actress Lydia Kelly between 2009 and 2010 . Lydia was created by series producer Bryan Kirkwood as one of many characters introduced that year . She made her debut in the soap on 4 March 2009 , and remained for ten months . 
 Lydia 's storylines focus on homosexuality , obsessiveness and murder . The seemingly level @-@ headed music lover and friend of Josh Ashworth , she is portrayed as opinionated , passionate young student who had a love of music and protecting her family , for example her young sister Persephone Hart who also appeared in the show for a period of three months . Lydia 's relationship to the sexually confused Sarah Barnes was central to the character for seven months of the year culminating with her screen death in October 2009 after she was murdered by Lydia . Other storylines included her ongoing on @-@ off relationship with ex @-@ girlfriend Charlotte Lau and continued feuds with Archie and Zoe Carpenter . The characters departure was announced in December 2009 , when the character was arrested for the attempted murder of Zoe at Sarah 's graveside after stabbing her , resulting in her being charged for the murder of Sarah and the attempted murder of Zoe , with Lydia making her final appearance on 1 January 2010 . The parachute stunt won a British Soap Award in 2010 . The aftermath storyline has received mixed reviews from critics . Some have favoured Lydia 's " bunny boiling " and others described it as a " drawn out and boring storyline . " 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 In November 2008 , during an episode of Hollyoaks spin @-@ off Hollyoaks Later , Sarah Barnes ( Loui Batley ) and Zoe Carpenter ( Zoë Lister ) had a sexual encounter . Up to now both characters had previously been portrayed as heterosexual and this was the start of Sarah 's on @-@ going sexuality crisis . The character of Lydia Hart was created as the new love interest for the sexually confused already established character , Sarah . When the character first appeared on @-@ screen she was revealed to have a younger sister , Persephone Hart ( Elizabeth Hadley ) , who was attending the dance classes taught by Sarah . Little is known about the rest of Lydia 's family , although the character did stay with her mother frequently off @-@ screen . The character was also given links to Charlotte Lau ( Amy Yamazaki ) who arrived in Hollyoaks in June 2009 . It was soon revealed that Lydia was Charlotte 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 It was announced in February 2009 that Hollyoaks series producer Bryan Kirkwood had cast television newcomer Lydia Kelly in the role of Lydia . Speaking to the Hollyoaks website of her casting , Kelly stated , " It was brilliant , when my agent said I 'd got the part I didn 't believe her . " and in Hollyoaks Backstage , Kelly was asked what was next for Lydia , she stated , " [ ... ] I don 't know whats next for Lydia [ ... ] I think justice has to be done soon . " In December 2009 , it was announced that Kelly would leave the show . Producers confirmed that Lydia would depart at the climax of her storyline . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Lydia first arriving on @-@ screen was first shown as different from other characters and it was stated from her inception that she was passionate about music and enjoyed getting people into the music scene . Speaking of her character , Kelly stated " She 's very down to earth . She knows exactly what she wants , where she wants to go , and how to get there ! She 's also very level @-@ headed . " From the characters inception , she was shown to be an opinionated , proud young student who wasn 't afraid of her homosexuality and a person who could make friends very easily , as well as enemies . 
 Lydia 's relationships helped develop the character . Her first relationship off @-@ screen is with ex @-@ girlfriend Charlotte , who supposedly shared her interests in music and fashion , as they were both considered ' out there ' . The history of the relationship immediately gave viewers an insight to the character . However , their relationship was seemingly shattered by Lydia 's constant jealousy and her clingy nature , which ultimately lead to their break up . But , Lydia tried to commit suicide soon after , which was told on @-@ screen when Charlotte arrived in the village . Lydia 's second relationship is a more serious one , with the sexually confused Sarah Barnes ; Sarah , who had previously been portrayed as heterosexual , suffers an identity crisis , coming to terms with her one @-@ night stand with Zoe Carpenter , however Sarah ended the relationship after Lydia became interfering and tried to control her life due to falling in love with her . Speaking to entertainment website Digital Spy about Sarah 's relationship with Lydia , Loui Batley commented , " With Lydia , she brought something to her and she got on with her and was sparky , which is something that Sarah liked . " After her relationship with Sarah ended , the character 's true persona was revealed . She became jealous of Sarah and her relationship with Zoe , and the character 's vulnerability became the centre of her deranged campaign for revenge in the latter part of 2009 , as she was excluded from Sarah 's life . 
 = = = Murder and exit = = = 
 In July 2009 , it was announced by Hollyoaks that Loui Batley had quit her role as Sarah and Zoe Lister ( Zoe ) would depart the soap later in the year and that one of the girls ' exits , however , will result in a " tragic curtain call " . It was announced that Lydia would be the cause of the pair 's departure . In later September , Lydia became very jealous of Sarah , who she had recently split up with . She also became jealous of Zoe , who Sarah had a one @-@ night stand with in the previous year . During the events of Hollyoaks Later in October , Lydia 's jealousy went out of control when she sabotaged a parachute , which was revealed to be used by either Sarah or Zoe . It was announced that one of the pair would be killed after plummeting to their death . 
 Hysterical Lydia , who thought Sarah and Zoe were having an affair , had a conversation with Charlotte and revealed when they split up , she attempted suicide , proving the character 's vulnerability . After sabotaging Zoe 's parachute , they are mixed up and a terrified Lydia began to worry that she might have got the sabotaged parachute . While doing the jump , Zoe 's deploys , however Sarah 's does not . As she hits the ground , Lydia screams in terror . She is completely destroyed by Sarah 's death , but does not admit to being responsible when Zoe is arrested , and with that Lydia tries to commit suicide once again . 
 After Zoe is released from prison and is found not guilty of Sarah 's murder , it is believed that Sarah committed suicide after her diary , found by Mike Barnes ( Tony Hirst ) is used as evidence in court . Soon Lydia starts to befriend Zoe and she ends up moving in with the Barnes family where Lydia now lives and soon Zoe plans too uncover Lydia 's murderous ways as she does not want to be known as a killer . In an interview with entertainment website Digital Spy , Lister said of the storyline , " It all gets really messy from here ! Because Lydia 's really deranged , Lydia starts thinking that because she loved Sarah and Sarah loved Zoe , if she gets with Zoe , that 'll be the final piece in the puzzle and it 'll all work out . " She explained : " Lydia starts becoming obsessed with Zoe and to keep control , Zoe has to go with it . There 's a point where Lydia kisses her ! And then Mike walks in and kicks Zoe out . " 
 The culmination of the plot saw Lydia lure Zoe to a church and stab her at Sarah 's grave . The stabbing storyline was described as a " brutal attack " and at the time producers refused to reveal if Zoe would die . Describing the terror Lydia causes a spokesperson for the serial stated : " Zoe can ’ t believe it when Lydia admits the parachute was meant for her . As soon as she realises Lydia wanted her dead she tries to run . That ’ s when Lydia pulls out a knife and stabs her . " This led to a fight between Lydia and Charlotte who arrives with Dave Colburn ( Elliot James Langridge ) . They both fight to grab the knife while an unconscious Zoe bleeds , ultimately leading to the arrest of Lydia when the police arrive . She is later charged with the murder of Sarah and the attempted murder of Zoe . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 = = = 
 Lydia first appears in March 2009 as a friend of Josh Ashworth ( Sonny Flood ) . She orders Steph Cunningham ( Carley Stenson ) to fire Sarah after her sister Persephone Hart tells her that Sarah hit her . Theresa McQueen ( Jorgie Porter ) steals Lydia 's handbag and she accuses Josh 's girlfriend Amy Barnes ( Ashley Slanina @-@ Davies ) . She decides not to press charges against Theresa . Amy accuses Lydia and Josh of having an affair . Josh tells her she is a lesbian and Amy hits her . Amy later apologises , however is still jealous of Lydia and Josh 's relationship . At Josh 's birthday party , Michaela McQueen ( Hollie @-@ Jay Bowes ) assumes that Lydia and Sarah are a couple . Sarah and Lydia then become friends . In late March , after agreeing to dance with Sarah during one of the classes , Lydia kisses her . Sarah denies it when Lydia claims that they felt something . Sarah then shows more of an interest in Lydia . 
 Lydia finds out Sarah is bribing Holly Cunningham ( Lydia Waters ) to befriend Persephone so she could get closer to her , leaving things awkward between the girls . The next day , Lydia allays her fears to Sarah over relationships and the girls seal it with a kiss , which Michaela sees . Sarah and Lydia then begin a full relationship . It is revealed that out of her family , Persephone is the only one who knows of Lydia 's sexuality . Lydia replaces Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) as the drummer of Josh 's band ' The <unk> ' as he kicked him out because he was against having wheelchair user Hayley Ramsey ( Kelly Marie Stewart ) as the lead singer because of their bad breakup . Lydia is later kicked out of the band due to unreliability . 
 After breaking up from Sarah , Lydia becomes jealous of Zoe and Sarah 's friendship . Lydia then begins going out with Sarah again although she is more invested in the relationship with Sarah . Lydia 's true colours start to show when she tells Sarah she has received dead flowers on her and former girlfriend Charlotte 's anniversary , she tells Sarah she thinks they are from Charlotte , she then shows the same bouquet to Charlotte and accuses Zoe . It is then revealed during an argument with Charlotte that Lydia tried to kill herself when she and Charlotte split up . Lydia sees Sarah and Zoe going on an adventure holiday with Steph Cunningham ( Carley Stenson ) , Fernando Fernandez ( Jeronimo Best ) and Gilly Roach ( Anthony Quinlan ) and is jealous when she takes Zoe . Lydia follows them and has an argument with Sarah . She continues to pretend Charlotte is stalking her in order to gain sympathy . When left alone with Zoe , she tells her Sarah tried to kill herself over her . Later , Lydia overhears Sarah admit her love to a drunken Zoe . The next day , Lydia begins slitting her wrists and tries to convince Sarah that Zoe is trying to split them up . Lydia uses a knife on one of the parachutes which Zoe will use , however they get mixed up . As the girls head into the sky , Lydia begins to feel guilty and tries to stop them , however Zoe and Sarah jump out . Lydia follows and is horrified when Zoe 's parachute deploys and Sarah 's does not . Sarah then hits the ground . Lydia and Zoe rush to her body , both crying . Lydia frames Zoe for the death of Sarah by hiding the knife used to sabotage the parachute behind Zoe 's bed . Lydia then proceeds to slit her wrists in the shower due to her guilt . 
 As Lydia recovers in hospital , Zoe is charged with Sarah 's murder . Realising she has escaped arrest for accidentally killing Sarah , Lydia lies to Charlotte , telling her how she and Sarah planned to travel and even adopt . Archie Carpenter ( Stephen Beard ) confronts Lydia over the day of Sarah 's death and is shocked when Lydia claims she was not supposed to die . Archie goes to the police , however they do not do anything . During Sarah 's funeral , Archie arrives at her wake and announces Lydia caused her death . When no one believes him , he is removed . Before Zoe 's court case , Mike goes to visit her . Lydia tries to tell Mike that she will try to appear innocent . When he returns , and claims he knows she could not have killed Sarah , Lydia manipulates him into believing that she was just trying to get him on side . At this time , Charlotte and Lydia get back together . At the court case , Lydia lies whilst giving a statement . Charlotte accompanies Lydia to the case , agreeing to keep their new relationship quiet . However , when she sees the knife used to cut the parachute , Charlotte realises Lydia was responsible for Sarah 's death . After she confesses , Lydia tells Charlotte if she goes to prison , she will kill herself . 
 Zoe is found not guilty of Sarah 's murder , due to the court believing Sarah committed suicide . After Lydia catches Mike kissing Zoe , she goes to Amy and tells her what she saw , and tells her she believes Zoe is trying to get Mike on her side to make it look like she is innocent . Lydia expresses her doubts with Mike , still trying to blame Zoe for Sarah 's death . However , after realising she could try to get Zoe on her side , she pleads with her to forgive her and move into the Barnes family home . An angry Zoe throws her out . Zoe then approaches Lydia and apologises . The pair slowly become friends . However , Zoe is only pretending in order to get a confession . Lydia and Zoe kiss as part of Zoe 's plan to expose Lydia as Sarah 's killer . Mike throws Zoe out of the flat . 
 On New Year 's Eve , Lydia discovers Zoe 's true reasons for befriending her and decides to murder her at Sarah 's grave , before taking her own life . Zoe and Lydia meet in a church to admit their ' relationship ' to Sarah . However , Zoe flees and is knocked unconscious . When she wakes up , she finally gets a confession from Lydia , who admits why she cut the parachute . Zoe attacks Lydia before leaving . At Sarah 's grave , Lydia stabs Zoe , as Charlotte , Mike and Dave arrive to stop her . As Zoe is taken away in an ambulance , Lydia is arrested . Lydia is questioned by D.I. Fletcher ( Laura Fletcher ) as Zoe recovers in hospital . Lydia admits everything and she is then charged for the murder of Sarah and attempted murder of Zoe . She is later given a lifetime prison sentence . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture criticised Lydia during her monthly review on the popularity of soap opera characters , she branded her as an unconvincing villain , stating : " Looking like a demented shrew doesn 't mean you 're convincing at being a crazed murderess . The whole ' who killed Sarah ' storyline is rather silly , and it 's not helped by Lydia being a rubbish villain . Memo to Hollyoaks : must try harder . " 
 The parachute stunt won " Spectacular Scene Of The Year " at the 2010 British Soap Awards . Olly <unk> men 's lifestyle magazine FHM commented on the aftermath of Sarah 's death and Lydia 's storyline branding it as a " really drawn out and really boring plotline . " Radio Times included Lydia on their list of top bunny boilers due to her attitude towards Sarah and killing her out of jealousy . They ironically joked about how long she could repress her murderous impulses , giving her until the new year . ( The actual time she tried to kill Zoe ) . Cara Lee of The Sun branded Lydia stabbing Zoe as one of <unk> 's most memorable New Year storylines in its history . The Daily Star also commented on the storyline with Zoe , stating " Smitten Lydia falls for her act and is delighted as she always thought Zoe was out of her league . " 
 = Black Moshannon State Park = 
 Black Moshannon State Park is a 3 @,@ 481 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 409 ha ) Pennsylvania state park in Rush Township , Centre County , Pennsylvania , United States . It surrounds Black Moshannon Lake , formed by a dam on Black Moshannon Creek , which has given its name to the lake and park . The park is just west of the Allegheny Front , 9 miles ( 14 km ) east of Philipsburg on Pennsylvania Route 504 , and is largely surrounded by Moshannon State Forest . A bog in the park provides a habitat for diverse wildlife not common in other areas of the state , such as carnivorous plants , orchids , and species normally found farther north . As home to the " [ l ] <unk> reconstituted bog / wetland complex in Pennsylvania " . 
 Humans have long used the Black Moshannon area for recreational , industrial , and subsistence purposes . The Seneca tribe used it as hunting and fishing grounds . European settlers cleared some land for farming , then clear @-@ cut the vast stands of old @-@ growth White Pine and Eastern Hemlock to meet the needs of a growing nation during the late 19th century . Black Moshannon State Park rose from the ashes of a depleted forest that was largely destroyed by wildfire in the years following the lumber era . The forests were rehabilitated by the Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression of the 1930s . Many of the buildings built by the Civilian Conservation Corps stand in the park today and are protected on the list of National Register of Historic Places in three historic districts . 
 Black Moshannon State Park is open year @-@ round for recreation and has an extensive network of trails which allow hiking , biking , and viewing the bog habitat at the Black Moshannon State Natural Area . The park is in Pennsylvania Important Bird Area # 33 , where bird watchers have recorded 175 different species . It is also home to many rare and unusual plants and animals , due to its location atop the Allegheny Plateau ; the lake is at an elevation of about 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 580 m ) . Much of the park is open for hunting and the lake and creek are open for fishing , boating , and swimming . In winter it is a popular destination for cross @-@ country skiing , and was home to a small downhill skiing area from 1965 to 1982 . <unk> and camping are also popular , and the " Friends of Black Moshannon State Park " group promotes the park and all of the recreational activities associated with it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Humans have lived in what is now Pennsylvania since at least 10 @,@ 000 BC . The first settlers were Paleo @-@ Indian nomadic hunters known from their stone tools . The hunter @-@ gatherers of the Archaic period , which lasted locally from 7000 to 1000 BC , used a greater variety of more sophisticated stone artefacts . The Woodland period marked the gradual transition to semi @-@ permanent villages and horticulture , between 1000 BC and 1500 AD . Archeological evidence found in the state from this time includes a range of pottery types and styles , burial mounds , pipes , bows and arrow , and ornaments . 
 Black Moshannon Creek is in the West Branch Susquehanna River drainage basin , whose earliest recorded inhabitants were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . They were a <unk> society that lived in large long houses in stockaded villages . Decimated by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . 
 After this , the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois . The Iroquois lived in long houses , primarily in what is now New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle in the West Branch watershed , including the Lenape ( or Delaware ) . 
 The Seneca , members of the Iroquois Confederacy , were inhabitants in the area of Black Moshannon Lake , which was a series of beaver ponds at the time . They and other Native Americans , including the Lenape , hunted , fished , and traded in the region . The Great Shamokin Path , the major native east – west path connecting the Susquehanna and Allegheny River basins , crossed Black Moshannon Creek at a ford a few miles downstream from the park ; however , no trails of the indigenous peoples are recorded as having passed through the park itself . The park 's 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) Indian Trail for hiking and cross @-@ country skiing recalls such native paths as it runs through an open forest of oak and pine trees , with occasional clearings and a grove of hawthorns . 
 The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) led to the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin . On November 5 , 1768 , the British acquired the " New Purchase " from the Iroquois in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix , including what is now Black Moshannon State Park . After the American Revolutionary War , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania . 
 While there are no known archeological sites within Black Moshannon State Park , the name Moshannon / <unk> / is derived from a Lenape ( Delaware ) term for Moshannon and Black Moshannon Creeks : Mos <unk> <unk> , which means " elk river place . " The name " Black Moshannon " refers to the dark color of the water , a result of plant tannins from the local vegetation and bog . 
 = = = Lumber era = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of William Penn and his Quaker colonists in 1682 , it has been estimated that up to 90 percent of what is now Pennsylvania was covered with woods : over 31 @,@ 000 square miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km2 ) of white pine , eastern hemlock , and a mix of hardwoods . The forests near the three original counties , Philadelphia , Bucks , and Chester , were the first to be harvested , as the early settlers used the readily available timber to build homes , barns , and ships , and cleared the land for agriculture . The demand for lumber slowly increased and by the time of the American Revolution the lumber industry had reached the interior and mountainous regions of Pennsylvania . 
 Lumber became one of the leading industries in Pennsylvania . Trees were used to furnish fuel to heat homes , tannin for the many tanneries that were spread throughout the state , and wood for construction , furniture , and barrel making . Large areas of forest were harvested by colliers to fire iron furnaces . Rifle stocks and shingles were made from Pennsylvania timber , as were a wide variety of household utensils , and the first Conestoga wagons . The Philadelphia – Erie Pike ( present day Pennsylvania Route 504 ) opened the Black Moshannon area to settlers by 1821 . The first settlers opened the Antes Tavern along the Pike , trapped fur @-@ bearing animals , and cleared land for farming . 
 By the mid @-@ 19th century , the demand for lumber reached the area , where eastern white pine and eastern hemlock covered the surrounding mountainsides . Lumbermen came and harvested the trees and sent them down Black Moshannon and Moshannon Creeks to the West Branch Susquehanna River , then along that to the Susquehanna Boom and sawmills at Williamsport . Lumber was also transported by sled and wagon over the ridges and through the valleys to Philipsburg , Julian and Unionville . 
 The Beaver Mill Lumber Company became one of the largest single lumber operations in all of Pennsylvania , and four lumber boomtowns , Beaver Mills , Star Mill , Underwood Mills , and Antes , altered the landscape in the Black Moshannon area . A dam was built at the site of an old beaver dam , and the mill ponds for the lumber mills flooded the old beaver ponds . The communities featured general stores , blacksmith shops , liveries , taverns , schools , and even a ten @-@ pin bowling alley . The area helped to meet the nation 's need for timber in mining operations , construction , and railroads . 
 A number of trails in the park today recall this time . The 0 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) Seneca Trail for cross @-@ country skiing and hiking passes through a second growth forest of oak and cherry trees that shade the stumps of the old growth pines harvested during the lumber era . The Shingle Mill Trail is a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) loop that begins at the main parking area near the dam on Black Moshannon Lake and follows the banks of Black Moshannon Creek to the Allegheny Front Trail and back . The remains of Star Mill , a sawmill built in 1879 that operated until the end of the lumber era , are on the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) Star Mill Trail . This loop trail for hiking and cross @-@ country skiing is flat , with a view of Black Moshannon Lake . 
 This boom era was not to last ; before long the lumber was gone , and once the trees were all clear @-@ cut , the loggers left the area . The lumbermen left behind a barren landscape that was devastated by erosion and wildfires . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania bought thousands of acres of deforested and burned land , then began the project of reforestation . By the 1930s , the land that became Black Moshannon State Park was already a place for picnics and camping , on the aptly named " Tent Hill " , and people swam and fished in the old mill pond . The 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 800 m ) Tent Hill Trail still runs from the campsites to the beach on Black Moshannon Lake . 
 = = = Civilian Conservation Corps = = = 
 The Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) was a work relief program for young men from unemployed families , established in 1933 . As part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal legislation , it was designed to combat unemployment during the Great Depression . The CCC operated in every U.S. state . 
 The original facilities at Black Moshannon State Park were constructed by the Civilian Conservation Corps , from 1933 to 1937 . The CCC created many jobs for unemployed industrial workers from throughout the United States . Black Moshannon State Park is the result of one of many projects undertaken by the CCC throughout central Pennsylvania . 
 Beaver Meadow CCC Camp S @-@ 71 was built in May 1933 near the abandoned village of Beaver Mills , and was one of the first to expand recreational facilities in Pennsylvania . Over 200 young men moved in and began the work of conserving soil , water , and timber in the area . They cut roads through the growing forest to aid in fighting the wildfires that sprang up , and planted many acres of Red Pines as part of the reforestation effort . 
 Most of the CCC @-@ built park facilities are still in use today , including log cabins , picnic pavilions , a food concession stand , and miles of trails . Early on , the CCC constructed a dam at Black Moshannon Lake , on the site of the former mill pond dam . CCC Camp S @-@ 71 closed in January 1937 and Black Moshannon State Park opened that same year . 
 = = = = Historic districts = = = = 
 In 1987 , three separate historic districts incorporating the existing CCC structures in Black Moshannon State Park were placed on the National Register of Historic Places . The structures in all three districts were built between 1933 and 1937 and are designated as part of either the Beach and Day Use , Family Cabin , or Maintenance Historic Districts . 
 Eighteen structures in the Beach and Day Use Historic District are protected as contributing properties , including seven " standard " pavilions , a larger picnic shelter , and three water pump shelters . These last were built of native stone and covered with pebbles , and have since been converted to small picnic pavilions . The concession building , beach bathhouse , and museum are also protected . Four open pit latrines with wane edge siding and hipped roofs are also contributing structures to the Beach and Day Use district . 
 The Family Cabin Historic District consists of 16 contributing properties : 13 log cabins , one lodge , and two latrines . Cabins 1 – 12 , half with one room and half with two , are in a line along a road , similar to 1930s motor courts . The cabin layout at Black Moshannon State Park is unique compared to CCC @-@ built cabins at other Pennsylvania state parks . The cabins at the other parks reflect the " rustic " style of cabin layout promoted by the National Park Service . The Lodge , also known as Cabin 13 , is a large rectangular clapboard @-@ sided building with a stone fireplace , while Cabin 14 is L @-@ shaped with an open porch . Two pit latrines built by the CCC are also contributing structures . 
 The Maintenance Historic District includes four CCC @-@ built structures . The storage building is a wood @-@ frame structure with a gable roof , similar to military storage buildings built in the 1930s and 1940s . A three @-@ bay garage of standard military design is included in this historic district , as is the gas pump house with an extended eave to protect the gas pumps . The ranger 's residence is a 1 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ story gable @-@ roofed house , with modern aluminum siding . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Since its establishment in 1937 , Black Moshannon State Park has undergone several changes . In 1941 , Governor Arthur James announced plans to expand the park to 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) by annexing surrounding state forest land . " Black Moshannon Airport " was built on land taken from the state park and Moshannon State Forest just prior to the Second World War , was operational by 1942 , and renamed " Mid @-@ State Airport " in 1962 . As of 2008 , it is officially known as " Mid @-@ State Regional Airport " and covers 500 acres ( 200 ha ) . While the airport has been designated a Keystone Opportunity Zone to encourage business growth , there are limitations in state law that prohibit any further development on park or forest lands . 
 The CCC @-@ built dam forming Black Moshannon Lake was replaced in the 1950s by the current structure . On November 11 , 1954 , the park was officially named " Black Moshannon State Park " by the Pennsylvania Geographic Board . The park experienced major developments between 1971 and 1980 . As of 2008 , post @-@ war facilities include the ranger 's station , six modern cabins , boat launches , <unk> , and modern restroom facilities . The CCC @-@ built Museum is now the Environmental Learning Center . There is a wastewater treatment plant near the dam for effluent from the park , airport , and some private homes . 
 Black Moshannon State Park was the site of a ski resort from the 1960s until 1982 . The state legislature authorized " construction of ski facilities " at the park in 1961 , which were operational by 1965 . Although managed by the state , a commercial operator was sought as early as 1969 , and in 1980 it was leased to a private contractor , before being closed in 1982 . The ski area was primitive by modern standards : skiers were lifted to the top of the slope by one of two tow ropes or <unk> lifts , and the slopes had about 250 feet ( 76 m ) of vertical drop . As of 2008 , the ski lodge remains open and is rented out to park visitors , while the Ski Slope Trail is a 1 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) hiking trail that follows the former ski slope . It begins at the parking area near the dam , climbs Rattlesnake Mountain , and crosses Pennsylvania Route 504 near a historical marker for the Philadelphia – Erie Turnpike . 
 By the 1980s , the park started to receive official recognition for its unique resources . The three Historic Districts were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1987 in recognition of their CCC @-@ built structures . That same year the state celebrated Black Moshannon State Park 's " 50th Anniversary " . In 1994 , the DCNR established the " Black Moshannon Bog Natural Area " as part of a program to recognize areas of " unique scenic , geologic or ecological value . " In 1997 the park 's Important Bird Area ( IBA ) was one of the first 73 IBAs established in Pennsylvania . By 2001 yearly attendance at Black Moshannon State Park was over 350 @,@ 000 . As of 2008 , the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) Bureau of Parks , which administers all 120 Pennsylvania state parks , had chosen Black Moshannon as one of its " 25 Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " , citing its location atop the Allegheny Plateau and within the state forest , its many trails and rare plants , and its status as a state park natural area and the " [ l ] <unk> reconstituted bog / wetland complex in Pennsylvania " . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 The rocks underlying the Black Moshannon Creek drainage basin are primarily shale , sandstone , and coal . Three major rock formations are present in Black Moshannon State Park , all from the Carboniferous period . These sedimentary rocks formed in or near shallow seas roughly 300 to 350 million years ago . The Mississippian Burgoon Formation is composed of buff @-@ colored sandstone and conglomerate . The late Mississippian Mauch Chunk Formation is formed with grayish @-@ red shale , siltstone , sandstone , and conglomerate . The third is the early Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , which is a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal . 
 The park is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 919 feet ( 585 m ) atop the Allegheny Plateau , just west of the Allegheny Front , a steep escarpment which rises 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) in 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , and marks the transition between the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians to the east and the Allegheny Plateau to the west . The Allegheny Plateau and Appalachian mountains were all formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when Gondwana ( specifically what became Africa ) and what became North America collided , forming Pangaea . 
 The lake within the park is at an elevation of about 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 580 m ) , and the park itself sits in a natural basin . The basin and the underlying sandstone trap water and thus form the lake and surrounding bogs . The higher elevation leads to a cooler climate , and the basin helps trap denser , cooler air , leading to longer winters and milder summers . 
 The cooler climate also means the park is home to animals and plants typically found much further north . The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . In 1972 , long @-@ term average monthly temperatures ranged from a high of 66 @.@ 8 ° F ( 19 @.@ 3 ° C ) in July to a low of 26 @.@ 2 ° F ( − 3 @.@ 2 ° C ) in January . The mean annual precipitation for the Black Moshannon Creek watershed is 40 to 42 inches ( 1016 to 1067 mm ) . The soil in the park is mostly derived from sandstone and as such does not have much capacity to neutralize acid rain . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 97 ° F ( 36 ° C ) in 1988 , and the record low was − 25 ° F ( − 32 ° C ) in 1994 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Within Black Moshannon State Park there is a State Park Natural Area protecting the bogs . The park itself is part of a much larger Important Bird Area , which includes most of the surrounding state forest , airport , and private properties . 
 = = = Bog Natural Area = = = 
 The bogs at the park contain large amounts of sphagnum moss ; this decomposes very slowly , causing layers of dead moss to build up at the bottom of the bog , creating peat . In 1994 , 1 @,@ 592 acres ( 644 ha ) of bog at the state park were protected as the " Black Moshannon Bog Natural Area " ; this was originally conceived as part of the State Parks 2000 strategic plan of the DCNR , and fourteen years later the total area of bog protected as a Natural Area had increased to 1 @,@ 992 acres ( 806 ha ) . 
 Most bogs exist in glaciated areas , but Black Moshannon State Park is on the Allegheny Plateau . This area was not covered by glaciers during the last ice age . The bogs formed here because of the beds of sandstone that lie flat , a short distance below the surface of the earth . The sandstone formations in the park do not absorb water very well , so any depression in them will collect water , as has happened here . The bogs extend the shores of the lake . Migratory shorebirds that visit here include greater and lesser <unk> , least sandpiper , solitary sandpiper , and the spotted sandpiper , which has been confirmed as using the IBA as a breeding grounds . 
 The water in the bog is low in nutrients and high in acidity , which makes it difficult for most plants to live there . Only specialized plants can thrive in the park bogs : there are three species of carnivorous plants and seventeen varieties of orchid . Wild cranberries and blueberries grow in the bog along with sedges , <unk> shrubs , Arctic cotton grass , and <unk> . The bogs are all protected by the state of Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 White @-@ tailed deer , wild turkey , ruffed grouse , opossum , raccoon , hawks , chipmunks , porcupine , woodpeckers , and flying , red , and eastern gray squirrels are all fairly common in the park . Black bears also inhabit Black Moshannon State Park . Many of these animals were decimated due to the effects of deforestation , pollution and unregulated hunting and trapping that took place during the late 19th century . Hunting controls established by the Pennsylvania Game Commission and the work of the Civilian Conservation Corps and Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources in re @-@ establishing the second growth forest have led to the strong comeback of game species at Black Moshannon State Park and throughout the forests of Pennsylvania . 
 The lake is home to American beavers , as well as great blue heron , swans , snow geese , common loons , and many other types of waterfowl , with Canada goose , ring @-@ necked duck , mallard , and wood duck the most commonly seen . The bogs , marshes , and swamps contain frogs and salamanders , and provide a habitat for carnivorous plants like the pitcher plant and sundew . Black Moshannon State Park is home to many common species of songbirds , including ovenbirds . 
 The conifer and mixed @-@ forests of the park and its surroundings provide habitats for northern saw @-@ whet owl , blue @-@ headed vireo , hermit thrush , dark @-@ eyed junco , and magnolia , pine , yellow @-@ rumped , Blackburnian , and black @-@ throated green warblers . The deciduous forests provide habitats for songbirds , such as scarlet tanager and red @-@ eyed vireo . 
 An outbreak of the non @-@ native gypsy moth in the mid @-@ 1980s nearly devastated the woods in a small valley . Selective timber cuts harvested the trees that were affected by species of moth . Today the 1 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) Sleepy Hollow Trail for hiking and cross @-@ country skiing loops through the new growth in the area , which provides an ideal habitat for populations of white @-@ tailed deer and wild turkey . 
 = = = = Important Bird Area = = = = 
 Pennsylvania Important Bird Area # 33 encompasses 45 @,@ 667 acres ( 18 @,@ 481 ha ) . The land includes parts of the state park and surrounding Moshannon State Forest , as well as Pennsylvania State Game Lands No. 33 , Mid @-@ State Regional Airport ( which borders both the park and forest ) , and some other nearby parcels of private land . The Pennsylvania Audubon Society has designated 3 @,@ 374 acres ( 1 @,@ 365 ha ) of Black Moshannon State Park as an IBA , which is an area designated as a globally important habitat for the conservation of bird populations . 
 Ornithologists and bird watchers have recorded a total of 175 species at the IBA . Several factors contribute to the high total of bird species observed : there is a large area of forest in the IBA , as well as great habitat diversity . The location of the IBA along the Allegheny Front also contributes to the diverse bird populations . 
 Black Moshannon Lake and the bogs of the Natural Area are especially important to the IBA . They serve as a stopover for migratory waterfowl and shorebirds . Waterfowl observed at the park include pied @-@ billed and Slavonian grebes , common loon , American black duck , ruddy duck , blue @-@ winged and green @-@ winged teal , tundra swan , long @-@ tailed duck , hooded and red @-@ breasted merganser , greater and lesser scaup , northern pintail , <unk> , American wigeon , and northern shoveler . 
 Pennsylvania IBA # 33 is on the Allegheny Front , which is along a prime migratory path for a variety of birds of prey . The golden eagle , bald eagle , osprey , and northern harrier pass through the area during their annual migration periods . It is possible that the bald eagle may nest within the IBA , but this has not been confirmed . Raptors which do nest in the forests of the IBA include the northern goshawk , red @-@ shouldered , broad @-@ winged , red @-@ tailed , sharp @-@ shinned , and Cooper 's hawks . 
 The cool , damp habitat provided by the bogs at Black Moshannon State Park provides a home for some birds that are at the southern limit of their habitat in central Pennsylvania . The Canada warbler and northern waterthrush nest in the bogs , as do the alder flycatcher , common yellowthroat , swamp sparrow , red @-@ winged blackbird , and gray catbird . The olive @-@ sided flycatcher , which is designated as locally extinct in Pennsylvania , has been seen during the breeding season at Black Moshannon State Natural Area . Bird watchers have observed nesting barred owls in the IBA , as well as Virginia rail and sora . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 = = = Cabins , camping , swimming , and picnics = = = 
 Nineteen cabins can be used by visitors at Black Moshannon State Park . Thirteen are rustic cabins , built by the CCC , with electric lights , a kitchen stove and a wood @-@ burning stove , refrigerator , and bunk beds . Six are modern cabins , including the former ski lodge , with electric heat , a bedroom , living room , kitchen , and bath . All cabin renters need to bring their own household items such as linens and cookware . 
 There are eighty campsites at Black Moshannon State Park . Each campsite has access to washhouses with flush toilets , showers , and laundry tubs . The campsites also have fire rings and picnic tables . There is also an organized group tenting area , which can accommodate a group of up to 60 persons . 
 The sandy beach on Black Moshannon Lake is open from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend , and the beach bathhouse was built by the CCC . Beginning in 2008 , lifeguards will not be posted at the beach . 
 There are eight picnic pavilions built by the CCC in the park , which can be reserved for a fee . In addition to the pavilions , Black Moshannon State Park has 250 picnic tables in four large picnic areas . The use of these picnic tables and unreserved pavilions is first come , first served , and they are free of charge . 
 = = = Boating , fishing , and hunting = = = 
 Boating is a popular use of the waters of Black Moshannon Lake , which covers 250 acres ( 100 ha ) . Canoes , sailboats , and motor boats are all permitted on Black Moshannon Lake , provided they are properly registered with the state . Edward Gertler , author of a series of canoeing books , calls Black Moshannon Creek " about the best whitewater run in the West Branch Susquehanna Watershed " in Keystone Canoeing , and the first 13 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 21 @.@ 2 km ) stretch of Class 2 + whitewater for canoeing and kayaking begins in the park , just downstream of the dam . 
 Cold water fishing is available in Black Moshannon Creek and several of its tributaries , where anglers will find rainbow and brown trout that have been stocked there for sport fishing by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . Black Moshannon Lake 's waters are warmer than those of the creek , and so hold many different species of fish , including largemouth bass , muskellunge , yellow perch , chain pickerel , bullhead catfish , northern pike , bluegill , and crappie . 
 Hunting is permitted in most of Black Moshannon State Park . It helps to prevent an overpopulation of animals and the resulting overbrowsing of the understory . The most common game species are ruffed grouse , eastern gray squirrel , wild turkey , and white @-@ tailed deer . However , the hunting of groundhogs is prohibited . 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 There are 16 miles ( 26 km ) of trails at Black Moshannon State Park that are open to hiking , mountain biking , cross @-@ country skiing , and snowmobiling . All trails are open to hiking , most are open to skiing during the winter months , and select trails are open to snowmobiles and mountain bikes . The park is especially popular among cross @-@ country skiing enthusiasts due to its high elevation . Skiers will find trails that are largely free of rocks , with a layer of grass beneath the snow . Sleepy Hollow , Seneca , Indian , and Hay Road Trails are most frequently used . Seven of the park 's thirteen trails are described above , the remaining six follow . 
 Allegheny Front Trail is a 41 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 67 @.@ 3 km ) hiking trail that passes through Black Moshannon State Park and Moshannon State Forest . It was built in the late 1990s and offers several vistas looking out from atop the Allegheny Front . 
 Bog Trail is a 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 800 m ) boardwalk hiking trail that was built by the Pennsylvania Conservation Corps and has received awards for its handicapped accessibility . Bog Trail loops through the bog at the park passing by lilies , sedges , rushes , <unk> , and various carnivorous plants . Visitors may observe waterfowl and wildlife in the bogs . Access for the handicapped is provided at the boating area . 
 Dry Hollow Trail is a 1 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) trail open to hiking , cross @-@ country skiing , mountain biking , and snowmobiling . It is in a narrow valley at the base of the former ski slope . The hollow consists of open woods with mountain laurel and meadows . 
 Hay Road Trail is a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) trail that is open to hiking and cross @-@ country skiing . An old road overgrown with grass , it passes through a mixed @-@ oak and black cherry forest . It was formerly used by farmers to gather grasses from the marshes of what is now Black Moshannon State Park . 
 Moss @-@ Hanne Trail is an 11 @-@ mile ( 18 km ) loop trail through the Black Moshannon Bog Natural Area . It is open to hiking and cross @-@ country skiing . The trail passes through pine plantations , hardwood forests , spruce groves , hemlock @-@ filled bottomlands , patches of wild blueberries , and by beaver ponds . The area is marshy ; waterproof footwear is recommended and parts of the trail are boardwalks . 
 Snowmobile Trail is a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) trail that runs parallel to Dry Hollow Trail . It provides access to the many miles of trails in Moshannon State Forest that are open to recreational snowmobiling . It is open during summer months for hiking and mountain biking . 
 = = = Friends of Black Moshannon State Park = = = 
 The Friends of Black Moshannon State Park is a volunteer organization that promotes the recreational use of the park through a summer festival . The group also works with the park staff to maintain the park lands , serve as campground hosts , survey the eastern bluebird population , and organize conservation projects . 
 The Summer Festival usually takes place over the third weekend of July . Events at the festival recall the lumbering history of the park . Log rolling , axe throwing , and cross @-@ cut sawing events are held , as are horseshoe and watermelon seed spitting contests . Black Moshannon Lake is open to canoe races and fishing . A Saturday night bonfire party is held at the beach , with live entertainment and refreshments . 
 = = Nearby state parks = = 
 The following state parks are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Black Moshannon State Park : 
 = Miniature Schnauzer = 
 The Miniature Schnauzer is a breed of small dog of the Schnauzer type that originated in Germany in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 19th century . Miniature Schnauzers developed from crosses between the Standard Schnauzer and one or more smaller breeds such as the Poodle and <unk> , as farmers bred a small dog that was an efficient ratting dog . They are described as " spunky " but aloof dogs , with good guarding tendencies without some guard dogs ' predisposition to bite . Miniature Schnauzers are recognized in three colors internationally : solid black , black and silver , and a color known as ' salt and pepper ' . There is a controversial fourth color variant in Miniature Schnauzers , pure white , which is not recognized universally . 
 The breed remains one of the most popular worldwide , primarily for its temperament and relatively small size . As of 2013 it is the 17th most popular breed in the U.S. 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest records surrounding development of the Standard Schnauzer in Germany come from the late 19th century . They were originally bred to be medium @-@ sized farm dogs in Germany , equally suited to ratting , herding , and guarding property . As time passed , farmers bred the Standard Schnauzer into a smaller , more compact size for ratting by combining it with the <unk> and Miniature Poodle . The first recorded Miniature Schnauzer appeared in 1888 , and the first exhibition was held in 1899 . 
 The AKC accepted registration of the new breed in 1926 , two years after Miniature Schnauzers were introduced to the United States . They were originally known as <unk> Pinschers . International Kennel Club classifications vary ; in the United Kingdom and Australia they fall within the Utility Group , while in Canada they are in the Working Group . In the AKC the Miniature Schnauzer is classed with the terriers . It was recognized by the United Kennel Club in 1948 and also classed as a terrier . The start of the modern Miniature Schnauzer is generally considered to begin with Ch . <unk> Display , the first Miniature Schnauzer to win Best in Show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show . He was born 5 April 1945 and lived to be nearly fourteen . Almost every living Miniature Schnauzer in America can trace its lineage back to <unk> Display . 
 Miniature Schnauzers were the 11th most popular breed in the U.S in 2008 , falling to 17th most popular in 2013 . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Miniature Schnauzers have a very square @-@ shaped build , measuring 13 to 14 inches ( 33 to 36 cm ) tall and weighing 10 to 15 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 8 kg ) for females and 11 to 18 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 to 8 @.@ 2 kg ) for males . They have a double coat , with wiry exterior fur and a soft undercoat . In show trim , the coat is kept short on the body , but the fur on the ears , legs , belly , and face is retained . Recognized coat colors are black , salt and pepper , black and silver , and pure white . 
 Miniature Schnauzers are often described as non @-@ moulting dogs , and while this is not entirely true , their shedding is minimal and generally unnoticeable . They are characterized by a rectangular head with bushy beard , mustache and eyebrows ; teeth that meet in a " scissor bite " ; oval and dark colored eyes ; and v @-@ shaped , natural forward @-@ folding ears ( when cropped , the ears point straight upward and come to a sharp point ) . Their tails are naturally thin and short , and may be docked ( where permitted ) . They will also have very straight , rigid front legs , and feet that are short and round ( so @-@ called " cat feet " ) with thick , black pads . 
 Docking of tails and cropping of ears has become a controversial practice , especially for non @-@ working dogs , and is now illegal or restricted in a number of countries worldwide . 
 = = = = North American white Schnauzer controversy = = = = 
 The white Schnauzer is one of four color varieties of the Miniature Schnauzer currently recognized by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale . However , they are not accepted for conformation showing by the American Kennel Club and Canadian Kennel Club . The controversy rests on the disputed origins of the white variation : whether it was contained within the genes of the originally recognized breed , or whether it was the result of subsequent modifications . Since the other two Schnauzer types have never been available in a white variation , and the original German standard never included white as an acceptable color , the <unk> chooses not to recognize white . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 The American Kennel Club breed standard describes temperament as " alert and spirited , yet obedient to command ... friendly , intelligent and willing to please ... never <unk> or timid . " Usually easy to train , they tend to be excellent watchdogs with a good territorial instinct , but more inclined toward barking than biting . They are often aloof with strangers until the owners of the home welcome the guest , upon which they are typically very friendly to them . 
 They are highly playful dogs , and , if not given the outlet required for their energy , they can become bored and invent their own " fun " . Miniature Schnauzers can compete in dog agility trials , obedience , showmanship , flyball , and tracking . Schnauzers have a high prey drive , which means they may attack other small pets such as birds , snakes , and rodents . Many will also attack cats , but this may be curbed with training , or if the dog is raised with cats . 
 = = Health and grooming = = 
 A UK Kennel Club survey puts the median lifespan of Miniature Schnauzers at a little over 12 years . About 20 % lived to > 15 years . While generally a healthy breed , Miniature Schnauzers may suffer health problems associated with high fat levels . Such problems include hyperlipidemia , which may increase the possibility of pancreatitis , though either may form independently . Other issues which may affect this breed are diabetes , bladder stones and eye problems . Feeding the dog low- or non @-@ fatty and unsweetened foods may help avoid these problems . Miniature Schnauzers are also prone to comedone syndrome , a condition that produces pus filled bumps , usually on their backs , which can be treated with a variety of methods . Miniature Schnauzers should have their ears dried after swimming due to a risk of infection , especially those with <unk> ears ; ear examinations should be part of the regular annual check up . Miniature Schnauzers are also prone to von Willebrand disease ( vWD ) . vWD in dogs is an inherited bleeding disorder that occurs due to qualitative or quantitative deficiency of von Willebrand factor ( <unk> ) , a multimeric protein that is required for platelet adhesion . 
 Schnauzers have a specific groom cut that is standard among the Schnauzer breed . Schnauzers require regular grooming , either by stripping ( mostly seen in show dogs ) , or by clipping ( a short @-@ cut usually reserved for family pets ) . <unk> removes the loose , dead coat ; it may be done by hand , called finger stripping , or plucking , or with a stripping knife ; either way , it is a laborious process . Many Miniature Schnauzers who are family pets have regular grooming appointments to have their hair clipped ; clipping , using a mechanical clippers ( or <unk> ) , produces a soft , silky , skin @-@ close trim . Whether stripped or clipped , the coat is close at the body , and falls into a fringe @-@ like foundation on its undercarriage , called furnishings , which can be left to grow , but must be combed regularly . All Schnauzers , whether they are Miniatures , Standards , or Giants , often sport a beard , created by allowing the hair around their noses to grow out . Left <unk> or <unk> , the body hair will grow two to four inches , and will often tangle into mats and curls . 
 = Ugg boots trademark dispute = 
 Ugg boots trademark disputes are the disputes between some footwear manufacturers , as to whether " ugg " is a protected trademark , or a generic term and thus ineligible for trademark protection . In Australia and New Zealand , where " Ugg " is a generic term for the style of footwear ; 81 registered trademarks include the term " Ugg " in various logos and designs . By contrast , UGG is a registered trademark of the California @-@ based company Deckers Outdoor Corporation , in over 130 countries worldwide , including the U.S. , the European Union , and China . 
 Ugg boots ( sometimes called uggs ) in Australia and New Zealand are a unisex style of sheepskin boot . In many other countries , however , UGG boots are a well @-@ known brand of footwear owned by Deckers . The boots are made of twin @-@ faced sheepskin with fleece on the inside and with a tanned outer surface , often with a synthetic sole . The boots originated in Australia and New Zealand , initially as utilitarian footwear worn for warmth and comfort . UGG boots emerged as a fashion trend in the United States in the late 1990s and as a world @-@ wide trend in the late 2000s . 
 = = Trademark law in the United States = = 
 The Lanham Act is the primary federal trademark statute of law in the United States however , as it only applies to " commerce which may lawfully be regulated by Congress , " it does not address terms that are used in foreign countries . The Doctrine of foreign equivalents guideline serves this purpose . 
 Under the doctrine of " foreign equivalents , " a foreign language term used in a foreign country , that is considered generic in that country , cannot be imported into the United States and used as a trademark . In applying the Doctrine , the courts consistently refer to two policy rationales . The first rationale , " the doctrine serves the interests of domestic competition " : 
 " Because of the diversity of the population of the United States , coupled with temporary visitors , all of whom are part of the United States marketplace , commerce in the United States utilizes innumerable foreign languages . No merchant may obtain the exclusive right over a trademark registration if that exclusivity would prevent competitors from designating a product as what it is in the language their customers know best . " — <unk> Co . Ltd . Vs Wine of Japan Import Inc . 
 The second rationale , " the doctrine serves the interests of international comity " : 
 " Because United States companies would be hamstrung in international trade if foreign countries granted trademark protection to generic English words , the United States reciprocates and refuses trademark protection to generic foreign words . " — Enrique Bernat F. , S.A. v. Guadalajara , Inc . 
 However , the Trademark Manual of Examining Procedure ( " <unk> " ) states that the test for applying the doctrine of foreign equivalents is " whether , to those American buyers familiar with the foreign language , the word would denote its English equivalent " . Thus the doctrine is generally interpreted by courts as not applying if the generic word is not a word from a foreign language , but one from an English @-@ speaking foreign country . 
 Court cases have noted that the generic status accorded to English @-@ language words in foreign countries has no bearing on the registration of marks in the United States . The <unk> argument was invoked for Ugg boots and was rejected by a U.S. district court which cited the following cases in support . In Anheuser @-@ Busch , Inc. v. Stroh Brewery Co . , the court rejected as irrelevant the generic usage of the phrase " L.A. beer " in Australia for Low @-@ alcohol beer . The court ruled that " a term may be generic in one country and suggestive in another " and that <unk> in Australia was irrelevant . In <unk> v. The <unk> , Inc . , the court rejected as irrelevant the generic use of the term " <unk> " in most English speaking countries for a retailer of fruit . The court rejected the argument on the grounds that it is irrelevant how a term is used outside the United States : " The parties agree that the term is generic in Britain . Since we deal here with American trademark law , and thus American consumers , neither British usage nor the dictionary definition indicating such usage are determinative . " In another case , the court stated that while a term may be generic in another country , if " it is not so recognized in this country [ the U.S. ] ... the mark must still be regarded as arbitrary and fanciful in the United States . " and thus remains eligible for registration as a trademark in the United States . 
 As the doctrine is a guideline rather than a rule , it has been criticized with commentators noting that United States courts are often contradictory and inconsistent in their application of the doctrine , and that it provides little guidance to owners when choosing their marks or to courts when assessing <unk> or likelihood of mark confusion . It has been suggested by the International Trademark Association that the doctrine be abolished and replaced with one that applies equally to all foreign words , regardless of whether they are from a foreign language or an English language , and that they take into account that country 's trademark laws . Under the proposed changes , " Terms that are generic are never <unk> as trademarks and are never <unk> " . 
 = = Trademark disputes = = 
 For UGG boots intellectual property disputes such as counterfeiting , see UGG Australia . 
 The UGG trademark has been the subject of dispute in several countries . The trademark for " Ugh @-@ Boots " has been removed from the trademark registry in Australia for non @-@ use . Outside Australia and New Zealand , UGG ( written in capital letters ) is a registered trademark of Deckers Outdoor Corporation . 
 In 1971 , an Australian surfer , Shane Steadman , registered the name " UGH @-@ <unk> " as a trademark in Australia and began selling sheepskin boots under that name . In 1982 he registered the name " UGH " and a logo containing a stylised Sun with the words " UGG AUSTRALIA " . In 1979 , Brian Smith , another Australian surfer , applied to be the United States distributor for Country Leather , a Western Australian manufacturer of ugg boots , and began selling their Australian @-@ made boots in New York and to surfers in California . In 1987 he set up Ugg Holdings Inc. and in 1995 purchased the trademarks from Steadman . In 1996 he sold his interest to Deckers and in 1999 Deckers registered the trademarks for " UGG " in the US and 25 foreign countries . Deckers began asserting its new trademark and sent out cease and desist letters to Australian manufacturers who were using the name ugg for their boots but otherwise took little action . In the early 2000s , demand for ugg boots was soaring , partly as a result of US $ 8 million spent on marketing by Deckers , but also due to several celebrity endorsements . 
 For the nine months to September 2004 , UGG boots sales totaled $ 39 @.@ 2 million , an increase of 180 % over the previous year . Plans were also in place to expand the UGG brand to cover hats , scarves and gloves . With the continuing rise in popularity , Deckers now began a serious effort to halt the use of the name " ugg " by other manufacturers . Deckers ' law firm , Middletons of Melbourne , sent cease and desist letters to a number of Australian and American manufacturers who were selling uggs over the Internet , preventing them from selling uggs on eBay or from using the word in their domain names or registered business names . 
 The manufacture of ugg boots in Australia was primarily a cottage industry . Individually lacking the resources to fight Deckers , 20 Australian manufacturers formed the Australian Sheepskin Association to fight the corporation 's claim , arguing that " ugg " is a generic term referring to flat @-@ heeled , pull @-@ on sheepskin boots . They further argued that Australian manufacturers had been making and trading this style of boot for decades , including exporting them to the US . One of these manufacturers , Perth 's Uggs @-@ N @-@ Rugs , who had been manufacturing uggs since 1978 and selling them online since 1996 , appealed to Australian trademark regulators , IP Australia . The officer who heard the case stated that the " evidence overwhelmingly supports the proposition that the terms ( ugg , ugh and ug boots ) are interchangeably used to describe a specific style of sheepskin boot and are the first and most natural way in which to describe these goods . " In 2006 Uggs @-@ N @-@ Rugs won the right to use the term UGG <unk> / S and variations such as UGH <unk> / S. The case was the subject of a 2006 television documentary , The Good , The Bad and The Ugg Boot .. 
 Deckers retained the rights to their UGG logo as trade mark protection only applies for the way the mark appears in its entirety and not for the words it contains . The name Ugg / UGG was determined to be generic after the Registrar of Trade Marks found that registration did not confer " rights in the generic term , or terms , from which it is derived " and that the identity of the various trade marks " derive from the hyphenated nature of the expression . " Therefore , UGH boots , UG boots and UGG boots ( " or other variations " ) without hyphens are all generic terms in Australia . IP Australia also ruled that the trademark " UGH @-@ boots " ( with hyphen ) should be removed from the trademark register for non @-@ use as Deckers had only been using the UGG logo , not the UGH marks . Deckers initially declined to pay Uggs @-@ N @-@ Rugs court costs as required by the 2006 ruling . Following the publication of a Wall Street Journal article which referred to the oversight , Deckers paid the costs in September 2010 . The ruling only applies in Australia and Deckers still owns the trademarks in other jurisdictions such as the US , China , Japan and the European Union . 
 In 1998 , Deckers demanded that the American company Koolaburra cease infringing the UGG trademark . Koolaburra replied that they did not use the name " UGG " or " UGH " and that the only mark they used was " Ug " . Deckers sent a further " cease and desist " letter in 2001 and another in 2003 but Koolaburra declined to stop using the name " Ug " and in 2004 , Deckers filed a case against Koolaburra in the California federal court alleging ( 1 ) trademark infringement , ( 2 ) false designation of origin ( Koolaburra labelled their boots " Australian Ug Boots " ) , ( 3 ) trademark dilution , ( 4 ) cybersquatting , ( 5 ) unfair competition , ( 6 ) trade disparagement , ( 7 ) unjust enrichment and ( 8 ) breach of contract ( Deckers claimed that in 1998 Koolaburra had agreed to stop using the name Ug ) . Koolaburra in turn challenged that the name UGG was generic and not entitled to trademark protection . As the UGG mark was registered , Deckers was entitled to the assumption that it was not generic , thus the burden of proof rested with Koolaburra . 
 In support , Koolaburra provided the testimony of America 's National Surfing Team coach Peter Townend and Nordstrom 's footwear buyer Heather <unk> . These declarations were accepted by the court as anecdotal . Additionally , Koolaburra provided three instances of the generic usage of Ugg in American magazines , however the court pointed out that the most recent was dated 1980 . Koolaburra also quoted the New York City published Oxford English Dictionary definition of " Ugg " ; however , this was rejected after Deckers petitioned the Dictionary to change the definition of " Ugg " from " a kind of soft sheepskin boot " to a definition that included UGG 's trademark , which the OED agreed to do . Koolaburra then argued that the UGG trademark was invalid as Brian Smith had fraudulently registered the name by giving false representations that the term was not generic , arguing that " as an Australian citizen , Smith knew of the fact that the term Ugg was a generic term " . This was rejected by the court as fraud requires an applicant to " knowingly " make the false representations , ruling that such belief was subjective , and finding that even if Smith knew the term was generic in Australia , he may have " honestly held [ a ] good faith belief " that it was not generic in the United States . 
 Deckers countered through submitting declarations from four professionals in the footwear industry who stated that " UGG " is widely recognized in the industry as a brand name , not a generic term and provided the court with survey evidence supporting that consumers in the US consider UGG to be a brand name ; among women aged 18 to 45 who had purchased footwear valued over $ 100 in the last 12 months , 58 % believed UGG was a brand name while only 11 % thought it generic . Koolaburra then argued that the term was generic under the doctrine of " foreign equivalents " ( Under U.S. law , a term used in another country that is considered generic in that country cannot be imported into the United States and used as a trademark ) . This was rejected as the doctrine only applied to terms in a foreign language . In February 2005 , the court ruled for Deckers on their claims of " trademark infringement " and " unfair competition " , finding that a consumer would likely be confused with the similarity in " appearance , sight and sound " between " Ug " and UGG " as the parties were marketing in direct competition with identical products . However , the court declined to rule on the validity of trademarks in Australia as it was considered inappropriate to interfere with another country 's rulings . 
 The Australian Sheepskin Association is attempting to change the name UGG into a regional mark similar to that achieved for Champagne which would negate its trademark status in many jurisdictions . Deckers in response has focused on the fact that its UGG boots are made in China and not Australia . In 2012 , sales of Deckers UGG boots totaled over US $ 630 million while the UGG brand , which now includes hats , scarves , gloves , slippers , casuals , jackets , coats , and handbags totaled over US $ 1 billion with 30 % of sales outside of the United States . 
 = = = Trademark infringement cases = = = 
 During a trademark infringement and trade dress case in 2008 , a generic term defense was rejected by a Dutch court as not being applicable to counterfeit goods . The court also rejected La Cheapa 's claim that as Australian companies believe " ugg " was a generic name , the " UGG AUSTRALIA " mark was not protected in the Benelux , noting that La Cheapa also admitted knowing that UGG in the Benelux is a famous brand which undermined their argument that UGG was generic . La Cheapa distributed sheepskin boots it had purchased from a supplier in China on an Internet site from the Netherlands , describing them on its website as " 100 % authentic Ugg Australian boots ! ! ! " , with " UGG logo on the heel " and in boxes virtually identical to Deckers packaging . These were found by the court to be counterfeits . The Deckers case had also included La Cheapa 's sale of imported boots manufactured by Jumbo Ugg Boots Binder Production Pty Ltd in Melbourne , Australia branded Jumbo Uggs . The court stated that " given the exact similarity of the goods ( namely : boots ) " and the fact that the word " ugg " was part of the brand , and the undisputed fact that the " UGG brand " was popular in the Benelux , it found that the importation and distribution of sheepskin boots which contained the word " ugg " in its label took an " unfair advantage of , or is detrimental to , the distinctive character of the brand UGG " and was thus an infringement of the Deckers trademark . 
 On December 25 , 2010 , Deckers filed a trademark infringement suit in a bid to stop Emu Australia from using the UGG name on its sales website . On December 30 Emu Australia counter @-@ sued for the cancellation of Deckers ' UGG trademark in the US . Emu 's suit alleged that Deckers ' trademark was obtained after a false statement to the US Patent and Trademark Office and was therefore invalid . On 25 August 2011 , the case was dismissed with prejudice by stipulation of the parties but the terms of the settlement were not disclosed . 
 In 2010 , the validity of the UGG trademark was challenged in a Turkish court by a local manufacturer after his application to register a trademark containing the words <unk> and AUSTRALIA was rejected . Judge Verda <unk> ruled for Deckers , finding that UGG was not a generic term and did not have any descriptive nature in the Turkish language , except to refer to Deckers products . The court further ruled that UGG was a well @-@ known trademark that has gained recognition and distinctiveness worldwide , and while acknowledging the challenger 's allegations that UGG was a generic term in Australia , ruled that such alleged facts have no bearing on the validity of the trademark within Turkey . Deckers was also awarded costs in the action . 
 In 2010 , IP Australia ruled on the trademark opposition dispute between Deckers and Luda Production Pty Ltd , granting Luda the right to register the trademarks UGG AUSTRALIA ( & Design ) and MADE BY UGG AUSTRALIA with costs awarded against Deckers . Luda declared that the " element ugg " was used generically in the sheepskin boot market but that its use had not caused any confusion with Luda 's UGG AUSTRALIA products . Luda began manufacturing ugg boots in 1981 and in 1982 began selling its boots with woven heel counters featuring the UGG AUSTRALIA mark . In 1984 , the company was incorporated at which time Luda had attempted to trademark its UGG AUSTRALIA logo but was asked by the Trade Mark Office not to proceed as the name was " descriptive " and was therefore not <unk> . In 2004 , Luda filed another trademark application after becoming aware of " other products being sold bearing variations of the element UGG " in conjunction with the word " Australia . " Deckers opposed the application on three grounds , prior use ( Deckers argued that the prior use shown by Luda was invalid as the mark they sought to register was not " an exact copy " of the mark they used ) , that Deckers had a more significant reputation in Australia and that Luda had filed the application in bad faith . The court found that Deckers did not have a significant reputation in an Australian market which was dominated by Luda Productions , and thus failed the requirements of the Trade Practices Act , regarding public misapprehension of the origin of the manufacturer . The court noted that Luda 's use of the term " UGG AUSTRALIA " predated Deckers ' infringement defense by 22 years , which negated Deckers ' claim that Luda was trading upon their reputation and that Luda had not filed in bad faith , but in order to gain statutory protection for trade marks already recognized in Australia . Regarding a non @-@ use action between Deckers and Luda Production Pty , IP Australia confirmed that Deckers owned the trademark of their UGG AUSTRALIA label ( with sun @-@ like device ) , however the scope of Deckers ' trademark was narrowed , restricted to just footwear . 
 In 2011 , Deckers filed suit against the Chinese company <unk> for allegedly selling counterfeit Uggs at the <unk> Mall and on Taobao , a Chinese language website similar to eBay and Amazon . Known as " snow boots " in China , <unk> had been selling Australian made boots labeled Merino World UGG . In defense , a spokesperson from <unk> Mall argued that the boots were a different brand to Deckers with the letters in the word " UGG " designed differently . In support , he cited <unk> <unk> , the Chinese online encyclopedia , which describes Ugg as a generic term for sheepskin boots . Asked to comment , the media and public relations Manager of the Australian Trade Commission attached to the Australian Embassy in Shanghai , Anthony @-@ Yan stated that the snow boots style originated in Australia where all such boots are referred to as UGG boots . The Australian manufacturers ' logos contained the word " UGG " in large block letters on the heel of the boot , and the court found that this practice deceived the ordinary consumer . The court ruled that use of the word " ugg " in Chinese commerce was an infringement of the Deckers Chinese " UGG " trademark , and held the manufacturers and distribution firms liable . 
 The Shanghai suburb of <unk> is the nation 's largest production base for snow boots with more than 200 businesses manufacturing footwear valued at more than 1 billion yuan ( US $ 163 million ) annually ; it is also " the nation 's largest production base for imitation UGG brands , " with an estimated 150 companies producing counterfeit <unk> . Deckers UGG boots cost from 1 @,@ 500 to 8 @,@ 000 yuan ( US $ 240 to US $ 1 @,@ 300 ) in China when demand exceeded supply in 2011 , which led to a large market for both counterfeit <unk> and the lower priced uggs imported from Australia . 
 = Kimmie Meissner = 
 Kimberly Claire " Kimmie " Meissner ( born October 4 , 1989 ) is an American former competitive figure skater . She is the 2006 World champion , the 2007 Four Continents champion , and the 2007 U.S. national champion . She is the first American and the first lady to simultaneously hold the World , Four Continents , and national titles . 
 In 2005 , Meissner became the second American woman to land the triple Axel jump in national competition . She was a member of the 2006 Olympic team and was the youngest American athlete to compete at those Games . She finished 6th at the Olympics in February 2006 and won the World Championships the following month . 
 She is a spokesperson for the Cool Kids Campaign , an organization that helps children with cancer . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Kimberly Meissner , nicknamed " Kimmie " , was born in Towson , Maryland , to Judy ( Roth ) and Paul Meissner . She is the youngest of four children and the only girl . She is Catholic . Her maternal great @-@ grandparents Paulina and Emmanuel Novo had emigrated separately from Spain during the 1920s . The latter was a fisherman from Galicia . 
 Meissner was a full @-@ time student at Fallston High School , a public high school and graduated from there in May 2007 . She entered the University of Delaware as a part @-@ time student in the fall semester of that year . Meissner trained for most of her career in Newark , Delaware at the University of Delaware Figure Skating Club , the club she represents in competition . Until February 2008 , Meissner lived in Maryland with her family , and lived at home while attending college . Following her coaching change after the 2008 U.S. Championships , Meissner moved to Fort Lauderdale , Florida . 
 In the fall of 2009 , Meissner moved back to Maryland . During 2010 @-@ 2012 , she attended the University of Delaware as a full @-@ time student . She transferred to Towson University for the spring semester of 2013 and changed her major to English . She graduated in December 2014 . 
 = = Skating career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Kimmie Meissner began figure skating at age six after watching her older brothers playing ice hockey . She landed her first triple , a <unk> jump , six years later . 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , Meissner qualified for the U.S. Junior Figure Skating Championships on the juvenile level , where she placed 16th . The following season , she repeated that placement , but on the Intermediate level . In the United States , Juvenile and Intermediate @-@ level skaters compete at the U.S. Junior Championships , while Novice , Junior , and Senior @-@ level skaters compete at the U.S. Championships . 
 In the 2002 – 03 season , Meissner placed second at her regional competition and won her sectional competition to qualify for the 2003 U.S. Championships on the novice level . At age thirteen , Meissner won the U.S. novice national title , after landing a triple lutz jump in her free skate . Following the 2003 U.S. Championships , Meissner was named to the team for the 2003 Triglav Trophy , where she won the bronze medal on the novice level . 
 From 2003 through 2008 , Meissner was coached by Pam Gregory at the University of Delaware Figure Skating Club . She moved up to the junior level in the 2003 – 04 season . She won the silver medal at the first event of the 2003 – 04 ISU Junior Grand Prix series , in Sofia , Bulgaria . She went on to win the Junior Grand Prix event in Bled , Slovenia , which qualified her for the Junior Grand Prix Final , where she placed 5th . At the 2004 U.S. Championships , Meissner was second behind Katy Taylor after the short program , but won the free skate , after landing two triple <unk> , to win the Junior national title . At Nationals , Meissner was named to the U.S. team to the 2004 World Junior Championships , where she landed her first triple lutz @-@ triple toe combination in competition and won the silver medal behind Miki Ando . 
 In the summer of 2004 , Meissner began working on a triple Axel but stopped practicing the jump for two months due to a slight back injury . She moved up to the senior level nationally but remained a junior internationally . She was practicing four to five hours on most days . On the 2004 – 05 ISU Junior Grand Prix series , the first season the ISU Judging System was being used in junior competition , she won silver medals at the event in Courchevel , France and a second silver medal at the event in Long Beach , California . Meissner 's two silver medals qualified her for the Junior Grand Prix Final in Helsinki , Finland , where she won the bronze medal , after placing seventh in the short program and second in the free skate . 
 On January 15 , 2005 , at the 2005 U.S. Championships , Meissner landed a triple axel jump , becoming only the second American lady to land the jump in competition , fourteen years after Tonya Harding became the first American lady to land the jump . Meissner won the bronze medal . 
 She was not age @-@ eligible for the senior World Championships and so was named in the U.S. team for the 2005 World Junior Championships . Meissner placed third in the short program and fourth in the free , placing fourth overall . Afterwards , Meissner went to Worlds as a guest of ESPN and watched from the sidelines . 
 = = = 2005 – 06 season = = = 
 Kimmie Meissner moved to the senior level internationally beginning in the 2005 – 06 Olympic season . She made her Grand Prix debut at the 2005 Trophée Eric Bompard , where she placed sixth in the short program , fourth in the free skate , and fifth overall . She repeated that overall placement at her second event , the 2005 NHK Trophy , where she placed third in the short program and fifth in the free skate . At the 2006 U.S. Championships , Meissner won the silver medal and was named to the U.S. team to the 2006 Winter Olympics . 
 Meissner was the youngest athlete on the United States Olympic team . She spent the first week of the Games training in Courmayeur , moving to Torino proper a few days before the ladies event began . Meissner skated second in the short program and landed a triple lutz @-@ triple toe loop combination to place fifth in that segment of the competition . Skating second @-@ to @-@ last in the final flight of the free skate , Meissner placed sixth in the free skate and overall . 
 Following the Olympics , Meissner returned to Baltimore . On the return flight , she partially ruptured one of her eardrums and fully ruptured the other . This affected her hearing as she trained for the 2006 World Championships , her first senior ISU Championship . At Worlds , Meissner placed second in her qualifying group and fifth in the short program , putting her in third place overall going into the free skate . During the free skate , Meissner completed seven triple jumps , including two triple @-@ triple combinations , to win the title . This win made her the first woman since Kristi Yamaguchi to win a world title before a national title . Meissner is also the first woman to win Worlds on her first appearance since Oksana <unk> in 1993 . She is the seventh @-@ youngest ladies World Champion in history . Meissner has described this win as changing her career from being the underdog to being expected to win every competition she entered . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 season = = = 
 Meissner began the 2006 – 07 season at the 2006 Skate America , where she won the silver medal , the highest finish of her career until then at a Grand Prix event . At her second Grand Prix event , the 2006 Trophée Eric Bompard , she fell on a triple Axel attempt and placed third overall . At the 2007 U.S. Championships , Meissner went in as the favorite . She won the title , after winning the short program and placing third in the free skate . This made her the first ladies skater since Barbara Roles to win the national title on the Novice , Junior , and Senior levels . 
 After Nationals , Meissner went to the Four Continents Championships , a competition for senior @-@ level skaters who are not from Europe , for the first time in her career . She fell on her triple @-@ triple combination in the short program and was in sixth place going into the free skate . She won the free skate and the competition overall , becoming the first U.S. ladies champion to become the Four Continents Champion . 
 After Four Continents , Meissner competed at the 2007 World Championships . She achieved a new personal best for her short program where she placed fourth . She did not complete either of her triple @-@ triple combinations in the free skating and placed third in that segment of the competition and fourth overall . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 season = = = 
 Meissner began the 2007 – 08 season by beating reigning World Champion Miki Ando at the 2007 Skate America . This was Meissner 's first win the Grand Prix series . She then placed second at the 2007 Trophée Eric Bompard , qualifying her for the Grand Prix Final , where she placed sixth . At the time , she was skating on a sprained right ankle , an injury she sustained during a show . 
 Before the 2008 U.S. Championships , Meissner worked on her spins with Todd Eldredge . She placed 4th in the short program and 7th in the free after falling three times . She placed 7th overall and was selected for the U.S. team to the 2008 World Championships . After Nationals , Eldredge called her with more input on her spins and recommended his long @-@ time coach Richard Callaghan . Meissner made the choice to switch coaches from long @-@ time coach Pam Gregory to a temporary arrangement with Richard Callaghan in Ft . Lauderdale , Florida . She trained with Callaghan for the six weeks between Nationals and the 2008 World Championships . 
 At the 2008 World Championships , Meissner placed 9th in the short program and 12th in the long . She placed 7th overall and was the highest placed American in the competition . In the off @-@ season , she toured with Stars on Ice and trained with both Callaghan and Eldredge . 
 = = = Post @-@ 2008 career = = = 
 Both Callaghan and Eldredge coached Meissner during the 2008 – 09 season . She began the season at the 2008 Skate America , where she placed 7th . She also placed 7th at the 2008 Cup of Russia . On January 19 , 2009 , Meissner announced her withdrawal from the 2009 U.S. Championships due to injury . 
 In the fall of 2009 , Meissner moved back to Maryland . Chris Conte became her coach and also choreographed ice show programs for her . Meissner had been assigned to the 2009 <unk> Cup and the 2009 NHK Trophy for the Grand Prix season . She announced her withdrawal from both events on October 8 , 2009 due to an injury to her right knee . Due to this , she did not receive a bye to the 2010 U.S. Championships and was too late to register to compete at the regional championships , thereby ending her season . She did not return to amateur competition . Commenting in July 2016 , she said , " The injury wasn 't devastating , but things in my personal life all happened at the same time . " 
 Meissner continues to appear in ice shows and pro @-@ am events . During the 2014 – 15 season , she performed as a full @-@ time member for the US Stars on Ice tour . 
 = = Public life , charity work and endorsements = = 
 When Meissner returned from the 2006 Olympic Games , a parade was held in her honor in her hometown of Bel Air . Following her win at the 2006 Worlds , the town gave one of its main roads , Pennsylvania Avenue , the honorary title of Kimmie Way . She threw out the ceremonial first pitch for the Phillies opening day game , and a week later for her hometown team , the Baltimore Orioles , on April 14 , 2006 . 
 Following Meissner 's win at the 2007 U.S. Championships , she signed endorsement deals with Subway , Under Armour , and Visa . She has appeared in Subway commercials , including a regional @-@ Baltimore one following the 2006 Olympics , and a national one with Jared Fogle . She appeared in the Under Armour commercial shown during Super Bowl XLII . Meissner appeared in the music video for Speed Feels Better by Michael <unk> wearing an Under Armour sweatshirt . 
 Following the 2006 World Championships , Meissner became a spokesperson for the Cool Kids Campaign , an organization for children with cancer . She designed gel bracelets for the organization as a fundraiser . On August 25 , 2007 , she put on a benefit show in Baltimore called " Kimmie 's Angels on Ice " to benefit the charity . Meissner also co @-@ edits the newsletter for the charity . 
 During the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , Russia , Meissner worked as a figure skating researcher for NBC Olympics . 
 = = Programs = = 
 = = = Post @-@ 2010 = = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 2010 = = = 
 = = Results = = 
 GP : Grand Prix ; <unk> : Junior Grand Prix 
 = Exchequer of Pleas = 
 The Exchequer of Pleas or Court of Exchequer was a court that dealt with matters of equity , a set of legal principles based on natural law and common law in England and Wales . Originally part of the curia regis , or King 's Council , the Exchequer of Pleas split from the curia during the 1190s , to sit as an independent , central court . The Court of Chancery 's reputation for tardiness and expense resulted in much of its business transferring to the Exchequer . The Exchequer and Chancery , with similar jurisdictions , drew closer together over the years , until an argument was made during the 19th century that having two seemingly identical courts was unnecessary . As a result , the Exchequer lost its equity jurisdiction . With the Judicature Acts , the Exchequer was formally dissolved as a judicial body by an Order in Council of 16 December 1880 . 
 The Exchequer 's jurisdiction , at various times , was common law , equity , or both . Initially a court of both common law and equity , it lost much of its common law jurisdiction after the formation of the Court of Common Pleas , and from then on concerned itself with equitable matters and those common law matters it had discretion to try , such as actions brought against Exchequer officials and actions brought by the monarch against non @-@ paying debtors . With the Writ of Quominus , which allowed the Exchequer to look at " common " cases between subject and subject , this discretionary area was significantly expanded , and it soon regained its standing in common law matters . Cases were formally taken by the Chancellor of the Exchequer , but in practice were heard by the Barons of the Exchequer , judicial officials led by the Chief Baron . Other court officials included the King 's Remembrancer , who appointed all other officials and kept the Exchequer 's records , and the sworn and side clerks , who acted as attorneys to parties to a case . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 It was originally claimed that the Exchequer was based on a similar Norman court ; however , while there are many records of the Exchequer 's work in England , there is no evidence of a similar body in pre @-@ conquest Normandy . The first reliable records come from the time of Henry I , when the sole surviving Pipe roll from his reign shows the Exchequer working out of the king 's palace as part of the curia regis . The curia regis followed the king as he travelled rather than sitting at any one fixed location , and was held in York , London and Northampton at various times . By the late 12th century it had taken to sitting in a fixed location ( the one body of government in England to do so ) , and by the 1170s it was possible to distinguish the Exchequer 's work from that of the other parts of the curia regis , although the king of the time considered the Exchequer to simply be an element of the curia ; indeed , it was referred to as the Curia Regis ad <unk> , or King 's Court at Exchequer . The word " Exchequer " derives from the chequered cloth laid on a table for the purposes of counting money . In the 1190s the Exchequer began separating from the curia regis , a process which continued until the beginning of the 13th century ; academics have suggested that this is due to an increasing demand on the revenue side of the court , which led to part of the common law element being split off to form the Court of Common Pleas . Although the Exchequer of Pleas was the first common law court , it was also the last to separate from the curia regis . 
 = = = Increasing work and transformation = = = 
 There are few records known to date from before 1580 , as bills were not dated before then . Until the 16th century , the Exchequer carried out its duties with little variation in its function or practice . A small court , the Exchequer handled around 250 cases a year , compared to 2 @,@ 500 in the Court of King 's Bench and 10 @,@ 000 in the Court of Common Pleas . Under the Tudors , however , the Exchequer 's political , judicial and fiscal importance all increased . This was partially thanks to the Lord High Treasurer ; although the Lord Chancellor was more traditionally important , the Lord High Treasurers from 1547 to 1612 were politically influential figures , including Robert Cecil , Thomas Sackville and William Paulet ; since the Lord High Treasurer was head of the Exchequer , with the Treasurer 's increased influence came increased importance for the Exchequer . 
 The appointment of the second and third Dukes of Norfolk as Lord High Treasurers from 1501 to 1546 led to a gradual reduction in the Exchequer 's power . The Dukes were seen by the government as too independent to be trusted with any real power , but too useful to be removed ; as a result , to indirectly reduce their power , the Exchequer was deliberately weakened . When William Paulet was appointed Treasurer in 1546 the Exchequer again increased in power , absorbing the Court of Augmentations and Court of First Fruits and <unk> by 1554 . The Exchequer was also assisted in this period by Thomas Fanshawe , the Queen 's Remembrancer ; a capable man , Fanshawe was often consulted by the Barons of the Exchequer as to the best way to administer the court , and helped standardise pleadings , allowing the Exchequer to cope during a period of increased business . Fanshawe 's administrative reforms were considered excellent , and his work continued to be used as the standard until the 1830s . 
 Exchequer business increased under James and Charles I , before the English Civil War disrupted the courts . With the increasing use of the Writ of Quominus , which allowed royal debtors to bring a case against a third party who owed them money if it was that lack of money which prevented them paying the king and the new regime , the Exchequer actively transformed from a " tax court " dealing with civil cases to a dedicated court of equity and common law . The Civil War caused four equitable courts to be dissolved ; the Court of Star Chamber was formally dissolved in 1641 , the Council of the North and Council of Wales and the Marches had their equity jurisdiction stripped by the same Act of Parliament , and the Court of Requests became invalid after the Privy Seal was invalidated by the outcome of the English Civil War , as it was dependent on the Seal for its authority . After the War ended there were only two equity courts remaining , the Exchequer and Court of Chancery , the latter publicly reviled for its slow pace and because it was led by the Lord Chancellor , a political figure who had been intimately involved in the conflict . As a result , the Exchequer increased in importance as a court , although it is not known whether its active transformation was a judicial or political decision . 
 = = = Loss of equity jurisdiction and dissolution = = = 
 By the beginning of the 18th century , the equity jurisdiction of the Exchequer of Pleas was firmly cemented , and it was considered a viable alternative to the Court of Chancery . As a result , each court cited the other 's cases as precedent , and drew closely together . In addition , 18th @-@ century Acts of Parliament treated them in the same way , merely referring to " courts of equity " rather than mentioning them individually . At the same time , the Treasury became more and more important , leading to a reduction in the inferior Exchequer 's influence . Despite these warning signs , the Exchequer continued to flourish , maintaining a large amount of business , and by 1810 was almost entirely an equity court , having little common law work . The court 's equity side became deeply unpopular during the 1830s because many cases were heard by a single judge with no real prospect of appeal ; while cases could be taken to the House of Lords , it was highly expensive and time @-@ consuming to do so . The Court of Chancery , however , had long had an established method of appealing to the Lords , and later introduced an intermediary appellate court – the Court of Appeal in Chancery . At the same time , many elements of the Exchequer 's equity business had dried up , with the Tithe Commutation Act 1836 ending their tithe cases and the Insolvent Debtors Act 1820 establishing the Court of Bankruptcy , removing cases of insolvency from the Exchequer . The Exchequer 's fees were also higher than those of the Court of Chancery , and with both courts now using almost identical precedent it was seen as unnecessary to maintain two equitable courts . As a result , the Administration of Justice Act 1841 formally dissolved the equitable jurisdiction of the court . 
 With the loss of its equitable jurisdiction , the Exchequer became a dedicated common law court , and thus fell prey to the same fate as the other two common law courts ( the Court of Queen 's Bench and the Court of Common Pleas ) during the late 19th century . There had long been calls for the merger of the courts , and in 1828 Henry Brougham , a Member of Parliament , complained in Parliament that as long as there were three courts unevenness was inevitable , saying that " It is not in the power of the courts , even if all were monopolies and other restrictions done away , to distribute business equally , as long as suitors are left free to choose their own tribunal " , and that there would always be a favourite court , which would therefore attract the best lawyers and judges and entrench its position . 
 In 1867 a commission was created to look into issues with the central courts , and the outcome were the Judicature Acts , under which all the central courts were made part of a single Supreme Court of Judicature , with the three central common law courts becoming three of the five divisions of the Supreme Court ; this was not designed to be permanent , but rather to avoid having to retire or demote two of the three Chief Justices to allow a single head of the Supreme Court , as this would have violated the constitutional principle that senior justices were irremovable . By sheer chance Fitzroy Kelly and Alexander Cockburn , Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer and Lord Chief Justice of England respectively both died in 1880 , allowing the merger of the common law divisions of the Supreme Court into a single division , the Queen 's Bench Division , under John Coleridge , who had been Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas and became Lord Chief Justice of England , by an Order in Council of 16 December 1880 . At this point , the Exchequer of Pleas formally ceased to exist . 
 = = Jurisdiction and relationship with other courts = = 
 The Exchequer 's position as a court originally came from an informal process of argument between the king and his debtors as to how much money was owed ; by the 13th century , this had evolved into formal court proceedings . Therefore , its initial jurisdiction , as defined by the Statute of Rhuddlan , was as a court where only the king could bring cases . The Exchequer became the first " tax court " , where the king was the plaintiff and the debtor the defendant . The king was represented by the Attorney General , allowing him to avoid much of the legal costs associated with a court case . The " next logical step " was to allow debtors to collect on their own debts in the Exchequer , so that they could better pay the king ; this was done through the Writ of Quominus . The Exchequer also had sole jurisdiction to try cases against their own officials and other figures engaged in collecting the royal revenue . The court was also used to prosecute clerics who , while innocent , had come close to committing an infraction ; as the plaintiff was represented by the Attorney General , the costs were reduced , and as the Attorney General had no incentive to compromise it was more threatening to the cleric . In 1649 the Exchequer formally extended its common law and equity jurisdiction , becoming a fully fledged court of law able to hear any civil case . 
 The main focus of the Exchequer was the collection of royal revenue as part of the greater Exchequer , which was officially undertaken by the Lord High Treasurer . The Exchequer was unique in having jurisdiction in matters of both equity and the common law , the latter initially curtailed after the Magna Carta and reserved for the Court of King 's Bench and Court of Common Pleas , although it later grew back . This process of common law and equity was reversed ; during the 16th century the Exchequer was solely a common law body , with the equity jurisdiction only again becoming relevant near the end of the Tudor period . W. H. Bryson argues that this happened during the reign of Edward I. By 1590 the Exchequer 's jurisdiction over equity cases was confirmed , and it was handling a significant number a year , including disputes over trusts , mortgages , tithes and <unk> ; since taxation was ever @-@ present , it was not difficult to show that the dispute prevented the payment of a debt to the monarch , allowing the Writ of Quominus . 
 The Exchequer stood on an equal footing with the other Westminster courts ( the Court of Common Pleas , Court of King 's Bench and Court of Chancery ) , with cases transferred easily from one to another , although there were problems in the case of the Court of King 's Bench . The traditional method for moving a case was the writ of <unk> , but the King 's Bench represented the monarch , who could not have writs placed against him . Instead , a clerk would bring the Red Book of the Exchequer to the King 's Bench and assert that the case 's claimant was an officer of the Exchequer , necessitating his trial there rather than in the King 's Bench . The Exchequer maintained a clear rule with the other equity court , the Court of Chancery ; a case heard in one could not be re @-@ heard in the other . Apart from that , cases of equity could be heard by either court . The Exchequer had superior status over inferior courts of equity , able to take cases from them and countermand their decisions . The jurisdiction of ecclesiastical courts also overlapped with that of the Exchequer , particularly in relation to the collection of tithes , and there are many records of disputes between the two . 
 As well as appeals to the Exchequer Chamber , the court also allowed appeals to the House of Lords , which was first used in 1660 for the case of Fanshawe v Impey and confirmed in 1677 . 
 = = Officers = = 
 = = = Treasurer = = = 
 The formal head of the Exchequer for much of its existence was the Lord High Treasurer , who was tasked with collecting royal revenues . Originally a clerk , he was supervised by the Chief Justiciar , and only became head of the court after this position was abolished during the reign of Henry III . During the reign of Elizabeth I the Treasurer 's other duties began to increase , and he played less of a role in the Exchequer 's affairs . By the 17th century , the Lord High Treasurer had been replaced by a dedicated Treasurer of the Exchequer ( although earlier writs show that the Lord High Treasurer had been independently given this title ) , who was ceremoniously presented with a white staff by the monarch . The Treasurer , while active in the revenue side of the Exchequer , played little or no active role in the Exchequer of Pleas . 
 = = = Chancellor = = = 
 The Chancellor of the Exchequer , independently head of the Court of Chancery , was also involved in the Exchequer of Pleas as a check on the Lord High Treasurer . He evolved out of the Lord Chancellor 's clerk , or <unk> <unk> , who sat in the Exchequer and was responsible for correcting and sealing writs of summons , also holding the Exchequer 's copy of the Great Seal . The earliest appearances of such a clerk in the records come from 1220 , when a document was signed by Robert de Neville , <unk> . The Lord Chancellors of the time were clergymen with little interest in judicial or fiscal matters ; as a result , the clerk became more independent from the Chancellor and , by the 1230s , became a royal appointment holding the seal independently of the Lord Chancellor , known as the Chancellor of the Exchequer . After 1567 the Chancellor was additionally confirmed as the Under @-@ Treasurer of the Exchequer , allowing him to carry out the Treasurer 's duties when he was unavailable . The Chancellor was appointed by letters patent , and until 1672 it was a life appointment , then changed to an office " to hold only during the pleasures of the crown " . Until the English Civil War the Chancellor of the Exchequer was a judicial office with little political standing ; after the War , however , it became seen as a " stepping stone " to higher political appointments . After 1672 it again became an administrative and judicial office , until 1714 , when the Chancellor 's position as head of the Treasury made it an important appointment again . 
 = = = Barons = = = 
 The main judicial officers were the Barons of the Exchequer , or <unk> <unk> , who were originally the same judges as those of the Court of King 's Bench , only becoming independent positions after the Exchequer 's separation from the curia regis . In the early years of the Exchequer 's existence , the Barons were the chief auditors of the accounts of England , a role passed to dedicated auditors during the reign of Edward II . With the Exchequer 's expansion during the Tudor era , the Barons became more important ; where previously only the Chief Baron had been appointed from the Serjeants @-@ at @-@ Law , with the other Barons mere barristers , it became practice for all Barons of the Exchequer to be Serjeants . This further increased the Exchequer 's standing , since for the first time it put the Exchequer at the same level as the Court of Common Pleas and Court of King 's Bench , where all judges were already required to be Serjeants . 
 At least one Baron sat to hear a case , with convention insisting on a maximum of four Barons after the rule of Edward IV ; as a mere convention , it was occasionally broken . When one Baron was ill or otherwise unable to sit it was felt appropriate to appoint a fifth , as in 1604 when Baron <unk> was ill , and in 1708 , when Baron Smith was called to Edinburgh to be a temporary Chief Baron of the Scottish Exchequer . In 1830 a fifth Baron was permanently added to relieve court congestion ; at the same time , a fifth judge was added to the Court of Common Pleas and King 's Bench . The First Baron was the Chief Baron of the Exchequer ; if the Chancellor and Treasurer were unavailable , he was the head of the court . When he was also absent the Second Baron took charge , and so on ; in one case in 1659 , the Fourth Baron was the only judge available . The Second , Third and Fourth Barons were known as puisne Barons ; initially treated as individual offices , after the time of James I the order was determined by the judges ' seniority . Unlike in the Court of King 's Bench , the different positions did not equate to different degrees of power ; each Baron had an equal vote in decisions . 
 Barons were appointed by letters patent and sworn in by the Lord Chancellor , head of the judiciary . During the 16th century they held their offices <unk> se bene <unk> , or " during good behaviour " . A Baron could leave the Exchequer in one of three situations ; resignation , death , or appointment to another court , which automatically made their office void . The letters patent expired after the death of each monarch ; when the new one was crowned , a Baron would have to receive a new patent or leave his office . This was mostly a routine event ; from 1550 to 1714 all but nine continued in office after the crowning of a new monarch . 
 = = = Remembrancer = = = 
 The King 's Remembrancer was the chief clerk of the Exchequer , handling all bills of equity . He was the equivalent of the Court of Chancery 's Master of the Rolls , in that he headed up the clerical side of the court . As well as his duties to the judicial body , the King 's Remembrancer also handled the revenue side of the Exchequer , a jurisdiction established in the 14th century . He was originally able to appoint all the sworn clerks , but by the 16th century this jurisdiction had been limited to appointing one of the 24 side clerks , with the sworn clerks appointing the rest . In a similar way , while he was originally in charge of the court 's records and the enrolment of writs , by the 17th century he no longer possessed the keys to the record office , and the sworn clerks had the exclusive right to search the records . His main job was instead quasi @-@ judicial , examining certain witnesses , taking minutes in court and settling disputes over " scandal and impertinence " . 
 The Remembrancer was appointed for life , and qualified to appoint a deputy , the first of whom , John West , was appointed by Sir Christopher Hatton in 1616 . From 1565 until 1716 , the office was kept in the Fanshawe family , starting with Henry Fanshawe and ending with Simon Fanshawe . After 1820 , the Remembrancer 's broad duties were split up by the Court of Exchequer ( England ) etc . Act 1820 . To replace him , two masters were appointed , one of whom was to be the accountant general . These officials were to be appointed by the Chief Baron of the Exchequer from barristers of five years standing , holding offices during good behaviour and unable to appoint a deputy . The masters handled the taking of minutes previously undertaken by the Remembrancer , with the accountant general overseeing all money paid into the court , which was deposited in the Bank of England ; previously the Remembrancer had held complete discretion as to what to do with the money . 
 = = = Other offices = = = 
 Other offices included the sworn clerks , the examiners , the clerk to the barons , and the clerk to the King 's Remembrancer . There were eight sworn clerks , so called because they were sworn officers of the court , who held their offices for life and worked under the Remembrancer . Each clerk acted as an attorney for the parties in court , and every party was required to employ one . The first clerk was known as the First Secondary , and administered oaths out of the Red Book of the Exchequer . The sworn clerks were assisted by 24 side clerks , of whom each sworn clerk appointed three . Each side clerk studied under a sworn clerk for five years before practising himself , although under the sworn clerk 's name . A side clerk had the chance of being promoted to sworn clerk , first by the Remembrancer and then by the sworn clerks themselves . The examiners were tasked with supervising depositions of witnesses , bringing the witness to a Baron , administering the oath and keeping the files of the depositions . In 1624 it was decided these examiners should be sworn officers of the court , and from then on each Baron had an examiner , who acted in the Baron 's name . The office of examiner was dissolved in 1841 , when the equity jurisdiction of the Exchequer came to an end . In addition to an examiner , each Baron had at least one clerk , who acted as their private secretary ; although not paid , they were authorised to take fees for their work . The Chief Baron had two clerks , while the puisne Barons had one each . The King 's Remembrancer also employed a clerk , who was also a secretary . He received no salary and was not a sworn officer of the court , meaning the Remembrancer could have him replaced at any time . 
 = From Russia , with Love ( novel ) = 
 From Russia , with Love is the fifth novel by the English author Ian Fleming to feature his fictional British Secret Service agent James Bond . Fleming wrote the story in early 1956 at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica ; at the time he thought it may be his final Bond book . The novel was first published in the United Kingdom by Jonathan Cape on 8 April 1957 . 
 The story centres on a plot by SMERSH , the Soviet counter @-@ intelligence agency , to assassinate Bond in such a way as to discredit both him and his organisation . As bait , the Russians use a beautiful cipher clerk and the Spektor , a Soviet decoding machine . Much of the action takes place in Istanbul and on the Orient Express . The book was inspired by Fleming 's visit to Turkey on behalf of The Sunday Times to report on an Interpol conference ; he returned to Britain by the Orient Express . From Russia , with Love deals with the East – West tensions of the Cold War , and the decline of British power and influence in the post @-@ Second World War era . 
 From Russia , with Love received broadly positive reviews at the time of publication . The book 's sales were boosted by an advertising campaign that played upon a visit by the British Prime Minister Anthony Eden to Fleming 's Goldeneye estate , and the publication of an article in Life , which listed From Russia , with Love as one of US President John F. Kennedy 's ten favourite books . The story was serialised in the Daily Express newspaper , first in an abridged , multi @-@ part form and then as a comic strip . In 1963 it was adapted into the second film in the Bond series , starring Sean Connery . 
 = = Plot = = 
 SMERSH , the Soviet counterintelligence agency , plans to commit a grand act of terrorism in the intelligence field . For this , it targets the British secret service agent James Bond . Due in part to his role in the defeat of the SMERSH agents Le Chiffre , Mr Big and Hugo Drax , Bond has been listed as an enemy of the Soviet state and a " death warrant " has been issued for him . His death is planned to precipitate a major sex scandal , which will run in the world press for months and leave his and his service 's reputations in tatters . Bond 's killer is to be the SMERSH executioner Red Grant , a psychopath whose homicidal urges coincide with the full moon . Kronsteen , SMERSH 's chess @-@ playing master planner , and Colonel Rosa Klebb , the head of Operations and Executions , devise the operation . They instruct an attractive young cipher clerk , Corporal Tatiana Romanova , to falsely defect from her post in Istanbul having , she would claim , fallen in love with Bond after seeing a photograph on his file . As an added lure for Bond , Romanova will provide the British with a Spektor , a Russian decoding device much coveted by MI6 . She is not told the details of the plan . 
 The offer of defection is received by MI6 in London , ostensibly from Romanova , but is conditional that Bond collects her and the Spektor from Istanbul . MI6 is unsure of Romanova 's motive , but the prize of the Spektor is too tempting to ignore ; Bond 's superior , M , orders him to go to Turkey . Once there , Bond forms a comradeship with Darko Kerim , head of the British service 's station in Turkey . Bond meets Romanova and they plan their route out of Turkey with the Spektor . He and Kerim believe her story and the three board the Orient Express . Bond and Kerim quickly discover three Russian MGB agents on board , travelling incognito . Kerim uses bribes and trickery to have two of them taken off the train , but he is later found dead in his compartment with the body of the third agent , both — unbeknown to Bond — having been killed by Grant . 
 At Trieste a fellow MI6 agent , " Captain Nash " , introduces himself and Bond presumes he has been sent by M as added protection for the rest of the trip . Romanova is suspicious of Nash , but Bond reassures her that the man is from his own service . After dinner , at which Nash has drugged Romanova , they rest ; Bond wakes up to find a gun pointing at him and Nash reveals himself to be the killer Grant . Instead of killing Bond immediately , Grant reveals SMERSH 's plan , including the detail that he is to shoot Bond through the heart and that the Spektor is booby @-@ trapped to explode when examined . As Grant talks , Bond places his metal cigarette case between the pages of a magazine he holds in front of him , positioning it in front of his heart to stop the bullet . After Grant fires , Bond pretends to be wounded ; when Grant steps over him , Bond attacks and Grant is killed . Bond and Romanova escape . 
 Later , in Paris , after successfully delivering Romanova and the booby @-@ trapped Spektor to his superiors , Bond meets Rosa Klebb . She is captured but manages to kick Bond with a poisoned blade concealed in her shoe ; the story ends with Bond fighting for breath and falling to the floor . 
 = = Background and writing history = = 
 By January 1956 the author Ian Fleming had published three novels — Casino Royale in 1953 , Live and Let Die in 1954 and Moonraker in 1955 . A fourth , Diamonds Are Forever , was being edited and prepared for production . That month Fleming travelled to his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica to write From Russia , with Love . He followed his usual practice , which he later outlined in Books and Bookmen magazine : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " He returned to London in March that year with a 228 @-@ page first @-@ draft manuscript that he subsequently altered more heavily than any of his other works . One of the significant re @-@ writes changed Bond 's fate ; Fleming had become disenchanted with his books and wrote to his friend , the American author Raymond Chandler : " My muse is in a very bad way ... I am getting fed up with Bond and it has been very difficult to make him go through his tawdry tricks . " Fleming re @-@ wrote the end of the novel in April 1956 to make Klebb poison Bond , which allowed him to finish the series with the death of the character if he wanted . Fleming 's first draft ended with Bond and Romanova enjoying a romance . By January 1957 Fleming had decided he would write another story , and began work on Dr. No in which Bond recovers from his poisoning and is sent to Jamaica . 
 Fleming 's trip to Istanbul in June 1955 to cover an Interpol conference for The Sunday Times was a source of much of the background information in the story . While there he met the Oxford @-@ educated ship owner Nazim Kalkavan , who became the model for Darko Kerim ; Fleming took down many of Kalkavan 's conversations in a notebook , and used them verbatim in the novel . 
 Although Fleming did not date the event within his novels , John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom wrote books for Ian Fleming Publications — have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . Chancellor put the events of From Russia , with Love in 1955 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place between June and August 1954 . 
 In August 1956 , for fifty guineas , Fleming commissioned Richard Chopping to provide the art for the cover , based on Fleming 's design ; the result won a number of prizes . After Diamonds Are Forever had been published in March 1956 , Fleming received a letter from a thirty @-@ one @-@ year @-@ old Bond enthusiast and gun expert , Geoffrey Boothroyd , criticising the author 's choice of firearm for Bond . Boothroyd 's suggestions came too late to be included in From Russia , with Love , but one of his guns — a .38 Smith & Wesson snub @-@ nosed revolver modified with one third of the trigger guard removed — was used as the model for Chopping 's image . Fleming later thanked Boothroyd by naming the armourer in Dr. No Major Boothroyd . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 As with several of his works , Fleming appropriated the names or backgrounds of people he knew or had heard of for the story 's characters : Red Grant , a Jamaican river guide — whom Fleming 's biographer Andrew Lycett described as " a cheerful , voluble giant of villainous aspect " — was used for the half @-@ German , half @-@ Irish assassin . Rosa Klebb was partly based on Colonel <unk> — a real @-@ life member of the Lenin Military @-@ Political Academy about whom Fleming had written an article for The Sunday Times . The Spektor machine used as the bait for Bond was not a Cold War device , but had its roots in the Second World War Enigma machine , which Fleming had tried to obtain while serving in the Naval Intelligence Division . 
 The idea of the Orient Express came from two sources : Fleming had returned from the Istanbul conference in 1955 by the train , but found the experience drab , partly because the restaurant car was closed . He also knew of the story of Eugene Karp and his journey on the Orient Express : Karp was a US naval attaché and intelligence agent based in Budapest who , in February 1950 , took the Orient Express from Budapest to Paris , carrying a number of papers about blown US spy networks in the Eastern Bloc . Soviet assassins were already on the train . The conductor was drugged and Karp 's body was found shortly afterwards in a railway tunnel south of Salzburg . Fleming had a long @-@ standing interest in trains and , following his involvement in a near @-@ fatal crash in 1927 , associated them with danger ; they also feature in Live and Let Die , Diamonds Are Forever and The Man with the Golden Gun . 
 The cultural historian Jeremy Black points out that From Russia , with Love was written and published at a time when tensions between East and West were on the rise and public awareness of the Cold War was high . A joint British and American operation to tap into landline communication of the Soviet Army headquarters in Berlin using a tunnel into the Soviet @-@ occupied zone had been publicly uncovered by the Soviets in April 1956 . The same month the diver Lionel Crabb had gone missing on a mission to photograph the propeller of the Soviet cruiser Ordzhonikidze while the ship was moored in Portsmouth Harbour , an incident that was much reported and discussed in British newspapers . In October and November that year a popular uprising in Hungary was repressed by Soviet forces . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 To make Bond a more rounded character , Fleming put further aspects of his personality into his creation . The journalist and writer Matthew Parker observes that Bond 's " physical and mental ennui " is a reflection of Fleming 's poor health and low spirits when he wrote the book . Following on from the character development of Bond in his previous four novels , Fleming adds further background to Bond 's private life , largely around his home life and personal habits , with Bond 's introduction to the story seeing him at breakfast with his housekeeper , May . The novelist Raymond Benson — who later wrote a series of Bond novels — sees aspects of self @-@ doubt entering Bond 's mind with the " soft " life he has been leading when he is introduced in the book . Benson identifies Bond 's fear when the flight to Istanbul encounters severe turbulence from a storm , and notes Bond 's apparent nervousness when he first meets Romanova ; he seems concerned and guilty about his mission . The other characters in the book are also well developed , according to Benson . He considers that the head of the Turkish office , Darko Kerim Bey , is " one of Fleming 's more colourful characters " ; Kerim is a similar type of dependable and appealing ally that Fleming also created with Quarrel ( in Live and Let Die ) and Colombo ( in the short story " Risico " ) . Parker considers that Kerim is " an antidote " to Bond 's lethargy , while the essayist Umberto Eco sees the character as having some of the moral qualities of the villains in the series , but that those qualities are used in support of Bond . 
 From Russia , with Love is one of the few stories by Fleming in which the Soviets are the main enemy , although Eco considers Bond 's Russian opponents " so monstrous , so improbably evil that it seems impossible to take them seriously " . Fleming introduced what was a new development for him , a female opponent for Bond , although much like the former adversaries in the series , Rosa Klebb is described as being physically repulsive , with poor hygiene and gross tastes . Eco — and Anthony Synnott , in his examination of aesthetics in the Bond novels — consider that despite Klebb being female , the character is more akin to a " sexually neuter " individual . Red Grant was Fleming 's first " psychotic opponent " for Bond , according to Benson . Charlie Higson — who later wrote the Young Bond series — finds Grant to be " a very modern villain : the relentless , remorseless psycho with the cold dead eyes of a ' drowned man ' . " 
 = = Style = = 
 According to Higson , Fleming spent the first four novels changing the style of his books , and his approach to his characters , but in From Russia , with Love the author " finally hits on the classic Bond formula , and he happily moved into his most creative phase " . The literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek observes that the previous novels were , in essence , episodic detective stories , while From Russia , with Love is structured differently , with an " extended opening picture " that describes Grant , the Russians and Romanova before moving onto the main story and then bringing back some of the elements when least expected . The extensive prose that describes the Soviet opponents and the background to the mission takes up the first ten chapters of the book , and Bond is only introduced into the story in chapter eleven . Eco identifies that the opening passage introducing Red Grant is a " cleverly presented " beginning , similar to the opening of a film . Eco remarks that " Fleming abounds in such passages of high technical skill " . 
 Benson describes the " Fleming Sweep " as taking the reader from one chapter to another using " hooks " at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader onto the next . He feels that the " Fleming Sweep steadily propels the plot " of From Russia , with Love and , though it was the longest of Fleming 's novels , " the Sweep makes it seem half as long " . Kingsley Amis , who later wrote a Bond novel , considers that the story is " full of pace and conviction " , while Parker identifies " cracks " in the plot of the novel , but believes that " the action mov [ es ] fast enough for the reader to skim over them " . 
 Fleming used known brand names and everyday details to produce a sense of realism , which Amis calls " the Fleming effect " . Amis describes " the imaginative use of information , whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond 's world ... [ is ] bolted down to some sort of reality , or at least counter @-@ balanced . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett consider that Fleming 's preface note — in which he informs readers that " a great deal of the background to this story is accurate " — indicates that in this novel " cold war tensions are most massively present , saturating the narrative from beginning to end " . As in Casino Royale , the concept of the loss of British power and influence during the post @-@ Second World War and Cold War period was also present in the novel . The journalist William Cook observes that , with the British Empire in decline " Bond pandered to Britain 's inflated and increasingly insecure self @-@ image , flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight . " Woollacott and Bennett agree , and maintain that " Bond embodied the imaginary possibility that England might once again be placed at the centre of world affairs during a period when its world power status was visibly and rapidly declining . " In From Russia , with Love , this acknowledgement of decline manifested itself in Bond 's conversations with Darko Kerim when he admits that in England " we don 't show teeth any more — only gums . " 
 Woollacott and Bennett argue that in selecting Bond as the target for the Russians , he is " deemed the most consummate embodiment of the myth of England " . The literary critic Meir Sternberg sees the theme of Saint George and the Dragon running through several of the Bond stories , including From Russia , with Love . He sees Bond as Saint George — the patron saint of England — in the story , and notes that the opening chapter begins with an examination of a dragonfly as it flies over the supine body of Grant . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 From Russia , with Love was released in the UK as a hardback on 8 April 1957 , by the publishers Jonathan Cape . The American edition was published a few weeks later by Macmillan . In November 1956 the Prime Minister , Sir Anthony Eden , had visited Fleming 's Jamaican Goldeneye estate , to recuperate from a breakdown in his health . This was much reported in the British press , and the publication of From Russia , with Love was accompanied by a promotional campaign that capitalised on Fleming 's raised public profile . The serialisation of the story in The Daily Express in 1957 provided a boost to the sales of the book ; a bigger rise in sales was to follow four years later . In an article in Life on 17 March 1961 , the US President John F. Kennedy listed From Russia , with Love as one of his ten favourite books . This accolade , and its associated publicity , led to a surge in sales that made Fleming the biggest @-@ selling crime writer in the US . There was a further boost to sales following the release of the film of the same name in 1963 , which saw the sales of the Pan paperback rise from 145 @,@ 000 in 1962 to 642 @,@ 000 in 1963 and 600 @,@ 000 in 1964 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 From Russia , with Love received mainly positive reviews from critics . Julian Symons , in The Times Literary Supplement , considered that it was Fleming 's " <unk> , most exciting and most brilliant tale " , that the author " brings the thriller in line with modern emotional needs " , and that Bond " is the intellectual 's Mike Hammer : a killer with a keen eye and a soft heart for a woman " . The critic for The Times was less persuaded by the story , suggesting that " the general tautness and brutality of the story leave the reader uneasily hovering between fact and fiction " . Although the review compared Fleming in unflattering terms to Peter Cheyney , a crime fiction writer of the 1930s and 1940s , it concluded that From Russia , with Love was " exciting enough of its kind " . 
 The Observer 's critic , Maurice Richardson , thought that From Russia , with Love was a " stupendous plot to trap ... Bond , our deluxe cad @-@ clubman agent " and wondered " Is this the end of Bond ? " The reviewer for the Oxford Mail declared that " Ian Fleming is in a class by himself " , while the critic for The Sunday Times argued that " If a psychiatrist and a thoroughly efficient copywriter got together to produce a fictional character who would be the mid @-@ twentieth century subconscious male ambition , the result would inevitably be James Bond . " 
 Writing in The New York Times , Anthony Boucher — described by a Fleming biographer , John Pearson , as " throughout an avid anti @-@ Bond and an anti @-@ Fleming man " — was damning in his review , saying that From Russia , with Love was Fleming 's " longest and poorest book " . Boucher further wrote that the novel contained " as usual , sex @-@ cum @-@ sadism with a veneer of literacy but without the occasional brilliant setpieces " . The critic for the New York Herald Tribune , conversely , wrote that " Mr Fleming is intensely observant , acutely literate and can turn a cliché into a silk purse with astute alchemy " . Robert R Kirsch , writing in the Los Angeles Times , also disagreed with Boucher , saying that " the espionage novel has been brought up to date by a superb practitioner of that nearly lost art : Ian Fleming . " In Kirsch 's opinion , From Russia , with Love " has everything of the traditional plus the most modern refinements in the sinister arts of spying " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 From Russia , with Love was serialised in The Daily Express from 1 April 1957 ; it was the first Bond novel the paper had adapted . In 1960 the novel was also adapted as a daily comic strip in the paper and was syndicated worldwide . The series , which ran from 3 February to 21 May 1960 , was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky . The comic strip was reprinted in 2005 by Titan Books in the Dr. No anthology , which also included Diamonds Are Forever and Casino Royale . 
 The film From Russia with Love was released in 1963 , produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , and directed by Terence Young . It was the second Bond film in the Eon Productions series and starred Sean Connery as Bond . The film version contained some changes to the novel , with the leading villains switching from SMERSH to SPECTRE , a fictional terrorist organisation . In the main it was a faithful adaptation of the novel ; the ending was changed to make clear Bond 's survival . Benson declares that " many fans consider it the best Bond film , simply because it is close to Fleming 's original story " . 
 In 2012 the novel was dramatised for radio by Archie Scottney , directed by Martin Jarvis and produced by Rosalind Ayres ; it featured a full cast starring Toby Stephens as James Bond and was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 . It continued the series of Bond radio adaptations featuring Jarvis and Stephens following Dr. No in 2008 and Goldfinger in 2010 . 
 = Black Creek ( Susquehanna River ) = 
 Black Creek is a tributary of the Susquehanna River in Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 2 @.@ 6 miles ( 4 @.@ 2 km ) long and flows through Conyngham Township . The creek 's watershed has an area of 3 @.@ 85 square miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km2 ) . It is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . The creek is ephemeral and loses its flow to underground mines . Varying concentrations of many alkali metals , alkaline earth metals , and transition metals occur in water in the creek 's watershed . The watershed typically experiences relatively mild temperatures . It is mainly accessible via U.S. Route 11 , Pennsylvania Route 239 , and a local road . 
 Black Creek is situated within the Northern Anthracite Coal Field . Rock formations in the watershed include the Mauch Chunk Formation , the Pottsville Formation , and the Llwellyn Formation . Coal beds in the watershed include the Lower Red Ash bed , the Upper Red Ash bed , the Lower Ross bed , the Upper Ross bed , and the Baltimore Bed . Ridges of mine waste also occur in the creek 's drainage basin . Mining was done in the watershed as early as the winter of 1836 @-@ 1837 , but it stopped in 1955 . The creek and the surrounding areas were the subject of a joint study by several federal and state organizations in the 1960s . 
 = = Course = = 
 Black Creek begins in a valley in Conyngham Township . It flows west @-@ northwest for nearly a mile , passing through a large pond or small lake , before turning north for several hundred feet . The creek then turns west for a short distance and enters a broader and much shallower valley before receiving an unnamed tributary from the right . It then turns southwest for more than a mile before turning south @-@ southwest and flowing through a deep and narrow valley to the northern border of Mocanaqua . The creek then turns west for a few tenths of a mile , following the border of Mocanaqua to its confluence with the Susquehanna River . 
 Black Creek joins the Susquehanna River 171 @.@ 90 miles ( 276 @.@ 65 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Black Creek has no officially named tributaries . However , an 1887 book stated that the creek had two tributaries . One was unnamed and flowed from a point 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) west of the DuPont Drift to the creek at the Golden Drift . The other was referred to as Turkey Pond Creek and was sometimes nearly dry , but could have a substantial flow during spring rains . 
 = = Hydrology and climate = = 
 Black Creek is an ephemeral stream . It used to drain an area between Turtle Creek and the Susquehanna River , but now loses its flow to underground mines via broken bedrock . Its channel is also disrupted by strip mines and rock piles . The waters of Black Creek are acidic . 
 <unk> in the waters of the Black Creek drainage basin include sulfate and bicarbonate . The concentrations of aluminum in the mine pools in the area are typically very low or nonexistent . However , some mine waters in the watershed can have aluminum ion concentrations of over 70 milligrams per liter , forming 6 percent of total dissolved solids in the water , as measured by weight . The concentration of manganese ions in the waters can be over 100 milligrams per liter and calcium also occurs in groundwater in the watershed . Magnesium occurs in the non @-@ polluted groundwater in the watershed in concentrations of 1 to 5 milligrams per liter and occurs in polluted groundwater at concentrations of 4 to 440 milligrams per liter . 
 Sodium and potassium occur in water in the Black Creek watershed , with sodium being considerably more common than potassium . Potassium concentrations are around 20 milligrams per liter , while sodium concentrations are less than 10 milligrams per liter . Lithium and rubidium also have been observed in the watershed , with concentrations of 0 @.@ 02 to 0 @.@ 2 and 0 @.@ 04 milligrams per liter , respectively . 
 Barium occurs in the water of the Black Creek watershed , typically at concentrations of less than 0 @.@ 07 milligrams per liter . Beryllium is about as common , with a concentration of less than 0 @.@ 06 milligrams per liter . Strontium is much more common , with a concentration of up to 4 @.@ 4 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of titanium in the waters of the Black Creek watershed is less than 0 @.@ 17 milligrams per liter and the concentration of zirconium is less than 0 @.@ 055 milligrams per liter . Small amounts ( less than 0 @.@ 01 milligrams per liter ) of vanadium , chromium , and molybdenum also occur in the water . The cobalt concentration in mine waters in the watershed ranges from 0 @.@ 07 to 0 @.@ 93 milligrams per liter and the nickel concentration ranges from 0 @.@ 09 to 1 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter . Copper , silver , tin , and lead also occur in the watershed . 
 The concentration of chloride ions in the watershed of Black Creek ranges from 0 to 14 milligrams per liter . 
 A 1971 report described the climate in the watershed of Black Creek as " mild " . Temperatures above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) are rare in the area , but temperatures below 32 ° F ( 0 ° C ) are common . At the United States Weather Bureau station in Wilkes @-@ Barre , the highest recorded temperature between 1945 and 1966 was 101 ° F ( 38 ° C ) and the lowest was − 15 ° F ( − 26 ° C ) . Killing frosts have been recorded as early as October and as late as May . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Black Creek is 482 feet ( 147 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is between 840 and 860 feet ( 260 and 260 m ) above sea level . The lowest elevations in the watershed are approximately 500 feet ( 150 m ) above sea level and they occur near the Susquehanna River . The highest part of the watershed is a ridge in the northern part of the watershed ; this area has an elevation of 1 @,@ 275 feet ( 389 m ) above sea level . The highest level of topographic relief in the watershed is 775 feet ( 236 m ) and local relief can be as high as 740 feet ( 230 m ) , but is typically less than 500 feet ( 150 m ) . 
 The watershed of Black Creek is situated at the southwestern end of the Northern Anthracite Coal Field . The watershed is also part of a " long , narrow , complexly deformed " <unk> , with complex folds and faults . The watershed of the creek is within the filled @-@ in valley of the preglacial Susquehanna River . The watershed contains three <unk> coal basins : the West Basin , the East Basin , and the Priscilla Lee Basin . A tunnel runs between the West Basin and the East Basin at an elevation of 567 feet ( 173 m ) above sea level . 
 There are a number of pits in the area of Black Creek , some of which are up to 100 feet ( 30 m ) deep . Some are former entrances to mines , while others are strip mining pits . There is standing water in the underground mine workings in the creek 's vicinity . It drains a coal sheet known as Mine Sheet No. 1 . The creek once flowed over a ledge of conglomerate of the Pottsville Formation 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) upstream of its mouth . An 1887 book described this as " producing an effect especially interesting in the study of creek erosion " . 
 Black Creek accumulates drift to some degree as it flows along its course . However , due to the high speed of its waters , it does not deposit significant amounts of drift along its course . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The bedrock in the watershed of Black Creek consists of several rock formations . The oldest is the Mauch Chunk Formation of the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian eras . Younger rock formations in the watershed include the Pottsville Formation and the Llwellyn Formation , both of which date to the Pennsylvanian era . There are anthracite beds in the watershed and these beds occur within the Llwellyn Formation . The Mauch Chunk Formation was originally 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) thick in the watershed . 
 Most of the surficial geology in the watershed of Black Creek consists of bedrock . However , <unk> deposits and mining waste also occur in some areas . To the west of the Lee Shaft , there are ridges of mine waste up to 70 feet ( 21 m ) thick and there are a number of " finger @-@ shaped " ridges with a thickness of 120 feet ( 37 m ) in the West Basin . 
 There are five beds of coal that have been mined in the watershed of Black Creek : the Lower Red Ash bed , the Upper Red Ash bed , the Lower Ross bed , the Upper Ross bed , and the Baltimore Bed . The Lower Red Ash coal bed has a thickness of up to 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) at the West End Mine in the watershed and the Upper Red Ash coal is up to 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) thick . 
 The bedrock is exposed on the ridges in the Black Creek watershed . The exposure is due to <unk> deposits disappearing due to erosion and mining . There are many faults in the watershed 's rocks . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Black Creek has an area of 3 @.@ 85 square miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km2 ) . The mouth of the creek is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Shickshinny . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Nanticoke . 
 The Susquehanna River watershed is immediately north and west of the watershed of Black Creek , while the watershed of Turtle Creek is located immediately south of the watershed . The eastern edge of the watershed ( the part that was studied during the 1960s study of the watershed ) includes a barrier pillar between the West End Mine and the Glen Lyon Mine . A body of water known as Stump Lake is in the creek 's watershed . 
 As of the 1960s or early 1970s , the only human inhabitants of the watershed of Black Creek reside either in the village of Mocanaqua in the southwestern part of the watershed or the small community of Lee . The watershed can be accessed from US Route 11 , Pennsylvania Route 239 , and a local road that runs from Mocanaqua to Glen Lyon . 
 Historically , there was a swamp at the headwaters of Black Creek . As late as the 1910s , the waters of the creek were described as coming from mountain springs and a swamp . 
 = = History = = 
 Black Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . 
 Coal mining was done in the watershed of Black Creek as early as the winter of 1836 – 1837 . Several people operated in the area until 1865 , when it was leased to the E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company for 99 years . However , the mining was stopped by a strike in 1872 and for some time thereafter mining was done by several smaller companies . The mine in the watershed was run by the Delaware , Lackawanna , and Western Railroad between 1901 and 1921 . The Glen Alden Corp. then operated it until 1938 , at which point underground mining in the watershed stopped . Strip mining was already underway there and it continued until 1955 , when all mining stopped . During World War II , coal waste in the watershed was rerun through a coal processing plant to recover coal . In 1971 , the land was owned by the Blue Coal Company . A total of 22 million tons of coal have been mined in the area . 
 In the early 1900s , mine water and culm were discharged into Black Creek . 
 Between 1965 and 1967 , the Federal Water Pollution Control Administration , the United States Bureau of Mines , the United States Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife , the United States Geological Survey , and the Pennsylvania Department of Mines and Mineral Industries conducted a joint study on the watershed of Black Creek . The purpose of the study was to deal with water pollution due to acid mine drainage . Geological field work was carried out in the area between October 1965 and December 1965 . Core and rock cuttings were done between October 1966 and June 1967 . However , this study was ended before all of the necessary scientific investigations were completed . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The entire drainage basin of Black Creek is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . 
 = Slayer = 
 Slayer is an American thrash metal band from Huntington Park , California , formed in 1981 by guitarists Jeff Hanneman and Kerry King . Slayer rose to fame with its 1986 release Reign in Blood , and is credited as one of the " big four " thrash metal bands , along with Metallica , Megadeth , and Anthrax . Since its debut album in 1983 , the band has released twelve studio albums , two live albums , a box set , six music videos , two extended plays and a cover album . Four of the band 's studio albums have received gold certification in the United States . The band has received five Grammy nominations , winning one in 2007 for the song " Eyes of the Insane " , and one in 2008 for the song " Final Six " ( both from 2006 's Christ Illusion ) . Slayer has also played at several music festivals worldwide , including Unholy Alliance , Download and Ozzfest . 
 Slayer 's musical style involves fast tremolo picking , double bass drumming , riffs in irregular scales and shouted vocals . In the original line @-@ up , King , Hanneman , and lead vocalist / bassist Tom Araya contributed to the band 's lyrics , and all of the band 's music was written by King and Hanneman . The band 's lyrics and album art , which cover topics such as murder , serial killers , necrophilia , torture , genocide , human experimentation , Satanism , hate crimes , terrorism , religion , <unk> , Nazism , and warfare , have generated album bans , delays , lawsuits , and criticism from religious groups and the public . However , its music has been highly influential , often being cited by many bands as an influence musically , visually , and lyrically . Between 1991 and 2013 , the band sold 4 @.@ 9 million albums in the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1981 – 1983 ) = = = 
 Slayer was founded in 1981 , when guitarist Kerry King met drummer Dave Lombardo . Upon meeting , the two quickly discovered they had similar taste in music and in their aspirations . Kerry soon introduced guitarist Jeff Hanneman and recruited Chilean @-@ born bassist and vocalist Tom Araya , who had played with King before in the band Quits ( previously known as Tradewinds ) . The band played cover versions of Iron Maiden and Judas Priest songs at clubs and parties in Southern California . Early shows relied on a Satanic image , which featured pentagrams , make @-@ up , spikes , and inverted crosses . Rumors that the band was originally known as Dragonslayer , after the 1981 movie of the same name , were denied by King , as he stated : " We never were ; it 's a myth to this day . " 
 The band was invited to open for Bitch at the Woodstock Club in Anaheim , California , performing eight songs , six of which were covers . While playing a gig , the band was spotted by Brian Slagel , a former music journalist who had , at the time , recently founded the label Metal Blade Records . Impressed with Slayer , he met with the band backstage and asked them to record an original song , " Aggressive Perfector " , for his upcoming Metal Massacre III compilation . The band agreed and the song created underground buzz , which led to Slagel offering the band a recording contract with Metal Blade . 
 = = = Show No Mercy , Haunting the Chapel and Hell Awaits ( 1983 – 1986 ) = = = 
 Without a recording budget , the band was forced to self @-@ finance its debut album . Combining the savings of Araya , who was employed as a respiratory therapist , and money borrowed from King 's father , the band entered the studio in November 1983 . The album was rushed into release , hitting shelves three weeks after tracks were completed . Show No Mercy , released in December 1983 by Metal Blade Records , generated underground popularity for the band , and the group began its first national club tour in 1984 to promote the album traveling in Tom Araya 's Camaro towing a U @-@ Haul trailer . The tour gave the band additional popularity ; sales of Show No Mercy reached more than 20 @,@ 000 in the US and another 20 @,@ 000 worldwide . 
 In August 1984 , Slayer released a three song EP titled Haunting the Chapel . The EP featured a darker , more thrash @-@ oriented style than its predecessor , and laid the groundwork for the future direction of the band . The opening track , " Chemical Warfare " , has become a live staple , played at nearly every show since 1984 . After the release of Haunting the Chapel , Slayer made its live European debut at the Heavy Sound Festival in Belgium opening for UFO , returning to the US to begin the Haunting The West Coast tour . 
 Following the tour , King joined Dave Mustaine 's new band Megadeth . Hanneman was worried about King 's decision , stating in an interview , " I guess we 're gonna get a new guitar player . " While Mustaine wanted King to stay on a permanent basis , King left after five shows , stating Mustaine 's band was " taking too much of my time " . The split caused a rift between King and Mustaine , which evolved into a long running feud between the two bands . Following King 's return , the band embarked on the 1984 Combat Tour , with Venom and Exodus , and released a live album titled Live Undead in November . 
 Slayer released its first live home video in 1985 , dubbed Combat Tour : The Ultimate Revenge . The video featured live footage filmed at New York 's Studio 54 club , on the band 's 1984 tour with Venom and Exodus . By early 1985 , Show No Mercy had sold over 40 @,@ 000 copies , which led to the band returning to the studio to record a second full @-@ length album . Metal Blade financed a recording budget , which allowed the band to hire producer Ron Fair . 
 Released in September 1985 , Slayer 's second full @-@ length release Hell Awaits expanded on the darkness of Haunting the Chapel , with hell and Satan as common song subjects . The album was the band 's most progressive offering , featuring longer and more complex song structures . The intro of the title track is a backwards recording of a demonic @-@ sounding voice repeating " Join us " , ending with " Welcome back " before the track begins . The album was a hit , with fans choosing Slayer for best band , best live band , Hell Awaits as 1985 's best album , and Dave Lombardo as best drummer in the British magazine Metal Forces ' 1985 Readers Poll . 
 = = = Reign in Blood ( 1986 – 1987 ) = = = 
 Following the success of Hell Awaits , Slayer was offered a recording contract with Russell Simmons and Rick Rubin 's newly founded Def Jam Records , a largely hip hop @-@ based label . The band accepted and with an experienced producer and major label recording budget , the band underwent a sonic makeover resulting in shorter , faster songs with clearer production . Gone were the complex arrangements and long songs featured on Hell Awaits , ditched in favor of stripped down , hardcore punk influenced song structures . 
 Def Jam 's distributor , Columbia Records , refused to release the album Reign in Blood due to the song Angel of Death . For example , " Angel of Death " detailed Holocaust concentration camps and the human experiments conducted by Nazi physician Josef Mengele . The album was distributed by Geffen Records on October 7 , 1986 . However , due to the controversy , Reign in Blood did not appear on Geffen Records ' release schedule . Although the album received virtually no radio airplay , it became the band 's first to enter the Billboard 200 , debuting at number 94 , and the band 's first album certified gold in the United States . 
 In October 1986 , Slayer embarked on the Reign in Pain world tour , with Overkill in the US , and Malice in Europe . The band was added as the opening act on W.A.S.P. ' s US tour , but just one month in , drummer Lombardo left the band : " I wasn 't making any money . I figured if we were gonna be doing this professionally , on a major label , I wanted my rent and utilities paid . " To continue with the tour , Slayer enlisted Tony Scaglione of Whiplash . However , Lombardo was convinced by his wife to return in 1987 . At the insistence of Rubin , Slayer recorded a cover version of Iron Butterfly 's " In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida " for the film Less Than Zero . Although the band was not happy with the final product , Hanneman deeming it " a poor representation of Slayer " and King labeling it " a hunk of shit " , it was one of their first songs to garner radio airplay . 
 = = = South of Heaven and Seasons in the Abyss ( 1988 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Slayer returned to the studio to record their fourth studio album . To contrast the speed of Reign in Blood , the band consciously decided to slow down the tempos , and incorporate more melodic singing . According to Hanneman , " We knew we couldn 't top Reign in Blood , so we had to slow down . We knew whatever we did was gonna be compared to that album , and I remember we actually discussed slowing down . It was weird — we 've never done that on an album , before or since . " 
 1988 's South of Heaven received mixed responses from both fans and critics , although it was Slayer 's most commercially successful release at the time , debuting at number 57 on the Billboard 200 , and the second album to receive gold certification in the United States . Press response to the album was mixed , with AllMusic citing the album as " disturbing and powerful " , and Kim Nelly of Rolling Stone calling it " genuinely offensive satanic drivel " . King said " that album was my most lackluster performance " , although Araya called it a " late bloomer " which eventually grew on people . 
 Slayer returned to the studio with co @-@ producer Andy Wallace in 1989 , to record its fifth studio album . Following the backlash created by South of Heaven , Slayer returned to the " pounding speed of Reign in Blood , while retaining their newfound melodic sense " . Seasons in the Abyss , released on October 25 , 1990 , was the first Slayer album to be released under Rubin 's new Def American label , as he parted ways with Def Jam owner Russell Simmons over creative differences . The album debuted at number 44 on the Billboard 200 , and was certified gold in 1992 . The album spawned Slayer 's first music video , which was filmed in front of the Giza pyramids in Egypt . 
 Slayer returned as a live act in September 1990 to co @-@ headline the European Clash of the Titans tour with Megadeth , Suicidal Tendencies , and Testament . During the sold out European leg of this tour tickets fetched up to 1 @,@ 000 Deutschmark ( $ 680 USD ) on the black market . With the popularity of American thrash at its peak , the tour was extended to the US beginning in May 1991 , with Megadeth , Anthrax and opening act Alice in Chains . The band released a double live album , Decade of Aggression in 1991 , to celebrate ten years . The compilation debuted at number 55 on the Billboard 200 . 
 In May 1992 , Lombardo quit the band due to conflicts with other members , as well as his desire to be off tour for the birth of his first child . Lombardo formed his own band Grip Inc , with <unk> guitarist Waldemar <unk> , and Slayer recruited former Forbidden drummer Paul Bostaph to take his place . Slayer made its debut appearance with Bostaph at the 1992 Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington . Bostaph 's first studio effort was a medley of three Exploited songs , " War " , " UK ' 82 " , and " Disorder " , with rapper Ice @-@ T , for the Judgment Night movie soundtrack in 1993 . 
 = = = Divine Intervention and Undisputed Attitude ( 1994 – 1997 ) = = = 
 In 1994 , Slayer released Divine Intervention , the band 's first record with drummer Bostaph . The record became the band 's highest charting at that time , peaking at number 8 on the Billboard 200 , and was eventually certified gold . The album featured songs about Reinhard Heydrich , an architect of the Holocaust , and Jeffrey Dahmer , an American serial killer and sex offender . Other themes included murder , the evils of church , and the lengths to which governments will go to wield power , Araya 's interest in serial killers inspired much of the content of the lyrics . 
 Slayer geared up for a world tour in 1995 , with openers Biohazard and Machine Head . A video of concert footage , Live Intrusion was released , featuring a joint cover of Venom 's " Witching Hour " with Machine Head . Following the tour , Slayer were billed third at the 1995 Monsters of Rock festival , headlined by Metallica . In 1996 , Undisputed Attitude , an album of punk covers , was released . The band covered songs by Minor Threat , T.S.O.L. , D.R.I. , D.I. , Verbal Abuse , Dr. Know and The Stooges . The album featured three original tracks , " Gemini " , " Can 't Stand You " , " <unk> " ; the latter two were written by Hanneman in 1984 – 1985 for a side project entitled Pap Smear . Bostaph left Slayer shortly after the album 's recording to work on his own project , Truth About Seafood . With Bostaph 's departure , Slayer recruited Testament drummer Jon Dette , and headlined the 1996 Ozzfest alongside Ozzy Osbourne , Danzig , Biohazard , Sepultura , and Fear Factory . Dette was fired after a year , due to a fallout with band members ; Bostaph returned to continue the tour . 
 = = = Diabolus in Musica ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Diabolus in Musica ( Latin for " The Devil in Music " ) was released in 1998 , and debuted at number 31 on the Billboard 200 , selling over 46 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album received a mixed critical reception and was criticized for adopting characteristics of nu metal music such as tuned down guitars , murky chord structures , and churning beats . Blabbermouth.net reviewer <unk> Krgin described the album as " a feeble attempt at incorporating updated elements into the group 's sound , the presence of which elevated the band 's efforts somewhat and offered hope that Slayer could refrain from endlessly rehashing their previous material for their future output " , while Ben Ratliff of The New York Times had similar sentiments , writing on June 22 , 1998 that : " Eight of the 11 songs on Diabolus in Musica , a few of which were played at the show , are in the same gray key , and the band 's rhythmic ideas have a wearying sameness too . " 
 The album was the band 's first to primarily feature dropped tuning , as featured on the lead track , " Bitter Peace " , making use of the tritone interval referred to in the Middle Ages as the Devil 's interval . Slayer teamed up with digital hardcore group Atari Teenage Riot to record a song for the Spawn soundtrack titled " No Remorse ( I Wanna Die ) " . The band paid tribute to Black Sabbath by recording a cover of " Hand of Doom " for the second of two tribute albums , titled Nativity in Black II . A world tour followed to support the new album , with Slayer making an appearance at the United Kingdom Ozzfest 1998 alongside Black Sabbath , Ozzy Osbourne , Foo Fighters , Pantera , Soulfly , Fear Factory , and Therapy ? . 
 = = = God Hates Us All ( 2001 – 2005 ) = = = 
 After delays regarding remixing and artwork , including slip covers created to cover the original artwork as it was deemed " too graphic " , God Hates Us All was released on September 11 , 2001 . The band received its first Grammy nomination for the lead track " Disciple " , although the Grammy was awarded to Tool , for " Schism " . The September 11 attacks on America jeopardized the 2001 European tour Tattoo the Planet originally set to feature Pantera , Static @-@ X , Cradle of Filth , Biohazard and Vision of Disorder . The dates in the United Kingdom were postponed due to flight restrictions , with a majority of bands deciding to withdraw , leaving Slayer and Cradle of Filth remaining for the European leg of the tour . 
 Pantera , Static @-@ X , Vision of Disorder and Biohazard were replaced by other bands depending on location ; <unk> , In Flames , Moonspell , Children of Bodom , and <unk> . Biohazard eventually decided to rejoin the tour later on , and booked new gigs in the countries where they missed a few dates . Drummer Bostaph left Slayer before Christmas in 2001 , due to a chronic elbow injury which would hinder his ability to play . Slayer 's " God Hates Us All " tour was unfinished so King contacted original drummer Lombardo , and asked if he would like to finish the remainder of the tour . Lombardo accepted the offer , and stayed as a permanent member . 
 Slayer toured playing Reign in Blood in its entirety throughout the fall of 2003 , under the tour banner " Still Reigning " . Their playing of the final song " Raining Blood " culminated with the band drenched in a rain of stage blood . Live footage of this was recorded at the Augusta Civic Center in Augusta , Maine , on July 11 , 2004 and released on the 2004 DVD Still Reigning . The band also released War at the Warfield and a box set , Soundtrack to the Apocalypse featuring rarities , live CD and DVD performances and various Slayer merchandise . From 2002 to 2004 the band performed over 250 tour dates , headlining major music festivals including <unk> , Summer tour , Ozzfest 2004 and a European tour with Slipknot . While preparing for the Download Festival in England , Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich was rushed to a hospital with a mysterious illness , and was unable to perform . Metallica vocalist James Hetfield searched for volunteers at the last minute to replace Ulrich ; Lombardo and Slipknot drummer Joey Jordison volunteered , with Lombardo performing the songs " Battery " and " The Four Horsemen " . 
 = = = Christ Illusion ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 The album Christ Illusion was originally scheduled for release on June 6 , 2006 , and would be the first album with original drummer Lombardo since 1990 's Seasons in the Abyss . However , the band decided to delay the release of the record as they did not want to be among the many , according to King , " half @-@ ass , stupid fucking loser bands " releasing records on June 6 , although USA Today reported the idea was thwarted because the band failed to secure sufficient studio recording time . Slayer released Eternal Pyre on June 6 as a limited @-@ edition EP . Eternal Pyre featured the song " Cult " , a live performance of " War Ensemble " in Germany and video footage of the band recording " Cult " . Five thousand copies were released and sold exclusively through Hot Topic chain stores , and sold out within hours of release . On June 30 , Nuclear Blast Records released a 7 " vinyl picture disc version limited to a thousand copies . 
 Christ Illusion was released on August 8 , 2006 , and debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200 , selling over 62 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album became Slayer 's highest charting , improving on its previous highest charting album , Divine Intervention , which had debuted at number 8 . However , despite its high positioning , the album dropped to number 44 in the following week . Three weeks after the album 's release Slayer were inducted into the Kerrang ! Hall of Fame for their influence to the heavy metal scene . 
 A worldwide tour dubbed The Unholy Alliance Tour , was undertaken to support the new record . The tour was originally set to launch on June 6 , but was postponed to June 10 , as Araya had to undergo gall bladder surgery . In Flames , Mastodon , Children of Bodom , Lamb of God , and Thine Eyes Bleed ( featuring Araya 's brother , Johnny ) and Ted Maul ( London Hammersmith Apollo ) were supporting Slayer . The tour made its way through America and Europe and the bands who participated , apart from Thine Eyes Bleed , reunited to perform at Japan 's <unk> Festival on October 15 , 2006 . 
 The video for the album 's first single , " Eyes of the Insane " , was released on October 30 , 2006 . The track was featured on the Saw III soundtrack , and won a Grammy @-@ award for " Best Metal Performance " at the 49th Grammy Awards , although the band were unable to attend due to touring obligations . A week later , the band visited the 52nd Services Squadron located on the Spangdahlem U.S. Air Force Base in Germany to meet and play a show . This was the first visit ever to a military base for the band . The band made its first network TV appearance on the show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on January 19 , playing the song " Eyes of the Insane " , and four additional songs for fans after the show ( although footage from " Jihad " was cut due to its controversial lyrical themes ) . 
 Slayer toured Australia and New Zealand in April with Mastodon , and appeared at the Download Festival , Rock Am Ring , and a Summer tour with Marilyn Manson and Bleeding Through . The band released a special edition of Christ Illusion , which featured new cover art and bonus track , " Final Six " , which was given a Grammy Award for " Best Metal Performance " . This is the band 's second consecutive award in that category . 
 = = = World Painted Blood ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = 
 In 2008 , Araya stated uncertainty about the future of the band , and that he could not see himself continuing the career at a later age . He said once the band finished its upcoming album , which was the final record in their contract , the band would sit down and discuss its future . King was optimistic that the band would produce at least another two albums before considering a split : " We 're talking of going in the studio next February [ 2009 ] and getting the next record out so if we do things in a timely manner I don 't see there 's any reason why we can 't have more than one album out . " Slayer , along with Trivium , Mastodon , and Amon Amarth teamed up for a European tour titled ' The Unholy Alliance : Chapter III ' , throughout October and November 2008 . Slayer headlined the second Mayhem Festival in the summer of 2009 . Slayer along with Megadeth also co @-@ headlined Canadian Carnage , the first time they performed together in more than 15 years when they co @-@ headlined four shows in Canada in late June 2009 with openers Machine Head and Suicide Silence . 
 The band 's tenth studio album , World Painted Blood , was released through American Recordings . It was available on November 3 in North America and November 2 for the rest of the world . The band stated that the album takes elements of all their previous works including Seasons in the Abyss , South of Heaven , and Reign in Blood . Slayer , along with Metallica , Megadeth , and Anthrax performed on the same bill for the first time on June 16 , 2010 at <unk> Airport , near Warsaw , Poland . One of the following Big 4 performances in ( Sofia , Bulgaria , June 22 , 2010 ) was sent via satellite in HD to cinemas . They also went on to play several other dates as part of the Sonisphere Festival . Megadeth and Slayer joined forces once again for the American Carnage Tour from July to October 2010 with opening acts Anthrax and Testament , and European Carnage Tour in March and April 2011 . The " Big Four " played more dates at Sonisphere in England and France for the first time ever . Slayer returned to Australia in February and March 2011 as part of the Soundwave Festival and also played in California with the other members of the " Big Four " . 
 In early 2011 , Hanneman contracted necrotizing fasciitis . According to the band , doctors say that it likely originated from a spider bite . Araya said of Hanneman 's condition : " Jeff was seriously ill . Jeff ended up contracting a bacteria that ate away his flesh on his arm , so they cut open his arm , from his wrist to his shoulder , and they did a skin graft on him , they cleaned up ... It was a flesh @-@ eating virus , so he was really , really bad . So we 'll wait for him to get better , and when he 's a hundred percent , he 's gonna come out and join us . " The band decided to play their upcoming tour dates without Hanneman . Gary Holt of Exodus was announced as Hanneman 's temporary replacement . Cannibal Corpse guitarist Pat O 'Brien filled in for Holt during a tour in Europe . On April 23 , 2011 , at the American Big 4 show , Hanneman rejoined his bandmates to play the final two songs of their set , " South of Heaven " and " Angel of Death " . This was Hanneman 's final live performance with the band . 
 = = = Death of Jeff Hanneman and Repentless ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 When asked if Slayer would make another album , Lombardo replied " Yes absolutely ; Although there 's nothing written , there are definitely plans . " However , Araya said Slayer would not begin writing a new album until Hanneman 's condition improved . To celebrate the 25th anniversary of Reign In Blood , the band performed the album at the All Tomorrow 's Parties festival at Alexandra Palace , London . 
 In November 2011 , Lombardo posted a tweet that the band had started to write new music . This presumably meant that Hanneman 's condition improved and it was believed he was ready to enter the studio . King had worked with Lombardo that year and they completed three songs . The band planned on entering the studio in either March or April 2012 and were hoping to have the album recorded before the group 's US tour in late May and release it by the summer of that year . However , King said the upcoming album would not be finished until September and October of that year , making a 2013 release likely . In July 2012 , Kerry King revealed two song titles for the upcoming album , " Chasing Death " and " Implode " . 
 In February 2013 , Lombardo was fired right before Slayer was to play at Australia 's Soundwave festival due to an argument with band members over a pay dispute . Slayer and American Records released a statement , saying " Mr. Lombardo came to the band less than a week before their scheduled departure for Australia to present an entirely new set of terms for his engagement that were contrary to those that had been previously agreed upon " , although Lombardo claimed there was a gag order in place . Jon Dette returned to fill in for Lombardo for the Soundwave dates . It was confirmed that Lombardo was officially out of Slayer for the third time when in May , Paul Bostaph rejoined the band . 
 On May 2 , 2013 , guitarist Jeff Hanneman died of liver failure in a local hospital near his home in Southern California 's Inland Empire ; the cause of death was later determined to be alcohol @-@ related cirrhosis . King confirmed the band will continue , saying " Jeff is going to be in everybody 's thoughts for a long time . It 's unfortunate you can 't keep unfortunate things from happening . But we 're going to carry on – and he 'll be there in spirit . " However , Araya has been more uncertain about the band 's future , expressing his belief that " After 30 years [ with Hanneman active in the band ] , it would literally be like starting over " , and doubting that Slayer 's fanbase would approve such a change . Despite the uncertainty regarding the band 's future , Slayer still worked on a followup to World Painted Blood . Additionally , it was reported that the new album would still feature material written by Hanneman . 
 At the 2014 Revolver 's Golden Gods Awards ceremony , Slayer debuted " Implode " , its first new song in five years . The group announced that they have signed to Nuclear Blast , and will release a new album in 2015 . It was reported that Holt would take over Hanneman 's guitar duties , although Holt did not participate in the song @-@ writing . In February , Slayer announced a seventeen date American tour to start in June featuring Suicidal Tendencies and Exodus . In 2015 , Slayer headlined the Rockstar Energy Mayhem Festival for the second time . Repentless , the band 's twelfth studio album , was released on September 11 , 2015 . In support of Repentless , Slayer toured Europe with Anthrax and <unk> in October and November 2015 , and toured the United States with Testament and Carcass in February and March 2016 . 
 = = Writing and style = = 
 Slayer 's early works were praised for their " breakneck speed and instrumental prowess , " combining the structure of hardcore punk tempos and speed metal . The band released fast , aggressive material . The album Reign in Blood is the band 's fastest , performed at an average of 220 beats per minute ; the album Diabolus in Musica was the band 's first to feature C ♯ tuning ; God Hates Us All was the first to feature drop B tuning and seven @-@ string guitars tuned to B ♭ . AllMusic cited the album as " abandoning the extravagances and accessibility of their late- ' 80s / early- ' 90s work and returning to perfect the raw approach , " with some fans labeling it as nu metal . 
 Hanneman and King 's dual guitar solos have been referred to as " wildly chaotic " , and " twisted genius " . Original drummer Lombardo would use two bass drums ( instead of a double pedal , which is used on a single bass drum ) . Lombardo 's speed and aggression earned him the title of the " godfather of double bass " by <unk> . Lombardo stated his reasons for using two bass drums : " When you hit the bass drum , the head is still resonating . When you hit it in the same place right after that , you kinda get a ' <unk> ' from the bass drum head hitting the other pedal . You 're not letting them breathe . " When playing the two bass drums , Lombardo would use the " heel @-@ up " technique . 
 In the original line @-@ up , Hanneman , King and Araya contributed to the band 's lyrics , and King and Hanneman wrote the music with additional arrangement from Lombardo , and sometimes Araya . Lombardo has never received any writing credits in Slayer 's history . Araya formed a lyric writing partnership with Hanneman , which sometimes overshadowed the creative input of King . Hanneman stated that writing lyrics and music was a " free @-@ for @-@ all " : " It 's all just whoever comes up with what . Sometimes I 'll be more on a roll and I 'll have more stuff , same with Kerry – it 's whoever 's hot , really . Anybody can write anything ; if it 's good , we use it ; if not , we don 't . " 
 When writing material , the band would write the music first before incorporating lyrics . King or Hanneman used a 24 @-@ track and drum machine to show band members the riff that they created , and to get their opinion . Either King , Hanneman or Lombardo would mention if any alterations could be made . The band played the riff to get the basic song structure , and figured out where the lyrics and solos would be placed . Hanneman , King and Araya tended to have different lyrical influences . Hanneman 's lyrics dealt with Nazis , religion , warfare and similar topics ; King 's lyrics are generally anti @-@ religious ; Araya 's lyrics usually dealt with topics that could be considered less controversial than Hanneman 's and King 's , such as serial killers and warfare . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Slayer is one of the most influential bands in heavy metal history . Steve Huey of AllMusic believes the musical style of Slayer makes the band stronger than the other members of the " Big Four " thrash metal bands Metallica , Megadeth and Anthrax , all of which rose to fame during the 1980s . Slayer 's " downtuned rhythms , infectious guitar licks , graphically violent lyrics and grisly artwork set the standard for dozens of emerging thrash bands " and their " music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal " states MTV , ranking Slayer as the sixth " greatest metal band of all time " , ranking number 50 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock . Hanneman and King ranked number 10 in Guitar World 's " 100 greatest metal guitarists of all time " in 2004 , and were voted " Best Guitarist / Guitar Team " in Revolver 's reader 's poll . Original drummer Lombardo was also voted " Best Drummer " and the band entered the top five in the categories " Best Band Ever " , " Best Live Band " , " Album of the Year " ( for Christ Illusion ) , and " Band of the Year " . 
 Music author Joel McIver considers Slayer very influential in the extreme metal scene , especially in the development of the death and black metal subgenres . According to John <unk> of Terrorizer , without " Slayer 's influence , extreme metal as we know it wouldn 't exist " . Kam Lee of Massacre and former member of Death stated : " there wouldn 't be Death Metal or Black Metal or even extreme Metal the likes of what it is today if not for Slayer " . Johan <unk> of Andromeda said that Slayer " were crucial in the development of Thrash Metal which then became the foundation for a lot of different subgenres . They inspired generations of Metal bands " . Alex Skolnick of Testament declared : " Before Slayer , metal had never had such razor @-@ sharp articulation , tightness , and balance between sound and stops . This all @-@ out sonic assault was about the shock , the screams , the drums , and [ ... ] most importantly the riffs " . 
 Groups who cited Slayer among their major influences include Bullet for My Valentine , Slipknot , Gojira , Hatebreed Cannibal Corpse , Pantera , Kreator , Mayhem , Darkthrone , System of a Down , Lamb of God , Behemoth , Evile and Lacuna Coil . Steve <unk> , drummer for Deicide , declared that " there obviously would not have been a Deicide as we know it without the existence of Slayer " . Sepultura guitarist Andreas Kisser affirmed that " without Slayer , Sepultura would never be possible " . Weezer mentions them in the song " Heart Songs " from their 2008 self @-@ titled " Red " album . The verse goes : " Iron Maiden , Judas Priest , and Slayer taught me how to shred ... " Dave Grohl recalled , " Me and my friends , we just wanted to listen to fucking Slayer and take acid and smash stuff . " 
 The band 's 1986 release Reign in Blood has been an influence to extreme and thrash metal bands since its release and is considered the record which set the bar for death metal . It had a significant influence on the genre leaders such as Death , Obituary , Cannibal Corpse , Morbid Angel and Napalm Death . The album was hailed the " heaviest album of all time " by Kerrang ! Magazine , a " genre @-@ <unk> " by Stylus magazine , and a " stone @-@ cold classic upon its release " by AllMusic . In 2006 it was named the best metal album of the last 20 years by Metal Hammer . According to Nielsen SoundScan , Slayer sold 4 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 copies in the United States from 1991 to 2013 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 A lawsuit was brought against the band in 1996 , by the parents of Elyse Pahler , who accused the band of encouraging their daughter 's murderers through their lyrics . Pahler was drugged , strangled , stabbed , trampled on , and raped as a sacrifice to the devil by three fans of the band . The case was unsealed by the court on May 19 , 2000 , stating Slayer and related business markets distribute harmful products to teens , encouraging violent acts through their lyrics , and " none of the vicious crimes committed against Elyse Marie Pahler would have occurred without the intentional marketing strategy of the death @-@ metal band Slayer " . The lawsuit was dismissed in 2001 , for multiple reasons including " principles of free speech , lack of a duty and lack of foreseeability " . A second lawsuit was filed by the parents , an amended complaint for damages against Slayer , their label , and other industry and label entities . The lawsuit was again dismissed . Judge E. Jeffrey Burke stated , " I do not consider Slayer 's music obscene , indecent or harmful to minors . " 
 Slayer has been accused of holding Nazi sympathies , due to the band 's eagle logo bearing resemblance to the Eagle atop swastika and the lyrics of " Angel of Death " . " Angel of Death " was inspired by the acts of Josef Mengele , the doctor who conducted human experiments on prisoners during World War II at the Auschwitz concentration camp , and was dubbed the " Angel of Death " by inmates . Throughout their career , the band members were asked about these accusations , and have stated numerous times they do not condone Nazism and are merely interested in the subject . 
 Slayer 's cover of Minor Threat 's " Guilty of Being White " raised questions about a possible message of white supremacy in the band 's music . The controversy surrounding the cover involved the changing of the refrain " guilty of being white " to " guilty of being right " , at the song 's ending . This incensed Minor Threat frontman Ian MacKaye , who stated " that is so offensive to me . " King said it was changed for " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " humor as he thought the allegation of racism at the time was " ridiculous " . 
 In a 2004 interview with Araya , when asked , " Did critics realize you were wallowing in parody ? " , Araya replied , " No . People thought we were serious ! ... back then you had that PMRC , who literally took everything to heart , when in actuality you 're trying to create an image . You 're trying to scare people on purpose . " Araya also denied rumors that Slayer members are Satanists , but they find the subject of Satanism interesting and " we are all on this planet to learn and experience . " 
 The song " Jihad " of the album Christ Illusion sparked controversy among families of the September 11 victims . The song deals with the attack from the perspective of a religious terrorist . The band stated the song is spoken through perspective without being sympathetic to the cause , and supports neither side . 
 Seventeen bus benches promoting the same album in Fullerton , California were deemed offensive by city officials . City officials contacted the band 's record label and demanded that the ads be removed . All benches were eliminated . 
 In India , Christ Illusion was recalled by EMI India after protests with Christian religious groups due to the nature of the graphic artwork . The album cover was designed by Slayer 's longtime collaborator Larry Carroll and features Christ in a " sea of despair " , with amputated arms , missing an eye , while standing in a sea of blood with severed heads . Joseph Dias of the Mumbai Christian group Catholic Secular Forum in India took " strong exception " to the original album artwork , and issued a memorandum to Mumbai 's police commissioner in protest . On October 11 , 2006 , EMI announced that all stocks had been destroyed , noting it had no plans to re @-@ release the record in India in the future . However , the album has since been imported and made available in India . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Show No Mercy ( 1983 ) 
 Hell Awaits ( 1985 ) 
 Reign in Blood ( 1986 ) 
 South of Heaven ( 1988 ) 
 Seasons in the Abyss ( 1990 ) 
 Divine Intervention ( 1994 ) 
 Undisputed Attitude ( 1996 ) 
 Diabolus in Musica ( 1998 ) 
 God Hates Us All ( 2001 ) 
 Christ Illusion ( 2006 ) 
 World Painted Blood ( 2009 ) 
 Repentless ( 2015 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = = = Kerrang ! Awards = = = 
 = = = Metal Edge Readers ' Choice Awards = = = 
 = = = Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards = = = 
 = Durian = 
 The durian ( / <unk> / ) is the fruit of several tree species belonging to the genus Durio . The name " durian " is derived from the Malay @-@ Indonesian languages word for <unk> or " spike " , a reference to the numerous spike protuberances of the fruit , together with the noun @-@ building suffix -an . There are 30 recognised Durio species , at least nine of which produce edible fruit , and over 300 named varieties in Thailand . Durio zibethinus is the only species available in the international market : other species are sold only in their local regions . There are hundreds of durian cultivars ; many consumers express preferences for specific cultivars , which fetch higher prices in the market . 
 Regarded by many people in southeast Asia as the " king of fruits " , the durian is distinctive for its large size , strong odour , and formidable thorn @-@ covered husk . The fruit can grow as large as 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) long and 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) in diameter , and it typically weighs one to three kilograms ( 2 to 7 lb ) . Its shape ranges from oblong to round , the colour of its husk green to brown , and its flesh pale yellow to red , depending on the species . 
 The edible flesh emits a distinctive odour that is strong and penetrating even when the husk is intact . Some people regard the durian as having a pleasantly sweet fragrance ; others find the aroma overpowering and revolting . The smell evokes reactions from deep appreciation to intense disgust , and has been described variously as rotten onions , turpentine , and raw sewage . The persistence of its odour , which may linger for several days , has led to the fruit 's banishment from certain hotels and public transportation in Southeast Asia . 
 The durian , native to Southeast Asia , has been known to the Western world for about 600 years . The nineteenth @-@ century British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace described its flesh as " a rich custard highly flavoured with almonds " . The flesh can be consumed at various stages of ripeness , and it is used to flavour a wide variety of savoury and sweet edibles in Southeast Asian cuisines . The seeds can also be eaten when cooked . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Durio sensu lato has 30 recognised species . Durio sensu stricto comprises 24 of these species . The 6 species included in Durio s.l. are now considered by some to comprise their own genus , Boschia . Durio s.s. and Boschia have indistinguishable vegetative characteristics and many shared floral characteristics . The crucial difference between the two is that anther locules open by apical pores in Boschia and by longitudinal slits in Durio s.s. These two genera form a clade that is sister to another genus in the tribe Durioneae , <unk> . These three genera together form a clade that is characterized by highly modified ( mono- and <unk> , as opposed to <unk> ) anthers . 
 The genus Durio is placed by some taxonomists in the family Bombacaceae , or by others in a broadly defined Malvaceae that includes Bombacaceae , and by others in a smaller family of just seven genera <unk> . 
 Durio is often included in Bombacaceae because of the presence of monothecate anthers , as opposed to the <unk> anthers common to the rest of the mallows ( and angiosperms , in general ) . However , the first studies to examine mallow phylogeny using molecular data found that the tribe Durioneae should actually be placed in the subfamily <unk> of an expanded Malvaceae . The authors of these studies hypothesize that monothecate anthers have most likely evolved convergently in Durioneae and in the <unk> clade ( comprising Malvaceae s.l. subfamilies <unk> and <unk> ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Durian trees are large , growing to 25 – 50 metres ( 80 – 164 ft ) in height depending on the species . The leaves are evergreen , elliptic to oblong and 10 – 18 centimetres ( 4 – 7 in ) long . The flowers are produced in three to thirty clusters together on large branches and directly on the trunk with each flower having a calyx ( sepals ) and five ( rarely four or six ) petals . Durian trees have one or two flowering and fruiting periods per year , although the timing varies depending on the species , cultivars , and localities . A typical durian tree can bear fruit after four or five years . The durian fruit can hang from any branch and matures roughly three months after pollination . The fruit can grow up to 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) long and 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) in diameter , and typically weighs one to three kilograms ( 2 to 7 lb ) . Its shape ranges from oblong to round , the colour of its husk green to brown , and its flesh pale @-@ yellow to red , depending on the species . Among the thirty known species of Durio , nine of them have been identified as producing edible fruits : D. zibethinus , D. dulcis , D. <unk> , D. graveolens , D. kutejensis , D. macrantha , D. oxleyanus , and D. testudinarum . There are many species for which the fruit has never been collected or properly examined , however , so other species with edible fruit may exist . The durian is somewhat similar in appearance to the jackfruit , an unrelated species . 
 The name durian comes from the Malay word <unk> ( thorn ) together with the suffix -an ( for building a noun in Malay ) . D. zibethinus is the only species commercially cultivated on a large scale and available outside of its native region . Since this species is open @-@ pollinated , it shows considerable diversity in fruit colour and odour , size of flesh and seed , and tree phenology . In the species name , zibethinus refers to the Indian civet , Viverra <unk> . There is disagreement regarding whether this name , bestowed by Linnaeus , refers to civets being so fond of the durian that the fruit was used as bait to entrap them , or to the durian smelling like the civet . 
 Durian flowers are large and feathery with copious nectar , and give off a heavy , sour , and buttery odour . These features are typical of flowers pollinated by certain species of bats that eat nectar and pollen . According to research conducted in Malaysia in the 1970s , durians were pollinated almost exclusively by cave fruit bats ( <unk> spelaea ) ; however , a 1996 study indicated two species , D. <unk> and D. oblongus , were pollinated by <unk> ( <unk> ) and another species , D. kutejensis , was pollinated by giant honey bees and birds as well as bats . 
 Some scientists have hypothesized that the development of monothecate anthers and larger flowers ( compared to those of the remaining genera in Durioneae ) in the clade consisting of Durio , Boschia , and <unk> was in conjunction with a transition from beetle pollination to vertebrate pollination . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 Over the centuries , numerous durian cultivars , propagated by vegetative clones , have arisen in southeast Asia . They used to be grown with mixed results from seeds of trees bearing superior quality fruit , but now are propagated by layering , <unk> , or more commonly , by grafting , including bud , veneer , wedge , whip or U @-@ grafting onto seedlings of randomly selected rootstocks . Different cultivars may be distinguished to some extent by variations in the fruit shape , such as the shape of the spines . Durian consumers express preferences for specific cultivars , which fetch higher prices in the market . 
 Most cultivars have a common name and a code number starting with " D " . For example , some popular clones are Kop ( <unk> Thai : <unk> – " frog " [ <unk> ] ) , Chanee ( <unk> , Thai : <unk> – gibbon [ <unk> ] ) , <unk> or Green Durian or Tuan Mek Hijau ( <unk> Thai : <unk> – Green Durian [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , Kan Yao ( <unk> , Thai : <unk> ้ <unk> – Long Stem [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , Mon Thong ( <unk> , Thai : <unk> – Golden Pillow [ mɔ ̌ <unk> <unk> ] ) , <unk> Thong ( Thai : <unk> – Golden Button [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , and with no common name , D24 and <unk> . Each cultivar has a distinct taste and odour . More than 200 cultivars of D. zibethinus exist in Thailand . 
 Mon thong is the most commercially sought after for its thick , full @-@ bodied creamy and mild sweet tasting flesh with relatively moderate smell emitted and smaller seeds , while Chanee is the best in terms of its resistance to infection by Phytophthora <unk> . Kan Yao is somewhat less common , but prized for its longer window of time when it is both sweet and odorless at the same time . Among all the cultivars in Thailand , five are currently in large @-@ scale commercial cultivation : Chanee , Mon Thong , Kan Yao , <unk> , and <unk> . There are more than 100 registered cultivars since 1920 's in Malaysia and up to 193 cultivar by 1992 , and many superior cultivars have been identified through competitions held at the annual Malaysian Agriculture , Horticulture , and <unk> Show . In Vietnam , the same process has been achieved through competitions held by the Southern Fruit Research Institute . A recently popular variety is , Cat Mountain King or Musang King . 
 By 2007 , <unk> <unk> , a Thai government scientist , had crossbred more than ninety varieties of durian to create Chantaburi No. 1 , a cultivar without the characteristic odour . Another hybrid , Chantaburi No. 3 , develops the odour about three days after the fruit is picked , which enables an odourless transport yet satisfies consumers who prefer the pungent odour . On 22 May 2012 , two other cultivars from Thailand that also lack the usual odour , Long Laplae and Lin Laplae , were presented to the public by <unk> <unk> , governor of <unk> province from where these cultivars were developed locally , while he announced the dates for the yearly durian fair of Laplae District , and the name giver to both cultivars . 
 Popular cultivars in Malaysia and Singapore ( Singapore imports most of its durians from Malaysia hence the varieties are similar although there may be slight variation in the names ) include " D24 " which is a popular variety known for its bitter sweet taste ; " XO " which has a pale color , thick flesh with a tinge of alcoholic fermentation ; " <unk> Kiok " ( Cantonese meaning : bamboo leg ) which has a distinctive yellowish core in the inner stem and " Musang King " ( Musang is the Malay word for civet cat ) which is usually the <unk> of all cultivars . Musang King is known for its bright yellow flesh and is almost like a more potent or enhanced version of the D24 . This particular variety should be consumed last since it tends to make other durians taste bland in comparison . 
 = = Cultivation and availability = = 
 The durian is native to Brunei , Indonesia and Malaysia . There is some debate as to whether the durian is native to the Philippines , particularly the Davao region in the island of Mindanao , or was introduced . The durian is grown in other areas with a similar climate ; it is strictly tropical and stops growing when mean daily temperatures drop below 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) . 
 The centre of ecological diversity for durians is the island of Borneo , where the fruit of the edible species of Durio including D. zibethinus , D. dulcis , D. graveolens , D. kutejensis , D. oxleyanus and D. testudinarum is sold in local markets . In Brunei , D. zibethinus is not grown because consumers prefer other species such as D. graveolens , D. kutejensis and D. oxleyanus . These species are commonly distributed in Brunei , and together with other species like D. testudinarum and D. dulcis , represent rich genetic diversity . 
 Although the durian is not native to Thailand , the country is currently one of the major exporters of durians , growing 781 @,@ 000 tonnes of the world 's total harvest of 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 tonnes in 1999 , 111 @,@ 000 tonnes of which it exported to Taiwan , Hong Kong , Malaysia , Singapore and Canada . Malaysia and Indonesia follow , both producing about 265 @,@ 000 tonnes each . Of this , Malaysia exported 35 @,@ 000 tonnes in 1999 . Chantaburi in Thailand each year holds the World Durian Festival in early May . This single province is responsible for half of the durian production of Thailand . In the Philippines , the centre of durian production is the Davao Region . The <unk> Festival is an annual celebration featuring the durian in Davao City . Other places where durian farms are located include Cambodia , Laos , Vietnam , Myanmar , Sri Lanka , India , the West Indies , Florida , Hawaii , Papua New Guinea , the Polynesian Islands , Madagascar , southern China ( Hainan Island ) , northern Australia , and Singapore . 
 Durian was introduced into Australia in the early 1960s and clonal material was first introduced in 1975 . Over thirty clones of D. zibethinus and six Durio species have been subsequently introduced into Australia . China is the major importer , purchasing 65 @,@ 000 tonnes in 1999 , followed by Singapore with 40 @,@ 000 tonnes and Taiwan with 5 @,@ 000 tonnes . In the same year , the United States imported 2 @,@ 000 tonnes , mostly frozen , and the European Community imported 500 tonnes . 
 The durian is a seasonal fruit , unlike some other non @-@ seasonal tropical fruits such as the papaya , which are available throughout the year . In Peninsular Malaysia and Singapore , the season for durians is typically from June to August , which coincides with that of the mangosteen . Prices of durians are relatively high as compared with other fruits . For example , in Singapore , the strong demand for high quality cultivars such as the D24 ( Sultan ) , and Musang King ( Mao Shan Wang ) has resulted in typical retail prices of between S $ 8 to S $ 15 ( US $ 5 to US $ 10 ) per kilogram of whole fruit . With an average weight of about 1 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) , a durian fruit would therefore cost about S $ 12 to S $ 22 ( US $ 8 to US $ 15 ) . The edible portion of the fruit , known as the aril and usually referred to as the " flesh " or " pulp " , only accounts for about 15 – 30 % of the mass of the entire fruit . Many consumers in Singapore are nevertheless quite willing to spend up to around S $ 75 ( US $ 50 ) on a single purchase of about half a dozen of the favoured fruit to be shared by family members . 
 In @-@ season durians can be found in mainstream Japanese supermarkets , while in the West they are sold mainly by Asian markets . 
 = = Flavour and odour = = 
 The unusual flavour and odour of the fruit have prompted many people to express diverse and passionate views ranging from deep appreciation to intense disgust . Writing in 1856 , the British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace provided a much @-@ quoted description of the flavour of the durian : 
 The five cells are silky @-@ white within , and are filled with a mass of firm , cream @-@ coloured pulp , containing about three seeds each . This pulp is the edible part , and its <unk> and flavour are indescribable . A rich custard highly flavoured with almonds gives the best general idea of it , but there are occasional wafts of flavour that call to mind cream @-@ cheese , onion @-@ sauce , sherry @-@ wine , and other incongruous dishes . Then there is a rich glutinous smoothness in the pulp which nothing else possesses , but which adds to its delicacy . It is neither acidic nor sweet nor juicy ; yet it wants neither of these qualities , for it is in itself perfect . It produces no nausea or other bad effect , and the more you eat of it the less you feel inclined to stop . In fact , to eat <unk> is a new sensation worth a voyage to the East to experience . ... as producing a food of the most exquisite flavour it is unsurpassed . 
 Wallace described himself as being at first reluctant to try it because of the aroma , " but in Borneo I found a ripe fruit on the ground , and , eating it out of doors , I at once became a confirmed Durian eater . " He cited one traveller from 1599 : " it is of such an excellent taste that it surpasses in flavour all other fruits of the world , according to those who have tasted it . " He cites another writer : " To those not used to it , it seems at first to smell like rotten onions , but immediately after they have tasted it they prefer it to all other food . The natives give it honourable titles , exalt it , and make verses on it . " Despite having tried many foods that are arguably more eccentric , Andrew Zimmern , host of Bizarre Foods , was unable to finish a durian upon sampling it , due to his intolerance of its strong taste . 
 While Wallace cautions that " the smell of the ripe fruit is certainly at first disagreeable " , later descriptions by westerners are more graphic . Novelist Anthony Burgess writes that eating durian is " like eating sweet raspberry <unk> in the lavatory " . Chef Andrew Zimmern compares the taste to " completely rotten , mushy onions " . Anthony Bourdain , a lover of durian , relates his encounter with the fruit thus : " Its taste can only be described as ... indescribable , something you will either love or despise . ... Your breath will smell as if you 'd been French @-@ kissing your dead grandmother . " Likewise , fellow chef Jamie Oliver has also expressed admiration for the fruit on his first sampling . Travel and food writer Richard Sterling says : 
 ... its odor is best described as pig @-@ shit , turpentine and onions , garnished with a gym sock . It can be smelled from yards away . Despite its great local popularity , the raw fruit is forbidden from some establishments such as hotels , subways and airports , including public transportation in Southeast Asia . 
 Other comparisons have been made with the civet , sewage , stale vomit , skunk spray and used surgical swabs . The wide range of descriptions for the odour of durian may have a great deal to do with the variability of durian odour itself . <unk> from different species or clones can have significantly different aromas ; for example , red durian ( D. dulcis ) has a deep caramel flavour with a turpentine odour while red @-@ fleshed durian ( D. graveolens ) emits a fragrance of roasted almonds . Among the varieties of D. zibethinus , Thai varieties are sweeter in flavour and less odorous than Malay ones . The degree of ripeness has an effect on the flavour as well . Three scientific analyses of the composition of durian aroma – from 1972 , 1980 , and 1995 – each found a mix of volatile compounds including esters , ketones , and different sulphur compounds , with no agreement on which may be primarily responsible for the distinctive odour . People in South East Asia with frequent exposures to durian are able to easily distinguish its sweet @-@ like ketones and esters scent from rotten or <unk> odours which are from volatile amines and fatty acids . Developmental or genetic differences in olfactory perception and mapping within the brain ( for e.g. anterior piriform cortex to the orbitofrontal cortex ) could possibly explain why some individuals are unable to differentiate these smells and find this fruit noxious whereas others find it extremely pleasant and appealing . 
 This strong odour can be detected half a mile away by animals , thus luring them . In addition , the fruit is extremely appetising to a variety of animals , including squirrels , mouse deer , pigs , orangutan , elephants , and even carnivorous tigers . While some of these animals eat the fruit and dispose of the seed under the parent plant , others swallow the seed with the fruit and then transport it some distance before excreting , with the seed being dispersed as a result . The thorny , armoured covering of the fruit discourages smaller animals ; larger animals are more likely to transport the seeds far from the parent tree . 
 = = = Ripeness and selection = = = 
 According to Larousse Gastronomique , the durian fruit is ready to eat when its husk begins to crack . However , the ideal stage of ripeness to be enjoyed varies from region to region in Southeast Asia and by species . Some species grow so tall that they can only be collected once they have fallen to the ground , whereas most cultivars of D. zibethinus are nearly always cut from the tree and allowed to ripen while waiting to be sold . Some people in southern Thailand prefer their durians relatively young when the clusters of fruit within the shell are still crisp in texture and mild in flavour . For some people in northern Thailand , the preference is for the fruit to be soft and aromatic . In Malaysia and Singapore , most consumers prefer the fruit to be as ripe and pungent in aroma as possible and may even risk allowing the fruit to continue ripening after its husk has already cracked open . In this state , the flesh becomes richly creamy , slightly alcoholic , the aroma pronounced and the flavour highly complex . 
 The various preferences regarding ripeness among consumers make it hard to issue general statements about choosing a " good " durian . A durian that falls off the tree continues to ripen for two to four days , but after five or six days most would consider it overripe and unpalatable , although some Thais proceed from that point to cook it with palm sugar , thus creating a dessert called Durian Guan . The usual advice for a durian consumer choosing a whole fruit in the market is to examine the quality of the stem or stalk which loses moisture as it ages : a big , solid stem is a sign of freshness . Reportedly , unscrupulous merchants wrap , paint , or remove the stalks altogether . Due to the popularity of Kan Yao , street vendors may sometimes sell a lesser variety with a long stem to unsuspecting customers . Another frequent piece of advice is to shake the fruit and listen for the sound of the seeds moving within , indicating the durian is very ripe and the pulp has dried out a bit . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Culinary = = = 
 Durian fruit is used to flavour a wide variety of sweet edibles such as traditional Malay candy , ice <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , rose biscuits , ice cream , milkshakes , <unk> , Yule logs , and cappuccino . Es durian ( durian ice cream ) is a popular dessert in Indonesia , sold at street side stall in Indonesian cities , especially in Java . <unk> Durian or <unk> durian is glutinous rice steamed with coconut milk and served with ripened durian . In Sabah , red durian is fried with onions and chilli and served as a side dish . Red @-@ fleshed durian is traditionally added to <unk> , an Indonesian soup made from freshwater fish . <unk> <unk> tempoyak is fish cooked in a durian @-@ based sauce , traditional in Sumatra . Traditionally Bollen pastry , specialty of Bandung is filled with banana and cheese . Today Bollen durian is also available , it is pastry filled with durian . Dried durian flesh can be made into <unk> durian ( durian chips ) . 
 Tempoyak refers to fermented durian , usually made from lower quality durian that is unsuitable for direct consumption . Tempoyak can be eaten either cooked or uncooked , is normally eaten with rice , and can also be used for making curry . Sambal Tempoyak is a Sumatran dish made from the fermented durian fruit , coconut milk , and a collection of spicy ingredients known as <unk> . In Palembang , <unk> catfish can be either cooked as tempoyak <unk> <unk> ( fish in tempoyak curry ) or as <unk> ( <unk> ) tempoyak , which is a steamed fermented durian paste in banana leaf container , 
 In Thailand , durian is often eaten fresh with sweet sticky rice , and blocks of durian paste are sold in the markets , though much of the paste is adulterated with pumpkin . <unk> durians may be cooked as a vegetable , except in the Philippines , where all uses are sweet rather than savoury . Malaysians make both sugared and salted preserves from durian . When durian is minced with salt , onions and vinegar , it is called <unk> . The durian seeds , which are the size of chestnuts , can be eaten whether they are boiled , roasted or fried in coconut oil , with a texture that is similar to taro or yam , but stickier . In Java , the seeds are sliced thin and cooked with sugar as a confection . <unk> durian seeds are toxic due to <unk> fatty acids and should not be ingested . 
 Young leaves and shoots of the durian are occasionally cooked as greens . Sometimes the ash of the burned rind is added to special cakes . The petals of durian flowers are eaten in the North Sumatra province of Indonesia , while in the Moluccas islands the husk of the durian fruit is used as fuel to smoke fish . The nectar and pollen of the durian flower that honeybees collect is an important honey source , but the characteristics of the honey are unknown . 
 = = = Nutrition = = = 
 Raw durian is composed of 65 % water , 27 % carbohydrates including 4 % dietary fiber , 5 % fat and 1 % protein ( table ) . In 100 grams , raw or fresh frozen durian provides 33 % of the Daily Value ( DV ) of <unk> and moderate content of other B vitamins , vitamin C and the dietary mineral , manganese ( 15 – 24 % DV , table ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The durian has been known and consumed in Southeast Asia since prehistoric times , but has only been known to the western world for about 600 years . The earliest native reference to durian is the several bas relief panels of 9th @-@ century Borobudur depicting durian as one of fruit offering for Javanese king , and also as one of the fruits sold in marketplace . 
 The earliest known European reference to the durian is the record of Niccolò Da Conti , who travelled to southeastern Asia in the 15th century . Translated from the Latin in which Poggio Bracciolini recorded Da Conti 's travels : " They [ people of Sumatra ] have a green fruit which they call durian , as big as a watermelon . Inside there are five things like elongated oranges , and resembling thick butter , with a combination of flavours . " The Portuguese physician Garcia de Orta described durians in <unk> dos simples e <unk> da India published in 1563 . In 1741 , Herbarium <unk> by the German botanist Georg Eberhard Rumphius was published , providing the most detailed and accurate account of durians for over a century . The genus Durio has a complex taxonomy that has seen the subtraction and addition of many species since it was created by Rumphius . During the early stages of its taxonomical study , there was some confusion between durian and the <unk> ( <unk> muricata ) , for both of these species had thorny green fruit . It is also interesting to note the Malay name for the <unk> is durian <unk> , meaning Dutch durian . In the 18th century , Johann Anton <unk> considered the durian to belong to <unk> as its fruit was similar to the horse chestnut . 
 D. zibethinus was introduced into Ceylon by the Portuguese in the 16th century and was reintroduced many times later . It has been planted in the Americas but confined to botanical gardens . The first seedlings were sent from the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew , to Auguste Saint @-@ <unk> of Dominica in 1884 . 
 In southeastern Asia , the durian has been cultivated for centuries at the village level , probably since the late 18th century , and commercially since the mid @-@ 20th century . In My Tropic Isle , Australian author and naturalist Edmund James Banfield tells how , in the early 20th century , a friend in Singapore sent him a durian seed , which he planted and cared for on his tropical island off the north coast of Queensland . 
 In 1949 , the British botanist E. J. H. Corner published The Durian Theory , or the Origin of the Modern Tree . His theory was that <unk> ( the enticement of animals to transport seeds in their stomach ) arose before any other method of seed dispersal , and that primitive ancestors of Durio species were the earliest practitioners of that dispersal method , in particular red durian ( D. dulcis ) exemplifying the primitive fruit of flowering plants . However , in more recent <unk> of Durioneae , the tribe into which Durio and its sister taxa fall , fleshy <unk> and spiny fruits are derived within the clade . Some genera possess these characters , but others don 't . The most recent molecular evidence ( on which the most recent , well @-@ supported circumscription of Durioneae is based ) therefore refutes Corner 's Durian Theory . 
 Since the early 1990s , the domestic and international demand for durian in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) region has increased significantly , partly due to the increasing affluence of Asia . 
 = = Culture and folk medicine = = 
 = = = Cultural influences = = = 
 A common local belief is that the durian is harmful when eaten with coffee or alcoholic beverages . The latter belief can be traced back at least to the 18th century when Rumphius stated that one should not drink alcohol after eating durians as it will cause indigestion and bad breath . In 1929 , J. D. <unk> wrote in his Malay Poisons and Charm Cures that the durian fruit must not be eaten with brandy . In 1981 , J. R. Croft wrote in his Bombacaceae : In Handbooks of the Flora of Papua New Guinea that " a feeling of morbidity " often follows the consumption of alcohol too soon after eating durian . Several medical investigations on the validity of this belief have been conducted with varying conclusions , though a study by the University of Tsukuba finds the fruit 's high sulphur content inhibits the activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase , causing a 70 % reduction of the ability to clear toxins from the body . 
 The durian is commonly known as the " King of the Fruits " , a label that can be attributed to its formidable look and overpowering odour . In its native southeastern Asia , the durian is an everyday food and portrayed in the local media in accordance with the cultural perception it has in the region . The durian symbolised the subjective nature of ugliness and beauty in Hong Kong director Fruit Chan 's 2000 film Durian Durian ( <unk> , lau lin <unk> <unk> ) , and was a nickname for the reckless but lovable protagonist of the eponymous Singaporean TV comedy Durian King played by Adrian Pang . Likewise , the oddly shaped Esplanade building in Singapore is often called " The Durian " by locals , and " The Big Durian " is the nickname of Jakarta , Indonesia . 
 A durian falling on a person 's head can cause serious injuries because it is heavy , armed with sharp thorns , and can fall from a significant height . Wearing a <unk> is recommended when collecting the fruit . Alfred Russel Wallace writes that death rarely ensues from it , because the copious effusion of blood prevents the inflammation which might otherwise take place . A common saying is that a durian has eyes and can see where it is falling because the fruit allegedly never falls during daylight hours when people may be hurt . A saying in Indonesian , <unk> durian <unk> , which translates to " getting a durian avalanche " , is the equivalent of the English phrase " windfall gain " . Nevertheless , signs warning people not to linger under durian trees are found in Indonesia . Strong nylon or woven rope <unk> are often strung between durian trees in orchards , serving a threefold purpose : the nets aid in the collection of the mature fruits , deter ground @-@ level scavengers , and most importantly , prevent the durians from falling onto people . 
 A naturally spineless variety of durian growing wild in Davao , Philippines , was discovered in the 1960s ; fruits borne from these seeds also lacked spines . Since the bases of the scales develop into spines as the fruit matures , sometimes spineless durians are produced artificially by scraping scales off immature fruits . In Malaysia , a <unk> durian clone <unk> is registered by Agriculture Department on 17 June 1989 . It was called " Durian <unk> " ( Bald Durian ) . In Indonesia , Ir <unk> <unk> , head of Durian Research Centre , Universitas <unk> reported spineless durian from <unk> , Malang . Another cultivar is from Lombok , Nusa Tenggara Barat , Indonesia . 
 Animals such as Sumatran elephants and tigers are known to consume durians . 
 One of the names Thailand contributed to the list of storm names for Western North Pacific tropical cyclones was ' Durian ' , which was retired after the second storm of this name in 2006 . Being a fruit much loved by a variety of wild beasts , the durian sometimes signifies the long @-@ forgotten animalistic aspect of humans , as in the legend of Orang <unk> , the Malaysian version of Bigfoot , and Orang <unk> , its Sumatran version , both of which have been claimed to feast on durians . 
 = = = Folk medicine = = = 
 In Malaysia , a decoction of the leaves and roots used to be prescribed as an antipyretic . The leaf juice is applied on the head of a fever patient . The most complete description of the medicinal use of the durian as remedies for fevers is a Malay prescription , collected by <unk> and <unk> in 1930 . It instructs the reader to boil the roots of Hibiscus rosa @-@ sinensis with the roots of Durio zibethinus , <unk> <unk> , <unk> mutabile and Artocarpus integrifolia , and drink the decoction or use it as a poultice . 
 Southeast Asian traditional beliefs , as well as traditional Chinese medicine , consider the durian fruit to have warming properties liable to cause excessive sweating . The traditional method to counteract this is to pour water into the empty shell of the fruit after the pulp has been consumed and drink it . An alternative method is to eat the durian in accompaniment with mangosteen , which is considered to have cooling properties . Pregnant women or people with high blood pressure are traditionally advised not to consume durian . 
 The Javanese believe durian to have aphrodisiac qualities , and impose a set of rules on what may or may not be consumed with it or shortly thereafter . A saying in Indonesian , durian <unk> <unk> <unk> , meaning " the durian falls and the sarong comes up " , refers to this belief . The warnings against the supposed lecherous quality of this fruit soon spread to the West – the Swedenborgian philosopher Herman <unk> commented on so @-@ called " erotic properties " of the durian in the early 20th century . 
 = Nagore Dargah = 
 Nagore Dargah ( also called <unk> Dargah or Hazrat Syed Shahul Hameed Dargah ) is a dargah built over the tomb of the Sufi a saint Hazrath Nagore Shahul Hamid ( 1490 – 1579 CE ) . It is located in Nagore , a coastal town in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu . Outer doors kept open always . Internal doors opening time is from 4 : 30 am to 07 : 00 am and 6 : 25 pm to 9 : 30 pm . Friday alone additionally kept open from 12 noon to 2 : 30 pm also . Shahul Hamid is believed to have performed many miracles in Nagore , and cured the physical affliction of king Achutappa Nayak , a 16th @-@ century Hindu ruler of Thanjavur . He is locally referred to as Nagore <unk> , meaning the " god of Nagore " . Nagore dargah as it stands now , is believed to have been built by ardent devotees of Shahul Hamid , with major contribution from Hindus . There are five minarets in the dargah , with the Hindu Maratha ruler of Thanjavur Pratap Singh ( 1739 – 1763 CE ) , building the tallest minaret . The dargah is a major pilgrimage centre that attracts pilgrims from both Islam and Hinduism , symbolizing peaceful coexistence between the two <unk> b 
 The most prominent event celebrated at Nagore dargah is the Kanduri festival , a fourteen @-@ day commemoration of the death anniversary of Shahul Hamid . Common worship practices at Nagore dargah include the presentation of offerings , accompanied by the playing of musical instruments like nadaswaram , atypical of Hindu religious tradition . The Shifa Gunta , a pool within the precincts of the dargah , is considered sacred ; pilgrims take a holy dip in it . The hereditary Khalifa ( Sufi saint ) , c selected from among the descendants of saint Yusuf , performs all the official and religious duties of the dargah . The administration and maintenance of the dargah is governed by a committee which operates under a scheme decreed by the Madras High Court . 
 = = About the saint = = 
 Hazrath Shahul Hamid <unk> <unk> was born to Hazrath Syed Hassan <unk> Baba <unk> and Bibi <unk> at <unk> , in Pratapgarh district of Uttar Pradesh . He was a 13th generation descendant of the renowned Sufi saint , Hazrath <unk> Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ <unk> . He had his Islamic education at Gwalior under the guidance of Hazrat Mohammad <unk> . He left on a pilgrimage to Mecca and then moved to Maldives , Sri Lanka and Tamil Nadu with his spiritual team . Historians Sayyid and Qadir Hussain ( 1957 ) place the date of his birth on 10 November 1504 , death on 10 November 1570 and arrival in Nagore during 1533 – 34 . Other sources mention the year of death as 1558 , 1570 or 1579 . He is believed to have led a simple and pious life , performing a lot of miracles , giving him the name Nagore <unk> ( meaning god of Nagore ) . His popularity grew outside Tanjore region during the period . He was also called Meera Saheb , Qadir Wali and <unk> @-@ e @-@ Sawai . 
 As per local legend , hagiographical texts and historical records , Shahul Hamid is believed to have cured a Hindu ruler of Thanjavur , king Achutappa Nayak ( 1529 – 1542 A.D. ) , of his physical affliction caused by sorcery . Shahul Hamid found a needled pigeon in the palace believed to be the cause of the misery . He removed the pins from the pigeon , resulting in the king 's health improvement . In remembrance of the event , the practice of setting pigeons free in the premises of the dargah is continued by worshipers in modern times . 
 = = History of the dargah = = 
 Achutappa Nayak , the king of Thanjavur during the 16th century , donated 200 acres ( 81 ha ) of land to the entourage of Shahul , after the saint cured the king 's affliction . The dargah was built on a part of the land donated by Nayak . Shahul Hamid is believed to have predicted his death and advised his adopted son Yusuf about his burial location and rites to be performed after his death . Yusuf performed the rites as per the instructions and decided to stay there for the rest of his life . A mausoleum was constructed over the grave . Devotees of Shahul , who continued to believe in his powers after his death , venerated the site of the burial . The shrine was initially a smaller one and gradually gained prominence . Pratap Singh ( 1739 – 1763 A.D. ) , the Hindu Maratha ruler of Thanjavur prayed for a son and built the tallest of the five minarets ( called Periya Manara locally ) with a height of 131 ft ( 40 m ) once his wish was fulfilled . The Marathas of the later period were patrons to the dargah , with the Maratha king <unk> , the son of Pratap Singh , donating 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) of agricultural land to the dargah . During the last quarter of 18th century , when there was conflict between European powers , the Nawab of Arcot , the Maratha kings and Tipu Sultan of Mysore over Thanjavur region , the dargah was considered strategically important by all of them . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Nagore Dargah covers an area of 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) enclosed by a compound wall . The main complex has four entrances in each direction . The dargah is believed to have been built by ardent devotees of Shahul Hamid , who are 60 per cent Hindus . There are five minarets with different heights and the tallest one has a height of 131 ft ( 40 m ) . It was erected during the 195th death anniversary of Shahul . The dargah has a gold @-@ plated dome located on the west face outside the main entrance over the tombs of Shahul , his son Yusuf and his daughter @-@ in @-@ law <unk> Sultana Biwi . The other four minarets are 77 ft ( 23 m ) tall Sahib Minara , 93 @.@ 5 ft ( 28 @.@ 5 m ) tall <unk> Minara , 93 @.@ 25 ft ( 28 @.@ 42 m ) tall <unk> Minara and 80 ft ( 24 m ) tall <unk> Minara , each constructed in four cardinal points around the dome . As a mark of respect , devotees venerate the sandals of the saint which are preserved in the shrine . The central part of the dargah is the tomb of the saint Shahul Hamid , which is approached through seven thresholds . Four of these doorways are made of silver and the remaining three of gold . The other tombs in the shrines are the ones for Shahul 's grandson Hassan <unk> Salam and Abdel Khader Gilani , each located in different chambers . The adjoining portion of the complex is called Peer Mandap , the Khalifa 's place of fasting during the annual festival . A mosque is located next to the Peer Mandap , where daily prayers are offered . 
 Shifa Gunta is a holy tank with stepped sides , located within the precincts of the dargah . As per a local legend , Shahul Hamid is believed to have brought an iron chain with him to Nagore to bind himself during severe austerities . The distinctive chain is identified as the one hanging from the ceiling above the tomb of Yusuf . <unk> shrine and <unk> shrine , located outside the main complex , are associated with the Nagore Dargah . The <unk> shrine is an underground cave located 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the main complex at Nagore . It is the place where Shahul is believed to have meditated for 40 days . <unk> shrine is located 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) towards the east of main complex , facing the Bay of Bengal , where Shahul is believed to have offered daily prayers . 
 There are similar shrines built in Shahul Hamid 's honour in Penang ( Malaysia ) and Singapore . The Singapore dargah , built during 1827 , has been declared a national monument . These two shrines along with the Masjid <unk> at <unk> in Singapore and the <unk> Data Koya in Penang are influenced by the architectural style of Nagore dargah . 
 = = Festivals = = 
 Kanduri festival is a 14 @-@ day annual event celebrated during the urs ( death anniversary ) of the saint . The festival is celebrated in commemoration of the anniversary of the saint 's death , and pilgrims participate in the rituals and rites . The word <unk> is derived from the Persian word for table cloth . The festival is also called Qadir Wali Ke <unk> festival . A saffron flag @-@ carrying ceremony is also observed , during which a flag is carried from a devotee 's house to the dargah , accompanied by a procession in streets . The flag is hoisted on a tree known as <unk> ka Fahad by a <unk> ( hereditary trustee ) who is assisted by twenty assistants . The Islamic rites performed during the festival include the recitation of <unk> verses and observance of Fatiha ( it includes ; recitation of Al @-@ Fatiha an essential part of daily prayer and <unk> ) . The main attraction of the festival is the presence of <unk> <unk> ( mendicant priests ) and <unk> — the disciples of the saint who witness the festival . On the 9th day of <unk> Akhir month in the Islamic calendar , at 10 p.m. , a <unk> ( one of the disciples ) is chosen for the spiritual exercise of offering prayers to the saint . The disciple throws lemons at the end of the prayers on devotees , which is believed to provide miraculous relief to worldly sorrows . The festival is also seen as a sacred exchange between Hindus and Muslims expressing solidarity of mixed faith in the region . Pilgrims from both the religions from the state and also from Sri Lanka , Burma and Gulf countries , attend the festival . In the evening of the ninth day of Akhir month in the Islamic calendar , a chariot containing sandal paste ( locally called <unk> ) is pulled across the streets of Nagore by pilgrims and devotees , accompanied by banging of instruments . The sandal paste is received by the saint 's descendants and used to anoint the <unk> Sharif ( sanctum ) of the saint by the Khalifa of the dargah . 
 = = Worship , rituals and administration = = 
 Nagore dargah is a common place of worship for devotees of various religious faiths . According to the administration of the dargah , about 50 – 75 per cent of pilgrims visiting the dargah everyday are Hindus . The practise of offering flowers , <unk> and food , the way of conducting worship , and playing musical instruments like nadaswaram ( a type of pipe instrument commonly used in Tamil Nadu ) are atypical of Hindu tradition . Other worship practises include offering flags and lighting lamps of ghee at the saint 's tomb . Devotees shave their heads near the tank and offer tin or silver @-@ plated facsimiles of body parts , houses , sailboats matching their material needs . 
 Since Shahul Hamid was a celibate , he is offered a <unk> ( head dress ) , and not the customary flowers as at other <unk> . As per a local legend , he was approached by a childless couple who informed them that they would be blessed with children but the first offspring would be presented to him to adopt . Following the tradition , many childless couple worship in the dargah . While the dargah is open throughout the day , the doors of the shrines are open only during early morning and evening . 
 Shifa Gunta , the tank within the precincts of the dargah , is considered sacred . It is believed that a dip in the tank cures physical ailments . There is a hereditary Khalifa , from among the descendants of saint Yusuf . He performs all the religious duties of the dargah . A central parliamentary committee deputed to verify the implementation of the Wakf Act of 1995 was informed in 2008 that the Nagore Dargah was not administered as per the provisions of the Act . The committee found that it is against the spirit of the provisions of the Act as the dargah is a surveyed and notified body under the Tamil Nadu Wakf board . The administration and maintenance of the dargah was henceforth governed by a committee which operates under a scheme decreed by the Madras High Court . 
 Shahul Hamid and the dargah are revered in Tamil religious literature across different centuries . The most important among them is <unk> Puranam ( 1812 ) by <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Alim ( also called <unk> <unk> ) that details the life of the saint . The <unk> Puranam , written by <unk> <unk> Navalar in 1893 , describes the miracles performed by Shahul in the dargah after his death . A prose biography <unk> <unk> , by <unk> <unk> Navalar , is also very popular . <unk> , a Tamil devotional poem , mentions the tank as " a haven of sweetness and comfort bedecked with the auspicious lotus " . 
 = Magna Carta Holy Grail = 
 Magna Carta ... Holy Grail ( alternatively written as Magna Carta Holy Grail ) is the twelfth studio album by American artist Jay Z. It was made available for free digital download for Samsung customers via the Jay Z Magna Carta app on July 4 , 2013 . It was released for retail sale on July 8 , 2013 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella and Roc Nation while being distributed by Universal . The album features guest appearances by Justin Timberlake , Nas , Rick Ross , Frank Ocean and Beyoncé . Most of the album was produced by Timbaland and Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , while other producers included Boi @-@ 1da , Mike Will Made It , Hit @-@ Boy , Mike Dean , No I.D. , The @-@ Dream , Swizz Beatz , and Pharrell Williams among others . The album was promoted through various commercials presented by Samsung and was not preceded by any retail singles . 
 Upon its release , Magna Carta Holy Grail was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Some complimented the album 's production and composition , while others were disappointed with its overall theme and found many songs repetitive . On the day of its physical release in the United States , the album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . It debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , selling 528 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , making it Jay @-@ Z 's 13th consecutive studio album to top the chart . On September 2 , 2013 , it was announced that Magna Carta Holy Grail was certified double Platinum by the RIAA , for shipments of two million copies in the United States . The album was nominated in six categories at the 2014 Grammy Awards winning the Best Rap / Sung Collaboration trophy for " Holy Grail " featuring Justin Timberlake . 
 The album spawned three successful singles , " Holy Grail " , " Tom Ford " and " Part II ( On the Run ) " featuring Beyoncé . Multiple other songs on the album achieved chart success including , " <unk> " , " Oceans " , " Heaven " and " Picasso Baby " . Additionally , the album was supported by the concert tour , Magna Carter World Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 23 , 2010 , rapper Q @-@ Tip confirmed working on Jay @-@ Z 's thirteenth studio album , with a tentative release in 2011 . By May 2012 , reports arose that he was working on new music with Roc Nation producer Jahlil Beats . In an interview with XXL , Beats stated : " Me and Jay @-@ Z been going back and forth . He picked a couple of my joints that he ’ s working on . I don ’ t even wanna say too much about Jay , but we definitely working on some stuff . I haven ’ t even sent him a bunch of beats . I sent him my favorite stuff . He hit me right back like , ‘ Yo , I ’ ma go in on this , ’ or , ‘ I like this . ’ ” The album development was kept a secret , but The @-@ Dream hinted about a new Jay @-@ Z album in an April 2013 interview with Hot 97 . 
 Leading up to the album 's announcement , Jay @-@ Z served as an executive producer for both the film The Great Gatsby and its soundtrack , The Great Gatsby : Music from Baz Luhrmann 's Film , which he and film director Baz Luhrmann worked together for two years . The opening song , " 100 $ Bill " by Jay @-@ Z contains a chopped and screwed beat , electro @-@ rap elements and is written in the perspective of a modern @-@ day Gatsby , it was both co @-@ written and produced by E * <unk> one half of electronic rock duo Ratatat . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In late 2011 , it was confirmed three songs had been recorded and one of which featured Frank Ocean which would end up being " Oceans " , the oldest song that appeared on the album . The recording for " Oceans " and production for " Holy Grail " were completed in 2011 , during the recording sessions for Jay 's collaborative album with Kanye West , Watch the Throne . West wanted the two songs to appear on Watch the Throne , however Jay @-@ Z chose to keep them for Magna Carta Holy Grail . After Watch the Throne was released , Jay @-@ Z chose to go on a worldwide concert tour instead of devoting more time for the album . Following the end of the tour , the main bulk of recording sessions for Magna Carta Holy Grail took place at Alicia Keys and Swizz Beatz ' Jungle City Studios in New York , where Justin Timberlake and Beyoncé Knowles were also working on their albums at the time . Jay @-@ Z described the recording process as having a " minimalist approach " to give Magna Carta Holy Grail a " 1990s feel " . 
 While working on Beyoncé 's fifth studio album , frequent collaborator Timbaland played Jay @-@ Z the instrumental for what would become " Picasso Baby " . According to Jay @-@ Z , that song built the sound of the album . Jay @-@ Z and Timbaland had grown apart after they worked on The Blueprint 3 , but reunited for this album . Timbaland ended up handling the majority of the production on Magna Carta Holy Grail . In an interview with BBC Radio 1 , Jay @-@ Z stated that while the two have recorded many songs in the past , it was not until Magna Carta Holy Grail that they got the chemistry to collaborate for a whole project . Producer J @-@ Roc described " Picasso Baby " as " just New York " . He told XXL that him and Timbaland " were really just feeling the city , the energy that it gives out " and were inspired by the " numerous different cultures and different dialects or sounds . " 
 The instrumental for " <unk> " was started by producer <unk> , who was inspired by a Pimp C speech he found on YouTube . He sampled Pimp C 's voice for the intro and then created the instrumental in a short amount of time . After fellow producer Boi @-@ 1da added to the production , the song was sent to Rick Ross who intended to use it for his upcoming album . Jay @-@ Z was meant to add a guest verse to it , but when he heard the instrumental , he wanted the track for his album . Timbaland added additional changes to it before they mastered the final version . 
 In 2012 , Jay @-@ Z contacted GOOD Music producer Hit @-@ Boy about working together on Magna Carta Holy Grail . Hit @-@ Boy created the instrumental for " Somewhereinamerica " , a song that was initially supposed to appear on the debut album of GOOD Music artist Travis Scott . While in the studio with Jay @-@ Z , Scott played the instrumental for him and Jay @-@ Z instantly liked it . The instrumental for the song " Crown " was made by 16 @-@ year @-@ old Canadian producer <unk> . She had collaborated with Travis Scott on his Owl Pharaoh mixtape and went on to produce another track for his upcoming album . Scott liked the instrumental and started to build upon it with Mike Dean . The two then gave it to Jay @-@ Z who recorded " Crown " over it . 
 Overall , Jay @-@ Z worked extensively on the album 's production with producers such as Swizz Beatz , Timbaland and Pharrell Williams who were also featured in the Samsung commercials promoting Magna Carta Holy Grail . He had also worked on the album 's production with Jahlil Beats , Boi @-@ 1da , Mike Dean , Kanye West and Mike Will Made It , among others . He had also been seen in the studio with various recording artists such as Drake , The @-@ Dream , Raekwon , Nas , and Timberlake working on the album . The final track listing revealed guest appearances by Timberlake , Frank Ocean , Nas , Pharrell , Swizz Beatz , Rick Ross and Beyoncé among others . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On June 16 , 2013 , during the fifth game of the 2013 NBA Finals , Jay @-@ Z was featured in a new commercial by Samsung where he announced that his twelfth studio album would be titled , Magna Carta Holy Grail and would be released on July 4 , 2013 . He was seen speaking to producer Rick Rubin in the studio about the album saying , " [ It ] is about , like this duality of how do you navigate through this whole thing , through success , through failures , through all this and remain yourself . " The commercial featured producers that are confirmed to be on the album including Timbaland , Swizz Beatz and Pharrell Williams . The album was made available for free download on July 4 , 12 : 01 a.m. EST , to the first one million Samsung Galaxy S III , Samsung Galaxy S4 and Samsung Galaxy Note II users of a new app . Shortly after , Billboard said that the Samsung deal would not count towards the sales figures used by Nielsen SoundScan to compile their charts . The album was then released for retail sale three days later , on July 7 , 2013 . 
 Leading up to the release of the album , Jay @-@ Z released selected lyrics of each song daily , via the Samsung app . This included " Holy Grail " , " Heaven " , " Oceans " , " Part II ( On the Run ) " , " BBC " , " Jay Z Blue " , " Versus " , " La Familia " , " Tom Ford " , " Beach Is Better " , " Crown " , " Picasso Baby " , " <unk> " , " Nickels & Dimes " and " <unk> " in order . On July 3 , 2013 , the cover art of the album was revealed in a photo where it was placed next to the one of the four surviving copies of album 's namesake ( the 13th @-@ century English charter ) in Salisbury Cathedral , England , and it remained on display there until the end of July . The logo for the album was inspired by an art piece by Be <unk> from 2009 named ‘ Untitled ( art ) ’ . 
 During the 2013 Grammy Awards , Timberlake and Jay @-@ Z performed their hit single " Suit & Tie " . Following their appearance on Grammys , rumors of a stadium tour between the artists were raised as a result of Jay @-@ Z 's posts on his Life + Times website ; he posted series of venues with the note " # <unk> this week " . The Legends of the Summer Stadium Tour was officially announced on February 22 , 2013 . The tour begun on July 14 , 2013 in London , England . Starting in October 2013 , Jay @-@ Z toured Europe on the Magna Carter World Tour . It begun on October 3 at the Manchester Arena in Manchester , England and concluded on October 29 at the <unk> Dome in Amsterdam , Netherlands . The North American leg followed that , and it ended on January 31 , 2014 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 On April 11 , 2013 , Jay @-@ Z released the first song from the album titled " Open Letter " . The song was a response to the critics of his fifth wedding anniversary that took place in Cuba . This was due to the current United States embargo against Cuba , which required them needing a permit to visit the country . The song was produced by Swizz Beatz , and was included on the album as a bonus track . On July 10 , 2013 , Third Man Records announced on their website that they had entered a deal to release Magna Carta Holy Grail on vinyl , also confirming that " Open Letter " would be included as a vinyl @-@ only bonus track and that there would be " something [ else ] very special planned for the vinyl edition . " However , the ' vinyl @-@ only ' appearance of " Open Letter " has been shown to not apply to all market areas . Third Man Records is set to issue " Open Letter " in the form of a vinyl single designed as a playable letter . In an interview with Hot 97 , Jay @-@ Z went into detail about the single 's release , saying : " It 's in a letter . You can play the letter . It 's amazing ... You open the letter , and you can actually play the card . " 
 The song " Holy Grail " features vocals from singer Justin Timberlake and served as the album 's first single . It was produced by The @-@ Dream , Timbaland and Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , with additional production from No ID and containing elements of Nirvana 's 1991 hit single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Following the release of the album , the song debuted at number eight on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 24 on the UK Singles Chart . The song has since peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video was released on August 29 , 2013 , making social media history as the first time a clip from major artists debuted strictly on Facebook . 
 On September 26 , 2013 , the album 's second single " Tom Ford " was serviced to urban contemporary radio in the United Kingdom and then on October 15 , 2013 , to rhythmic contemporary in the United States . Prior to its single release , the song peaked at number 39 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . " Part II ( On the Run ) " featuring Beyoncé was serviced to contemporary hit radio stations on February 18 , 2014 as the album 's third single . The song has since peaked at number 80 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Magna Carta Holy Grail debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 528 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , which bypassed its predicted debut in the range of 350 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 . The album also debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart . It is Jay @-@ Z 's third straight number one album in Canada . The album debuted at number one on the UK Album Chart , Jay @-@ Z 's first UK number one album . In its second week the album sold 129 @,@ 000 more copies in the United States . Despite the 76 % drop in sales , Magna Carta Holy Grail retained its number one position on the Billboard 200 , becoming the first rap album to spend two consecutive weeks on top since Lil Wayne 's Tha Carter IV ( 2011 ) . In its third week the album would drop down to number two , selling 77 @,@ 000 copies . In its fourth week the album would drop down to number three , selling 62 @,@ 000 copies . It sold 1 @,@ 099 @,@ 000 copies in 2013 in the United States , making it the tenth best @-@ selling album of the year . By February 26 , 2014 , the album had sold 1 @,@ 130 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . As of September 2 , 2013 , It was announced by Billboard that Magna Carta Holy Grail was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of two million copies in the United States . 
 At the time of its release , the album had the second @-@ biggest sales week for 2013 , behind Justin Timberlake 's The 20 / 20 Experience . Magna Carta Holy Grail 's debut marked the first time in Billboard 's history when four different rap albums have consecutively spent weeks at number one , after Kanye West 's Yeezus , Wale 's The Gifted and J. Cole 's Born Sinner . Magna Carta Holy Grail also became Jay @-@ Z 's 13th studio album in a row to top the Billboard 200 , extending his record for the most chart @-@ toppers by a solo act in Billboard 's history . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Magna Carta Holy Grail received generally mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from critics , the album received an average score of 60 , based on 42 reviews . In his review for The New York Times , Jon Pareles wrote that Jay @-@ Z is trying to transition from pop but has not yet found a " reliable alternative " , and that his raps are often mismatched with rigidly produced tracks . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman felt that the album was hastily produced and that , despite occasionally impressive lyrics , Jay @-@ Z 's pop culture references sound reflexive . Spin magazine 's Jordan Sargent said that the songs sound both too elaborate and unfinished , and have similar but less momentous themes as Watch the Throne . Slant Magazine 's Jesse Cataldo viewed Magna Carta Holy Grail as a self @-@ important album marred by shallow name @-@ dropping and accused Jay @-@ Z of becoming disinterested creatively because of his increased success . Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club said that he exhausts the ending of his rags to riches narrative and cannot reinvent himself beyond gloating superficially about his riches . The Daily Telegraph 's Helen Brown found his boastful references heavy @-@ handed and the album unchallenging , albeit enjoyable for " the lazy listener " . Greg Kot , writing in the Chicago Tribune , viewed that , apart from well @-@ written moments on " Oceans " , " Jay @-@ Z Blue " , and " Nickel & Dimes " , most of the album is inconsequential . 
 In a positive review , Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times was impressed by the production 's energy and effective samples , even though he thought the album is not as intellectual or adventurous as its title suggests . Uncut wrote that it mostly succeeds as Jay @-@ Z 's attempt to " balance his great wealth , tough history and news responsibility while retaining his grit . " Louis Pattison of NME said that it lacks a radical presence such as Kanye West to complement Jay @-@ Z 's mature ruminations , but still shows him as a sagacious lyricist comparable with Bruce Springsteen or Bob Dylan . Kitty Empire , writing in The Observer , believed that the diverse production will initially draw listeners rather than Jay @-@ Z 's predictably " umpteenth retelling " of his rags @-@ to @-@ riches story , but the topics become more interesting on subsequent listens because of his surprisingly concerned takes on fatherhood and charity . In his review for MSN Music , Robert Christgau said he was won over after several listens by the familial songs , which he found amusing on an album that pits " black man as artistic rebel versus black man as family stalwart " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Closing out the year , Magna Carta Holy Grail was met with many accolades and was named in multiple " Albums of the Year " lists by major publications . It was nominated for Album of the Year at the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards and for Best Rap Album at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards . Complex ranked the album at number 23 , on their list of the 50 best albums of 2013 . They praised the " high @-@ gloss production , " and strong rhymes by Jay @-@ Z , deeming it " very listenable " . Rolling Stone named it the tenth best hip hop album of the 2013 saying , " The legendary MC explored of @-@ the @-@ moment sounds , textures and tempos in ways only he could [ ... ] Even on a bit of an off day , Jay is still plenty impressive . " It was named the eighth best album of 2013 by XXL . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 On June 22 , Jay @-@ Z held a viral scavenger hunt around Brooklyn , New York as part of his " # <unk> " venture with Samsung . The 100 winners of the hunt were given a binder that revealed the track list . 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer . 
 ^ b signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 ^ c signifies an additional programmer . 
 " Somewhereinamerica " is alternatively spelled as " Somewhere in America " in some versions of the album . 
 " Holy Grail " features additional vocals by The @-@ Dream . 
 " Picasso Baby " features additional vocals by The @-@ Dream and Zofia <unk> Moreno . 
 " Tom Ford " features additional vocals by Beyoncé Knowles who is credited as " Third Ward Trill " . 
 " Crown " features additional vocals by Travis Scott . 
 " Heaven " features additional vocals by Justin Timberlake . 
 " BBC " features additional vocals by Pharrell Williams , Timbaland , <unk> , Justin Timberlake , Swizz Beatz & Beyoncé Knowles who is credited as " Third Ward Trill " . 
 " Jay Z Blue " features additional vocals by Taffy . 
 Samples credits 
 " Holy Grail " contains elements of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " performed by Nirvana . 
 " Picasso Baby " contains a sample of " Sirens " performed by Adrian Younge . 
 " Tom Ford " contains elements of " Bad Girls " performed by M.I.A. 
 " Somewhereinamerica " embodies portions of " Gangster of Love ( Part 1 ) " written by Johnny Guitar Watson . 
 " Crown " contains a sample of " Solid as a Rock " performed by <unk> . 
 " Heaven " contains a sample of " Reverie " performed by Adrian Younge , and lyrically samples " Losing My Religion " performed by R.E.M. 
 " Versus " embodies portions of A Tribe Called Quest 's " <unk> Nigga " , and contains a sample of " Lilith - On The Way " performed by Bruno Spoerri 
 " Part II ( On the Run ) " contains a sample of " Believe in Me " performed by One Way . 
 " BBC " lyrically samples " Feel So Good " performed by Mase . 
 " Jay Z Blue " contains samples from " My Downfall " performed by The Notorious B.I.G. and a monologue by Faye Dunaway in the 1981 film Mommie Dearest . 
 " Nickels and Dimes " contains a sample of " <unk> and Dimes " performed by <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Homicide in English law = 
 English law contains homicide offences – those acts involving the death of another person . For a crime to be considered homicide , it must take place after the victim 's legally recognised birth , and before their legal death . There is also the usually uncontroversial requirement that the victim be under the " Queen 's peace " . The death must be causally linked to the actions of the defendant . Since the abolition of the year and a day rule , there is no maximum time period between any act being committed and the victim 's death , so long as the former caused the latter . 
 There are two general types of homicide , murder and manslaughter . Murder requires an intention to kill or an intention to commit grievous bodily harm . If this intention is present but there are certain types of mitigating factors – loss of control , diminished responsibility , or pursuance of a suicide pact – then this is voluntary manslaughter . There are two types of involuntary manslaughter . Firstly , it may be " constructive " or " unlawful act " <unk> , where a lesser but inherently criminal and dangerous act has caused the death . Alternatively , manslaughter may be caused by gross negligence , where the defendant has broken a duty of care over the victim , where that breach has led to the death , and is sufficiently gross as to warrant criminalisation . 
 = = General features = = 
 Death is an <unk> harm that is dealt with particularly seriously in English law . For example , the crime of murder uniquely carries a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment , regardless of the degree to which the defendant is morally culpable provided they are legally culpable . To use another example : causing injury by dangerous driving carries a maximum sentence of two years , whereas causing death by dangerous driving carries one of fourteen years . 
 All homicides involve three elements as a defining feature : firstly , that the victim must be a legally defined " human being " ; that their death must be caused by the act or omission of one or more human beings ; and that this must occur within the " Queen 's peace " , which relates to jurisdiction . 
 = = = Birth and death = = = 
 A foetus , even at a late stage of pregnancy , is not protected by the law of homicide ( rather , other offences have been created to prevent the proscribed harm ) . To qualify , the victim must have an " independent existence " . This was confirmed in 1998 in Attorney General 's Reference ( No. 3 of 1994 ) , even where the foetus is viable and could have survived if born before the offence was committed . The confused rationale appears to match the complicated moral and biological distinction on which it is based ; there is huge social significance placed upon birth and thus the law is unlikely to change – Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights has not yet been interpreted to conflict with the English law . Instead , in Vo v France , the European Court of Human Rights ruled that most definitions were within the margin of appreciation set aside to national law . The death of a child after birth from injuries sustained before birth would only constitute murder if the requisite intent – that the child would die after birth – was present . Other forms of homicide would also be applicable . 
 There is no legislation that defines when death has occurred . However , in Airedale NHS Trust v Bland , cessation of brain stem function , one form of brain death , was considered the definition by the House of Lords . Much medical law – for example , that conferring the right to remove organs for transplant – is predicated on this decision and it is unlikely to be overturned . The Criminal Law Revision Committee has declined to propose a legal definition , for fear of the wide impact that it could have on disparate branches of the law , and the changing basis in medical science . In Bland , a person in a persistent vegetative state was considered to be alive ; accordingly , anything less than brain stem cessation is unlikely to be sufficient for death . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The normal rules of causation apply , although they can become strained when compared to the various moral issues of importance in cases of homicide . In R v. <unk> , the defendant was found guilty of the manslaughter of a hostage he was using as a human shield , who was killed by police returning fire against the defendant . Whether another 's actions are " free , voluntary and informed " is the operating definition , as upheld in R. v Kennedy ( No. 2 ) where the defendant was acquitted . Such an intervening act is known as a " <unk> actus <unk> " . The judgments of several judges in various cases , including Devlin J in R. v Adams appear to confuse causality with motive : where there is a strong moral imperative to clear the defendant , causality is doubted , rather than the mental element ( mens rea ) . Since everyone will die at some point , then even murder is a mere acceleration of death . In Adams the question of life @-@ shortening palliative care was approached , and the need to provide a suitable reason with which to distinguish the doctor from any other murderer . Ultimately it seems a special defence was created . 
 A homicide can be brought about through act or omission . Baker , notes " R v Evans [ 2009 ] EWCA Crim 650 , [ 2009 ] 1 WLR 1999 holds that if a person merely facilitates another to create a dangerous situation for himself , that person may be held criminally liable for a homicide offence if that self @-@ endangerment results in death . Evans 's sister made an intervening choice to self @-@ inject and it was her independent self @-@ injection that was the direct cause of the dangerous situation . Evans 's pre @-@ existing duty of care was grounded on her act of supply and her awareness of the fact that her act of supply had facilitated the creation of a dangerous and life @-@ threatening situation . Evans did not create the dangerous situation , but rather she merely made an indirect causative contribution to the dangerous situation . Furthermore , if she had merely supplied the drugs and had left the scene , and therefore had remained ignorant of the fact that her act of supply had resulted in a dangerous overdose situation , her act of mere supply per se would not have been sufficient for a conviction of gross negligence manslaughter . " Baker , Dennis J , <unk> Liability for Homicide Offences : Reconciling R V Kennedy with R V Evans ( May 21 , 2012 ) . ( 2010 ) 74 Journal of Criminal Law 310 . Available at SSRN : http : / / <unk> / abstract = <unk> Elsewhere Baker argues : " In R. v. Evans , Gemma Evans , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old woman , purchased heroin and supplied her 16 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Carly . Carly self @-@ injected in a house in which she resided with Evans ( the defendant ) and her mother . After injecting the drug she developed and complained of symptoms consistent with an overdose . Evans appreciated that Carly ’ s condition was very serious and indicative of an overdose and , together with her mother , Andrea Townsend , who was also convicted of manslaughter , believed that she was responsible for Carly ’ s care . “ The appellant described in a later interview with the police that she had seen that Carly ’ s lips had turned blue , that she was ‘ in a mess ’ , and was incapable of responding to attempts to speak to her . The appellant and her mother decided not to seek medical assistance because they feared that they themselves and possibly Carly would get into trouble . ” Instead , they put Carly in bed with the hope that she would make a miraculous recovery . The defendant and her mother checked on Carly occasionally and slept in the same room , but tragically , Carly died during the night . The medical evidence demonstrated that the cause of death was heroin poisoning . Evans and Townsend were charged with manslaughter .... Lord Judge C.J. held that Gemma Evans assisted Carly Evans to create a dangerous situation and was aware of the danger she assisted Carly to bring about for herself and that these two factors gave rise to a duty of reasonable rescue . The mother was convicted on the basis of her parental duty , which required her to take reasonable steps to summon assistance . Since Evans was an older half @-@ sister , she was not covered by the parental duty doctrine . Instead , a new law had to be minted to catch her conduct . The new law being that mere assistance gives rise to duty of care . Since Evans assisted her sister ’ s overdose by supplying the drug she had a duty to summon help once she realised her sister was in peril . This category of duty is a newly minted one . Arguably , the courts cannot create further situations ( or declare further relationships such as roommate / roommate ) where a duty will be imposed the breach of which will amount to manslaughter . Hence , the categories should be regarded as closed . Cases not covered by the aforementioned duties should not give rise to a duty of care . It is arguable that since the conduct in R. v. Evans ( assisting another to create a dangerous situation for herself ) is not covered by the R. v. Miller doctrine ( perpetrating an act that directly creates a dangerous situation ) , nor by the category of duty as set down in R. v. Stone , the Court of Appeal should have held that Evans had no duty of care . There is nothing wrong with applying R. v. Miller to a manslaughter case , but the court extended the R. v. Miller doctrine to cover mere facilitation , and then applied that new doctrine to manslaughter . The category of duty created in R. v. Evans seems to contravene the ruling in R. v. <unk> , which holds that judges cannot extend common law offences to cover new forms of conduct . It is one thing to apply an existing doctrine to new facts , and another to apply it to conceptually different conduct such as assistance rather than perpetration . " Dennis J. Baker , Glanville Williams : Textbook of Criminal Law , ( London : Sweet & Maxwell , 2015 ) at paragraph 10 @-@ 024 . 
 There are no specific rules that apply to acts or omissions in homicide : an omission is criminal if the defendant fails to prevent the avoidable death of the victim where he or she has the duty to do so and that the defendant had the capacity to do so . As noted below , unlawful omissions have been excluded from unlawful act manslaughter . Like in other areas , a duty of care may now be owed , following R. v Evans , even where the dangerous situation which results in the victim 's death was not caused by the defendant . Medical professionals may be relieved of their responsibility to sustain a patient 's life , where terminating life support is dubiously legally classified as an omission . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 The year and a day rule was abolished in England and Wales by the Law Reform ( Year and a Day Rule ) Act 1996 . As a matter of practice , the defendant may already have been prosecuted for the initial offence ( for example , another offence against the person ) . Accordingly , the Attorney General 's consent is required if more than three years has elapsed , or where the defendant has already been prosecuted in the circumstances alleged to have resulted in the victim 's death . 
 A person who is not " under the Queen 's Peace " cannot be the victim of a homicide . This includes the killing of alien enemies during a time of war . Murder or manslaughter committed by a British citizen is triable in an English ( or Northern Irish ) court , regardless of where the crime took place . The same is true for homicides committed on British ships or aircraft , regardless of the nationality of the offender . There are other statutory provisions which extend jurisdiction regarding types of offender on foreign ships , and , in the case of murder , terrorist activities . Although most crimes committed overseas are generally dealt with in the home jurisdiction , the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 formally brings the offences of a British citizen under the jurisdiction of the British courts , and therefore the " Queen 's Peace " rule is usefully retained . 
 = = = Defences = = = 
 The killing of another person must be unlawful . Some defences are therefore open to the defendant , among them self @-@ defence . Carrying a lawful activity , for example , a fully qualified doctor carrying out an abortion in the required circumstances , could not result in an unlawful homicide even if the child was born alive . Consent might be relevant to some forms of homicide , but not to murder . 
 = = Murder = = 
