 Murder has never been statutorily defined , despite being recognised as either the most serious crime , or certainly among them . The actus reus ( prohibited act ) of murder , unlawfully causing the death of another person , fits the general provisions for homicide . The mens rea ( mental element ) of murder was long held to be " malice aforethought " , which took on a meaning only of the required mental state for murder , since malice aforethought required neither malice ( compassionate killing is still murder ) nor aforethought ( no premeditation is required ) . It is this mental component that marks murder out from manslaughter . 
 The mental element is taken to be either an intention to kill , or an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm . Grievous bodily harm is " really serious " harm . The extension of the intention to inflict grievous bodily harm has been criticised , although it has remained in place despite several legal challenges , and , in the case of R v Hyam the minority judgments of Lord Diplock and Lord Kilbrandon which would have removed it . The judges there made reference to the abolition under the Homicide Act 1957 of constructive malice ( causing death whilst committing a felony or resisting arrest ) , believing the rule for grievous bodily harm to be a hang @-@ over of the old system . It can now be concluded that only legislative intervention could abolish this form of murder , and , although the Law Commission proposed a change in the law , none has yet been enacted . The current law was judged to be compatible with Article 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights in relation to Northern Ireland . It can also be defended with reference to the actor taking responsibility for his actions , even unforeseen consequences , or merely as an appropriate response in itself . Intent is subjective : that the defendant must surely have intended their actions because a reasonable person would , knowing what the defendant knew , have foreseen death as a result , is insufficient . This seemed to have been allowed as a form of intent in DPP v Smith , but that case has been considered overturned following legislative changes , and more recent cases leave no room for doubt on this issue . 
 Core intent would be where the defendant acted either to cause at least grievous bodily harm to the victim , or where the defendant acted to achieve some other aim , where the death caused was a necessary means to that other end . In general , the jury is directed that " intent " is to be taken as meaning what it does in ordinary life , and that the judge should not attempt to define it in other terms . However , following R v Woollin , it is also possible for a jury to convict if they " feel sure that death or serious injury was a virtual certainty ( barring some unforeseen intervention ) as a result of the defendant 's actions and that the defendant appreciated that such was the case " – known as " oblique intent " . Despite appearing to present an alternative to the primary , core sense of intent , courts have generally seen Woollin as allowing the jury to infer core intent from the evidence of virtual certainty . The jury are entitled to convict in these circumstances , and they should not be directed that they , finding virtual certainty , must convict . However , if it is difficult to imagine circumstances where a jury would find virtual certainty but not convict , which would support this complicating factor . The exception for medical care is mentioned as a general principle for homicide . 
 There is a mandatory life sentence for murder in England and Wales . David Ormerod describes the evidence for abolishing it – instead giving judges discretion to impose a life sentence , or some lesser term – as " overwhelming " since murders and murderers differ greatly , as in any other crime . However , no government has yet , or seems likely to , institute such reform . The former role of the Home Secretary in deciding the minimum time spent in jail was successfully challenged with reference to the ECHR in R v Home Secretary , ex p Anderson , but the mandatory life sentence itself has been judged compatible . The sentencing and release of life prisoners was reformed by the Criminal Justice Act 2003 . 
 = = Manslaughter = = 
 Previously , all deaths which were not murder were classified as " manslaughter " – however , the law now requires that the death fit a particular type of manslaughter . Modern manslaughter does , however , retain a very wide scope . 
 There are three main forms of manslaughter in English law : voluntary manslaughter , cases which would otherwise amount to murder but for some legally recognised mitigating factor ; and involuntary manslaughter which includes cases of gross negligence manslaughter and unlawful act manslaughter . 
 = = = Voluntary manslaughter = = = 
 There are three types of voluntary manslaughter : that resulting from loss of self @-@ control ; that resulting from statutorily defined diminished responsibility ; and killing in perseverance of a suicide pact . 
 Loss of control is defined in sections 54 and 55 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 . Section 56 abolishes the common law defence of provocation , which also dealt only with murder . There is no mandatory life sentence for voluntary manslaughter . The defence operates whether the defendant is a principal or an accomplice . Broadly speaking , the defendant must have actually lost self @-@ control ; the trigger for this must be a qualifying trigger ; and it must be that a " normal " person might also have lost control in the circumstances . The loss of control need not be sudden , but cannot be in a " considered desired for revenge " . The loss of control is a subjective test which asks whether this defendant actually lost control , and if so , whether that loss of control led to their killing . The qualifying trigger may take one of two forms , or be a combination of both : that the killing was attributable to the defendant 's fear of serious violence from the victim against the defendant or another identified person ; or where the defendant 's loss of self @-@ control was attributable to a thing or things done or said ( or both ) which constituted circumstances of an extremely grave character , and caused the defendant to have a justifiable sense of being seriously wronged . The meaning of the terms " extremely grave character " and " justifiable sense of being seriously wronged " used in the second form is currently unclear . Section 51 ( 1 ) ( c ) requires that " a person of [ the defendant ] ' s sex and age , with a normal degree of tolerance and self @-@ restraint and in the circumstances of [ the defendant ] , might have reacted in the same or in a similar way to [ the defendant ] . " These issues are complicated and directing a jury on issues of loss of control is likely to be difficult . 
 Diminished responsibility occurs where the defendant has an " abnormality of mental functioning " <unk> to a recognised medical condition . It must " substantially impair " the defendant 's ability to either : under the nature of his or her conduct ; form a rational judgment ; or exercise self @-@ control . It must provide an explanation for the defendant 's actions . There is some sort of causal link required between the defendant 's condition and his acts or omissions , a change on the previous law . A.P. Simester and G. R. Sullivan have argued that it is more clearly worded and more schematic provision than the earlier law , although they are worried if the wording of the section is taken to imprison those better suited to psychiatric help outside of prison . 
 A killing in <unk> of a suicide pact , where the defendant had the " settled intention " of also committing suicide – although not necessarily by the same act – is a partial defence to murder . He or she must intend to fulfil that pact at the time of the killing and may renege on it later . Where the jury is not satisfied that the killing can be attributed to the defendant , a charge of encouraging or assisting suicide may be substituted to a charge of murder or voluntary manslaughter . 
 = = = Involuntary manslaughter = = = 
 Involuntary manslaughter involves the causing of the death of another person without intent to kill or intention to commit grievous bodily harm . Some cases are in form similar to murder cases ; whilst , in others , had death not been caused , the defendant would only be liable for an insignificant crime . 
 = = = = " Constructive " or " unlawful act " manslaughter = = = = 
 " Constructive " or " unlawful act " manslaughter results from the continuation of aspects of the felony murder rule , which was abolished in English law . Under that rule , the perpetrator of any ( civil or criminal ) illegality were held responsible for manslaughter for any death they caused . It had a huge scope . Constructive manslaughter has been narrowed , but remains broad . It requires a criminal act that causes the death ; that that act is inherently criminal ; and that that act is dangerous . Civil liability is insufficient for constructive manslaughter to result . It is deemed " constructive " in the sense that a greater crime – manslaughter – is constructed from a lesser . 
 The typical case will be of an non @-@ fatal offence against the person that causes death . There must be a criminal act , rather than an omission , following R v Lowe . Although acts and omissions may be equally culpable , the extension to omissions – where there is no need to show intent – would have made illegal a huge class of persons . Cases such as Lowe , which there was parental neglect , can be dealt with by gross negligence manslaughter . Judges have often failed to identify a single unlawful act on which the crime of manslaughter is to be constructed , rather assuming the presence of one in particular circumstances . There is a required mental element ( mens rea ) for this crime , but it has in some cases not actually been formally established . This mens rea might be very low , such as recklessness . The requirement of an unlawful act also means that no lawful defence must be available to the defendant in respect of the lesser crime . 
 The act must be inherently criminal – the case in point is that of R v Andrews , where the defendant had killed whilst driving dangerously . It was only the fact that the driving was dangerous that made it a crime , not the driving itself . Accordingly , Andrews removed driving and regulatory offences from the scope of constructive manslaughter . There are separate rules for causing death by dangerous driving and some regulatory offences . Some commentators took Andrews as excluding strict liability and negligence cases out of constructive manslaughter , although contrary to the exact wording in the judgment there ; however , a separate case also called R v Andrews convicted the defendant of constructive manslaughter based on a strict liability offence and this alternative proposition cannot be supported . Gross negligence manslaughter exists as a complementary form , and , if a driver was sufficiently negligent , as well he might , he would be liable for it . This provides an additional reason to exclude such cases from constructive manslaughter . 
 The requirement that the action be dangerous was confirmed in R v Newbury , which applied the previous reasoning on R v Church : " the unlawful act must be such that all sober and reasonable people would inevitably recognise it as an act which must subject the other person to at least the risk of some harm resulting therefrom albeit not serious harm " . This is an ( almost completely ) objective test , it disregards whether the defendant in particular foresaw the danger , and requires only that it would create a risk of some harm . The ordinary person knows only what the defendant did , at least in relation to the susceptibility of the victim . R v Ball did , however , create a class of dangerous – that of the act itself – where the jury knew more than the defendant ; in this case , whilst the defendant knew he was loading a blank cartridge , the jury was entitled to ascribe knowledge that it might be a live cartridge to the reasonable man . This has been criticised , and may not have been necessary . The act need not be directed at the victim : the killing of an innocent bystander by mistake could be manslaughter . 
 This act must be causally linked to the death . In the case of an offence against the person , it is usually obvious ; however , rather more controversial cases have founded constructive manslaughter on drug possession crimes involving the subsequent injection of the drug into another . 
 = = = = Gross negligence manslaughter = = = = 
 Gross negligence manslaughter requires a much greater level of wrongdoing that the civil tort of negligence . 
 It requires that the defendant owed a duty of care to the victim ( it is for the judge to decide on which facts such a duty would be created ) . These rules are typically those of tort . For example , in R v <unk> , the defendant was put under a duty to act on account of being contractually obliged to close the gates at a railway crossing . Similar duties include those of a doctor of his patients , an electrician over a householder he has done work for , parents over their children , and , developed more recently , a police officer over persons he arrests . Included , however , are those of a criminal enterprise , which would not attract tortious liability in the civil law . Where the defendant is liable through an omission and not an act , then a legal duty to act – rather than a duty of care – is needed . Andrew Ashworth has criticised the nature of the duty of care requirement as " decision @-@ making at its retrospective worst " . 
 Once a duty of care ( or duty to act , as required ) has been shown , the jury should then be asked , following Lord Mackay in R v <unk> : " having regard to the risk of death involved , [ was ] the conduct of the defendant ... so bad in all the circumstances as to amount to a criminal act or omission " . This has two elements : firstly , the breach of the duty of care must relate to the risk of death ( confirmed in R v Singh ) , and not to any lesser harm . In other words , the breach of the duty of care must cause the victim 's death . Secondly the breach of the duty of care must be so egregious as to amount to a crime . For example , on the fact of <unk> itself , the defendant , an anaesthetist , failed to spot a problem with the victim 's breathing tube for 11 minutes , something expert evidence suggested a competent anaesthetist would spot within thirty seconds or so . The defendant was convicted . This definition has been opposed as being circular , as defining the crime of manslaughter as gross negligence as being negligence to a criminal degree . The jury may , under this characterisation , be ruling upon a point of law and not a point of fact . 
 = Clitoris = 
 The clitoris ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is a female sex organ present in mammals , ostriches and a limited number of other animals . In humans , the visible button @-@ like portion is near the front junction of the labia minora ( inner lips ) , above the opening of the urethra . Unlike the penis , the male homologue ( equivalent ) to the clitoris , it usually does not contain the distal portion ( or opening ) of the urethra and is therefore not used for urination . While few animals urinate through the clitoris , the spotted hyena , which has an especially well @-@ developed clitoris , urinates , mates and gives birth via the organ . Some other carnivorous animals , or mammals in particular , such as lemurs and spider monkeys , also have a well @-@ developed clitoris . 
 The clitoris is the human female 's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure . In humans and other mammals , it develops from an outgrowth in the embryo called the genital tubercle . Initially undifferentiated , the tubercle develops into either a penis or a clitoris , depending on the presence or absence of the protein <unk> , which is codified by a single gene on the Y chromosome . The clitoris is a complex structure , and its size and sensitivity can vary . The glans ( head ) of the human clitoris is roughly the size and shape of a pea , and is estimated to have more than 8 @,@ 000 sensory nerve endings . 
 Extensive sociological , sexological and medical debate have focused on the clitoris , primarily concerning anatomical accuracy , orgasmic factors and their physiological explanation for the G @-@ spot , and whether the clitoris is vestigial , an adaptation , or serves a reproductive function . Social perceptions of the clitoris range from the significance of its role in female sexual pleasure , assumptions about its true size and depth , and varying beliefs regarding genital modification such as clitoris enlargement , clitoris piercing and clitoridectomy ; genital modification may be for aesthetic , medical or cultural reasons . 
 Knowledge of the clitoris is significantly impacted by cultural perceptions of the organ . Studies suggest that knowledge of its existence and anatomy is scant in comparison with that of other sexual organs , and that more education about it could help alleviate social stigmas associated with the female body and female sexual pleasure ; for example , that the clitoris and vulva in general are visually unappealing , that female masturbation is taboo , or that men should be expected to master and control women 's orgasms . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Oxford English Dictionary states that the word clitoris likely has its origin in the Ancient Greek <unk> , <unk> , perhaps derived from the verb <unk> , <unk> , " to shut " . Clitoris is also Greek for the word key , " indicating that the ancient anatomists considered it the key " to female sexuality . In addition to key , the Online Etymology Dictionary suggests other Greek candidates for the word 's etymology include a noun meaning " latch " or " hook " ; a verb meaning " to touch or titillate lasciviously " , " to tickle " ( one German synonym for the clitoris is der <unk> , " the tickler " ) , although this verb is more likely derived from " clitoris " ; and a word meaning " side of a hill " , from the same root as " climax " . The Oxford English Dictionary also states that the shortened form " clit " , the first occurrence of which was noted in the United States , has been used in print since 1958 : until then , the common abbreviation was " <unk> " . 
 The plural forms are clitorises in English and <unk> in Latin . The Latin genitive is clitoridis , as in " glans clitoridis " . In medical and sexological literature , the clitoris is sometimes referred to as " the female penis " or pseudo @-@ penis , and the term clitoris is commonly used to refer to the glans alone ; partially because of this , there have been various terms for the organ that have historically confused its anatomy ( see below ) . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In mammals , sexual differentiation is determined by the sperm that carries either an X or a Y ( male ) chromosome . The Y chromosome contains a sex @-@ determining gene ( <unk> ) that encodes a transcription factor for the protein <unk> ( testis determining factor ) and triggers the creation of testosterone and Anti @-@ Müllerian hormone for the embryo 's development into a male . This differentiation begins about eight or nine weeks after conception . Some sources state that it continues until the twelfth week , while others state that it is clearly evident by the thirteenth week and that the sex organs are fully developed by the sixteenth week . 
 The clitoris develops from a phallic outgrowth in the embryo called the genital tubercle . Initially undifferentiated , the tubercle develops into either a clitoris or penis during development of the reproductive system depending on exposure to androgens ( primarily male hormones ) . The clitoris forms from the same tissues that become the glans and upper shaft of the penis , and this shared embryonic origin makes these two organs homologous ( different versions of the same structure ) . 
 If exposed to testosterone , the genital tubercle elongates to form the penis . By fusion of the urogenital folds – elongated spindle @-@ shaped structures that contribute to the formation of the urethral groove on the belly aspect of the genital tubercle – the urogenital sinus closes completely and forms the spongy urethra , and the <unk> swellings unite to form the scrotum . In the absence of testosterone , the genital tubercle allows for formation of the clitoris ; the initially rapid growth of the phallus gradually slows and the clitoris is formed . The urogenital sinus persists as the vestibule of the vagina , the two urogenital folds form the labia minora , and the <unk> swellings enlarge to form the labia majora , completing the female genitalia . A rare condition that can develop from higher than average androgen exposure is clitoromegaly . 
 = = = General structure and histological evaluation = = = 
 The clitoris is a complex structure , containing external and internal components . It consists of the glans ( including the frenulum clitoridis , which is a frenulum on the under @-@ surface of the glans and is created by the two medial parts of the labia minora ) , the clitoral body ( which is composed of two erectile bodies known as the corpora cavernosa ) , two clitoral crura , the clitoral hood ( formed by the labia minora ) and the vestibular or clitoral bulbs . The clitoral body is commonly referred to as the shaft ( or internal shaft ) , while the length of the clitoris between the glans and the body may also be referred to as the shaft ( or external shaft ) because , like the shaft as a whole , it supports the glans , and its shape can be seen and felt through the clitoral hood . 
 Research indicates that clitoral tissue extends into the vagina 's anterior wall . Şenaylı et al. said that the histological evaluation of the clitoris , " especially of the corpora cavernosa , is incomplete because for many years the clitoris was considered a rudimentary and nonfunctional organ . " They added that Baskin and colleagues examined the clitoris 's masculinization after dissection and , using imaging software after Masson chrome staining , put the serial dissected specimens together ; this revealed that the nerves of the clitoris surround the whole clitoral body ( corpus ) . 
 The clitoris , vestibular bulbs , labia minora , and urethra involve two histologically distinct types of vascular tissue ( tissue related to blood vessels ) , the first of which is <unk> , erectile tissue . The <unk> tissue has a spongy appearance ; along with blood , it fills the large , dilated vascular spaces of the clitoris and the bulbs . Beneath the epithelium of the vascular areas is smooth muscle . It may also be that the urethral lumen ( the inner open space or cavity of the urethra ) , which is surrounded by spongy tissue , has tissue that " is grossly distinct from the vascular tissue of the clitoris and bulbs , and on macroscopic observation , is paler than the dark tissue " of the clitoris and bulbs . 
 The second type of vascular tissue is non @-@ erectile . Although the clitoral body becomes engorged with blood upon sexual arousal , erecting the clitoral glans , some sources describe the clitoral glans and labia minora as composed of non @-@ erectile tissue ; this is especially the case for the glans . They state that the clitoral glans and labia minora have blood vessels that are dispersed within a fibrous matrix and have only a minimal amount of smooth muscle , or that the clitoral glans is " a midline , densely neural , non @-@ erectile structure " . Other sources state that the glans is composed of erectile tissue and that erectile tissue is present within the labia minora ; adipose tissue is absent in the labia minora , but the organ may be described as being made up of dense connective tissue , erectile tissue and elastic fibers . 
 Yang et al. are among the researchers who challenge the notion that the glans is not formed of erectile tissue , stating that their dissections clearly show <unk> vascular spaces , although not as prominent as those in the clitoral body . " The erectile tissue of the glans is slightly different from that of the body and crura . The vascular spaces are separated more by smooth muscle than in the body and crura , " they concluded . They stated that there is a thick layer of tissue that supports the tissue between the epithelium and vascular spaces and that " there is a dense distribution of nerves and sensory receptors " in the epithelium and supporting tissue . 
 = = = <unk> and body = = = 
 Highly innervated , the glans exists at the tip of the clitoral body as a fibro @-@ vascular cap , and is usually the size and shape of a pea , although it is sometimes much larger or smaller . While whether or not the glans is composed of erectile or non @-@ erectile tissue is subject to debate ( see above ) , it , or the entire clitoris , is estimated to have 8 @,@ 000 or more sensory nerve endings . 
 The clitoral body forms a wishbone @-@ shaped structure containing the corpora cavernosa – a pair of sponge @-@ like regions of erectile tissue which contain most of the blood in the clitoris during clitoral erection . The two corpora forming the clitoral body are surrounded by thick fibro @-@ elastic tunica albuginea , literally meaning " white covering " , connective tissue . These corpora are separated incompletely from each other in the midline by a fibrous <unk> septum – a comblike band of connective tissue extending between the corpora cavernosa . 
 The clitoral body extends up to several centimeters before reversing direction and branching , resulting in an inverted " V " shape that extends as a pair of crura ( " legs " ) . The crura are the proximal portions of the arms of the wishbone . Ending at the glans of the clitoris , the tip of the body bends anteriorly away from the pubis . Each crus ( singular form of crura ) is attached to the corresponding ischial ramus – extensions of the <unk> beneath the descending pubic rami . Concealed behind the labia minora , the crura end with attachment at or just below the middle of the pubic arch . Associated are the urethral sponge , perineal sponge , a network of nerves and blood vessels , the suspensory ligament of the clitoris , muscles and the pelvic floor . 
 There is no identified correlation between the size of the clitoral glans , or clitoris as a whole , and a woman 's age , height , weight , use of hormonal contraception , or being post @-@ menopausal , although women who have given birth may have significantly larger clitoral measurements . <unk> ( cm ) and millimeter ( mm ) measurements of the clitoris show variations in its size . The adult clitoral glans usually has a width less than 1 cm , with an average length of 1 @.@ 5 to 2 cm . A 1992 study gives clitoral glans widths of 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 098 to 0 @.@ 177 in ) , with the average size smaller than a pencil @-@ top eraser . The study concluded that the total clitoral length , including glans and body , is 16 @.@ 0 ± 4 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 ± 0 @.@ 17 in ) . 
 Concerning other studies , researchers from the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and <unk> Hospital in London measured the labia and other genital structures of 50 women from the age of 18 to 50 , with a mean age of 35 @.@ 6 . , from 2003 to 2004 , and the results given for the clitoral glans were 3 – 10 mm for the range and 5 @.@ 5 [ 1 @.@ 7 ] mm for the mean . Other research indicates that the clitoral body can measure 5 – 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) in length , while the clitoral body and crura together can be 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) or more in length . 
 = = = Hood and bulbs = = = 
 The clitoral hood projects at the front of the labia commissure , where the edges of the labia majora ( outer lips ) meet at the base of the pubic mound ; it forms as part of the external folds of the labia minora ( inner lips ) and covers the glans and external shaft . There is considerable variation in how much of the glans protrudes from the hood and how much is covered by it , ranging from completely covered to fully exposed , and tissue of the labia minora also encircles the base of the glans . 
 The vestibular bulbs are more closely related to the clitoris than the vestibule because of the similarity of the trabecular and erectile tissue within the clitoris and bulbs , and the absence of trabecular tissue in other genital organs , with the erectile tissue 's trabecular nature allowing engorgement and expansion during sexual arousal . The vestibular bulbs lie close to the crura on either side of the vaginal opening ; internally , they are beneath the labia majora . When engorged with blood , they cuff the vaginal opening and cause the vulva to expand outward . Though some texts state that they surround the vaginal opening , this does not appear to be the case and tunica albuginea does not envelop the erectile tissue of the bulbs . In Yang et al . ' s assessment of the bulbs ' anatomy , they conclude that the bulbs " arch over the distal urethra , outlining what might be appropriately called the ' bulbar urethra ' in women . " 
 = = = Clitoral and penile similarities and differences = = = 
 The clitoris and penis are generally the same anatomical structure , although the distal portion ( or opening ) of the urethra is absent in the clitoris of humans and most other animals . The idea that males have clitorises was suggested in 1987 by researcher Josephine Lowndes <unk> , who theorized that the male corpora cavernosa ( a pair of sponge @-@ like regions of erectile tissue which contain most of the blood in the penis during penile erection ) are the true counterpart of the clitoris . She argued that " the male clitoris " is directly beneath the rim of the glans penis , where the frenulum of prepuce of the penis ( a fold of the prepuce ) is located , and proposed that this area be called the " <unk> 's crown . " Her theory and proposal , though acknowledged in anatomical literature , did not materialize in anatomy books . Modern anatomical texts instead show that the clitoris displays a hood that is the equivalent of the penis 's foreskin , which covers the glans , and a shaft that is attached to the glans ; the male corpora cavernosa are homologous to the corpus <unk> clitoridis ( the female cavernosa ) ; the corpus spongiosum is homologous to the vestibular bulbs beneath the labia minora , and the scrotum is homologous to the labia minora and labia majora . 
 Upon anatomical study , the penis can be described as a clitoris that has been mostly pulled out of the body and grafted on top of a significantly smaller piece of spongiosum containing the urethra . With regard to nerve endings , the human clitoris 's estimated 8 @,@ 000 or more ( for its glans or clitoral body as a whole ) is commonly cited as being twice as many as the nerve endings found in the human penis ( for its glans or body as a whole ) , and as more than any other part of the human body . These reports sometimes conflict with other sources on clitoral anatomy or those concerning the nerve endings in the human penis . For example , while some sources estimate that the human penis has 4 @,@ 000 nerve endings , other sources state that the glans or the entire penile structure have the same amount of nerve endings as the clitoral glans , or discuss whether the uncircumcised penis has thousands more than the circumcised penis or is generally more sensitive . 
 Some sources state that in contrast to the glans penis , the clitoral glans lacks smooth muscle within its <unk> cap and is thus differentiated from the erectile tissues of the clitoris and bulbs ; additionally , bulb size varies and may be dependent on age and <unk> . Though the bulbs are considered the equivalent of the male spongiosum , they do not completely encircle the urethra . 
 The thin corpus spongiosum of the penis runs along the underside of the penile shaft , enveloping the urethra , and expands at the end to form the glans . It partially contributes to erection , which are primarily caused by the two corpora cavernosa that comprise the bulk of the shaft ; like the female cavernosa , the male cavernosa soak up blood and become erect when sexually excited . The male corpora cavernosa taper off internally on reaching the spongiosum head . With regard to the Y @-@ shape of the cavernosa – crown , body , and legs – the body accounts for much more of the structure in men , and the legs are <unk> ; typically , the cavernosa are longer and thicker in males than in females . 
 = = Sexual stimulation , findings and debates = = 
 = = = General stimulation , practices , and arousal = = = 
 The abundance of nerve endings in the clitoris , the majority of which exist specifically for sexual enjoyment , make it the human female 's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure . Sexual stimulation of the clitoris can produce female sexual arousal and orgasm , and may be achieved by masturbation or with a sexual partner . The most effective sexual stimulation of the organ is usually through manual or oral stimulation ( cunnilingus ) , often referred to as direct clitoral stimulation ; in cases involving sexual penetration , these activities may also be referred to as additional or assisted clitoral stimulation . 
 Direct clitoral stimulation involves physical stimulation to the external anatomy of the clitoris – glans , hood and the external shaft . Stimulation of the labia minora ( inner lips ) , due to its external connection with the glans and hood , may have the same effect as direct clitoral stimulation . Though these areas may also receive indirect physical stimulation during sexual activity , such as when in friction with the labia majora ( outer lips ) , indirect clitoral stimulation is more commonly attributed to penile @-@ vaginal penetration . Penile @-@ anal penetration may also indirectly stimulate the clitoris , either by the shared sensory nerves ( especially the pudendal nerve , which gives off the inferior anal nerves and divides into two terminal branches : the perineal nerve and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris ) or by the crura ( " legs " ) . 
 Due to the glans 's high sensitivity , direct stimulation to it is not always pleasurable ; instead , direct stimulation to the hood or the areas near the glans are often more pleasurable , with the majority of females preferring to use the hood to stimulate the glans , or to have the glans rolled between the lips of the labia , for indirect touch . It is also common for women to " enjoy a light caressing of the shaft of the clitoris " combined with the occasional circling of the clitoral glans , with or without manual penetration of the vagina , while other women enjoy having the entire area of the vulva caressed . As opposed to use of dry fingers , stimulation from fingers that have been well @-@ lubricated , either by vaginal lubrication or a personal lubricant , is usually more pleasurable for the external anatomy of the clitoris . 
 As the clitoris 's external location does not allow for direct stimulation by sexual penetration , any external clitoral stimulation while in the missionary position usually results from the pubic bone area , the movement of the groins when in contact . As such , some couples may engage in the woman @-@ on @-@ top position or the coital alignment technique , a technique combining the " riding high " variation of the missionary position with pressure @-@ <unk> movements performed by each partner in rhythm with sexual penetration , to maximize clitoral stimulation . Lesbian couples may engage in tribadism for ample clitoral stimulation or for mutual clitoral stimulation during whole @-@ body contact . Pressing the penis or a dildo in a gliding or circular motion against the clitoris ( <unk> sex ) , or stimulating it by movement against another body part , during any number of sex positions , may also be practiced . A vibrator , or specifically a clitoral vibrator , or other sex toys , may be used during or absent of any of the aforementioned practices . Other women stimulate the clitoris by use of a pillow or other inanimate object , by a jet of water from the faucet of a bathtub or shower , or by closing their legs and rocking . 
 During sexual arousal , the clitoris and the whole of the genitalia engorge and change color as the erectile tissues fill with blood ( <unk> ) , and the individual experiences vaginal contractions . The <unk> and <unk> muscles , which insert into the corpora cavernosa , " contract and compress the dorsal vein of the clitoris , the only vein that drains the blood from the spaces in the corpora cavernosa " and the arterial blood " continues to pour in and , having no way to drain out , fills the venous spaces until they become turgid and engorged with blood " . It is this mechanism that " causes the stiffening and erection of the clitoris " . 
 The clitoral glans doubles in diameter upon arousal , and , upon further stimulation , it becomes less visible as it is covered by the swelling of tissues of the clitoral hood . The swelling protects the glans from direct contact , as direct contact at this stage can be more irritating than pleasurable . <unk> eventually " sets off a muscular reflex " which expels the blood that was trapped in surrounding tissues , and leads to an orgasm . A short time after stimulation has stopped , especially if orgasm has been achieved , the glans becomes visible again and returns to its normal state , with a few seconds ( usually 5 – 10 ) to return to its normal position and 5 – 10 minutes to return to its original size . If orgasm is not achieved , the clitoris may remain engorged for a few hours , which women often find uncomfortable . Additionally , the clitoris is very sensitive after orgasm , making further stimulation initially painful for some women . Masters and Johnson documented the sexual response cycle , which has four phases and is still the clinically accepted definition of the human orgasm . > 
 = = = Clitoral and vaginal orgasmic factors = = = 
 Physical sexual stimulation of the clitoris is the most common way for women to achieve orgasm ; general statistics indicate that 70 – 80 percent of women require direct clitoral stimulation ( consistent manual , oral or other concentrated friction against the external parts of the clitoris ) to reach orgasm , though indirect clitoral stimulation ( for example , via vaginal penetration ) may also be sufficient for female orgasm . The area near the entrance of the vagina ( the lower third ) contains nearly 90 percent of the vaginal nerve endings , and there are areas in the anterior vaginal wall and between the top junction of the labia minora and the urethra that are especially sensitive , but intense sexual pleasure , including orgasm , solely from vaginal stimulation is occasional or otherwise absent because the vagina has significantly fewer nerve endings than the clitoris . 
 Prominent debate over the quantity of vaginal nerve endings began with Alfred Kinsey ; although Sigmund Freud 's theory that clitoral orgasms are a prepubertal or adolescent phenomenon and that vaginal ( or G @-@ spot ) orgasms are something that only physically mature females experience had been criticized by few researchers before , Kinsey was the first researcher to harshly criticize the theory . Through his observations of female masturbation and interviews with thousands of women , Kinsey found that most of the women he observed and surveyed could not have vaginal orgasms , a finding that was also supported by his knowledge of sex organ anatomy . He " criticized Freud and other theorists for projecting male constructs of sexuality onto women " and " viewed the clitoris as the main center of sexual response " . He considered the vagina to be " relatively unimportant " for sexual satisfaction , relaying that " few women inserted fingers or objects into their vaginas when they masturbated " . Believing that vaginal orgasms are " a physiological impossibility " because the vagina has insufficient nerve endings for sexual pleasure or climax , he " concluded that satisfaction from penile penetration [ is ] mainly psychological or perhaps the result of referred sensation " . 
 Masters and Johnson 's research , as well as Shere Hite 's , generally supported Kinsey 's findings about the female orgasm . Masters and Johnson were the first researchers to determine that the clitoral structures surround and extend along and within the labia . They observed that both clitoral and vaginal orgasms have the same stages of physical response , and found that the majority of their subjects could only achieve clitoral orgasms , while a minority achieved vaginal orgasms . On that basis , they argued that clitoral stimulation is the source of both kinds of orgasms , reasoning that the clitoris is stimulated during penetration by friction against its hood . The research came at the time of the second @-@ wave feminist movement , which inspired feminists to reject the distinction made between clitoral and vaginal orgasms . Feminist Anne <unk> argued that because men " have orgasms essentially by friction with the vagina " and not the clitoral area , this is why women 's biology had not been properly analyzed . " Today , with extensive knowledge of anatomy , with [ C. Lombard Kelly ] , Kinsey , and Masters and Johnson , to mention just a few sources , there is no ignorance on the subject [ of the female orgasm ] , " she stated in her 1970 article The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm . She added , " There are , however , social reasons why this knowledge has not been popularized . We are living in a male society which has not sought change in women 's role . " 
 Supporting an anatomical relationship between the clitoris and vagina is a study published in 2005 , which investigated the size of the clitoris ; Australian urologist Helen O 'Connell , described as having initiated discourse among mainstream medical professionals to refocus on and redefine the clitoris , noted a direct relationship between the legs or roots of the clitoris and the erectile tissue of the clitoral bulbs and corpora , and the distal urethra and vagina while using MRI technology . While some studies , using ultrasound , have found physiological evidence of the G @-@ spot in women who report having orgasms during vaginal intercourse , O 'Connell argues that this interconnected relationship is the physiological explanation for the conjectured G @-@ Spot and experience of vaginal orgasms , taking into account the stimulation of the internal parts of the clitoris during vaginal penetration . " The vaginal wall is , in fact , the clitoris , " she said . " If you lift the skin off the vagina on the side walls , you get the bulbs of the clitoris – triangular , <unk> masses of erectile tissue . " O 'Connell et al . , having performed dissections on the female genitals of cadavers and used photography to map the structure of nerves in the clitoris , made the assertion in 1998 that there is more erectile tissue associated with the clitoris than is generally described in anatomical textbooks , and were thus already aware that the clitoris is more than just its glans . They concluded that some females have more extensive clitoral tissues and nerves than others , especially having observed this in young cadavers compared to elderly ones , and therefore whereas the majority of females can only achieve orgasm by direct stimulation of the external parts of the clitoris , the stimulation of the more generalized tissues of the clitoris via vaginal intercourse may be sufficient for others . 
 French researchers Odile Buisson and Pierre <unk> reported similar findings to that of O 'Connell 's . In 2008 , they published the first complete 3D <unk> of the stimulated clitoris , and republished it in 2009 with new research , demonstrating the ways in which erectile tissue of the clitoris <unk> and surrounds the vagina . On the basis of their findings , they argued that women may be able to achieve vaginal orgasm via stimulation of the G @-@ spot , because the highly innervated clitoris is pulled closely to the anterior wall of the vagina when the woman is sexually aroused and during vaginal penetration . They assert that since the front wall of the vagina is inextricably linked with the internal parts of the clitoris , stimulating the vagina without activating the clitoris may be next to impossible . In their 2009 published study , the " coronal planes during perineal contraction and finger penetration demonstrated a close relationship between the root of the clitoris and the anterior vaginal wall " . Buisson and <unk> suggested " that the special sensitivity of the lower anterior vaginal wall could be explained by pressure and movement of clitoris 's root during a vaginal penetration and subsequent perineal contraction " . 
 Researcher Vincenzo <unk> , who , while agreeing that the clitoris is the center of female sexual pleasure and believing that there is no anatomical evidence of the vaginal orgasm , disagrees with O 'Connell and other researchers ' terminological and anatomical descriptions of the clitoris ( such as referring to the vestibular bulbs as the " clitoral bulbs " ) and states that " the inner clitoris " does not exist because the penis cannot come in contact with the congregation of multiple nerves / veins situated until the angle of the clitoris , detailed by Kobelt , or with the roots of the clitoris , which do not have sensory receptors or erogenous sensitivity , during vaginal intercourse . <unk> 's belief contrasts the general belief among researchers that vaginal orgasms are the result of clitoral stimulation ; they reaffirm that clitoral tissue extends , or is at least stimulated by its bulbs , even in the area most commonly reported to be the G @-@ spot . 
 The G @-@ spot being analogous to the base of the male penis has additionally been theorized , with sentiment from researcher <unk> <unk> that because female fetal development is the " default " state in the absence of substantial exposure to male hormones and therefore the penis is essentially a clitoris enlarged by such hormones , there is no evolutionary reason why females would have an entity in addition to the clitoris that can produce orgasms . The general difficulty of achieving orgasms vaginally , which is a predicament that is likely due to nature easing the process of child bearing by drastically reducing the number of vaginal nerve endings , challenge arguments that vaginal orgasms help encourage sexual intercourse in order to facilitate reproduction . Supporting a distinct G @-@ spot , however , is a study by Rutgers University , published in 2011 , which was the first to map the female genitals onto the sensory portion of the brain ; the scans indicated that the brain registered distinct feelings between stimulating the clitoris , the cervix and the vaginal wall – where the G @-@ spot is reported to be – when several women stimulated themselves in a functional magnetic resonance ( fMRI ) machine . Barry <unk> , head of the research findings , stated that he feels that " the bulk of the evidence shows that the G @-@ spot is not a particular thing " and that it is " a region , it 's a convergence of many different structures " . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 = = = Clitoral modification = = = 
 There are intentional and unintentional modifications concerning the clitoris , including female genital mutilation ( FGM ) , sex reassignment surgery , clitoris enlargement and genital piercings . For example , use of anabolic steroids by bodybuilders and other athletes can result in significant enlargement of the clitoris in concert with other <unk> effects on their bodies . Abnormal enlargement of the clitoris may also be referred to as clitoromegaly , but clitoromegaly is more commonly seen as a congenital anomaly of the genitalia . 
 Parts of the clitoris may be partially or completely removed during FGM ; this may be additionally known as a clitoridectomy , female circumcision , or female genital cutting ( <unk> ) . Removing the glans of the clitoris does not mean that the whole structure is lost , since the clitoris reaches deep into the genitals . 
 In reduction clitoroplasty , a common intersex operation , the glans is preserved and parts of the erectile bodies are excised . Problems with this technique include loss of sensation , sexual function , and sloughing of the glans . One way to preserve the clitoris with its <unk> and function is to imbricate and bury the clitoral glans ; however , Şenaylı et al. state that " pain during stimulus because of trapped tissue under the scarring is nearly routine . In another method , 50 percent of the ventral clitoris is removed through the level base of the clitoral shaft , and it is reported that good sensation and clitoral function are observed in follow up " ; additionally , it has " been reported that the complications are from the same as those in the older procedures for this method " . 
 What is often referred to as " clit piercing " is actually the more common ( and significantly less complicated ) clitoral hood piercing . Since clitoral piercing is difficult and very painful , piercing of the clitoral hood is more common than piercing the clitoral shaft , owing to the small percentage of people who are anatomically suited for it . Clitoral hood piercings are usually channeled in the form of vertical piercings , and , to a lesser extent , horizontal piercings . The triangle piercing is a very deep horizontal hood piercing , and is done behind the clitoris as opposed to in front of it . For styles such as the Isabella , which pass through the clitoral shaft but are placed deep at the base , they provide unique stimulation and still require the proper genital build ; the Isabella starts between the clitoral glans and the urethra , exiting at the top of the clitoral hood ; this piercing is highly risky with regard to damage that may occur because of intersecting nerves . 
 = = = Sexual disorders = = = 
 Persistent genital arousal disorder ( PGAD ) results in a spontaneous , persistent , and uncontrollable genital arousal in women , with or without orgasm , unrelated to any feelings of sexual desire . Clitoral priapism , also known as <unk> , is a rare , potentially painful medical condition and is sometimes described as an aspect of PGAD , in which the erect clitoris does not return to its relaxed state for an unusually extended period of time ( ranging from minutes to days ) , despite the absence of both physical and psychological stimulation ; PGAD can also be associated with morphometric and vascular modifications of the clitoris . 
 Drugs may cause or affect clitoral priapism . The drug <unk> is known to cause male priapism as a side effect , but there is only one documented report that it may have caused clitoral priapism , in which case discontinuing the medication may be a remedy . Additionally , nefazodone is documented to have caused clitoral engorgement , as distinct from clitoral priapism , in one case , and clitoral priapism can sometimes start as a result of , or only after , the discontinuation of antipsychotics or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( SSRIs ) . 
 Because PGAD is relatively rare and , as its own concept apart from clitoral priapism , has only been researched since 2001 , there is little research into what may cure or remedy the disorder . In some recorded cases , PGAD was caused by , or caused , a pelvic arterial @-@ venous malformation with arterial branches to the clitoris ; surgical treatment was effective in these cases . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Ancient Greek – 16th century knowledge and vernacular = = = 
 With regard to historical and modern perceptions of the clitoris and associated sexual stimulation , for more than 2 @,@ 500 years there were scholars who considered the clitoris and the penis equivalent in all respects except their arrangement . The clitoris was , however , subject to " discovery " and " rediscovery " through empirical documentation by male scholars , due to it being frequently omitted from , or misrepresented , in historical and contemporary anatomical texts . The ancient Greeks , ancient Romans , and Greek and Roman generations up to and throughout the Renaissance , were aware that male and female sex organs are anatomically similar , but prominent anatomists , notably Galen ( 129 AD – 200 AD ) and Vesalius ( 1514 – 1564 ) , regarded the vagina as the structural equivalent of the penis , except for being inverted ; Vesalius argued against the existence of the clitoris in normal women , and his anatomical model described how the penis corresponds with the vagina , without a role for the clitoris . 
 Ancient Greek and Roman sexuality additionally designated penetration as " male @-@ defined " sexuality . The term <unk> , or <unk> , was used to refer to a woman or intersex individual who actively penetrated another person ( male or female ) through use of the clitoris or a dildo . As any sexual act was believed to require that one of the partners be " phallic " and that therefore sexual activity between women was impossible without this feature , mythology popularly associated lesbians with either having enlarged clitorises or as incapable of enjoying sexual activity without the substitution of a phallus . 
 In 1545 , Charles Estienne was the first writer to identify the clitoris in a work based on dissection , but he concluded that it had a urinary function . Following this study , <unk> Colombo ( also known as Matteo Renaldo Colombo ) , a lecturer in surgery at the University of Padua , Italy , published a book called De re <unk> in 1559 , in which he describes the " seat of woman 's delight " . In his role as researcher , Colombo concluded , " Since no one has discerned these projections and their workings , if it is permissible to give names to things discovered by me , it should be called the love or sweetness of Venus . " , in reference to the mythological Venus . Colombo 's claim was disputed by his successor at Padua , Gabriele Falloppio ( discoverer of the fallopian tube ) , who claimed that he was the first to discover the clitoris . In 1561 , Falloppio stated , " Modern anatomists have entirely neglected it ... and do not say a word about it ... and if others have spoken of it , know that they have taken it from me or my students . " This caused an upset in the European medical community , and , having read Colombo 's and Falloppio 's detailed descriptions of the clitoris , Vesalius stated , " It is unreasonable to blame others for incompetence on the basis of some sport of nature you have observed in some women and you can hardly ascribe this new and useless part , as if it were an organ , to healthy women . " He concluded , " I think that such a structure appears in hermaphrodites who otherwise have well formed genitals , as Paul of Aegina describes , but I have never once seen in any woman a penis ( which Avicenna called <unk> and the Greeks called an enlarged nympha and classed as an illness ) or even the rudiments of a tiny phallus . " 
 The average anatomist had difficulty challenging Galen 's or Vesalius 's research ; Galen was the most famous physician of the Greek era and his works were considered the standard of medical understanding up to and throughout the Renaissance ( i.e. for almost two thousand years ) , and various terms being used to describe the clitoris seemed to have further confused the issue of its structure . In addition to Avicenna 's naming it the <unk> or virga ( rod ) and Colombo 's calling it sweetness of Venus , Hippocrates used the term columella ( little pillar ) , and <unk> , an Arabic medical authority , named it <unk> ( tension ) . The names indicated that each description of the structures was about the body and glans of the clitoris , but usually the glans . It was additionally known to the Romans , who named it ( vulgar slang ) <unk> . However , Albertus Magnus , one of the most prolific writers of the Middle Ages , felt that it was important to highlight " homologies between male and female structures and function " by adding " a psychology of sexual arousal " that Aristotle had not used to detail the clitoris . While in Constantine 's treatise Liber de <unk> , the clitoris is referred to a few times , Magnus gave an equal amount of attention to male and female organs . 
 Like Avicenna , Magnus also used the word virga for the clitoris , but employed it for the male and female genitals ; despite his efforts to give equal ground to the clitoris , the cycle of suppression and rediscovery of the organ continued , and a 16th @-@ century justification for clitoridectomy appears to have been confused by hermaphroditism and the imprecision created by the word <unk> substituted for the word clitoris . <unk> was a medical operation to excise an unusually large clitoris , but what was considered " unusually large " was often a matter of perception . The procedure was routinely performed on Egyptian women , due to physicians such as Jacques <unk> who believed that this version of the clitoris was " an unusual feature that occurred in almost all Egyptian women [ and ] some of ours , so that when they find themselves in the company of other women , or their clothes rub them while they walk or their husbands wish to approach them , it erects like a male penis and indeed they use it to play with other women , as their husbands would do ... Thus the parts are cut " . 
 = = = 17th century – present day knowledge and vernacular = = = 
 Caspar Bartholin , a 17th @-@ century Danish anatomist , dismissed Colombo 's and Falloppio 's claims that they discovered the clitoris , arguing that the clitoris had been widely known to medical science since the second century . Although 17th @-@ century midwives recommended to men and women that women should aspire to achieve orgasms to help them get pregnant for general health and well @-@ being and to keep their relationships healthy , debate about the importance of the clitoris persisted , notably in the work of <unk> de Graaf in the 17th century and Georg Ludwig Kobelt in the 19th . 
 Like Falloppio and Bartholin , De Graaf criticized Colombo 's claim of having discovered the clitoris ; his work appears to have provided the first comprehensive account of clitoral anatomy . " We are extremely surprised that some anatomists make no more mention of this part than if it did not exist at all in the universe of nature , " he stated . " In every cadaver we have so far dissected we have found it quite perceptible to sight and touch . " De Graaf stressed the need to distinguish nympha from clitoris , choosing to " always give [ the clitoris ] the name clitoris " to avoid confusion ; this resulted in frequent use of the correct name for the organ among anatomists , but considering that nympha was also varied in its use and eventually became the term specific to the labia minora , more confusion ensued . Debate about whether orgasm was even necessary for women began in the Victorian era , and Freud 's 1905 theory about the immaturity of clitoral orgasms ( see above ) negatively affected women 's sexuality throughout most of the 20th century . From the 18th – 20th century , especially during the 20th , details of the clitoris from various genital diagrams presented in earlier centuries were omitted from later texts . 
 The full extent of the clitoris was alluded to by Masters and Johnson in 1966 , but in such a muddled fashion that the significance of their description became obscured ; in 1981 , the Federation of Feminist Women 's Health Clinics ( FFWHC ) continued this process with anatomically precise illustrations identifying 18 structures of the clitoris . Despite the FFWHC 's illustrations , Josephine Lowndes <unk> , in 1987 , described the vagina as more of the counterpart of the penis . 
 Concerning other beliefs about the clitoris , Hite ( 1976 and 1981 ) found that , during sexual intimacy with a partner , clitoral stimulation was more often described by women as foreplay than as a primary method of sexual activity , including orgasm . Further , although the FFWHC 's work created " fertile ground for feminist reformation of anatomical texts " and " revolutionized existing descriptions and renderings of the clitoris " , it did not have a general impact on anatomical texts ; it took Helen O 'Connell 's late 1990s research for the medical community to start changing the way the clitoris is anatomically defined . O 'Connell describes typical textbook descriptions of the clitoris as lacking detail and including inaccuracies , such as older and modern anatomical descriptions of the female human urethral and genital anatomy having been based on dissections performed on elderly cadavers whose erectile ( clitoral ) tissue had shrunk . She instead credits the work of Georg Ludwig Kobelt as the most comprehensive and accurate description of clitoral anatomy . MRI measurements , which provide a live and multi @-@ planar method of examination , now complement the FFWHC 's , as well as O 'Connell 's , research efforts regarding the clitoris , showing that the volume of clitoral erectile tissue is ten times that which is shown in doctors ' offices and in anatomy text books . 
 In Bruce <unk> 's survey of The Zoological Record ( 1978 – 1997 ) – which contains over a million documents from over 6 @,@ 000 scientific journals – 539 articles focusing on the penis were found , while 7 were found focusing on the clitoris . In 2000 , researchers Shirley Ogletree and Harvey Ginsberg concluded that there is a general neglect of the word clitoris in common vernacular . They looked at the terms used to describe genitalia in the <unk> database from 1887 to 2000 and found that penis was used in 1 @,@ 482 sources , vagina in 409 , while clitoris was only mentioned in 83 . They additionally analyzed 57 books listed in a computer database for sex instruction . In the majority of the books , penis was the most commonly discussed body part – mentioned more than clitoris , vagina , and uterus put together . They last investigated terminology used by college students , ranging from Euro @-@ American ( 76 % / 76 % ) , Hispanic ( 18 % / 14 % ) , and African American ( 4 % / 7 % ) , regarding the students ' beliefs about sexuality and knowledge on the subject . The students were overwhelmingly educated to believe that the vagina is the female counterpart of the penis . The authors found that the students ' belief that the inner portion of the vagina is the most sexually sensitive part of the female body correlated with negative attitudes toward masturbation and strong support for sexual myths . 
 A 2005 study reported that , among a sample of undergraduate students , the most frequently cited sources for knowledge about the clitoris were school and friends , and that this was associated with the least amount of tested knowledge . Knowledge of the clitoris by self @-@ exploration was the least cited , but " respondents correctly answered , on average , three of the five clitoral knowledge measures " . The authors stated that " [ k ] <unk> correlated significantly with the frequency of women 's orgasm in masturbation but not partnered sex " and that their " results are discussed in light of gender inequality and a social construction of sexuality , endorsed by both men and women , that privileges men 's sexual pleasure over women 's , such that orgasm for women is pleasing , but ultimately incidental . " They concluded that part of the solution to remedying " this problem " requires that males and females are taught more about the clitoris than is currently practiced . 
 In 2012 , New York artist Sophia Wallace started work on a multimedia project to challenge misconceptions about the clitoris . Based on O 'Connell 's 1998 research , Wallace 's work emphasizes the sheer scope and size of the human clitoris . She says that ignorance of this still seems to be pervasive in modern society . " It is a curious dilemma to observe the paradox that on the one hand the female body is the primary metaphor for sexuality , its use saturates advertising , art and the mainstream erotic imaginary , " she said . " Yet , the clitoris , the true female sexual organ , is virtually invisible . " The project is called <unk> and it includes a " clit rodeo " , which is an interactive , climb @-@ on model of a giant golden clitoris , including its inner parts , produced with the help of sculptor Kenneth Thomas . " It 's been a showstopper wherever it 's been shown . People are hungry to be able to talk about this , " Wallace said . " I love seeing men standing up for the clit [ ... ] Not having access to the pleasure that is your birthright is a deeply political act . " 
 In May 2013 , humanitarian group Clitoraid launched the first annual International Clitoris Awareness Week , from May 6 to May 12 . Clitoraid spokesperson Nadine Gary stated that the group 's mission is to raise public awareness about the clitoris because it has " been ignored , vilified , made taboo , and considered sinful and shameful for centuries " . 
 = = = Reasons for clitoral modification = = = 
 Motivations for clitoral modification and mutilation vary . Those taking hormones or other medications as part of female @-@ to @-@ male transition usually experience dramatic clitoral growth ; individual desires and the difficulties of <unk> ( construction of a penis ) often result in the retention of the original genitalia with the enlarged clitoris as a penis analogue ( metoidioplasty ) . However , the clitoris cannot reach the size of the penis through hormones . A surgery to add function to the clitoris , such as metoidioplasty , is an alternative to <unk> that permits retention of sexual sensation in the clitoris . 
 Significant controversy surrounds female genital mutilation ( FGM ) , with the World Health Organization ( WHO ) being one of many health organizations that have campaigned against the procedures on behalf of human rights , stating that " FGM has no health benefits " and that it is " a violation of the human rights of girls and women " and " reflects deep @-@ rooted inequality between the sexes " . The practice has existed at one point or another in almost all human civilizations , most commonly to exert control over the sexual behavior , including masturbation , of girls and women , but also to change the clitoris 's appearance . Custom and tradition are the most frequently cited reasons for FGM , with some cultures believing that not performing it has the possibility of disrupting the cohesiveness of their social and political systems , such as FGM also being a part of a girl 's initiation into adulthood . Often , a girl is not considered an adult in a FGM @-@ practicing society unless she has undergone FGM , and the " removal of the clitoris and labia – viewed by some as the male parts of a woman 's body – is thought to enhance the girl 's femininity , often synonymous with docility and obedience " . 
 Female genital mutilation is carried out in several countries , especially in Africa , with 85 percent of genital mutilations performed in Africa consisting of clitoridectomy or excision , and to a lesser extent in other parts of the Middle East and Southeast Asia , on girls from a few days old to mid @-@ adolescent , often to reduce sexual desire in an effort to preserve vaginal virginity . In the United States , it is sometimes practiced on girls born with a clitoris that is larger than usual . Comfort Momoh , who specializes in the topic of FGM , states that FGM might have been " practiced in ancient Egypt as a sign of distinction among the aristocracy " ; there are reports that traces of infibulation are on Egyptian mummies . FGM is still routinely practiced in Egypt . Greenberg et al. report that " one study found that 97 % of married women in Egypt had had some form of genital mutilation performed . " Amnesty International estimated in 1997 that more than two million FGM procedures are performed every year . 
 With regard to females who have the condition congenital adrenal hyperplasia , the largest group requiring surgical genital correction , researcher Atilla Şenaylı stated , " The main expectations for the operations are to create a normal female anatomy , with minimal complications and improvement of life quality . " Şenaylı added that " [ c ] <unk> , structural integrity , and coital capacity of the vagina , and absence of pain during sexual activity are the parameters to be judged by the surgeon . " He stated that although " expectations can be standardized within these few parameters , operative techniques have not yet become homogeneous . Investigators have preferred different operations for different ages of patients " . 
 Gender assessment and surgical treatment are the two main steps in intersex operations . " The first treatments for clitoromegaly were simply resection of the clitoris . Later , it was understood that the clitoris glans and sensory input are important to facilitate orgasm , " stated Atilla . The clitoral glans 's epithelium " has high cutaneous sensitivity , which is important in sexual responses " and it is because of this that " recession clitoroplasty was later devised as an alternative , but reduction clitoroplasty is the method currently performed . " 
 = = = <unk> , adaptionist and reproductive views = = = 
 Whether the clitoris is vestigial , an adaptation , or serves a reproductive function has also been debated . Geoffrey Miller states that Helen Fisher , Meredith Small and Sarah Blaffer <unk> " have viewed the clitoral orgasm as a legitimate adaptation in its own right , with major implications for female sexual behavior and sexual evolution " . Like Lynn Margulis and Natalie Angier , Miller believes , " The human clitoris shows no apparent signs of having evolved directly through male mate choice . It is not especially large , brightly colored , specifically shaped or selectively displayed during courtship . " He contrasts this with other female species such as spider monkeys and spotted hyenas that have clitorises as long as their male counterparts . He suggests that the human clitoris " could have evolved to be much more conspicuous if males had preferred sexual partners with larger brighter clitorises " and that " its inconspicuous design combined with its exquisite sensitivity suggests that the clitoris is important not as an object of male mate choice , but as a mechanism of female choice . " 
 While Miller states that male scientists such as Stephen Jay Gould and Donald Symons " have viewed the female clitoral orgasm as an evolutionary side @-@ effect of the male capacity for penile orgasm " and that they " suggested that clitoral orgasm cannot be an adaptation because it is too hard to achieve " , Gould acknowledged that " most female orgasms emanate from a clitoral , rather than vaginal ( or some other ) , site " and that his nonadaptive belief " has been widely misunderstood as a denial of either the adaptive value of female orgasm in general , or even as a claim that female orgasms lack significance in some broader sense " . He explained that although he accepts that " clitoral orgasm plays a pleasurable and central role in female sexuality and its joys , " " [ a ] ll these favorable attributes , however , emerge just as clearly and just as easily , whether the clitoral site of orgasm arose as a spandrel or an adaptation " . He said that the " male biologists who fretted over [ the adaptionist questions ] simply assumed that a deeply vaginal site , nearer the region of fertilization , would offer greater selective benefit " due to their Darwinian , summum bonum beliefs about enhanced reproductive success . 
 Similar to Gould 's beliefs about adaptionist views and that " females grow nipples as adaptations for suckling , and males grow smaller unused nipples as a spandrel based upon the value of single development channels " , Elisabeth Lloyd suggests that there is little evidence to support an adaptionist account of female orgasm . " Lloyd views female orgasm as an ontogenetic leftover ; women have orgasms because the urogenital neurophysiology for orgasm is so strongly selected for in males that this developmental blueprint gets expressed in females without affecting fitness " and this is similar to " males hav [ ing ] nipples that serve no fitness @-@ related function , " stated Meredith L. Chivers . 
 At the 2002 conference for Canadian Society of Women in Philosophy , Dr. Nancy <unk> asserted that the clitoris is unnecessary in reproduction ; she states that it has been ignored because of " a fear of pleasure . It is pleasure separated from reproduction . That 's the fear . " She reasoned that this fear causes ignorance , which veils female sexuality . O 'Connell states , " It boils down to rivalry between the sexes : the idea that one sex is sexual and the other reproductive . The truth is that both are sexual and both are reproductive . " She reiterates that the vestibular bulbs appear to be part of the clitoris and that the distal urethra and vagina are intimately related structures , although they are not erectile in character , forming a tissue cluster with the clitoris that appears to be the location of female sexual function and orgasm . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Although the clitoris exists in all mammal species , few detailed studies of the anatomy of the clitoris in non @-@ humans exist . The clitoris is especially developed in apes , lemurs , and , like the penis , often contains a small bone , the os clitoridis . The clitoris exists in ostriches , and it erects in squirrel monkeys during dominance displays , which indirectly influences the squirrel monkeys ' reproductive success . In female galagos ( bush babies ) , the clitoris is long and pendulous with a urethra extending through the tip for urination . Some intersex female bears mate and give birth through the tip of the clitoris ; these species are grizzly bears , brown bears , American black bears and polar bears . Although the bears have been described as having " a birth canal that runs through the clitoris rather than forming a separate vagina " ( a feature that is estimated to make up 10 to 20 percent of the bears ' population ) , scientists state that female spotted hyenas are the only non @-@ hermaphroditic female mammals devoid of an external vaginal opening , and whose sexual anatomy is distinct from usual intersex cases . 
 = = = Spider monkeys and bonobos = = = 
 In spider monkeys , the clitoris is especially developed and has an interior passage , or urethra , that makes it almost identical to the penis , and it retains and distributes urine droplets as the female spider monkey moves around . Scholar Alan F. Dixson stated that this urine " is voided at the bases of the clitoris , flows down the shallow groove on its perineal surface , and is held by the skin folds on each side of the groove " . Because spider monkeys of South America have pendulous and erectile clitorises long enough to be mistaken for a penis , researchers and observers of the species look for a scrotum to determine the animal 's sex ; a similar approach is to identify scent @-@ marking glands that may also be present on the clitoris . 
 The clitoris of bonobos is larger and more externalized than in most mammals ; Natalie Angier said that a young adolescent " female bonobo is maybe half the weight of a human teenager , but her clitoris is three times bigger than the human equivalent , and visible enough to waggle unmistakably as she walks " . Female bonobos often engage in the practice of genital @-@ genital ( GG ) rubbing , which is the non @-@ human form of tribadism that human females engage in . Ethologist Jonathan Balcombe stated that female bonobos rub their clitorises together rapidly for ten to twenty seconds , and this behavior , " which may be repeated in rapid succession , is usually accompanied by grinding , shrieking , and clitoral engorgement " ; he added that , on average , they engage in this practice " about once every two hours " , and as bonobos sometimes mate face @-@ to @-@ face , " evolutionary biologist Marlene <unk> has suggested that the position of the clitoris in bonobos and some other primates has evolved to maximize stimulation during sexual intercourse " . 
 = = = Spotted hyenas = = = 
 While female spotted hyenas are sometimes referred to as hermaphrodites or as intersex , and scientists of antiquity ( ancient and later historical times ) believed that they were hermaphrodites , modern scientists do not refer to them as such . That designation is typically reserved for those who simultaneously exhibit features of both sexes ; the genetic makeup of female spotted hyenas " are clearly distinct " from male spotted hyenas . 
 Female spotted hyenas have a clitoris 90 percent as long and the same diameter as a male penis ( 171 millimeters long and 22 millimeters in diameter ) , and this pseudo @-@ penis 's formation seems largely androgen @-@ independent because it appears in the female fetus before differentiation of the fetal ovary and adrenal gland . The spotted hyenas have a highly erectile clitoris , complete with a false scrotum ; author John C. Wingfield stated that " the resemblance to male genitalia is so close that sex can be determined with confidence only by palpation of the scrotum " . The pseudo @-@ penis can also be distinguished from the males ' genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans . The female possesses no external vagina , as the labia are fused to form a pseudo @-@ scrotum . In the females , this scrotum consists of soft adipose tissue . Like male spotted hyenas with regard to their penises , the female spotted hyenas have small penile spines on the head of their clitorises , which scholar Catherine Blackledge said makes " the clitoris tip feel like soft sandpaper " . She added that the clitoris " extends away from the body in a sleek and slender arc , measuring , on average , over 17 cm from root to tip . Just like a penis , [ it ] is fully erectile , raising its head in hyena greeting ceremonies , social displays , games of rough and tumble or when sniffing out peers " . 
 Due to their higher levels of androgen exposure , the female hyenas are significantly more muscular and aggressive than their male counterparts ; social @-@ wise , they are of higher rank than the males , being dominant or dominant and alpha , and the females who have been exposed to higher levels of androgen than average become higher @-@ ranking than their female peers . Subordinate females lick the clitorises of higher @-@ ranked females as a sign of submission and obedience , but females also lick each other 's clitorises as a greeting or to strengthen social bonds ; in contrast , while all males lick the clitorises of dominant females , the females will not lick the penises of males because males are considered to be of lowest rank . 
 The urethra and vagina of the female spotted hyena exit through the clitoris , allowing the females to urinate , copulate and give birth through this organ . This trait makes mating more laborious for the male than in other mammals , and also makes attempts to sexually coerce ( physically force sexual activity on ) females futile . Joan <unk> , an ecologist and evolutionary biologist , said that because the hyena 's clitoris is higher on the belly than the vagina in most mammals , the male hyena " must slide his rear under the female when mating so that his penis lines up with [ her clitoris ] " . In an action similar to pushing up a <unk> , the " female retracts the [ pseudo @-@ penis ] on itself , and creates an opening into which the male inserts his own penis " . The male must practice this act , which can take a couple of months to successfully perform . Female spotted hyenas exposed to larger doses of androgen have significantly damaged ovaries , making it difficult to conceive . After giving birth , the pseudo @-@ penis is stretched and loses much of its original aspects ; it becomes a slack @-@ walled and reduced prepuce with an enlarged orifice with split lips . Approximately 15 % of the females die during their first time giving birth , and over 60 % of their species ' firstborn young die . 
 A 2006 Baskin et al. study concluded , " The basic anatomical structures of the corporeal bodies in both sexes of humans and spotted hyenas were similar . As in humans , the dorsal nerve distribution was unique in being devoid of nerves at the 12 o 'clock position in the penis and clitoris of the spotted hyena " and that " [ d ] <unk> nerves of the penis / clitoris in humans and male spotted hyenas tracked along both sides of the corporeal body to the corpus spongiosum at the 5 and 7 o 'clock positions . The dorsal nerves penetrated the corporeal body and distally the glans in the hyena " and , in female hyenas , " the dorsal nerves fanned out laterally on the clitoral body . <unk> morphology was different in appearance in both sexes , being wide and blunt in the female and tapered in the male " . 
 = = = Cats , sheep and mice = = = 
 Researchers studying the peripheral and central afferent pathways from the feline clitoris concluded that " <unk> neurons projecting to the clitoris of the cat were identified by WGA @-@ HRP tracing in the S1 and S2 dorsal root ganglia . An average of 433 cells were identified on each side of the animal . 85 percent and 15 percent of the labeled cells were located in the S1 and S2 dorsal root ganglia , respectively . The average cross sectional area of clitoral afferent neuron profiles was 1 @.@ 479 ± 627 <unk> . " They also stated that light " constant pressure on the clitoris produced an initial burst of single unit firing ( maximum frequencies 170 – 255 Hz ) followed by rapid adaptation and a sustained firing ( maximum 40 Hz ) , which was maintained during the stimulation . Tonic firing increased to an average maximum of 145 Hz at 6 – 8 g / mm2 pressure " and " [ t ] hese results indicate that the clitoris is innervated by <unk> @-@ sensitive myelinated afferent fibers in the <unk> nerve which project centrally to the region of the dorsal commissure in the L7 @-@ S1 spinal cord " . 
 The external phenotype and reproductive behavior of 21 <unk> sheep and two male <unk> sheep were recorded with the aim of identifying any characteristics that could predict a failure to breed . Among things recorded were the size and shape of the vulva and clitoris , the length of the vagina , the size of the teats , the presence or absence of inguinal gonads , and the <unk> characteristics of the inguinal gonads : " A subjective assessment of the masculinity of each animal 's body form was also made , and its behavioural responses to a virile ram and to an oestrus ewe were recorded . A number of physical and behavioural abnormalities were detected but the only consistent finding in all 23 animals was a short vagina which varied in length from 3 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 0 cm , compared with 10 to 14 cm in normal animals . " 
 In a study documenting the clitoral structure of mice , it was found that the mouse perineal urethra is surrounded by erectile tissue forming the bulbs of the clitoris , similar to the anatomy of human females : " In the mouse , as in human females , tissue organization in the corpora cavernosa of the clitoris is essentially similar to that of the penis except for the absence of a <unk> layer interposed between the tunica albuginea and the erectile tissue . " 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = 2011 BMC Racing Team season = 
 The 2011 season for the BMC Racing Team began in January with the Tour Down Under and ended in October at the Giro di Lombardia . As a UCI ProTeam , they are automatically invited and obligated to send a squad to every event in the UCI World Tour . 
 Team captain Cadel Evans provided the majority of their victories in 2011 , most notably the overall crown at the Tour de France . Twice a runner @-@ up at that race , and at age 34 the oldest post @-@ World War II winner , Evans took used a different race program than he had in previous years . He rode relatively few races prior to the Tour , though he was also the overall victor at Tirreno – Adriatico and the Tour de Romandie . 
 Though often considered to be a team with a strong classics pedigree , and active in most races with several top tens , they did not win any single @-@ day race in the spring season . Greg Van Avermaet won the late @-@ season Paris – Tours , along with two stages in stage races earlier in the season . The team 's ostensible classics leader , Italian Alessandro Ballan , did not win any race in 2011 and was again briefly suspended from racing pursuant to the ongoing Mantova doping investigation , as he had been in 2010 . 
 = = 2011 roster = = 
 Ages as of January 1 , 2011 . 
 = = One @-@ day races = = 
 = = = Spring classics = = = 
 BMC was active at two of the traditional season @-@ opening races , attaining seventh place with Ballan in the Italian opener Trofeo <unk> , and eighth with Quinziato in the Belgian opener , Omloop Het Nieuwsblad . Ballan narrowly missed victory a week later at Montepaschi Strade Bianche , finishing second at the line behind Philippe Gilbert . Ballan acknowledged that Gilbert and not he had used the optimal tactics in the final sprint , but felt nonetheless pleased with his early @-@ season form . The two had been part of a 19 @-@ rider group that made all the selections through the sectors of unpaved roads before the finish on cobblestones in Siena . 
 At the first monument race of the season , Milan – San Remo , BMC was one of only two teams to have more than three riders present in the leading group on the road after a crash on the Le Manie climb 90 kilometers ( 56 mi ) from the finish effectively split the field in two . With both teams lacking field sprinters , and with sprinters Tom Boonen , Alessandro Petacchi , and Heinrich Haussler surviving the split , BMC captain Ballan and Liquigas – Cannondale 's Vincenzo Nibali struck a deal that they would each send men to the front of the lead group to help keep it away from the sprinters left behind in the second group , and dislodge the sprinters in the first group if possible . The tactic worked ; with domestiques from both these teams , plus Omega Pharma – Lotto , pulling at the head of the leading group , they kept their lead through to the end of the race . Ballan , and Nibali , later figured into a crucial eight @-@ rider selection that took place on the Poggio just a few kilometers from the end of the 298 kilometers ( 185 mi ) day of racing . Those eight riders represented eight different teams , so no one had a teammate to perform a proper leadout . After Nibali , Gilbert , and FDJ 's Yoann <unk> opened up the sprint , Ballan was gapped off momentarily and could manage only fourth behind race winner Matthew Goss . Van Avermaet had also been with the first group after the split on Le Manie , and occupied first position on the road for the kilometers between the Cipressa and the descent from the Poggio , before he was caught by the select group of eight that finished together at the head of the race . 
 At the second monument , the Tour of Flanders , BMC was noted to be bringing a strong squad , headed by Ballan and Hincapie . Burghardt and Van Avermaet went on the attack in the early portions of the race , only to be brought back after a short while . When Fabian Cancellara put in an attack on the Leberg , the day 's fourteenth cobbled climb , and quickly took a sizable time gap , it was the BMC team which organized the chase to bring him back . They placed four riders into a seven @-@ rider chase group and succeeded in bringing Cancellara back , something which has usually not happened to him in classics races . A further two riders had remained at the head of the peloton , giving them six riders at the front of the race when Cancellara was caught . Cancellara put in another move on the Muur van Geraardsbergen and was followed only by Sylvain Chavanel and eventual race winner Nick Nuyens . Hincapie finished with the group 5 seconds back for sixth place on the day . Kristoff rode to seventh place in the sprinters ' classic Scheldeprijs later in April , back of three @-@ time winner Mark Cavendish . 
 Ballan also rode to a top @-@ ten placing at the third monument , Paris – Roubaix . He and Thor Hushovd marked the accelerations of odds @-@ on favorite Cancellara throughout the day and , with both having teammates up the road in breakaway groups , did not contribute any work . This led to the lightly heralded Johan Vansummeren from Hushovd 's Garmin – Cervélo team winning the race from a solo escape , but Ballan was able to finish sixth by staying with Cancellara as best he could , losing contact only when Cancellara put in his most strenuous attack near the finish . The race came just days after Ballan was again named in the ongoing Mantova doping investigation as a rider who may have perpetrated blood doping while riding for his former team Lampre . Unlike in 2010 , when these accusations broke , BMC chose not to suspend Ballan from competition . Ballan felt his suspension in 2010 was because the team had not yet attained the highest level in the sport and had to rely on wildcard invitations to attend top @-@ level races . In 2011 , they had attained UCI ProTeam status and were therefore guaranteed these invites . However , team president Jim <unk> denied that this was the case , saying that the team had cleared Ballan in 2010 and that the 2011 accusations were not new and therefore did not require any action on their part . However , Ballan and Santambrogio were indeed suspended and later reactivated around the time of the Giro d 'Italia . 
 Van Avermaet was the team 's top finisher at each of the Ardennes classics , though he did not come especially close to victory in any of them , finishing 24th at the 2011 Amstel Gold Race , 16th at La Flèche Wallonne , and seventh at Liège – Bastogne – Liège , the fourth monument . BMC 's record at the early @-@ season single day races ended with a series of near misses in May and June . Murphy , an essentially unknown rider on the international scene , was the sixth @-@ place finisher at the inaugural <unk> Berlin . BMC and Leopard Trek were the only top @-@ level professional teams in the race . Santambrogio was second at the Giro della Toscana , losing out to Garmin – Cervélo 's Dan Martin in the uphill final sprint . Van Avermaet narrowly missed the podium at Halle – <unk> , losing the sprint for third place to FDJ 's Gianni Meersman and taking fourth on the day . 
 The team also sent squads to the Classica Sarda , Kuurne – Brussels – Kuurne , the Giro del Friuli , Dwars door Vlaanderen , Gent – Wevelgem , and Brabantse Pijl , but finished no higher than 13th in any of these races . 
 = = = Fall races = = = 
 Van Avermaet opened the team 's later season with a podium finish at the Clásica de San Sebastián , winning a seven @-@ rider sprint for third place 14 seconds back of the day 's winner Philippe Gilbert . Much like he had earlier in the season at Scheldeprijs , Kristoff finished in the top ten but not especially close to victory at the sprinters ' classic Paris – Brussels in September , taking seventh place in a 46 @-@ rider sprint . He turned in a similar performance a week later at the Championship of Flanders , seventh from a 55 @-@ rider sprint , and two days hence at the Grand Prix d 'Isbergues with fifth from a group of 57 . He also added a second place , again in a large sprint , at the Grand Prix de <unk> . Murphy took his second top @-@ ten finish of the year at the Omloop van het <unk> , with sixth place in a breakaway sprint behind Guillaume Van <unk> of Quick @-@ Step . Van Avermaet and Phinney finished at the front of the race in Binche – Tournai – Binche , though neither threatened for victory , finishing seventh and 13th in the 13 @-@ rider lead group . 
 Van Avermaet took the team 's lone single @-@ day victory of the season at Paris – Tours . Despite the expectation that the race would come down to a sprint finish , Van Avermaet and other attackers provided for a different sort of finish . The sprinters ' teams worked to chase down the morning breakaway , but the only effect this actually had was allowing Van Avermaet , and others , a shorter distance to bridge from the main field up to the front of the race . The leading group 's advantage over the peloton never exceeded two minutes , but it proved to be enough as Van Avermaet took the win ahead of Vacansoleil – DCM 's Marco Marcato , with the next rider a further 15 seconds down . Van Avermaet was also the team 's best finisher at the Italian races which traditionally conclude the season . He just missed out on victory at the Giro del Piemonte , finishing second of 11 riders in a breakaway sprint behind Daniel Moreno of Team Katusha . He was more distant , 12th , in the Giro di Lombardia , though this was nonetheless a strong result for him due to that race 's much hillier profile . 
 The team also sent squads to Vattenfall Cyclassics , the GP Ouest @-@ France , the Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal , the Grand Prix Cycliste de Québec , and the Grand Prix de Wallonie , but finished no higher than 14th in any of these races . 
 = = Stage races = = 
 Evans took the team 's first wins at Tirreno – Adriatico . Despite the fact that he had raced only two days prior to Tirreno – Adriatico on the 2011 season , as part of a planned light program meant to culminate in victory at the Tour de France , Evans showed fine form at the race of the two seas . He finished near the front of the race in the first two hilly stages , both of them 240 kilometers ( 150 mi ) in length , and took the race lead after the second of them . The next day , he won the stage into Macerata , extending his race lead to nine seconds . With only a very short individual time trial remaining , and the riders directly behind Evans in the overall standings lesser than him in time trial skills , nine seconds was a significant advantage . Evans managed only 12th in the 9 @.@ 3 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 8 mi ) race against the clock that closed out the race , but this was easily enough to preserve his overall victory . In April , Evans won the Tour de Romandie without winning any stage . His greatest time win came in the stage 4 individual time trial . Sitting third at that point , he finished eighth on the day and took sufficient time to overtake Pavel Brutt and Alexander Vinokourov to move into the race lead . The flat final stage provided for no meaningful changes to the overall standings , securing Evans ' win . While he did not win anything at the Critérium du Dauphiné , Evans showed strongly at that race as well . While Bradley Wiggins proved by far the strongest of the overall classification <unk> in the stage 3 individual time trial , Evans ' sixth place on the day moved him up to second overall . He finished sufficiently near the front of the race on all other days as well , assuring him second place overall in the event . 
 The team 's principal winner in the later season was Van Avermaet . At the Tour of Austria , he won stage 6 in a photo finish from a breakaway , besting HTC – Highroad 's Matt Brammeier by the thinnest of margins . He took the points jersey with this stage win , adding a first to a fourth and an eighth place secured earlier in the event , and won it at the event 's conclusion . Van Avermaet next triumphed at the Tour de Wallonie . He and Vacansoleil – DCM 's Joost van Leijen were the only two riders to finish at the front of the race in each of the first two stages . Though van Leijen won stage 2 , Van Avermaet took the race lead because of his higher finish on stage 1 . This stage occurred on the same day that Evans sealed his Tour de France championship in Paris ; the team posted news of Van Avermaet 's race leadership by calling it the " other yellow jersey " they had taken . Van Avermaet successfully retained the race lead to the event 's conclusion , adding a stage win on the last day , beating out van Leijen . 
 The team took a further two victories in August . Phinney earned the first win of his professional career in the prologue time trial at the Eneco Tour , finishing the 5 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) course 7 seconds faster than Edvald Boasson Hagen in second place . Hincapie returned to the winners ' circle for the first time in two years at the USA Pro Cycling Challenge , finishing the best of six breakaway riders in stage 2 in Aspen . 
 The team also sent squads to the Tour Down Under , the Tour of Qatar , the Tour of Oman , the Giro di Sardegna , Paris – Nice , the Volta a Catalunya , the Tour of the Basque Country , the Giro del Trentino , the Tour de Suisse , the Tour of Utah , Circuit Franco @-@ Belge , and the Tour of Beijing , but did not achieve a stage win , classification win , or podium finish in any of them . 
 = = Grand Tours = = 
 = = = Giro d 'Italia = = = 
 BMC came to the Giro without a real overall classification hopeful . Sporting director Fabio Baldato stated that the team 's nine @-@ man squad was designed to give them a chance at a stage win every day , with Kristoff for the sprints , Kohler , Wyss , and <unk> for the breakaways , and Tschopp and Frank for the climbs . Rounding out the squad were young Americans Barton , Beyer , and Butler , riding the Giro mainly for experience . They constituted three of the seven Americans in the Giro peloton . The team 's preparation for the Giro was also affected by the Mantova investigation , which resulted in the team 's banning of Ballan and Santambrogio for the second time , after a previous ban in April 2010 . Again just as in 2010 , the two were reactivated shortly after the Giro concluded . 
 The squad was middle of the pack in the stage 1 team time trial , finishing 13th of 23 teams . The squad was most active during stage 5 , on the unpaved or ' white ' roads into Orvieto , when Kohler went on the attack after 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) and made the principal breakaway as a single rider . His advantage ballooned to almost 13 minutes at its highest point , but when it began to fall , it did not fall precipitously at first . With 70 kilometers ( 43 mi ) left to race , Kohler still had eight minutes on the main field . He was therefore first over the two third @-@ category climbs on the course , and while mountains leader Gianluca Brambilla took maximum points from the peloton on both , Kohler took the green jersey from him at day 's end . Kohler retained the jersey on stage 6 before seventh stage winner Bart De Clercq of Omega Pharma – Lotto assumed it on Montevergine di Mercogliano . Kristoff took two top ten stage placings in the first half of the race , with fourth on stage 8 ( second from the peloton behind the attacking Oscar Gatto and Alberto Contador ) , and ninth on stage 10 ( a more traditional field <unk> ) . Tschopp finished the best of the team 's six riders to reach the finish , finishing 16th overall . The team also shared the Fair Play award with five other teams , avoiding penalty points for minor technical infringements . 
 = = = Tour de France = = = 
 The Tour de France was the main focal point of the season for BMC 's leader Evans , and perhaps the team itself . He had ridden two Grand Tours each of the past two seasons , and in three of the past four , but in 2011 he focused solely on the Tour . He rode a different race program in preparation for the Tour than he had in previous years , riding fewer races . Among them were the early @-@ season stage races Tirreno – Adriatico and Tour de Romandie , both of which Evans won , and the Critérium du Dauphiné , where he finished on the podium in second overall . The squad named to the race was chosen with the sole goal of helping Evans win the race overall . It consisted of classics specialists Hincapie and Burghardt with the aim of keeping Evans out of trouble in the flatter stages , climbers <unk> and Morabito to help in the mountains , and strong time trialists Bookwalter and Schär ( and Hincapie ) for the stage 2 team time trial . Hincapie made his 16th consecutive Tour start , to tie the record held by Joop Zoetemelk , having finished each except the very first . 
 Evans was active in the finale of the first road race stage . Almost completely flat with a punchy uphill finish , the stage kept the peloton together most of the way before a crash 9 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) from the end split the field . Evans stayed out front and shadowed Philippe Gilbert on the finish atop the Mont des Alouettes . The Belgian won the stage , but Evans finished clear of the peloton for second place three seconds back . This positioned the team well for the stage 2 team time trial . Despite being considered the lesser of squads such as Garmin – Cervélo , Team Sky , and HTC – Highroad , among others , the squad finished second just four seconds back of Garmin – Cervélo , tied with Team Sky and Leopard Trek . The result left Garmin – Cervélo riders Thor Hushovd and David Millar tied on the same time at the top of the overall classification , with the Norwegian taking the yellow jersey , and Evans installed into third overall just a single second back . Evans said after the stage that he was very pleased with the team 's effort and had confidence for the continuation of the race . 
 Stage 4 , again mostly flat with an uphill finish , was another important day for the team . Evans approached the finish with a select group at the head of the race , including most of the race 's overall favorites and race leader Hushovd . Evans outsprinted Alberto Contador at the finish to claim his second career Tour stage win . After finishing safely in the peloton on the next three stages , all of them favoring sprinters , Evans took third , just behind Gilbert , on Super Besse in stage 8 . Despite the uphill finish and the stage 's bumpy profile , Hushovd also finished in this group , meaning Evans did not , as was expected , take the yellow jersey . Though the next day featured a change of race leader , when a breakaway including Thomas Voeckler gained almost four minutes against the peloton , Evans remained well @-@ placed in third overall . There were then no significant changes to the overall standings until stage 16 . This was a medium mountain stage heading gradually uphill until a second @-@ category climb 11 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) from the finish in Gap . Hushovd won the stage from a breakaway , but together with Contador and Samuel Sánchez , Evans attacked on the descent . He gained over a minute against the race 's other top riders , most notably Andy Schleck . 
 Stage 18 was extremely important to the race 's overall standings . With 60 kilometers ( 37 mi ) still to go before the finish , Andy Schleck attacked out of the group of race favorites , and no one followed him . He made the bridge up to a teammate from the morning escape , who paced him to a maximum four @-@ minute advantage at the front of the race . From behind , Evans put in an intensive effort from about the 10 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to go mark to limit his losses . Schleck easily won the stage , but Evans remained only 57 seconds down , a time gap he could easily make up in the stage 20 individual time trial . Evans had mounted the final chase all on his own , with riders near him such as Voeckler and Ivan Basso contributing no work . Fränk Schleck took a little time out of him in view of the finish line , but no one else did , as the field finished scattered behind Evans . His long , largely solo chase was characterized as saving his overall chances after Andy Schleck had made his bid for Tour victory beforehand . The status quo largely held the next day on Alpe d 'Huez , though Voeckler at last fell from the race lead , putting Andy Schleck in the yellow jersey . Schleck was characterized as missing an important chance to pad his race lead with the time trial , where Evans was recognized as the better of the two , still to race . 
 The Tour came down to the stage 20 time trial in Grenoble . While Evans was certainly the stronger of the two in the event , Schleck had surpassed expectations in the long time trial in the 2010 Tour de France and there was speculation as to whether the <unk> had enough time in hand to win the Tour with his 57 @-@ second cushion . They were the last two riders on the course , and rode diametrically different time trials . About an hour earlier , Tony Martin had set a dominant best time , finishing more than a minute better than any other rider in the field . Evans rode one of the best time trials of his life , seconds off Martin 's pace at each time check and only seven seconds the lesser of him at the finish line . Schleck 's ride was unremarkable , ceding two and a half minutes to Evans by finishing 17th on the day . What had been speculated to be a close challenge ended up being no challenge at all – Evans took the race lead by over a minute and a half . Since the Tour 's final stage is largely ceremonial and not competitive for the overall classification , the time trial clinched the Tour for Evans , the first Grand Tour win in Evans ' long top @-@ level career that had featured three previous podiums and six previous top @-@ tens . All nine BMC riders reached the Tour 's finish . Evans ' triumph meant that Hincapie set a new record as the only man ever to ride on nine Tour @-@ winning squads . 
 Australia 's prime minister phoned Evans personally to congratulate him . He was later honored with a parade and a state reception in Melbourne , with thousands of supporters attending . 
 = = = Vuelta a España = = = 
 Shortly after the Tour de France ended , the team reiterated Evans ' season plan , that it had been his only Grand Tour for 2011 and that he would not ride the Vuelta . The team made its Vuelta debut in 2011 , having ridden the Italian and French Grand Tours in 2010 via wildcard invites while receiving no such invite to the Tour of Spain . Much as at the Giro , BMC 's squad for the Vuelta was chosen with stage wins in mind . Van Avermaet and Grand Tour debutant Phinney would try for the sprints , with Frank , <unk> , and Tschopp for the climbs . Kohler , Kroon , Quinziato , and Santambrogio rounded out the squad . 
 In a squad with much less star power than that sent to the Tour de France , they were again middle of the pack in the team time trial , finishing 11th of 22 teams . The squad did not show themselves much , as it was not until stage 10 that they so much as finished in the top ten on a stage . Phinney took fifth place in the stage 10 individual time trial , a minute and a half off the pace of the day 's winner Tony Martin . Frank rode to fourth from a breakaway in the next stage , again a minute and a half off the pace of the day 's winner , this time David Moncoutié . All the team had to show for itself from the second half of the Vuelta was a seventh place from Van Avermaet in the field sprint finish to stage 12 . Six BMC riders reached the Vuelta 's finish , with Van Avermaet in 83rd place being their highest overall finisher . 
 = = Season victories = = 
 = Jud Süß ( 1940 film ) = 
 Jud Süß ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] , " Süss the Jew " ) is a 1940 Nazi propaganda film produced by Terra Filmkunst at the behest of Joseph Goebbels , and considered one of the most antisemitic films of all time . The movie was directed by Veit Harlan , who wrote the screenplay with Eberhard Wolfgang Möller and Ludwig Metzger . The leading roles were played by Ferdinand Marian and Harlan 's wife Kristina Söderbaum ; Werner Krauss and Heinrich George played key supporting roles . 
 The film has been characterized as " one of the most notorious and successful pieces of antisemitic film propaganda produced in Nazi Germany . " It was a great success in Germany , with some 20 million viewers . Although the film 's budget of 2 million Reichsmarks was considered high for films of that era , the box office receipts of 6 @.@ 5 million Reichsmarks made it a financial success . Heinrich Himmler urged members of the SS and police to watch the movie . 
 After the war , some of the leading cast members were brought to trial as part of the denazification process . They generally defended their participation in the film on the grounds that they had only done so under duress . Despite significant evidence to support their arguments , Susan Tegel , author of Nazis and the Cinema , characterizes their postwar attempts to distance themselves from the film as " crass and self @-@ serving " . However , she concedes that their motives for accepting the roles seem to have been more driven by opportunistic ambition than by antisemitism . Veit Harlan was the only major movie director of the Third Reich to stand trial for " crimes against humanity " . After three trials , Harlan was given a light sentence because he convinced the courts that the antisemitic content of the film had been dictated by Goebbels and that Harlan had worked to moderate the antisemitism . Eventually , Harlan was reinstated as a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany and went on to make nine more films . He remained a controversial figure and the target of protests . 
 Together with Die Rothschilds and Der ewige Jude , both released in 1940 , the film remains one of the most frequently discussed examples of the use of film to further the Nazi antisemitic agenda . In 2010 , two documentary films were released that explore the history and impact of this movie . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Joseph Süß Oppenheimer = = = 
 Joseph Süß Oppenheimer was an 18th century Court Jew in the employ of Duke Karl Alexander of Württemberg in Stuttgart . As a financial advisor for Duke Karl Alexander , Duke of Württemberg , he also gained a prominent position as a court Jew and held the reins of the finances in his duchy . He established a duchy monopoly on the trade of salt , leather , tobacco , and liquor and founded a bank and porcelain factory . In the process , he made a number of enemies who claimed , among other things , that he was involved with local gambling houses . When Karl Alexander died suddenly , Oppenheimer was arrested and accused of various things , including fraud , embezzlement , treason , lecherous relations with the court ladies , accepting bribes , and trying to reestablish Catholicism . The Jewish community tried unsuccessfully to ransom him . After a heavily publicized trial during which no proofs were produced , he was sentenced to death . When his jailers demanded that he convert to Christianity , he refused . Joseph Süß Oppenheimer was led to the gallows on 4 February 1738 , and given a final chance to convert to Christianity , which he refused to do . 
 = = = Feuchtwanger 's novel = = = 
 Although the story of Duke Karl Alexander and Joseph Süß Oppenheimer constituted a relatively obscure episode in German history , it became the subject of a number of literary and dramatic treatments over the course of more than a century ; the earliest of these having been Wilhelm Hauff 's 1827 novella . The most successful literary adaptation was Lion Feuchtwanger 's novel titled Jud Süß ( 1925 ) based on a play that he had written in 1916 but subsequently withdrew . As a Jew , Feuchtwanger did not intend his portrayal of Süß to be antisemitic but rather as a study of the tragedy caused by the human weaknesses of greed , pride , and ambition . With an interest in exploring the challenges confronting Jews in the Diaspora , Feuchtwanger was particularly concerned with the issues of conversion and antisemitism . He was particularly struck by the fact that Süß could have saved himself by converting to Christianity but had steadfastly refused to do so , opting instead to return to formal Jewish observance and piety . 
 Ashley Dukes and Paul Kornfeld wrote dramatic adaptations of the Feuchtwanger novel . German @-@ born American director , Lothar Mendes directed a British @-@ financed film adaptation of the novel in 1934 . It was the making of this film as an early effort to expose Nazi anti @-@ semitism that prompted the Nazi propaganda ministry to make their own version of the film , which has unfortunately far outstripped the original philo @-@ Semitic intentions both of the original book and the British adaptation , which starred the then top German star , another Nazi refugee , Conrad Veidt . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with the coronation of Karl Alexander , Duke of Württemberg ( Heinrich George ) , a man much beloved by his people , who swears an oath to obey the laws of the dukedom " according to the traditional Württemberg loyalty and honesty . " However , the Duke soon becomes frustrated because the Württemberg Diet ( the provincial council ) refuses him the funds needed to maintain a lifestyle comparable to his neighboring sovereigns ; in particular , he wants a personal bodyguard , an opera company , and a ballet company . Lacking funds even to purchase coronation gifts for the Duchess ( Hilde von Stolz ) , the Duke sends a courtier to Frankfurt to borrow money from Joseph Süß Oppenheimer ( Ferdinand Marian ) . Süß shows the emissary jewels and jewelry that are obviously beyond the Duke 's means and then says that it would be his honor to provide the Duke with jewelry at a substantial discount . However , Süß insists on presenting the items to the Duke personally despite a ban against Jews ( <unk> ) entering the city that has been in force for over a century . Armed with a pass from the Duke , Süß cuts his hair , shaves his beard , and dons " Christian " clothes so that he can enter Württemberg disguised as a Christian . As his carriage gets into an accident , Süß gets a lift from Dorothea Sturm ( Kristina Söderbaum ) to the city . 
 The Duke is delighted with the jewelry , and Süß willingly defers payment . Süß offers to provide financing for the Duke 's bodyguard , opera , and ballet as well . Eventually , the Duke discovers that he owes Süß 350 @,@ 000 thalers but Süß demurs saying that all he wants in " payment " is the authority to maintain the roads and bridges of the dukedom for 10 years — and the right to levy tolls for their use and upkeep . The Duke will receive a percentage of the proceeds , thereby freeing him from the financial limits imposed by the council . 
 The new tolls cause the price of food and other essentials to rise , enriching both Süß and the Duke . Süß gains the authority to levy taxes on salt , beer , wine , and wheat as well . He also assists in procuring local women for the Duke , thus engaging in the corruption of their morals . The increase in the price of basic necessities causes the people of Württemberg to suffer great privation . 
 The oppressive taxes and brutal collection methods incite sporadic rebellions that are suppressed harshly . Süß goes so far as to destroy half of a blacksmith 's house to prove his power to punish those who refuse to pay their taxes . When the blacksmith attacks Süß 's coach with a sledgehammer , Süß has the blacksmith hanged on the grounds that an attack on the Duke 's minister is tantamount to an attack on the Duke himself . 
 After some initial resistance , the Duke yields to Süß 's request for the repeal of the law prohibiting Jews from living in Württemberg ; a horde of dirty , disreputable Jews are then shown moving into the city . Süß enables them to enrich themselves at the expense of the populace . The aged Rabbi Loew ( Werner Krauss ) criticizes Süß for his excessively opulent lifestyle as the Duke 's finance minister and warns that it could be his downfall , warning that , “ The Lord punishes Jews who forget who they are ! ” but Süß pays him no heed . 
 Süß relentlessly pursues Dorothea Sturm and schemes to marry her but his plans are frustrated when her father , the council chairman ( Eugen <unk> ) , intervenes . Dorothea and her fiancé , Faber ( Malte Jaeger ) , marry in secret . Süß then has Dorothea 's father imprisoned — on the grounds that he is a leader of the conspiracy against the Duke . 
 When the council objects to the Duke 's increasing usurpation of power and abrogation of the constitution , Süß suggests to him that this challenge to his authority can be suppressed by dismissing the council and restructuring the government so that the Duke can reign as an absolute monarch . Süß tells the Duke that he can accomplish this by hiring mercenaries and that , as a sign of their gratitude , the Jews of Württemberg will provide all the requisite funds . Süß argues that he would be most effective if the Duke were to give him a letter granting him immunity from the laws of Württemberg . The Duke demurs at first but ultimately grants Süß 's request . 
 As part of an attempt to thwart the Duke 's planned coup d 'état , Faber is sent on a mission to get help from outside the city but is arrested as he tries to leave the city . Despite being tortured , he refuses to reveal the identities of his co @-@ conspirators . Dorothea goes to Süß to beg for her husband 's release but Süß demands that she have sex with him as the price for her husband 's freedom . Süß rapes Dorothea , who then escapes and drowns herself . Süß keeps his promise to free Faber who subsequently discovers his wife 's drowned corpse . 
 Süß suggests to the Duke that the two of them go to Ludwigsburg on the pretext of meeting the emperor 's emissary and return to Württemberg only after the planned coup has established him as an absolute monarch . However , before the foreign mercenaries arrive to effect Süß 's coup , the people of Württemberg rise up under the leadership of <unk> <unk> . The Württemberg soldiers refuse to fire on their fellow citizens and several of the townspeople go to Ludwigsburg to confront the Duke and Süß . As they are presenting their grievances , the Duke suffers a fatal heart attack . Süß is taken into custody by the rebels and subjected to a lengthy trial on charges that include treason and financial improprieties . However , he is ultimately convicted primarily on the charge that he had sex with a Christian woman . Süß is executed , pleading to the last that he was nothing more than a " faithful servant " of the late Duke . All the other Jews are then given three days to leave Württemberg . As the film draws to a close , a citizen of Württemberg , observing the Jews leave , comments , " May the citizens of other states never forget this lesson . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Goebbels ' propaganda campaign = = = 
 Adolf Hitler and his Propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels believed that film was a very potent tool for molding public opinion . The Nazis first established a film department in 1930 and Goebbels had taken a personal interest in the use of film to promote the Nazi philosophy and agenda . Soon after the Nazi takeover , Goebbels was insisting in speeches that the role of the German cinema was to serve as the " vanguard of the Nazi military " as they set forth to conquer the world . He asked them to " produce films with ... sharp racial contours " that portrayed men and society " as they are in reality . " 
 According to Richard Levy , " Of the 1100 feature films produced under the Nazis , only a handful demonstrated explicit antisemitic content and even there , the antisemitism was often secondary to the film 's plot . ... Two films , however , were designed to translate National Socialism 's antisemitic ideology to a popular audience : Der ewige Jude ( The Eternal Jew [ 1940 ] ) and Jud Süß ( Jew Süss [ 1940 ] ) . " 
 In November 1938 , Goebbels made a series of attacks against the Jews in the German media that instigated the pogrom known as Kristallnacht . Despite the emotional satisfaction afforded the Nazis by carrying out their antisemitism with direct violence , Kristallnacht was considered by Hitler to have been a political disaster both within Germany and internationally . Not only did the brutality instigated by Goebbels evoke harsh criticism internationally , the mixed reaction in the German media evidenced a lack of broad @-@ based support among Germans for antisemitic violence . Hitler expressed his frustration and anger at the mixed response from the German media and insisted that , instead of openly calling for violence against the Jews as Goebbels had in instigating the pogrom , Nazi propaganda should " elucidate events of foreign policy " in such a way that the German people themselves would call for violence against the Jews . In response to Hitler 's harsh reprimand , Goebbels launched a campaign to promote the antisemitic views of the Nazis to the German populace . He ordered each film studio to make an antisemitic film . Hitler preferred films such as Der ewige Jude which presented the Nazi antisemitic agenda openly and directly ; however Goebbels disliked the crudeness of such straight @-@ forward approaches , preferring the much more subtle approach of couching antisemitic messages in an engaging story with popular appeal . 
 Although Goebbels did not generally take an active role in the production of particular films , he elected to do so in the case of major propaganda films such as Jud Süß . Saul Friedländer suggests that Goebbels ' intent was to counter three films whose messages attacked the persecution of Jews throughout history by producing violently antisemitic versions of those films with identical titles . After viewing Lothar Mendes ' sensitive 1934 British @-@ financed film Jew Süss starring the great German @-@ Jewish exile from Nazism Conrad Veidt , Goebbels was adamant that " a new film version had to be made . " 
 Although Metzger had been trying to pitch a movie based on the life of Joseph Süß Oppenheimer for many years , the impetus for the movie came from Joseph Goebbels ' desire to make an antisemitic response to Mendes ' philo @-@ semitic film adaptation of Lion Feuchtwanger 's 1925 novel Jud Süß . Because Mendes ' movie was so sympathetic to the subject , the scriptwriters shifted their model to Wilhelm Hauff 's 1827 novella . However , even after Harlan rewrote the original script , the result was not antisemitic enough to suit Goebbels ' propaganda needs so he personally intervened in the editing process to the point of dropping some scenes and rewriting others including making a substantial change to the film 's ending to show Süß as humbled rather than defiant . Thus , the message of the film was diametrically opposed to the intent of Feuchtwanger 's novel . At the same time , however , the film evokes Feuchtwanger ’ s texts , twisting and reversing the core of the Jewish writer ’ s work . Although inspired by the historical details of Süß 's life , the novel , novella , and film only loosely correspond to the historical sources available at the <unk> Baden @-@ Württemberg . Christiane Schönfeld , who examines the connections between Feuchtwanger 's Jud Süß play and novel and Veit Harlan 's propaganda film , writes : " Lion Feuchtwanger [ ... ] considered Harlan ’ s film an adaptation of his novel " Jud Süß " that perverted and reversed the intentions of his text , as he writes in his open letter to seven Berlin actors after having read a review of the film in an NSDAP newspaper [ ... ] . Even without having seen the film , Lion Feuchtwanger had no doubt that Veit Harlan and his collaborators had expropriated his novel and adapted it to the purposes of Nazi propaganda . The synopsis of the film narrative provided in the review highlighted a perversion of the plot of Feuchtwanger ’ s text that the author instantly recognised . He identifies the focal point of the distortion when he refers to the desperate young woman and the sexual abuse she endures . She is indeed a prime example of the Nazis ’ ruthless misrepresentation , and her character , her rape , and tragic death prove the Nazis ’ deliberate abuse of the Jewish writer ’ s work . " 
 Susan Tegel ascribes the genesis of the project more to opportunism than to ideological antisemitism . Tegel 's assessment echoes Klaus <unk> 's assertion that the " recognized stars of the ( German ) stage and screen " were less aligned with the Nazi philosophy and more motivated by professional ambition and the " illusion that Goebbels would fulfill them . " 
 = = = Metzger and Möller script = = = 
 Ludwig Metzger had been trying to promote his proposal for a film on the life of Joseph Süß Oppenheimer since as early as 1921 but without any success . The publication of Feuchtwanger 's book and Mendes ' film adaptation of it irritated Metzger because he himself had been incubating the idea for many years . 
 In January or February 1939 , Metzger , now a scriptwriter for Terra Filmkunst , mentioned his idea to Wolfgang Ebbecke with whom he was working on the script for Central Rio . Ebbecke shot down the idea , raising a number of objections including the fact that Mendes had already done a film on the same topic in England and the concern that German audiences might confuse the proposed film with Feuchtwanger 's novel which was not antisemitic . 
 Undaunted by Ebbecke 's objections , Metzger took his idea to Teich , the story editor at Terra but was once again turned down . Finally , Metzger approached the Propaganda Ministry directly where his proposal was received like a " bomb hitting its target . " Teich was informed that Terra should proceed with Metzger 's proposal and so he reluctantly presented the idea to the head of the studio . When the studio head refused to approve the project , Goebbels had him fired and replaced by Peter Paul Brauer , a minor director with no experience in producing films . As head of the studio , Brauer assigned himself the task of directing the film . However , the project stalled out for a number of reasons including challenges in recruiting a suitable cast and difficulties in producing a script acceptable to Goebbels . 
 At Goebbels ' direction , Metzger was given a contract by Terra to write a script for the proposed film . He decided to base his script on the 1827 Hauff novella rather than the more recent and better known 1925 Feuchtwanger novel . However , when Goebbels read Metzger 's draft of the script , he deemed it to be insufficiently antisemitic for his propaganda campaign . To remedy the script 's deficiencies , Goebbels assigned playwright Eberhard Wolfgang Möller to assist Metzger even though Möller had no experience as a screenwriter . Möller 's role was to ensure that the script met <unk> 's ideological objectives . Möller decided to abandon Hauff 's novella as the basis of the script , dismissing Hauff as too sentimental about the " emancipation of Jews and Poles . " 
 In the meantime , Brauer was working on recruiting a cast but with little success . The actors being considered for the lead role of Joseph Süß Oppenheimer included Gustaf Gründgens , Rene <unk> , Rudolf <unk> , Richard <unk> , Siegfried Bräuer , Paul <unk> and Ferdinand Marian . Gründgens declined , citing his responsibilities as director of the Prussian State Theatre . Marian also declined . 
 = = = Veit Harlan = = = 
 When Nazi Germany conquered Poland in September 1939 , it was faced with the disposition of the large Jewish population . In view of the German populace 's tepid response to the orchestrated violence of Kristallnacht , the Nazis perceived an urgent need for films that would move German popular sentiment in favor of the Nazi Final Solution to the ' Jewish question ' . Frustrated with the delays on the Jud Süß project , Goebbels ordered Fritz <unk> , the head of his film department , to sack Brauer and bring in Veit Harlan to take over as director . 
 After the war , Harlan claimed that no other director would touch the project and that he himself had tried to decline the role of director . The filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl , in her 1987 memoir , confirmed that Harlan had told her of Goebbels 's insistence that he direct the film and of his ardent desire to get out of the project . Harlan had even written to Goebbels volunteering for military service in order to avoid making the film . Goebbels ' responded to this by informing Harlan that , if he enlisted , he would do his military service at the front . According to Harlan , Goebbels screamed at him , " I can crush you like a bug on the wall ! " When Harlan asked Riefenstahl to intercede for him with Goebbels , she demurred citing her own conflicts with the propaganda minister . Instead of intervening on his behalf , Riefenstahl advised Harlan to move to Switzerland ; however , Harlan expressed fear for his life and the impact it would have on his wife . 
 = = = Script rewrite = = = 
 According to Harlan 's postwar testimony , he told Goebbels that the Metzger / Möller script was nothing more than " dramatized Stürmer " , referring to a Nazi weekly propaganda publication . He argued that such a piece of poor writing would lead not to the portrayal of a " despicable Jew " but rather to just a " despicable film . " Goebbels wanted Harlan to include sequences depicting Jewish ritual slaughter but Harlan demurred , arguing that portraying such cruelty would " make audiences sick to their stomachs . " Harlan complained to Goebbels that all the characters were negative ; to this , Goebbels retorted that Harlan would not turn down the role of Richard III just because he was a negative character . However , Goebbels acceded to Harlan 's insistence on rewriting the script and Harlan spent from November 1939 to March 1940 revising the script although he kept much of what Metzger and Möller had written . 
 After the war , Harlan claimed that his script was less antisemitic than the Metzger / Möller script . He even claimed that the Mendes ' script was more antisemitic than his . However , in rebuttal , Haggith and Newman point out that Harlan added an important sequence in which Süß is responsible for the execution of a blacksmith , a sequence which served to increase the audience 's hatred for Süß . 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 Feeling that a project of this significance required top @-@ caliber actors and frustrated at the delay in casting the film , Goebbels personally participated in the recruitment of the lead actors . For example , he insisted that Ferdinand Marian and Werner Krauss take on key roles in the film . However , Goebbels had to employ a combination of accommodation , generous compensation , pressure , intimidation and even threats of reprisal in order to fill the lead roles in the film with the top German cinema stars of the day . Harlan claimed that " virtually every actor was performing under duress . " 
 Daniel <unk> ascribes the cast 's reluctance to an unwillingness to be typecast as Jews . David Welch identifies Werner Krauss as having asked Goebbels to make a public pronouncement stating that Krauss was not Jewish but merely " playing a part as an actor in the service of the State . " In order to address their concerns , Goebbels issued a disclaimer stating that those actors playing the parts of Jews were in fact of pure ' Aryan ' blood . 
 Similarly , Josef Škvorecký also notes that all the major cast members as well as Harlan himself tried in various ways to avoid participation in the project ; however Škvorecký ascribes a rather different motivation to the cast than the one that <unk> propounds . Škvorecký attributes the reluctance of actors to participate in what he characterizes as a " politically @-@ most @-@ correct film " as an indication of " how aware most German artists were of the fact that antisemitism under Hitler changed from prejudice to murder . " While cast members could have declined the roles that were offered to them , Škvorecký asserts that such action would have required " extraordinary courage : the dire consequences of such an act of defiance were only too easy to imagine . " According to Škvorecký , " Goebbels either outwitted [ the actors he desired for the cast ] , or knew about compromising circumstances in their lives and used this knowledge for bludgeoning them into acceptance . " Elaborating on the " compromising circumstances " , Škvorecký writes , " One of the paradoxes of this sinister film is how many participants in the violently racist project had either Jewish spouses or relatives , were disciples of Jewish artists and known friends or Jews , or had been — before the Nazi takeover — left @-@ leaning intellectuals , even communists . " For example , Škvorecký points out that Veit Harlan 's first wife was Dora Gerson , a German @-@ Jewish actress and cabaret singer . Harlan himself had flirted with socialism . Although Werner Krauss was openly antisemitic and an ardent Nazi , his daughter @-@ in @-@ law was Jewish . Ferdinand Marian had a half @-@ Jewish daughter from his first marriage and the former husband of his second wife was a Jew . 
 Heinrich George was active in the Communist party before the Nazi takeover . He had worked with fellow left @-@ wingers , the theatre director Erwin Piscator and dramatist Bertolt Brecht and had starred in the lead role of the film Berlin @-@ Alexanderplatz ( 1931 ) . After the Nazi takeover , George was identified as a " non @-@ desirable " actor because of his earlier political affiliations and was barred from working in cinematic productions ; however , he was able to reach an accommodation with the Nazi regime and was eventually appointed director of the Schiller Theater , Berlin in 1938 . From that point onwards , George actively collaborated with the Nazis and agreed to star in Nazi propaganda films such as Jud Süß and Kolberg ( 1945 ) as well as appearing in numerous newsreels . 
 George had a stocky build and a Berlin accent which made him readily recognizable to German audiences . His prestige as a leading actor of the day made him an " extraordinarily valuable catch for the Nazis . " Cooke and Silberman describe him as " the actor most closely tied with fascist fantasies of the autocratic and the populist leader " . George 's affiliation with the Nazis would have fatal consequences for him after the war when the Soviets arrested him as a Nazi collaborator . He died in 1946 while interned in NKVD special camp Nr. 7 located in Sachsenhausen . 
 According to Harlan , it was Goebbels who insisted that Harlan 's wife , Kristina Söderbaum , play the leading female role . According to Antje <unk> , <unk> is frequently identified as " most singularly representative of the Nazi ideal , as the quintessential Nazi star . " As a beautiful Swedish blonde , Söderbaum had the baby @-@ doll looks that epitomized the model Aryan woman . In fact , she had already played the role of the innocent Aryan in a number of feature films and was well @-@ known to German audiences . Her youth and beauty made her a symbol health and purity and thus an exemplary specimen of the Nazi ideal of womanhood . In a number of her films , she had been imperiled by the threat of " <unk> " ( " racial pollution " ) . Because two of her films ended with her committing suicide by drowning , she was given the mock honorary title <unk> ( ' Drowned Corpse of the Reich ' ) . 
 Harlan argued to Goebbels that Söderbaum , having just given birth , was too weak to take on the role . Goebbels countered that a special room could be set up as a nursery and that a wet @-@ nurse could be hired to care for the infant . He further offered to halt shooting if Söderbaum became ill . Harlan later reported that Söderbaum was so upset by the entire affair that she considered fleeing back to her native Sweden to avoid having to play the part of Dorothea . In the end , however , she decided to stay and performed the role . 
 The story was different in the case of Ferdinand Marian who is often characterized as having established a reputation as a " matinee idol " . Initially , Marian was repulsed by the proposal that he play the title role of Jud Süß and demurred for almost a year . As a result , he was not confirmed in the role until about a week before shooting was scheduled to begin . According to Kristina Söderbaum , Marian was afraid that playing such an unappealing character would damage his image with film audiences . She recalled that Marian had told Goebbels that his stage persona was one of a bon @-@ vivant and a lover and that Süß , in contrast , was a " truly unpleasant character " . Goebbels rebutted Marian 's argument by pointing out that he had just seen Marian 's portrayal of Iago , asking " Was he a nice bon @-@ vivant ? " When Marian responded " But that was Shakespeare , Herr Minister ! " , Goebbels screamed into his face saying , " And I am Joseph Goebbels ! " 
 Marian finally agreed to play the part of Süß for fear of reprisal against members of his family . Marian had a daughter from his first marriage to the Jewish pianist , Irene <unk> . The former husband of his second wife was also Jewish , making her son ( and Marian 's stepson ) half @-@ Jewish . 
 Goebbels , however , used not only intimidation but also cajoling and generosity to achieve his goals . Ferdinand Marian requested compensation of 50 @,@ 000 marks for taking on the role of Süß , an amount double anything he had received for previous roles . When asked to approve this amount , Goebbels did so citing the importance of the film and the need for a high @-@ caliber cast to ensure its success . 
 According to his biographer , Friedrich Knilli , Marian never forgave himself for having accepted the role of Süß . Knilli ascribes Marian 's alcoholism and alleged suicide after the war to his feelings of guilt . 
 Of all the cast members , Werner Krauss was the one most clearly identified as an antisemite . His consummate skills in characterization had earned him the title of " the man with a thousand faces " . There is some difference of opinion regarding the number of roles that Krauss played in the film . While it is generally recognized that , with the exception of Marian 's title role , the other five speaking parts that depicted Jews were all played by Krauss , Gottfried Reinhardt asserts that Krauss played " no less than thirteen Jews " in the movie . The roles that Krauss played in the film are often characterized as portraying antisemitic stereotypes . In an interview , Harlan explained that the decision to have Krauss play all the roles was " meant to show how all these different temperaments and characters — the pious patriarch , the wily swindler , the penny @-@ pinching merchant , and so on — were all ultimately derived from the same ( Jewish ) root " . Katrin Sieg describes Krauss ' face as eerily appearing in different guises whenever the camera pans across a crowd of Jews , creating what Sieg calls a " paranoid effect of déjà vu " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Shooting began in March 1940 and , with the exception of some scenes which were shot on location in Prague , most of the filming took place at the UFA studios in Berlin Babelsberg . The scenes showing the entry of the Jews into Württemberg and worshipping in a synagogue were filmed in Prague where Jewish extras were coerced into performing . 
 The total cost of production was approximately two million Reichsmarks , a rather high figure for German feature films of that era . However , between 1940 and 1943 , it grossed over 6 @.@ 2 million Reichsmarks thus making it a blockbuster in contrast to the commercial failure of Der Ewige Jude . David Culbert attributes the film 's box @-@ office success in large part to " its lavish sets , its effective crowd scenes , its skillful script , and the splendid acting by most of the principals . " 
 = = Editing = = 
 According to Harlan 's postwar testimony , Goebbels was infuriated when he saw Harlan 's first version of the film because it was not antisemitic enough for his purposes . Harlan reported that Goebbels accused him of being " incapable of thinking in political terms " . Goebbels told him that he " should produce political films and not [ the kind of ] films that he would make in peacetime . " Goebbels ' dissatisfaction was centered on the relationship between Dorothea , the leading female character and Süß . He complained that Harlan had " transformed Süß , a monster , into a Romeo . " 
 Harlan testified that Goebbels removed him from the editing process and insisted on many changes , mostly with the intent of making Süß more unambiguously evil . The film was extensively re @-@ edited to remove ambiguities that portrayed Süß in too sympathetic a light to suit Goebbels ' antisemitic agenda . For example , Goebbels insisted on dropping a scene in which Dorothea responds to Süß 's wooing with a smile . Scenes in which Süß was depicted as " too pleasant " were simply dropped . In some scenes , new lines were scripted for Marian to read in order to make his character less sympathetic . Other scenes were added including a new ending to replace the original one written by Harlan . Harlan claimed that he had wanted to make the hanging of Süß appear to have been a " great injustice . " For the final execution scene , Harlan had written a defiant speech in which Süß condemned the German authorities . When Goebbels was shown a rough @-@ cut copy , he was infuriated , insisting that Süß must not be portrayed in any way as a martyr . Demanding that Süß must be humbled and humiliated at the end , he had Harlan 's speech replaced with one in which Süß <unk> begged for his life . 
 While Harlan 's account of Goebbels ' involvement in the film has been treated by a number of sources as factual , Haggith and Newman assert that " it is difficult to find any evidence of significant interference ( by Goebbels ) aside from casting and the appointment of Harlan . " They point out that it was in Harlan 's interest to shift the blame to Goebbels after the war . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film premiered at the Venice Film Festival on 8 September 1940 and received rave reviews , earning the top award . Unlike most of the other major antisemitic films produced during the Third Reich , it was a great box @-@ office success in Germany and abroad . It ranked sixth out of the thirty most popular German films of the war years . Within the Third Reich , it was the number one film of the 1939 – 1940 season , viewed by audiences totaling over twenty million at a time when the population of Germany was some seventy million . 
 Heinrich Himmler ordered that the film be shown to SS units about to be sent against Jews , to non @-@ Jewish populations of areas where Jews were about to be deported , and to concentration camp guards . Children under the age of fourteen were prohibited from seeing the film . There were reports of anti @-@ Jewish violence after audiences viewed the film ; in particular , teenagers seemed particularly prone to be instigated to violence by the film . 
 In early 1941 , the company Nordisk <unk> sought permission to distribute the film in Sweden but it was banned by the Censor . During the war the movie was never screened in public in Sweden , although the German embassy arranged screenings for special invitees . 
 Feuchtwanger was horrified and incensed at the way in which his work had been manipulated and distorted , calling Harlan 's film a <unk> ( " a shameful work " ) . In 1941 , he wrote an open letter to seven actors . Based on the sentiments expressed in the letter , it appears that Feuchtwanger was shocked that these men , whom he considered colleagues and who he knew were familiar with his work , would agree to participate in Goebbels ' antisemitic propaganda film . 
 = = Postwar legacy = = 
 In 1945 , exhibition of the film in Germany was banned by decree of the Allied Military Occupation . In fact , the film was banned throughout the western world and most of the extant copies were destroyed . Harlan , who had later directed the propaganda movie Kolberg ( 1945 ) , was the only film director of the Third Reich to be charged with crimes against humanity . Harlan defended himself asserting that he had been neither Nazi nor antisemitic . He claimed that Goebbels had controlled his work and that he should not be held personally responsible for its content . He recounted the ways in which he had been forced to endure Goebbels ' constant haranguing and meddling in the production of the film . In the end , the court condemned the film but exonerated the director . While Harlan had not acted nobly , the court recognized that he had operated under duress and should not be held responsible for the content of the film . 
 After the war , all the cast members also disclaimed responsibility , pleading that they had been coerced into participating in the film . According to his biographer Friedrich Knilli , Marian never came to terms with his having accepted the role of Süß and became an alcoholic , dying shortly after the war in a 1946 car accident . Some have attributed the accident to suicide . 
 Both Heinrich George and Werner Krauss were placed under arrest because of their past affiliation with the Nazi party . Although Heinrich George had been a member of the German Communist Party before the Nazi takeover , he was nonetheless interned as a Nazi collaborator at the Soviet special camp in Sachsenhausen where he died in 1946 . 
 Werner Krauss was banned from performing on stage and in films in Germany . He was required to undergo a de @-@ Nazification process from 1947 to 1948 . Ultimately , he was rehabilitated to the extent of being invited to German film festivals . In 1954 , he was awarded the Order of the Federal Republic of Germany ; in 1955 , he received the High Decoration of the Republic of Austria . 
 In the first few years after the war , Kristina Söderbaum was often heckled off the stage and even suffered the indignity of having rotten vegetables thrown at her . In subsequent years , she frequently expressed regret for her roles in antisemitic films . Although Söderbaum continued to play roles in film , she was never offered a leading role after the war . Eventually , she became a photographer of celebrities . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Harlan was required by court order to destroy what was then believed to be the only remaining negative of Jud Süß and he reportedly did this in April 1954 . A few years later , however , copies of the film began to turn up to the embarrassment of the West German government . After a lengthy investigation , it was determined that another negative existed in East Germany and it was used it to make prints that were dubbed in Arabic and distributed in Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt and Lebanon . Though that negative has never been located , it has been widely suspected that this version was produced and distributed by the Stasi or the KGB in order to arouse anti @-@ semitism among Egyptian and Palestinians against the US @-@ backed Israel ( and henceforth , support for the Soviet @-@ backed Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser ) . 
 The copyright of the film is held by the F.W. Murnau Foundation which is owned by the German government . The Foundation only permits screenings of the film when accompanied by an introduction explaining the historical context and the intended impact . Distribution , sale and screening of the film are forbidden in Germany and Austria . Sale of the DVD is also prohibited in France and Italy . 
 In July 2008 , the film was publicly screened in Budapest by Sándor and Tibor Gede , Hungarian right @-@ wing <unk> without the permission and consent of the Murnau Foundation . The Murnau Foundation protested to the Hungarian government through diplomatic channels . 
 The film is available for sale on VHS from Facets . 
 The film has been available for sale on VHS in the United States at least since 1983 ( the copyright date on a commercially marketed video cassette ) . In 2008 , a digitally restored subtitled DVD became generally available online with commentary by film historian Eric Rentschler . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Historical accuracy = = = 
 Although the film claimed to be " historically accurate " , the plot presents only a few historically accurate details and significantly departs from the historical record on a number of key points . Some of these departures were based on the Feuchtwanger novel and the Mendes ' film adaptation of it ; others were introduced by Goebbels and Harlan . According to Wallace , it is generally recognized that the narratives of both films are only loosely related by being rooted in the same " chapter of Wurttemberg history " . 
 Joseph Süß Oppenheimer did serve Duke Karl Alexander as a Court Jew . When the duke died suddenly , Süß was , in fact , brought to trial and subsequently executed in an iron cage more or less as depicted in the film . Haggith and Newman assert that much of the rest of Harlan 's film is " pure invention . " For example , the film presents the grounds for Süß 's execution as being abuse of power and sexual relations with a Christian woman . According to Shay <unk> , these accusations are not mentioned in any of the historical essays about the real Süß . 
 = = = Relationship to previous works = = = 
 Although Lion Feuchtwanger believed that Harlan 's film relied heavily on his novel , <unk> and <unk> characterize the film as " based primarily on Wilhelm Hauff 's novella " and assert that it only uses a few characters from Feuchtwanger 's novel . Even these characters and their actions are distorted to support the film 's antisemitic message . 
 Because Goebbels envisioned a film that would be a response to Mendes ' film adaptation of Feuchtwanger 's novel , Harlan 's plot shares a similar structure to the plot of the Mendes film with a few crucial changes which Feuchtwanger characterized as shameful distortions . Feuchtwanger himself referred to Harlan 's film as a " <unk> " ( " a shameful work " ) and wrote an open letter to seven Berlin actors , two of them having played lead roles in the film . He asserted that Harlan 's film had distorted his novel so much that it was a perversion of it . He further called into question their motives for making the film in light of their familiarity with him and his novel . 
 Haines and Parker characterize Feuchtwanger 's works and the Mendes film adaptation as " diametrically opposed to Nazi anti @-@ Semitism . " 
 For Feuchtwanger , Süß was a forerunner that symbolized the evolution in European philosophy and cultural mentality , representing a shift towards Eastern philosophy , from Nietzsche to Buddha , from " the old to the new covenant . " 
 In his novel , Feuchtwanger portrayed greed , pride and ambition as human weaknesses found in both Jews and Gentiles and which could be overcome by the denial of desire . In contrast to Feuchtwanger 's philosophical meditation on the tension between Eastern and Western philosophy , Harlan 's film casts these as uniquely Jewish traits and presents Jews as a " dangerous and recklessly underestimated threat . " 
 = = = Stereotypes of Jews = = = 
 The film employs a number of negative stereotypes of Jews as being materialistic , immoral , cunning , untrustworthy and physically unattractive . At one extreme , Jews are portrayed as cut @-@ throat capitalists ; at the other , they are depicted as poor , filthy immigrants . Mike Davis writes that , " A thousand years of European anti @-@ semitism were condensed into the cowering rapist , Süss , with his dirty beard , hook nose and whining voice . " 
 The character of Süß is based on the stereotype of the grasping Jewish moneylender . There is an early scene in which Süß is shown to possess a fortune in jewels and jewelry . In another , he tells an innocent German girl that his home is " the world " ( reflecting the Nazi stereotype of Jews as rootless wanderers in contrast to the Germans ' love of their German homeland ) . Several conversations between Jewish characters perpetuate the Nazi line that Jews are inherently hostile to non @-@ Jews . According to David Welch , the Nazis issued a guide to the press explaining how to interpret the film . The guide emphasized that a key point of the film was that once Jews like Süß got into positions of responsibility and power , " they exploited power , not for the good of the community , but for their own racial ends . " 
 = = = Racial pollution = = = 
 In both Feuchtwanger 's novel and Harlan 's film , the dramatic climax is rape . However , Feuchtwanger posits that Süß has a hidden daughter whom the duke discovers , rapes and who then dies by drowning . The novel then focuses on Süß 's grappling with the desire for revenge and the tragedy resulting from his decision to exact vengeance for the loss of his daughter . Harlan replaced the rape of Süß 's daughter by the duke with Süß 's rape of an Aryan woman , thus completely inverting Feuchtwanger 's plot device from a father 's tragic quest for vengeance to the punishment of a Jew for having sexual relations with a Christian . 
 Christiane Schönfeld writes that , " ( t ) he Jew as sexual beast and vampire , sucking the life spirit from individual and community alike is an all too common motif in anti @-@ Semitic propaganda and is put to effective use in Harlan 's film . " Michael <unk> writes : " ( Jud Süß ) openly mobilized fears and sexual aggression and exploited them for anti @-@ Semitic incitement . " According to Michael Kater , the film was shown to " a large number of ( German ) girls " in order to warn them of the " sexual devastation that Jews had wrought in the past " and to remind them of the Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935 . In an interview with Der Film given before the release of the film , Harlan pointed out that Süß was ultimately sentenced to death not for his financial machinations which were technically legal but for violating an ancient law which prohibited Jews from having sexual relations with Christian women . He then cites this as being " an interesting parallel to the Nuremberg Laws . 
 There is also Süß 's role as a purveyor of women for the Duke , and his relentless pursuit of an " Aryan " woman for sexual purposes , even after she rebuffs his first attempt to seduce her . From the Nazi perspective , this was Rassenschande , a racial pollution , a crime against the German blood . The heroine 's suicide is a proper response of a German to such a tragedy . 
 = = = " Jew in disguise " = = = 
 One antisemitic theme that is introduced at the beginning of the film is the portrayal of Süß as the typical " Jew in disguise " , a concept which Welch describes as " the inherent rootlessness of the Jew and his ability to assimilate himself into whichever society he chooses . " Süß is presented to the audience first in traditional ghetto attire and then a quick cutaway to a shot of him in elegant clothes riding in a carriage on his way to Stuttgart . Thus , Süß is shown to be hiding his true identity as a marginalized Jew and posing as a respected member of German society . However , despite Süß 's attempts to fit into Württemberg high society , Harlan will not let the audience forget that he is ultimately depicted as a " dirty Jew " and underlines this point by juxtaposing him with the elderly Rabbi Löw . In an interview with Der Film , a German film magazine , Harlan explained : 
 It is meant to show how all these different temperaments and characters – the pious Patriarch , the wily swindler , the penny @-@ pinching merchant and so on – are ultimately derived from the same roots . 
 Around the middle of the film we show the Purim festival , a victory festival which the Jews celebrate as a festival of revenge on the <unk> , the Christians . Here I am depicting authentic Jewry as it was then and as it now continues unchecked in Poland . In contrast to this original Jewry , we are presented with Süss , the elegant financial adviser to the Court , the clever politician in short , the Jew in disguise . 
 = = = Effectiveness of the film = = = 
 Stephen Lee writes that Hitler 's vision of the kind of film that was likely to engage the German public proved to be less effective than the more subtle approach advocated by Goebbels . For example , the documentary film Der Ewige Jude ( The Eternal Jew ) that Hitler commissioned was so crude and strident that many audiences were repelled by the grotesque imagery and the film was a box @-@ office flop . The failure of Der Ewige Jude convinced Goebbels that the most effective approach for disseminating propaganda was subtle and indirect . Lee writes that Goebbels had learned to " introduce propaganda as a subliminal message within the context of a story with which the audience could identify . " The Nazi antisemitic message was more subtly and artfully presented in the feature film format that Goebbels preferred . 
 Richard Levy attributes the effectiveness of the film in part to an " arguably engaging story " and the casting of some of the leading German stars of that period including Ferdinand Marian , Heinrich George , Kristina Söderbaum and Werner Krauss . He characterizes the film 's antisemitic message as being " integrated into the film 's story and strategy rather than overwhelming it or seeming to stand apart from it . " Edgar Feuchtwanger attributes the success of the film to it being " a combination of virulent anti @-@ Semitism with a compelling love story , full of sex and violence . " 
 However , Stephen Brockman cautions against making " all @-@ too @-@ sweeping assumptions " about how effective Jud Süß was as a propaganda tool . To support his argument , he points to anecdotal evidence that , rather than being perceived as a despicable Jew , Marian 's portrayal of Süß was considered to be quite sympathetic ; so much so that he received fan mail from women who had become infatuated with his character . 
 David Culbert notes that " [ t ] hose who have condemned Jew Süss as a lifeless production are presuming — understandably — a morally abhorrent film cannot possibly have redeeming artistic merit . " However , Culbert argues that , while one can understand such reasoning , it is actually a fallacy . He argues that those who dismiss Harlan as a " loud @-@ mouthed opportunist who could direct crowd scenes " have failed to understand the structure of the script whose brilliance is due to Harlan rather than to his predecessors , Metzger and Möller . Culbert attributes much of the film 's success to Marian 's performance . He describes Marian as making use of " techniques and gestures perfected in his stage portrayal of Iago ( in Shakespeare 's Othello ) " . According to Culbert , " the construction of [ Harlan 's ] plot owes much to Shakespeare . " 
 = = = Recent documentary films = = = 
 In recent years , the film has become the subject of a number of documentary films . In 2001 , Horst <unk> made a film titled Jud Süss — Ein Film als <unk> ? ( Jud <unk> — A Film As a Crime ? ) . The 2008 documentary Harlan – In the Shadow of Jew Süss by Felix Moeller explores Harlan 's motivations and the post @-@ war reaction of his large family to his notoriety . In 2010 , Oskar <unk> directed a film titled Jew <unk> : Rise and Fall ( German : Jud Süss : Film ohne Gewissen , Jud Süss — film without conscience ) that premiered at the 2010 Berlinale . 
 = Uturunku = 
 Uturunku ( Quechua for jaguar , Hispanicized spellings <unk> , <unk> ) is a dormant volcano in the Cordillera de Lípez in Potosí Department , Bolivia . It is located in the Sur Lípez Province , San Pablo de Lípez Municipality . It is in the Central Volcanic Zone of the Andes , and its highest summit is 6 @,@ 008 metres ( 19 @,@ 711 ft ) above sea level . The volcano has two summits , with a fumarole field between them . The volcano 's landforms include lava domes and lava flows . 
 The volcano was sporadically active during the Pleistocene , with the most recent eruption dated at 271 @,@ 000 years ago . Since then , Uturunku has displayed fumarolic activity . Starting in 1992 , satellite observations have indicated a large area of regional uplift centered on Uturunku , which has been interpreted as an indication of large @-@ scale magma intrusion under the volcano . This might be a prelude to large @-@ scale volcanic activity , including " <unk> " activity and caldera formation . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Uturunku is a dormant 6 @,@ 008 metres ( 19 @,@ 711 ft ) high stratovolcano south of <unk> Chico , in the Altiplano of Bolivia . The edifice has a volume of 85 cubic kilometres ( 20 cu mi ) , covering an area of 400 square kilometres ( 150 sq mi ) on a base altitude of 4 @,@ 500 metres ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) . It is constructed from porphyritic dacite lava flows and lava domes . <unk> enclaves are also present and some dacites border on silicic andesite in composition . The edifice has been affected by glacial activity . The Lower and Middle Pleistocene lava flows form the base of the edifice and extend 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) away from the volcano . Middle and Upper Pleistocene lavas form the upper part of the volcanoes and extend up to 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) away . According to geological inspection involving both aerial surveys and field work , the longest lava flows appear to generate from the central vent . Flow features on the lavas are well preserved , and are blocky with high fronts . The flows are several tens of metres thick . A sulfur mine ( 22 ° 14 ′ 50 ″ S 67 ° 10 ′ 53 ″ W ) was reported in 1975 . It was based on native sulfur and minor realgar in the volcanic ash , with an estimated 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 49 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 long tons ; 55 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 short tons ) of ore . Laguna Celeste lies at the foot of the volcano and is fed by snow melt from the volcano 's northeastern side . Mama <unk> , a lake on the western side of the volcano , is also fed from the volcano . 
 Uturunku 's lavas contain biotite , <unk> , ilmenite , magnetite , orthopyroxene and plagioclase . They also contain inclusions , a few percent andesite , <unk> and xenoliths derived from the crust containing <unk> gneiss and igneous rocks . Morphological and chemical analysis of the eruption products indicate that the dacites formed by fractional crystallization of andesite magma . Some of the dacite magma was modified by mixing of dacite and andesite magmas . The magma also underwent oxidation and degassing during ascent . Analysis of the erupted dacites indicate that the magma was nearly water @-@ saturated and stored at depths given differently as 2 – 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 5 mi ) or 5 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) by studies , and temperatures of 870 ° C ( 1 @,@ 600 ° F ) . The chemistry and microstructure suggest that Uturunku magmas formed in magma chambers subject to episodic replenishment with hotter magmas . Major and trace element analysis indicates a substantial similarity of Uturunku lavas to local ignimbrites . 
 = = = Regional setting = = = 
 The Central Andes and the Central Volcanic Zone formed in response to the subduction at a rate of about 6 @.@ 5 centimetres per year ( 2 @.@ 6 in / year ) at an angle of 25 ° of the Nazca Plate below the South American Plate . The onset of the modern orogeny was precipitated by the breakup of the Farallon Plate 26 mya , resulting in accelerated and steepening subduction of the now @-@ Nazca plate . After a 14 million year phase of shallow subduction , 12 mya the subduction steepened to the current angle of 30 ° by 3 mya . The Altiplano – Puna volcanic complex ( APVC ) formed during this time . 
 The APVC is an area of the Andes where an upper crust magmatic system has generated large @-@ scale ignimbrite eruptions and calderas between one and ten mya . The melting of the crust that generated this activity is also thought to have contributed to crustal thickening in the area to about 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) . An underlying area of partial melts ( around 20 % volume ) with low density and seismic velocity and high conductivity has been identified with a top at 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) depth . This area accumulates magma at an average rate of 0 @.@ 001 cubic kilometres per year ( 7 @.@ 6 × 10 − 6 cu mi / Ms ) . This area of melt arches upward and has its thickest and shallowest parts below Uturunku , with the slowest seismic velocity zones located south and west of the volcano . 
 = = = Local setting = = = 
 Uturunku is located 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) west of the main volcanic arc . Starting 11 @-@ 10 mya ago during the Neogene , the Lípez area was affected by ignimbritic activity . Cerro Lípez formed in the Miocene from dacites and rhyolites intruding into Middle Miocene ash flows . <unk> activity includes the 2 @.@ 89 mya Pastos Grandes , the 1 @.@ 98 mya Laguna Colorada and the 0 @.@ 7 mya El Tatio ignimbrite . The smaller <unk> caldera formed 8 @.@ 4 mya and the larger <unk> caldera between 6 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 9 mya . The <unk> – <unk> <unk> complex was the last active volcano in the area with intrusions dated 85 @,@ 000 years ago . Further west on the border between Bolivia and Chile activity continues today with Iru <unk> , <unk> , Ollagüe , Putana and others . 
 The volcano is constructed on local ignimbrite layers , the 8 @.@ 1 mya <unk> and the 5 @.@ 65 mya <unk> ignimbrites . The Lipez – <unk> lineament ( also known as the Pastos Grandes @-@ <unk> lineament ) runs through the volcano , and seismic activity in the area is aligned to this and neighbouring NW – SE faults . These fault zones may influence the activity of the volcano and are associated with caldera formation . Volcanoes in the Uturunku area rise about 1 @,@ 600 – 1 @,@ 700 metres ( 5 @,@ 200 – 5 @,@ 600 ft ) above the surrounding terrain . 
 = = Climate and glaciation = = 
 Present @-@ day climate conditions at Uturunku volcano are scarcely recorded . Most of the humidity comes from the Amazon basin in the east ; this generates a decreasing gradient over the Altiplano westwards . The Lipez area is dry , receiving less than 100 millimetres per year ( 0 @.@ 12 in / Ms ) of precipitation . Because of this insufficient precipitation , there is no present @-@ day glaciation on Uturunku despite the 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) isotherm being lower than the summit of the volcano and of other neighbouring summits at 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 The presence of a shallow ( less than 100 @-@ metre / 330 ft ) difference between the altitude of the valley bottom of the southern glacial valley , and its shoulders indicates past low @-@ volume glaciation . Five different moraine stages between 4 @,@ 800 metres ( 15 @,@ 700 ft ) and 4 @,@ 850 metres ( 15 @,@ 910 ft ) altitude have been identified . <unk> rocks and <unk> <unk> are also present in the area . Based on helium @-@ 3 surface exposure dating , these moraines originated from Pleistocene glacier fluctuations between 65 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 years ago . The lowest of the moraines , and thus the largest extent of glaciation , coincides with the <unk> of the " Lake Tauca " lake episode 16 @,@ 000 @-@ 14 @,@ 000 years ago , where the Altiplano was covered by a large lake . Rapid deglaciation occurred after the disappearance of Lake Tauca 14 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Holocene = = = 
 Uturunku was active between 890 @,@ 000 and 271 @,@ 000 years ago . Lavas higher up the edifice are younger and less extensive . The volcano was constructed in two phases dated by argon – argon dating , one 890 @,@ 000 – 549 @,@ 000 years ago and the younger , less extensive one 427 @,@ 000 – 271 @,@ 000 years ago . The youngest age belongs to the summit lava dome . Older estimates by the Servicio <unk> de Bolivia proposed that the northern and western flows were between 10 and 15 mya old and the summit flows older than one million years . 
 Two lava domes south of the summit , with a combined volume of 1 km3 ( 0 @.@ 24 cu mi ) , are the oldest structures of the volcano , having formed 1 @,@ 050 ka and 1 @,@ 041 ka . Lava flows on the southern and southwestern sides of the edifice have similar ages of 1 @,@ 028 and 1 @,@ 018 ka . Subsequently , two lava flows on the southern and eastern side of the volcano and a group of flows on the northeastern side erupted 890 , 714 and 660 ka were the only eruptions until 595 ka . Ten domes and flows were erupted between 595 – 590 ka , including two large domes located north – northwest of the summit erupted at the start and end of this period . These domes formed directly on the Altiplano and are 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) high , 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) wide and have a combined volume of 0 @.@ 4 km3 ( 0 @.@ 096 cu mi ) . 549 ka the western dome was erupted 5 @.@ 5 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) southeast of the NNW domes ; it subsequently collapsed , forming a debris avalanche that covered 1 @.@ 3 km2 ( 0 @.@ 50 sq mi ) . The largest lava flow from Uturunku was erupted 544 ka ; this <unk> <unk> flow flowed 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) over the ignimbrite plain . Based on a thickness of 200 m ( 660 ft ) a volume of 1 @.@ 7 km3 ( 0 @.@ 41 cu mi ) was estimated from this flow . 
 Starting from 450 @,@ 000 years ago , the morphology of the flows change . Between 458 and 387 ka flows and domes are shorter and originate mostly around the summit area ; the longest flow from this phase erupted 455 ka and is 2 @.@ 6 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) . The last major pulse occurred 316 @-@ 267 ka , and its products have dimensions similar to those older than 500 @,@ 000 . The youngest flow in the southeastern summit area is dated 250 ka . 
 Volcanic activity at Uturunku was episodic , with bursts of eruptions separated by between 50 @,@ 000 and 180 @,@ 000 years of rest . Eruptions were likely voluminous , with lava flow volumes of about 0 @.@ 1 – 10 km3 ( 0 @.@ 024 – 2 @.@ 399 cu mi ) erupted in short time periods . Such eruptions originated from ephemeral magma chambers formed by repeated transfer of magmas from the APVC melt generating zone . In these magma chambers , andesites and silica @-@ rich magmas formed dacites that erupted to the surface when the magma chamber grew to the point of rupturing its walls . Assuming that the magma output of the volcano was a total of 170 km3 ( 41 cu mi ) , the average flux rate was less than 0 @.@ <unk> km3 / a ( 2 @.@ 1 × 10 − 6 cu mi / Ms ) , below the average for local volcanoes . 
 = = = Recent unrest = = = 
 The volcano has two fields of fumaroles ( < 80 ° C ( 176 ° F ) ) in the area between Uturunku 's two summits and has caused hydrothermal alteration of country rock . These fumaroles form visible clouds of steam . This heat may have been replenished from the APVC melt generating zone or survived since the last eruption of the volcano . <unk> activity is distinct enough to be visible from <unk> satellite image but barely visible from the ground . The temperature of the hotspot has been relatively constant in contrast to Lascar . The presence of lava flows overlying moraines , which indicate post @-@ glacial activity , is controversial ; the summit lava flows have been glaciated . 
 Starting in 1992 , and increasing in 1998 , a 70 km ( 43 mi ) wide circular region around Uturunku has been deforming at a rate of 1 – 2 cm / year ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 79 in / year ) . Research has indicated that the sources must be deep to create large @-@ scale ground inflation , but above the partially molten layer of the APVC partial melt zone . A ring of subsidence surrounds the uplift and expands the size of the deformed area to a diameter of 150 km ( 93 mi ) . The total volume changes over 14 years amount to 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @.@ 4 × 1012 cu ft ) at a depth of 17 – 30 km ( 11 – 19 mi ) below the surface . Magma accumulation rates of 0 @.@ 01 cubic kilometres per year ( 7 @.@ 6 × 10 − 5 cu mi / Ms ) have been estimated . These inflation and accumulation rates are comparable to the inflation rates at Yellowstone Caldera and Long Valley Caldera in the United States and <unk> ( Lastarria – Cerro del Azufre ) in Chile . The depth and scale of deformation and the absence of a large @-@ scale hydrothermal system indicates that the ground inflation is unlikely to be hydrothermal . Evidence from prehistoric levels in local lakes does not suggest that such ground movements occurred in the volcano 's past . 
 Anomalous seismic activity was also observed centered in a source 3 – 4 km ( 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 5 mi ) deep , 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) southwest of the summit . <unk> activity was also registered . Such seismicity exceeds that of other volcanoes in the region ( with the exception of Lascar during active periods , and Lastarria and San Pedro ) and is unlikely to be normal background activity for the area . Some earthquake activity and seismic swarms were triggered by the 2010 Chile earthquake , which may be indicative of unstable <unk> systems or interactions of the magmatic system with far field earthquake waves . Hypotheses regarding the earthquake activity either consider shallow faults deforming in a brittle manner , groundwater movements or a combination of these with a disturbance of a hydrothermal system . The presence of partial melts below the Altiplano – Puna volcanic complex suggests a magmatic origin of the activity . 
 <unk> data indicate that a vertical low density body connects Uturunku with the APVC magma body at a depth of 25 km ( 16 mi ) . Several such bodies with radii 12 – 20 km ( 7 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 4 mi ) are found beneath the APVC . In 2013 , del Potro et al. estimated that this body may contain 25 % by volume of molten dacite . The formation of buoyant mobile layers following heating may destabilize this magma mush and cause lavas to accumulate a few kilometres below the volcano and erupt . 
 = = Threats = = 
 The magma intrusion rate below Uturunku is considerably larger than the magma output of the Pleistocene volcano , being comparable to the magma flux of historic eruptions and estimates of magma generation rates in local caldera forming magma chambers . Evidence for the formation of such a magma chamber is elusive but might be hidden by the deformation activity of the APVC melt generation zone . Uturunku may be developing into a supervolcano , and a caldera forming super @-@ eruption may occur there ; this possibility has resulted in international media attention . 
 = South Stoneham House = 
 South Stoneham House is a Grade II * listed former manor house in Swaythling , Southampton ; the former seat of the Barons Swaythling before the family moved to the nearby Townhill Park House . The building is currently owned by the University of Southampton , and until recently was used as a hall of residence , part of the Wessex Lane Halls . 
 Originally called Bishop 's Stoneham , the records of the manor date from Domesday , but the current house was constructed in the early eighteenth century . Attributed to Nicholas Hawksmoor with gardens and landscaping by Lancelot " Capability " Brown , the house is close to the River Itchen and Monks Brook . The manor was owned and occupied by a long series of families and people , including the Willis @-@ Fleming family of nearby North Stoneham and Samuel Montagu , 1st Baron Swaythling . 
 After Montagu 's death his son elected to continue living at nearby Townhill Park House , and South Stoneham was subsequently sold to University College Southampton ( now the University of Southampton ) for use as student accommodation . In 1964 the building was considerably altered by adding a 17 @-@ storey tower and a kitchen and dining complex to the building . In 2004 the University submitted plans to demolish these extensions with the intention of converting the original house into a conference venue and building new blocks of flats on the remaining landscaped gardens . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Manor of South Stoneham ( 990 – 1708 ) = = = 
 A charter dating from 990 relates to the manor of South Stoneham and during building works in the area immediately around the current house and grounds , archaeological evidence of a Saxon settlement was found . The manor of South Stoneham was originally called Bishop 's Stoneham , and was held by the Bishop of Winchester at the time of the Domesday Book . The original parish of South Stoneham covered more than 8 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @.@ 37 km2 ; 12 @.@ 50 sq mi ) , and extended along the eastern side of the River Itchen from the site of the present day Eastleigh in the north to just above Northam Bridge in the south , and from Swaythling to the outskirts of the original town of Southampton on the western side of the river ; it included the tithings of Allington , Barton , Pollack , <unk> , and Portswood . Other than St. Mary 's Church ( which is close to South Stoneham House but predates it considerably ) and a few adjacent houses , there was no village of " South Stoneham " ; the closest village to the house was Swaythling , now a suburb of Southampton . 
 The tenants of the manor apparently took their name from it ; a Gregory de South Stoneham ( or <unk> de Stoneham ) is recorded there in 1236 and 1249 , and in 1315 the manor was held by Nicholas de South Stoneham ( son of Guy de South Stoneham ) . In 1348 Thomas de Stoneham and his wife Alice were lord and lady of the manor , and five heiresses of theirs – possibly daughters – held the manor in 1367 . However , that year they <unk> it to Adam le <unk> . 
 The history is somewhat incomplete after that point , but records do exist of the manor being passed from Nicholas Fitz John to William Nicholl in 1436 and from John Langhorn to Thomas Payne in 1478 . After Payne 's death the manor passed to John Langhorn 's son William , and it remained in the Langhorn family until Stephen Langhorn , or <unk> , sold it to John <unk> for £ 140 in 1553 . 
 <unk> sold the manor to William Conway in 1600 , who sold it to Edmund Clerke in 1612 ; Clerke 's son inherited the manor in 1634 but only survived for a further two years , at which point the manor passed to Edmund Clerke 's 8 ½ -year @-@ old grandson , another Edmund . This Edmund Clerke was the Sheriff of Hampshire and clerk to the Signet in 1671 . Clerke the younger married the daughter of Giles Frampton , who took control of the manor after Clerke 's death and sold it to Edmund Dummer , a former Surveyor of the Navy , in 1705 . 
 = = = South Stoneham House ( 1708 – 1920 ) = = = 
 Dummer purchased the South Stoneham estate , comprising approximately 300 acres ( 120 ha ) , for the sum of £ 3 @,@ 400 . The house was constructed in 1708 as Dummer 's family home , and its design has been attributed to Nicholas Hawksmoor . The actual construction was carried out by Dummer 's uncle , Thomas Dummer of London . Edmond Dummer was from nearby North Stoneham and had been baptised in St. Nicolas ' Church there . The grounds of the house comprised 110 acres , with 5 acres of water . 
 Edmund Dummer was declared bankrupt in 1711 and he died in debtors ' prison two years later . His cousin Thomas , a lawyer who had acquired the manor on Edmund 's behalf , fought a lawsuit attempting to gain control of the property ; however in 1716 , Edward Nicholas of Newton Valence took ownership of South Stoneham , purchasing it from Edmund Dummer 's daughter , Jane . William Sloane , whose brother Hans founded the British Museum , purchased the manor from Nicholas in 1740 , and it was subsequently owned by his son Hans Sloane , and later by Jean Louis Bazalgette . 
 The previously formal grounds were landscaped between 1772 and 1780 by Capability Brown . The landscaping work cost £ 1 @,@ 050 . John Lane purchased the estate from Bazalgette for £ 15 @,@ 000 in 1809 or 1810 , but was later declared bankrupt and the manor was put up for sale in 1815 . It was not until 1819 , however , that it was bought by John Willis Fleming , who also owned the manor of North Stoneham where a new house was being built for him at North Stoneham Park . 
 When the new North Stoneham House was completed , John Willis Fleming moved there and leased South Stoneham House to General Joseph Gubbins until the general 's death in 1832 . In 1831 there was a major fire at North Stoneham , and John Willis Fleming returned to live in South Stoneham House again after Gubbins ' death while North Stoneham was rebuilt . When this was completed in 1834 South Stoneham House was again advertised to let , and in the latter part of the 1830s a Colonel Boucher was in residence . The house was advertised for let again in 1843 . Mrs Charlotte Maria Beckford leased the property with Miss Lucy Middleton and Beckford died at South Stoneham House at the age of 86 on 25 Jun 1854 , after which Thomas Willis Fleming ( second son of John ) moved in . He purchased the property from his elder brother in 1857 and lived there until 1860 / 61 . At this point they leased the property to W. C. Standish . The Willis Flemings put the house up for sale in 1875 and sold South Stoneham House for £ 20 @,@ 000 in 1878 , to Captain Thomas Davison ( or <unk> ) . Included in the sale catalogue issued on 23 November 1875 was Wood Mill ( still standing and operating as an outdoor activities centre as of 2013 ) , Gascon Cottage , and land for building . " Gascon 's Meadow with house thereon in South Stoneham " was <unk> the next year . 
 In 1888 South Stoneham House was purchased from Davison by Samuel Montagu , who became the first Baron Swaythling in 1907 . During his tenure he had a large porch added to the front entrance of the house . Eleven years after buying South Stoneham House he also purchased Townhill Park House for his son Louis , who continued to live at Townhill after Samuel 's death in 1911 . 
 = = = Hall of residence ( 1920 – present day ) = = = 
 South Stoneham House was acquired , with South Hill ( some two miles to the northwest ) , in 1920 to house male students at University College Southampton . The salmon pool at South Stoneham was retained by the Montagu family , becoming part of the Townhill Park estate . Tradition prevailed in the house , with a collegiate atmosphere as gowns were expected to be worn to dinner and lectures and curfews were enforced . 
 A bell was rung at 5 @.@ 45 each evening and everyone settled in silence to study until another bell two hours later released us for dinner . At 10 o 'clock another bell called us to prayers . Half an hour later the warden came round to all the bedrooms to check that everyone was in bed . 
 By 1924 , there was distinct pressure on space in the halls of residence , and it was clear that more rooms were needed . The existing halls were full and so South Stoneham and South Hill were extended by covering their outbuildings . 
 During the Second World War , the Highfield location of the College meant it was directly in the war zone itself . With Southampton being attacked , the halls of residence were also under siege : at South Stoneham windows were blown in by bombs . The School of Navigation at the College was relocated to the communal rooms of South Stoneham House for the duration of the war , and afterwards was moved to Warsash ; in 1970 the school became independent of the University ( instead it is affiliated to Southampton Solent University ) and is known as the Warsash Maritime Academy . 
 The stables and servants ' quarters were demolished in 1961 and in 1964 a concrete tower extension was added to the hall , incorporating a bar and dining hall area . The tower contains 180 student rooms over its 17 floors and is 48 @.@ 7 metres high , making it the 8th @-@ tallest building in Southampton . 
 On 9 January 1986 , Southampton City Council created the Itchen Valley Conservation Area which includes South Stoneham House and Lodge . This places a number of restrictions on the construction of new buildings and the demolition of existing structures ; however the Council have made an exception in the case of the tower block attached to South Stoneham House , which " may be considered for demolition by the University within the plan period . " 
 In the 1990s South Stoneham House was merged into the Wessex Lane Halls complex of residences , although each individual hall maintained an individual character . Residents were catered for and ate originally in South Stoneham 's own dining hall , part of the 1960s extension , and later in the Galley Restaurant in the neighbouring Connaught Hall . Residents shared small kitchen and bathroom facilities . 
 South Stoneham House continued to be used as a hall of residence into the first decade of the 21st century . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Original house = = = 
 The architecture of the original building is attributed to Nicholas Hawksmoor , with some alterations from around 1900 and the subsequent modern 1960s extensions . The original mansion is in the Queen Anne style . The house itself has three storeys constructed of red brick . The ground floor level has a rubbed brick band at nine courses , and another rubbed brick band exists on the second floor , along with a moulded stone cornice level with the sills . 
 The attic is tall and embraces the second floor . It has moulded stone coping and a small pediment in the centre , which is supported by an entablature decorated with triglyphs and <unk> . 
 The roof is tiled and hipped , with five hips in all . The seven window openings built into the roof at second @-@ floor level are original , but fitted with modern windows . On the first floor there are nine tall , narrow windows with wide frames , stone sills and deep arches of rubbed brick . In the late 18th century eight windows , two of which are on the left @-@ hand @-@ side of the door , were altered . The door itself is placed centrally with a coved , moulded architrave above and 45 @-@ degree corbels decorated with acanthus supporting a cornice with round brackets and a carved keystone . The door is glazed and a Doric porch of modern brick covers the doorcase . 
 A full @-@ height extension exists to the left @-@ hand side of the building ( looking at the north front ) , and the attic storey was extended by one bay on each side after this full @-@ height extension was built . The building is now flanked by two modern wings . 
 The rear of the house , the south front , has the same overall design as the north front with the exception of a large central bay at ground and first @-@ floor level . The first floor of the bay has three windows ; the ground floor has two windows with a glazed door in the middle . This door is of similar design to the front door at the north of the house , and has four steps of Portland stone accompanied by balustrades also of Portland stone . 
 On both the north and south faces of the building there are two rainwater heads made of cast lead , inscribed with the initials " EDS " . 
 = = = 1960s extension = = = 
 The extension was designed by Robert Potter and Richard Hare , while the associate architect in charge was <unk> <unk> . Potter was based in Salisbury and was better known as an ecclesiastical architect , having previously designed the ( now listed ) Church of the Ascension in Crownhill , Plymouth and St George 's Church in Oakdale , Dorset . During his lifetime he was also responsible for significant work on Chichester Cathedral , Chelmsford Cathedral , Oxford 's Bodleian Library and he held the post of Surveyor to the Fabric of St Paul 's Cathedral in London . 
 <unk> Gifford and Partners were the structural engineers , while the general contractors were a company called Trollope and Colls Limited . The designers settled on a tower block so as to leave as much of the gardens and grounds intact as they could . 
 The tower block and other additions to the house were described in the January – March 1964 edition of Concrete Quarterly as " some very fine extensions " : 
 The low blocks are of traditional brick construction to serve as a ' continuation ' of the mansion . The tower , on the other hand , is concrete built and finished – a strikingly simple design of cross walls and facing panels which , in structural and elevational treatment , strongly suggests an industrialized building system : so much so , in fact , that it serves as a pointer to what system building can mean in terms of good architecture . 
 The tower block measures 49 by 56 feet ( 15 by 17 m ) and rests on a concrete raft 2 feet 6 inches ( 76 cm ) thick on a stiff clay subsoil . A reinforced concrete core keeps the tower stable and contains the lifts and other services . This central core also supported a tower crane during construction which meant no scaffolding was used at all . Above the first floor level , the tower has an " egg crate structure " with cross walls made of reinforced concrete and measuring 6 inches ( 15 cm ) thick , and 5 inches ( 13 cm ) thick reinforced concrete floor slabs . Both the walls and floor slabs were cast on site . 
 = = Grounds and gardens = = 
 The estate was landscaped some time after 1722 by Lancelot " Capability " Brown and Kelly 's Directory of 1915 described the house as being " pleasantly seated " . At that time the grounds comprised 110 acres , with 5 acres of water , which would have included parts of Monks Brook ( including the salmon pool that it flows into ) and the River Itchen and the modern Riverside Park . However 100 years earlier the estate was more extensive , being described thus in The Times on 21 June 1815 : 
 A highly valuable and very compact <unk> <unk> , comprising the manor or reputed manor of South Stoneham , and the capital Mansion , called South Stoneham @-@ house , most delightfully situate on the banks of the Itchen river , distant only two miles and a half from Southampton , with offices of every description for a family of respectability , gardens , pleasure grounds , hot houses , ice house , sheets of water , fish ponds , and 360 customary acres of arable , meadow , and wood land , about 40 acres of which form a beautiful paddock , in which the mansion stands ; the remainder divided into a farm , with farm house and buildings ... 
 In 1839 the estate was described as not particularly extensive , but notable for its groups of " patrician " elm trees . 
 It has been suggested that the ponds are relics of the " 2 fisheries " mentioned in the Domesday Book entry for the site . The gardens and salmon pool were the subject of an oil painting by the neo @-@ classical painter Adam Buck ; the painting , measuring 35 inches by 57 inches , sold at auction at Sotheby 's in London for £ 3 @,@ 200 on 27 November 1974 . Some of Capability Brown 's signature cedars of Lebanon still surround the house today . 
 = = Interior = = 
 = = = Original house = = = 
 When the house was sold in 1875 , the interior was described thus : 
 A Corridor with scagliola pilaster , having solid Ormolu Corinthian caps and bases , leads to a spacious <unk> @-@ <unk> LIBRARY , surrounded by twenty fluted three @-@ quarter column scagliola pilasters , standing on a scagliola base , and having ormolu caps and bases supporting a richly moulded imitation marble cornice , the recesses filled with <unk> for Books , and a black marble chimney @-@ piece and register stove . Plate glass French Windows open into a <unk> @-@ <unk> 40 @-@ ft. long and 14 @-@ ft . 6 @-@ in. wide , with a silvered plate glass screen at the further end , giving an appearance of greater length , and stocked , with some choice <unk> . On the right of the Hall is a Gentleman 's Room or Study with <unk> Walls , two large <unk> , marble and carved Mantel @-@ piece , next to which is a <unk> and CHINA <unk> ROOM , fitted with numerous <unk> and a close Stove , and at the back a <unk> ROOM overlooking the Lawn , with marble Chimney Piece and register Stove . <unk> @-@ ROOM at side , <unk> , long Passage , W.C. ; <unk> ROOM at end , opening on to the Terrace . THE <unk> <unk> with spiral balusters and Gallery Landing , leads to TWO <unk> <unk> <unk> , divided by folding doors , one being 20 @-@ ft . 3 @-@ in . , by 18 @-@ ft .. 6 @-@ in . , and the other 25 @-@ ft. by 20 @-@ ft . 6 @-@ in . , with moulded cornices , distempered walls , woodwork grained maple , enamelled slate chimney @-@ piece in imitation of Sienna marble , and polished register Stove . A <unk> ROOM , 18 @-@ ft. by 16 @-@ ft . , adjoining , and a <unk> ROOM , also A <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ROOM OVER THE LIBRARY . 
 Surviving interior features include an early 18th @-@ century staircase with carved tread ends decorated with scroll , flower and leaf designs . Each step has three twisted balusters , and there is a moulded hand rail . The staircase is situated in a hall with an 18th @-@ century ceiling painting of pelicans , trumpets and swags . In the early 21st century it was planned to remove the staircase from the house entirely . 
 The interior is panelled to dado level and in the Music Room there is a cornice decorated with swags and paterae and a marble fireplace decorated with cupids , urns and more swags . The music room is situated at the eastern end of the ground floor . 
 = = = 1960s extension = = = 
 Each of the upper floors of the tower block has a kitchen , a laundry and wash rooms as well as ten " study @-@ bedrooms " and two larger rooms linked by a lobby . Each study room has a wash basin and fitted wardrobe . Originally the interior walls of the extension were not plastered since a plastic @-@ faced plywood framework had been used to give a higher quality finish to the concrete , rendering plastering unnecessary . As a result , internal decoration was applied directly to the concrete walls . 
 = = Redevelopment proposals = = 
 Much controversy has surrounded the continuous use of South Stoneham Tower and in 1997 a large wooden collar was added to the base of the tower to prevent crumbling concrete falling onto staff and students below . The tower 's construction and its extensive use of asbestos mean that decommission and deconstruction has provided a technical stumbling block to redevelopment of the South Stoneham site . Physical disassembly would be hugely expensive , while explosives cannot be used due to the proximity of private houses and the Grade II * listed original building . Indeed , because the tower and kitchen / dining hall complex are physically linked to the original house by a glazed connection , the whole site , including the tower , shares the listed building status . 
 Nevertheless the University commissioned a firm of architects to create a listed building consent application for the tower and the kitchen and dining hall complex to be demolished with the resulting report being published in 2004 . The application stated that the demolition was part of a " master plan " which " seeks to establish the reinstatement of South Stoneham House to a standard befitting its Listed Building status . The key part of the master plan is to refurbish and change the use of the Listed Building as a conference facility . " The application stated that this would replace the University 's conference centre at Chilworth Manor . 
 To pay for the demolition of the 1960s extension , the consent application indicated that the University planned to sell off another part of the current South Stoneham estate , currently occupied by a tennis court and caretakers ' house , for a residential scheme comprising 65 flats . In addition , to replace the student accommodation that the demolition would remove , the plan was for another building containing 64 student flats plus staff accommodation to be constructed on the eastern part of the site . 
 The plan also indicated the provision of better access to the site including new footpaths alongside Monks Brook and the River Itchen as well as the possibility of handing part of the site to the city council as a nature conservation area . The University also planned a series of repairs and alterations to the original house . 
 The listed building consent application for the demolition was recommended for approval although some concerns were raised regarding the proposed new constructions , which were to be detailed in a separate application . Other applications made at the time , for the demolition of other buildings on the site and for the refurbishment and change of use of the house itself were also recommended for approval . 
 In 2006 , the first six floors of the tower were re @-@ opened to accommodate an overflow of students . As of 2012 , however , the building was no longer in use and was not listed on the University 's website for the Wessex Lane Halls complex . 
 A 2007 promotional leaflet revealed that architecture firm Poole Philips had recently completed a design for the " restoration and enhancement " of South Stoneham House to be used as a conference centre . The design combined the historical original house with " a modern glass structure " . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 By 2011 the western part of the house ( the end closest to the 1960s extension ) had been water damaged leading to a substantial dry rot infestation . To remedy this several of the original timber lintels , wooden wall panelling , plasterwork and some steps from the staircase had all been removed and it was planned to remove the entire staircase from the house . The lintels were to be replaced with new wood and the walls were to be <unk> . 
 = Hurricane Debra ( 1959 ) = 
 Hurricane Debra was a destructive tropical cyclone that developed during the 1959 Atlantic hurricane season . The fifth tropical storm and third hurricane of the season , Debra originated from the interaction of a cold @-@ core low and a tropical wave on July 15 . The system was designated a tropical depression on July 23 when it was south of Louisiana and meandered westward while it swiftly intensified into a tropical storm along the Gulf Coast of the United States . A turn towards the northwest became evident as it attained Category 1 hurricane status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale the following day while it organized into a developed storm . As the hurricane curved northward at a slow forward speed , strength was maintained as it approached the coast of Texas as a minimal hurricane . It came ashore during the evening of July 24 local time ( 0000 UTC on July 25 ) between Freeport and Galveston , Texas . It rapidly weakened into a tropical storm and later a depression as it moved inland , and dissipated on July 28 while it turned northwestward . The remnant moisture later sparked upper @-@ level thunderstorms in late July and early August . 
 Prior to Debra 's arrival in Texas , numerous hurricane warnings were issued and at least 8 @,@ 600 individuals evacuated . Torrential rains were produced in southeastern Texas , which led to widespread flooding on highways . Sea vessels took the brunt of the storm , with many having become stranded or damaged . Forms of transportation such as air , rail , and road were significantly interrupted or even shut down . High winds from the storm caused expansive damage to buildings , windows , signs , and roofs . The hurricane resulted in 11 injuries but no deaths , and approximately 90 cattle drowned . Damage in Texas ' Brazoria , Galveston , and Harris counties surmounted $ 6 @.@ 685 million , and total damage from the storm reached $ 7 million . In the aftermath , the Weather Bureau was criticized for the lack of warning ; the bureau 's chief , Stephen Lichtblau , maintained that it was fortunate that any warnings were issued , and those that were had been delivered in a timely manner . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Debra 's origins were from an area of convection over the western Bahamas and Florida related to an upper @-@ tropospheric cold @-@ core low and a tropical wave on July 15 . Whilst under the influence of a subtropical ridge – or a belt of high pressure – it slowly meandered southwestward and arrived into the Gulf of Mexico on July 20 . A weak surface circulation was observed near 1900 EST ( 0100 UTC on July 21 ) which was affected by an inverted trough as they turned westward . The system 's circulation remained indistinct until July 23 as winds of 22 – 30 knots consorted with squalls adjacent to the coasts of Louisiana and Texas . 
 The storm attained tropical characteristics near 0000 UTC while situated south of Louisiana and was subsequently designated a tropical depression . Ship communications off the coast on July 24 relayed winds of 23 – 50 knots and a barometric pressure of 1007 @.@ 5 mbar ( 29 @.@ 75 inHg ) , which indicated it was a tropical storm on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Radar imagery taken near <unk> CST ( 1333 UTC ) from a Dow Chemical plant in Freeport , Texas evidenced that Debra was a full @-@ fledged Category 1 hurricane on the scale , with a prominent spiral appearance that was not perceived by the radar the previous afternoon . 
 As the result of a polar trough aloft in the central United States , Debra curved northward though its winds shifted southward , defying the earlier prediction of a bend west @-@ northwest to northwest . A reconnaissance flight determined the location of its center during the mid @-@ morning , and the hurricane made landfall near its peak intensity between Freeport and Galveston , Texas during the evening of July 24 local time ( 0000 UTC on July 25 ) . It rapidly weakened on July 26 while it arched west @-@ northwest , though it maintained tropical characteristics until its dissipation on July 28 over central Oklahoma while the system progressed north @-@ northwestward . As it moved inland , moisture along its eastern fringe converged with a front to its northeast , causing heavy rains that were confined to limited areas in northeast Louisiana and southern Arkansas ; they eventually traversed east @-@ northeastward over northern Mississippi , Tennessee , and Kentucky . Moisture and instability from Debra led to high @-@ level thunderstorms in Montana and northern Idaho on July 31 and August 1 . 
 Hurricane Debra 's development near the coast was unusual , complicating forecasting in addition to its rapid intensification and abnormal direction . The lack of ship reports and incorrect information received from those that were received further complicated Debra 's forecasts . However , due to its formation close to the coast , Debra had inadequate time to cause a greater storm surge . Debra 's floods accounted for most of the month 's rainfall . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Weather Bureau in New Orleans , Louisiana issued small craft warnings at 1230 UTC on July 24 stretching from Port O 'Connor to High Island , Texas , while " whole gale warnings " were posted from Port O 'Connor to Matagorda , Texas with regular gale warnings extending north to Freeport , Texas at 1500 UTC . A hurricane warning was later declared for areas between Matagorda to High Island at 2130 UTC , which was published at 2200 UTC . Warnings were widely distributed through radio services ( including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) , newspapers , bulletin boards , telegraph via the Western Union , regional <unk> , the Chamber of Commerce 's storm board , and storm warning displays . Several thousand citizens sought shelter at public facilities , including schools and courthouses . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants of Surfside Beach evacuated amid the threat of Debra . Between two and three thousand fled to Angleton , and another 1 @,@ 000 fled to Freeport . An estimate said that at least 2 @,@ 500 people left the Galveston Bay area ; another 1 @,@ 100 stayed in the Brazoria County Courthouse and 1 @,@ 000 residents took shelter in public buildings in Galveston . Numerous others moved from resort towns into other areas . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 The highest reported winds were estimated at 80 – 90 mph ( 130 – 150 km / h ) , with gusts up to 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) at the Brazos River floodgates near Freeport . Tides were 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) at Galveston Bay ; Morgan Point measured the highest tides , at 7 @.@ 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal . Overall , the storm surge was about 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high ; near Harrisburg , Houston , its height was approximately 9 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 @.@ 9 m ) ; around the Kemah @-@ Seabrook area , the storm surge was 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) , while along the Dickinson Bayou they were 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) to 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) above average . Alongside the Gulf Coast , especially in Texas , there were widespread measurements of heavy rainfall , which included a total of 15 @.@ 89 inches ( 404 mm ) at Orange , Texas , which led to the inundation low @-@ lying streets ; this total was the highest attributed to Debra . A daily rainfall record of 3 @.@ 62 inches ( 92 mm ) was achieved at Beaumont , and hurricane @-@ force winds stretched 100 miles ( 160 km ) inland . 
 The simultaneous occurrence of a storm surge and heavy rainfall wrought by Debra led to widespread flooding on highways , including that on Highway 75 northwest of Galveston on July 25 which caused the detachment of Galveston Island from the mainland for several hours . Other major roadways flooded were Highway 6 between Hitchcock and Galveston ; Highway 146 from Kemah to Seabrook ; and Farm Road 518 extending from Kemah through League City . An unconfirmed report indicated that a funnel cloud briefly touched down roughly 40 miles ( 64 km ) northwest of Brownsville / South Padre Island International Airport at approximately 0027 UTC , though no damage occurred . 
 The majority of private piers situated upon the western and northern ends of Galveston Bay were destroyed as a result of Debra 's storm surge . Damage primarily constituted to roofs , glass , sign boards , antennas , and certain sea vessels ; abundant damage was caused by rising waters due to torrential rains . Approximately 90 cattle were killed on the western edge of Galveston Island . Furniture was thrown from the luxury Buccaneer Hotel into its swimming pool , shattering a large window . In Fort Worth , the entrance to the Tabernacle Baptist Church was completely destroyed , with its remnants littering the adjacent road . The largest quantity of damage to sea vessels was consolidated near the Kemah @-@ Baytown area . Widespread damage from winds and tides was evident in the Hitchcock area , where three men were rescued after attempting to endure the hurricane at a fishing camp , although they were later rescued . In the Houston area , damage was limited to power lines and downed trees . At the former Houston International Airport , air transport was terminated , and water transportation was impeded as vast ships remained in ports . Onlookers were advised not to touch downed power lines , and electricity was knocked out at a hospital and roads were immersed in floodwaters . Most rail and road traffic in Houston was significantly interrupted . 
 One person went missing in Texas City , and several others were unaccounted for at other areas . There , damage to houses and other structures totaled several hundreds of thousands of dollars . Although 16 shops were damaged , no homes suffered any damage . Crop damage in Brazoria County also reached hundreds of thousands of dollars . A boat captain was hurt when his vessel crashed into a rock jetty under waves of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . A tower 75 feet ( 23 m ) tall utilized for the purpose of hoisting storm warning flags in Freeport was demolished , and damage within the city involved broken windows and roof shingles , in addition to the power outages that occurred . Automobiles were blown onto the city 's roads , and Second Street , the city 's primary street , was below 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) of floodwaters ; the costs of the overall effects from Debra in Freeport were estimated at $ 300 @,@ 000 , although then @-@ mayor Jim Russell claimed that damage could reach $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Damage at La Marque ( then known as Lamarque ) totaled to as much as $ 1 million . Reports asserted that one person was engulfed and died offshore the Freeport area , but they were unconfirmed ; another individual and their daughter previously listed as missing in the city were discovered at Houston . Several other individuals were reported as missing , including four on a vessel offshore Freeport and one in Texas City . Another two were unaccounted for in Green Lake . A night club at Clute burst into flames during the hurricane and winds created the possibility of the blaze spreading , although it was dealt with after several firemen came to the location . Debra destroyed approximately 1 @,@ 000 piers of a small size at La Porte . 
 A shrimp boat and two other watercraft were known to be in difficult situations , while another sent out a distress call claiming that the boat 's fuel tank had dismantled from it and its crew was anticipating an explosion . A Coast Guard aircraft searched for the shrimping boat Rosina after it had began to dismantle while a Coast Guard buoy identified as the Blackthorn probed for the Cain Hoy , although the three on board the Rosina were later recovered . All vessels reported as missing were recovered by the Coast Guard on July 25 . A ship known as Hope with a crew of three was thrown ashore 35 miles ( 56 km ) southeast of Freeport , but the United States Coast Guard was incapable of rescuing the craft and its <unk> . Tornadoes touched down near the then @-@ Jefferson County Airport , Sebastian , and Kenedy , with the first associated with the precursor to Debra . 
 In all , damage in Brazoria , Galveston , and the eastern part of Harris counties totaled $ 6 @.@ 7 million , while damage elsewhere increased the total to $ 7 million . 10 people suffered minor injuries in Brazoria County , in addition to one off the coast . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In Oklahoma , torrential rainfall produced floods in small areas of the state , especially the southeast , east- , north- , and north @-@ central portions of the state . Two tornadoes touched down in Kiowa and Caddo counties , with the prior tracking 20 miles ( 32 km ) , resulting in minimal damage . In Stillwater , three consecutive hours of torrential rains led to an inundation of 8 inches ( 200 mm ) as observed by the Oklahoma Highway Patrol . Heavy rainfall also occurred in Louisiana , Mississippi , Arkansas , Alabama , Missouri , Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , and Ohio . Debra sparked high @-@ level thunderstorms in Montana and northern Idaho , eventually leading to wildfires . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 An editorial published in the Houston Chronicle criticized the lack of warnings prior to Hurricane Debra 's arrival in Texas , alleging that with radar , aircraft , and communication systems , the Weather Bureau should have been able to give a warning well in advance of the storm . The article remarked that the Bureau " seemed almost as uninformed as the ordinary citizen " in regards to the forecasting . The chief of the Weather Bureau , Stephen Lichtblau , fired back , saying that " we were fortunate to get a warning . " He continued " had [ the Weather Bureau ] not had ... [ such ] equipment they are complaining about , we could have [ released ] nothing , " and maintained that warnings were issued promptly . When repairs in Calhoun County , Texas were completed in 1961 , Hurricane Carla struck shortly thereafter in September . 
 = Gunfight at the O.K. Corral = 
 The Gunfight at the O.K. Corral was a 30 @-@ second gunfight between an outlaw group of Cowboys and lawmen . It is generally regarded as the most famous shootout in the history of the American Wild West . The gunfight took place at about 3 : 00 p.m. on Wednesday , October 26 , 1881 , in Tombstone , Arizona Territory . It was the result of a long @-@ simmering feud , with Cowboys Billy Claiborne , Ike and Billy Clanton , Tom and Frank McLaury on one side and town Marshal Virgil Earp , Special Policeman Morgan Earp , Special Policeman Wyatt Earp and temporary policeman Doc Holliday on the other side . Billy Clanton and both McLaury brothers were killed . Ike Clanton , who had repeatedly threatened to kill the Earps , claimed he was unarmed and ran from the fight , along with Billy Claiborne . Virgil , Morgan , and Doc Holliday were wounded , but Wyatt Earp was unharmed . The fight has come to represent a period in American Old West when the frontier was virtually an open range for outlaws , largely unopposed by law enforcement officers , who were spread thin over vast territories , leaving some areas unprotected . 
 The gunfight was not well known to the American public until 1931 , when Stuart Lake published an initially well @-@ received biography , Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal , two years after Earp 's death . The book was the basis for the 1946 film My Darling Clementine , directed by John Ford , and the 1957 film Gunfight at the O.K. Corral , after which the shootout became known by that name . Since then , the conflict has been portrayed with varying degrees of accuracy in numerous Western films and books . 
 Despite its name , the historic gunfight did not take place within or next to the O.K. Corral , which fronted on Allen Street and had a rear entrance lined with stalls on Fremont Street . The shootout actually took place in a narrow lot on the side of C. S. Fly 's Photographic Studio on Fremont Street , six doors west of the O.K. Corral 's rear entrance . Some members of the two opposing parties were initially only about 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) apart . About 30 shots were fired in 30 seconds . Ike Clanton , whose brother Billy had been killed , filed murder charges against the Earps and Doc Holliday . The lawmen were eventually exonerated by a local justice of the peace after a 30 @-@ day preliminary hearing and then by a local grand jury . 
 The gunfight was not the end of the conflict . On December 28 , 1881 , Virgil Earp was ambushed and maimed in a murder attempt by outlaw Cowboys . On March 18 , 1882 , Cowboys fired from a dark alley through the glass door of a saloon and shot Morgan Earp , killing him . The suspects in both incidents furnished alibis supplied by other Cowboys and were not indicted . Wyatt Earp , newly appointed as Deputy U.S. Marshal in Cochise County , took matters into his own hands in a personal vendetta . He was pursued by county Sheriff Johnny Behan , who had received a Tucson warrant for Wyatt 's shooting of Frank Stilwell . 
 = = Background to the conflict = = 
 Tombstone , near the Mexican border , was formally founded in March 1879 ; it was a rapidly growing frontier mining boomtown . The Earps arrived on December 1 , 1879 , when the small town was mostly composed of tents as living quarters , a few saloons and other buildings , and the mines . Virgil Earp had been hired as Deputy U.S. Marshal for eastern Pima County , with his offices in Tombstone , only days before his arrival . In June 1881 he was also appointed as Tombstone 's town marshal ( or police chief ) . 
 Though not universally liked by the townspeople , the Earps tended to protect the interests of the town 's business owners and residents , although Wyatt Earp helped protect Cowboy Curly Bill Brocius from being lynched after he accidentally killed Tombstone city Marshal Fred White . In contrast , Cochise County Sheriff Johnny Behan was generally sympathetic to the interests of the rural ranchers and Cowboys . In that time and region , the term cowboy generally meant an outlaw . Legitimate cowmen were referred to as cattle herders or ranchers . 
 = = Conflicting versions of events = = 
 Many of the supporting facts about the events leading up to the gunfight and details of the gunfight itself are uncertain . Newspapers of the day were not above taking sides , and news reporting often editorialized on issues to reflect the publisher 's interests . John Clum , publisher of The Tombstone Epitaph , had helped organize a " Committee of Safety " ( a vigilance committee ) in Tombstone in late September 1881 . He was elected as the city 's first mayor under the new city charter of 1881 . Clum and his newspaper tended to side with the interests of local business owners and supported Deputy U.S. Marshal Virgil Earp . 
 Harry Woods , the publisher of the other major newspaper , the The Daily Nugget , was an undersheriff to Behan . He and his newspaper tended to side with Behan , the Cowboys ( some of whom were part @-@ time ranchers and landowners ) , and the rural interests of the ranchers . 
 Much of what is known of the event is based on a month @-@ long preliminary hearing held afterward , generally known as the Spicer hearings . Reporters from both newspapers covered the hearings and recorded the testimony at the coroner 's inquest and the Spicer hearings , but only the reporter from The Daily Nugget knew shorthand . The testimony recorded by the court recorder and the two newspapers varied greatly . 
 According to the Earps ' version of events , the fight was in self @-@ defense because the Cowboys , armed in violation of local ordinance , aggressively threatened the lawmen , defying a lawful order to hand over their weapons . The Cowboys maintained that they raised their hands , offering no resistance , and were shot in cold blood by the Earps . Sorting out who was telling the truth then was difficult and remains so . 
 Though usually opposing each other in their reporting of events , reporting by both the Epitaph and the Nugget initially supported the lawmen 's version of events . Woods , the publisher of the pro @-@ Cowboy Nugget , was out of town during the hearings , and an experienced reporter , Richard Rule , wrote the story . The Nugget staff had a close relationship with Sheriff Behan , but Rule 's story , as printed in the Nugget the day after the shootout , backed up the Earps ' version of events . This varied widely from Behan 's and the Cowboys ' later court testimony . Subsequent stories about the gunfight published in the Nugget after that day supported Behan 's and the Cowboys ' view of events . Other stories in the Epitaph countered the Nugget 's later view entirely and supported the lawmen . In addition , the autopsies of the deceased Cowboys indicated that none of them were shot with their hands up , as the Clantons had claimed . 
 Part @-@ time newspaper reporter Howell " Pat " Hayhurst transcribed the testimony from the hearing in the early 1930s as part of a federal Federal Writers ' Project , part of the Works Progress Administration . According to one report , Hayhurst was a friend of the Behan family . After he completed his transcription , he kept the original document in his home , where it was destroyed in a house fire . 
 = = Origins of the conflict = = 
 = = = Earps versus Cowboys = = = 
 The interpersonal conflicts and feuds leading to the gunfight were complex . Each side had strong family ties . The brothers James , Virgil , Wyatt , Morgan , and Warren Earp were a tight @-@ knit family , working together as pimps , lawmen , and saloon owners in several Western towns , among other occupations , and had moved together from one town to another . Virgil served in the Union Army during the Civil War and in 1877 became a police officer in Prescott , Arizona . He followed that with a job as night watchman before he became a constable . Wyatt had held two jobs as a police officer in the cattle @-@ drive towns of Wichita and Dodge City , Kansas . 
 James , Virgil and Wyatt Earp , together with their wives , arrived in Tombstone on December 1 , 1879 , during the early period of rapid growth associated with mining , when there were only a few hundred residents . Virgil had been appointed Deputy U.S. Marshal for the Tombstone area shortly before they arrived . In the summer of 1880 , Morgan and Warren Earp also moved to Tombstone . Wyatt arrived hoping he could leave " <unk> " behind . He bought a stagecoach , only to find the business was already very competitive . The Earps invested together in several mining claims and water rights . The Earps were Republicans and Northerners who had never worked as cowmen or ranchers . 
 The Earps came into conflict with Cowboys Frank and Tom McLaury , Billy and Ike Clanton , Johnny Ringo , and Curly Bill Brocius , among others . They were part of a large , loose association of cattle smugglers and horse thieves known as the Cowboys , outlaws who had been implicated in various crimes . Ike Clanton was prone to drinking heavily and threatened the Earp brothers numerous times . 
 Tombstone resident George Parson wrote in his diary , " A Cowboy is a rustler at times , and a rustler is a synonym for desperado — bandit , outlaw , and horse thief . " The San Francisco Examiner wrote in an editorial , " Cowboys [ are ] the most reckless class of outlaws in that wild country ... infinitely worse than the ordinary robber . " At that time during the 1880s in Cochise County it was an insult to call a legitimate cattleman a " Cowboy . " Legal cowmen were generally called herders or ranchers . The Cowboys teamed up for various crimes and came to each other 's aid . Virgil Earp thought that some of the Cowboys had met at Charleston , Arizona , and taken " an oath over blood drawn from the arm of Johnny Ringo , the leader , that they would kill us.' 
 = = = The Earps as lawmen = = = 
 Virgil Earp had been appointed Deputy U.S. Marshal for eastern Pima County by U.S. Marshal Crawley Dake before the Earps arrived in Tombstone on December 1 , 1879 . Virgil ran for the office of Tombstone 's city marshal ( or police chief ) in November 1880 but lost to Ben Sippy . Sippy left town in June 1881 , and Virgil was appointed to replace him . At the time of the gunfight and afterward , until he was wounded on December 29 , 1881 , Virgil was both Deputy U.S. Marshal and town marshal . The city suspended him as town marshal after Ike Clanton filed murder charges . 
 With his business efforts yielding little profit , Wyatt Earp became a stagecoach shotgun messenger for Wells Fargo , guarding shipments of silver bullion , until he was appointed Pima County Deputy Sheriff on July 28 , 1880 . He held this position for only three months until after the election of November 9 , 1880 , when he resigned . While Wyatt was Pima County Deputy Sheriff , Morgan Earp took over his job as shotgun messenger for Wells Fargo . The job as Pima County Sheriff was the only job Wyatt held as a lawman in Arizona , except for occasions when Virgil temporarily appointed him to be a deputy town marshal , including the week prior to the gunfight . Morgan also occasionally assisted Virgil and at the time of the gunfight was wearing a deputy city marshal 's badge and drawing pay . When Virgil was maimed by an assassination attempt , Wyatt was appointed Deputy U.S. Marshal in his place . He held that position until he left Cochise County in April 1882 . The Earps ' work as lawmen was not welcomed by the outlaw Cowboys , who viewed the Earps as badge @-@ toting tyrants who ruthlessly enforced the business interests of the town . In direct conflict with the Earps ' roles as lawmen , Johnny Behan was Cochise County Sheriff . 
 Wyatt Earp was an imposing , handsome man : blond , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , weighing about 165 to 170 pounds ( 75 to 77 kg ) , was broad @-@ shouldered , long @-@ armed , and muscular . He had been a boxer and was reputed to be an expert with a pistol . According to author Leo Silva , Earp showed no fear of any man . 
 Earp had developed a reputation as a no @-@ nonsense , hard @-@ nosed lawman , but prior to the gunfight in October 1881 , he had been involved in only one prior shooting in Dodge City , Kansas during the summer of 1878 . Wyatt was an assistant marshal and with policeman James Masterson , along with a few other citizens , fired their pistols at several Cowboys who were fleeing town after shooting up a theater . A member of the group , George Hoyt ( sometimes spelled Hoy ) , was shot in the arm and died of his wound a month later . Wyatt always claimed to have been the one to shoot Hoyt , although it could have been anyone among the lawmen . 
 The 1931 book Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal was a best @-@ selling biography by Stuart N. Lake . It established Wyatt Earp 's role as a fearless lawman in the American Old West and the " Gunfight at the O.K. Corral " in the public consciousness . But Lake wildly exaggerated Wyatt 's role in the gun battle . He and many others in the popular media have embellished Wyatt 's role as the central figure in the gunfight . It was only discovered much later that Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal , based on a eight interviews with Earp , was largely fictional . The book and later Hollywood portrayals exaggerated Wyatt 's reputation and magnified his mystique as a western lawman . 
 Among the lawmen involved in the O.K. Corral shooting , only Virgil had any real experience in combat , and he had far more experience than any of his brothers as a sheriff , constable , and marshal . Virgil served for three years during the Civil War and had also been involved in a police shooting in Prescott , Arizona Territory . Morgan Earp had no known experience with gunfighting prior to this fight , although he frequently hired out as a shotgun messenger . 
 Doc Holliday had a reputation as a gunman and had reportedly been in nine shootouts during his life , although it has only been verified that he killed three men . One well @-@ documented episode occurred on July 19 , 1879 , when Holliday and his business partner , former deputy marshal John Joshua Webb , were seated in their saloon in Las Vegas , New Mexico . Former U.S. Army scout Mike Gordon got into a loud argument with one of the saloon girls that he wanted to take with him . Gordon stormed from the saloon and began firing his revolver into the building . Before Gordon could get off his second shot , Holliday killed him . Holliday was tried for the murder but acquitted , mostly based on the testimony of Webb . 
 Holliday had saved Wyatt Earp 's life at one time and had become a close friend . He had been living in Prescott , Arizona Territory and making a living as a gambler since late 1879 . There , he first met future Tombstone sheriff Johnny Behan , a sometime gambler and saloon owner . In late September 1880 , Holliday followed the Earps to Tombstone . 
 = = = Rural Cowboys vs. Tombstone interests = = = 
 The ranch owned by Newman Haynes Clanton near Charleston , Arizona was believed to be the local center for the Cowboys ' illegal activities . Tom and Frank McLaury worked with the rustlers buying and selling stolen cattle . 
 Many of the rural ranchers and Cowboys resented the growing influence of the city residents over county politics and law enforcement . The ranchers largely maintained control of the country outside Tombstone , due in large part to the sympathetic support of Cochise County Sheriff Johnny Behan , who favored the Cowboys and rural ranchers , and who also grew to intensely dislike the Earps . Behan tended to ignore the Earps ' complaints about the McLaurys ' and Clantons ' horse thieving and cattle rustling . As officers of the law , the Earps were known to bend the law in their favor when it affected their gambling and saloon interests , which earned them further enmity with the Cowboy faction . 
 = = = Tombstone , a boomtown = = = 
 After silver was discovered in the area , Tombstone grew rapidly . At its founding in March 1879 , it had a population of just 100 , and only two years later , in late 1881 , it had more than 7 @,@ 000 citizens , excluding Chinese , Mexicans , women and children . Tombstone was the largest boomtown in the Southwest . Silver mining and its attendant wealth attracted many professionals and merchants , who brought their wives and families . With them came churches and ministers . They brought a Victorian sensibility and became the town 's elite . By 1881 there were fancy restaurants , a bowling alley , four churches , an ice house , a school , an opera house , two banks , three newspapers , and an ice cream parlor , along with 110 saloons , 14 gambling halls , and numerous brothels , all situated among a number of dirty , hardscrabble mines . 
 Horse rustlers and bandits from the countryside came to town , and shootings were frequent . In the 1880s , illegal smuggling and theft of cattle , alcohol , and tobacco across the Mexico – United States border , about 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Tombstone , were common . The Mexican government assessed heavy export taxes on these items , and smugglers earned a handsome profit by stealing them in Mexico and smuggling them across the border . 
 = = = Relevant law in Tombstone = = = 
 To reduce crime in Tombstone , on April 19 , 1881 , the city council passed ordinance 9 , requiring anyone carrying a bowie knife , dirk , pistol or rifle to deposit their weapons at a livery or saloon soon after entering town . The ordinance was the legal basis for City Marshal Virgil Earp 's decision to confront the Cowboys , which resulted in the shoot @-@ out . 
 = = = Smuggling and stock thefts = = = 
 In that border area there was only one passable route between Arizona and Mexico , a passage known as Guadalupe Canyon . In August 1881 , 15 Mexicans carrying gold , coins and bullion to make their purchases were ambushed and killed in Skeleton Canyon . The next month Mexican Commandant Felipe Neri dispatched troops to the border , and they killed five Cowboys , including Old Man Clanton , in Guadalupe Canyon . The Earps knew that the McLaurys and Clantons were reputed to be mixed up in the robbery and murder in Skeleton Canyon . Wyatt Earp said in his testimony after the shootout , " I naturally kept my eyes open and did not intend that any of the gang should get the drop on me if I could help it . " 
 = = = Earp loses sheriff 's office to Behan = = = 
 On July 27 , 1880 , Pima County Sheriff Charles A. Shibell , whose offices were in the county seat of Tucson , appointed Wyatt Earp as deputy sheriff . On October 28 , 1880 , Tombstone Town Marshal Fred White attempted to disarm some late @-@ night revelers who were shooting their pistols in the air . When he attempted to disarm Curly Bill Brocius , the gun discharged , striking White in the abdomen . Wyatt saw the shooting and pistol @-@ whipped Brocius , knocking him unconscious , and arrested him . Wyatt later told his biographer John Flood that he thought Brocius was still armed at the time , and didn 't see Brocius ' pistol on the ground . 
 Brocius waived the preliminary hearing so he and his case could be immediately transferred to Tucson . Wyatt and a deputy took Brocius in a wagon the next day to Tucson to stand trial , possibly saving him from being lynched . Wyatt testified that he thought the shooting was accidental . It was also demonstrated that Brocius ' pistol could be fired from half @-@ cock . Fred White left a statement before he died two days later that the shooting was not intentional . Based on the evidence presented , Brocius was not charged with White 's death . 
 The Tombstone council convened and appointed Virgil Earp as " temporary assistant city marshal " to replace White for a salary of $ 100 per month until an election could be held on November 12 . For the next few weeks , Virgil represented federal and local law enforcement and Wyatt represented Pima County . 
 In the November 2 , 1880 election for Pima County sheriff , Democrat Shibell ran against Republican Bob Paul , who was expected to win . Votes arrived as late as November 7 , and Shibell was unexpectedly reelected . He immediately appointed Johnny Behan as the new deputy sheriff for eastern Pima County , a job that Wyatt wanted . A controversy ensued when Paul uncovered ballot @-@ stuffing by Cowboys and he sued to overturn the election . 
 Paul finally became sheriff in April 1881 , but it was too late to reappoint Wyatt Earp as deputy sheriff because on January 1 , 1881 , the eastern portion of Pima County containing Tombstone had been split off into the new Cochise County , which would need its own sheriff , based in the county 's largest city , Tombstone . This position was filled by a political appointment from the governor , and Wyatt and Behan both wanted the job . The Cochise County sheriff 's position was worth more than $ 40 @,@ 000 a year ( about $ 980 @,@ 828 today ) because the office holder was also county assessor and tax collector , and the board of supervisors allowed him to keep ten percent of the amounts paid . 
 Behan utilized his existing position and his superior political connections to successfully lobby for the position . He also promised Wyatt a position as his undersheriff if he was appointed over Wyatt . Wyatt withdrew from the political contest and the governor and legislature appointed Behan to the job of Cochise County sheriff on February 10 , 1881 . Behan reneged on his deal with Earp and appointed Harry Woods as undersheriff instead . Behan said he broke his promise to appoint Earp because Wyatt Earp used Behan 's name to threaten Ike Clanton when Wyatt recovered his stolen horse from Clanton . 
 = = Earp conflicts with Cowboys = = 
 Tensions between the Earp family and both the Clanton and McLaury clans increased through 1881 . 
 = = = Stolen mules tracked to McLaury 's ranch = = = 
 On July 25 , 1880 , Captain Joseph H. Hurst , of Company A , 12th Infantry , and Commanding Officer of Fort Bennett , asked Deputy U.S. Marshal Virgil Earp to help him track Cowboys who had stolen six U.S. Army mules from Camp Rucker . This was a federal matter because the animals were U.S. property . Hurst brought four soldiers , and Virgil invited Wyatt and Morgan Earp , as well as Wells Fargo agent Marshall Williams . The posse found the mules on the McLaury 's Ranch on the <unk> Creek , north west of Tombstone , and the branding iron used to change the " US " brand to " D8 " . 
 To avoid bloodshed , Cowboy Frank Patterson promised Hurst they would return the mules and Hurst persuaded the posse to withdraw . Hurst went to nearby Charleston , but the Cowboys showed up two days later without the mules , laughing at Hurst and the Earps . In response , Hurst had printed and distributed a handbill in which he named Frank McLaury as specifically assisting with hiding the mules . He reprinted this in The Tombstone Epitaph on July 30 , 1880 . Virgil later said that McLaury had asked him if he had posted the handbills . When Virgil said he had not , McLaury said if Virgil had printed the handbills it was Frank 's intention to kill Virgil . He warned Virgil , " If you ever again follow us as close as you did , then you will have to fight anyway . " This incident was the first run @-@ in between the Clantons and McLaurys and the Earps . 
 = = = March stagecoach robbery and murder = = = 
 On the evening of March 15 , 1881 , a Kinnear & Company stagecoach carrying US $ 26 @,@ 000 in silver bullion ( about $ 637 @,@ 538 in today 's dollars ) was en route from Tombstone to Benson , Arizona , the nearest freight terminal . Bob Paul , who had run for Pima County Sheriff and was contesting the election he lost due to ballot @-@ stuffing , was temporarily working once again as the Wells Fargo shotgun messenger . He had taken the reins and driver 's seat in Contention City because the usual driver , a well @-@ known and popular man named Eli " Budd " Philpot , was ill . Philpot was riding shotgun . 
 Near Drew 's Station , just outside Contention City , a man stepped into the road and commanded them to " Hold ! " Three Cowboys attempted to rob the stage . Paul , in the driver 's seat , fired his shotgun and emptied his revolver at the robbers , wounding a Cowboy later identified as Bill Leonard in the groin . Philpot , riding shotgun , and passenger Peter Roerig , riding in the rear <unk> seat , were both shot and killed . The horses spooked and Paul wasn 't able to bring the stage under control for almost a mile , leaving the robbers with nothing . Paul said he thought the first shot killing Philpot in the shotgun messenger seat had been meant for him because he would normally have been seated there . 
 = = = = Suspects identified = = = = 
 Deputy U.S. Marshal Virgil Earp , along with temporary federal deputies Wyatt and Morgan Earp , Wells Fargo agent Marshall Williams , former Kansas Sheriff Bat Masterson ( who was dealing faro at the Oriental Saloon ) , and County Sheriff Behan set out to find the robbers . Wells Fargo issued a wanted poster offering a US $ 3 @,@ 600 ( $ 1 @,@ 200 per robber ) reward for capture of the robbers , dead or alive . Robbery of a mail @-@ carrying stagecoach was both a federal crime and territorial crime , and the posse consisted of both county and federal authorities and deputies . The posse trailed the robbers to a nearby ranch where they found a drifter named Luther King . He wouldn 't tell who his confederates were until the posse lied and told him that Doc Holliday 's girlfriend had been shot . Fearful of Holliday 's reputation , he confessed to holding the reins of the robbers ' horses , and identified Bill Leonard , Harry " The Kid " Head and Jim Crane as the robbers . They were all known Cowboys and rustlers . Behan and Williams escorted King back to Tombstone . 
 = = = = Suspect escapes Behan 's jail = = = = 
 Somehow King walked in the front door of the jail and a few minutes later out the back . King had arranged with Undersheriff Harry Woods ( publisher of the Nugget ) to sell the horse he had been riding to John Dunbar , Sheriff Behan 's partner in the Dexter Livery Stable . On March 19 , King conveniently escaped while Dunbar and Woods were making out the bill @-@ of @-@ sale . Woods claimed that someone had deliberately unlocked a secured back door to the jail . The Earps and the townspeople were furious at King 's easy escape . Williams was later dismissed from Wells Fargo , leaving behind a number of debts , when it was determined he had been stealing from the company for years . 
 = = = = Earp pursues suspects = = = = 
 The Earps pursued the other two men for 17 days , riding for 60 hours without food and 36 hours without water , during which Bob Paul 's horse died , and Wyatt and Morgan 's horses became so weak , that the two men walked 18 miles ( 29 km ) back to Tombstone to obtain new horses . After pursuing the Cowboys for over 400 miles ( 640 km ) they could not obtain more fresh horses and were forced to give up the chase . They returned to Tombstone on April 1 . Behan submitted a bill for $ 796 @.@ 84 to the county for posse expenses , but he refused to reimburse the Earps for any of their costs . Virgil was incensed . They were finally reimbursed by Wells , Fargo & Co. later on , but the incident caused further friction between county and federal law enforcement , and between Behan and the Earps . 
 = = = = Wyatt offers Ike reward money = = = = 
 After he was passed over by Johnny Behan for the position of undersheriff , Wyatt thought he might beat him in the next Cochise County election in late 1882 . He thought catching the murderers of Bud Philpot and Peter Roerig would help him win the sheriff 's office . Wyatt later said that on June 2 , 1881 he offered the Wells , Fargo & Co. reward money and more to Ike Clanton if he would provide information leading to the capture or death of the stage robbers . According to Wyatt , Ike was initially interested , but the plan was foiled when the three suspects — Leonard , Head and Crane — were killed in unrelated incidents . 
 Ike began to fear that word of his possible cooperation had leaked , threatening to compromise his standing among the Cowboys . Undercover Wells Fargo Company agent M. Williams suspected a deal , and said something to Ike , who was fearful that other Cowboys might learn of his double @-@ cross . Ike now began to threaten Wyatt and Doc Holliday ( who had learned of the deal ) for apparently revealing Ike 's willingness to help arrest his friends . 
 = = = = Earp , Cowboy fallout = = = = 
 The fallout over the Cowboys ' attempt to implicate Holliday and the Earps in the robbery , along with Behan 's involvement in King 's escape , was the beginning of increasingly bad feelings between the Earp brothers and Cowboy factions . 
 = = = Earp and Behan attracted to Josephine Marcus = = = 
 Wyatt Earp and Cochise County sheriff Johnny Behan were interested in the same sheriff 's position and also may have shared an interest in the same woman , Josephine Marcus , known as Sadie . Citizens of Tombstone believed that Behan and Marcus were married , but Behan was a known womanizer and had sex with prostitutes and other women . Marcus ended the relationship after she came home and found Behan in bed with the wife of a friend and kicked him out , although she used the Behan surname through the end of that summer . She rented her home sometime before April 1881 , to Dr. George Goodfellow . 
 Wyatt Earp was still living with his common @-@ law wife , Mattie Blaylock , who was listed as his wife in the 1880 census , but she had a growing addiction to the opiate laudanum . There are no contemporary Tombstone records that indicate a relationship between Marcus and Earp , but Earp certainly knew her , because both Behan and Earp had offices above the Crystal Palace Saloon . 
 Sadie , traveling as either Mrs. J. C. Earp or Mrs. Wyatt Earp , left for Los Angeles on March 25 , 1882 , and then returned to her family in San Francisco . In July 1882 , Wyatt left Colorado and went to San Francisco , where he sought out Sadie and his brother Virgil , who was seeking treatment for his arm . In February or March 1883 , Sadie and Earp left San Francisco for Gunnison , where Earp ran a Faro bank until he received a request in April for assistance from Luke Short in Dodge City . Sadie was his common @-@ law wife for the next 46 years . 
 = = = September stage holdup = = = 
 Tensions between the Earps and the McLaurys further increased when another passenger stage on the ' Sandy Bob Line ' in the Tombstone area , bound for Bisbee , was held up on September 8 , 1881 . The masked bandits robbed all of the passengers of their valuables since the stage was not carrying a strongbox . During the robbery , the driver heard one of the robbers describe the money as " sugar " , a phrase known to be used by Frank Stilwell . Stilwell had until the prior month been a deputy for Sheriff Behan but had been fired for " accounting irregularities " . 
 Wyatt and Virgil Earp rode with a sheriff 's posse and tracked the Bisbee stage robbers . Virgil had been appointed Tombstone 's town marshal ( i.e. , chief of police ) on June 6 , 1881 , after Ben Sippy abandoned the job . However , Virgil at the same time continued to hold his position of deputy U.S. marshal , and it was in this federal capacity that he continued to chase robbers of stage coaches outside Tombstone city limits . At the scene of the holdup , Wyatt discovered an unusual boot print left by someone wearing a custom @-@ repaired boot heel . The Earps checked a shoe repair shop in Bisbee known to provide widened boot heels and were able to link the boot print to Stilwell . 
 = = = = Stilwell and Spence arrests = = = = 
 Frank Stilwell had just arrived in Bisbee with his livery stable partner , Pete Spence , when the two were arrested by Deputy U.S. Marshal Virgil Earp for the holdup . Both were friends of Ike Clanton and the McLaurys . At the preliminary hearing , Stilwell and Spence were able to provide several witnesses who supported their alibis . Judge Spicer dropped the charges for insufficient evidence just as he had done for Doc Holliday earlier in the year . 
 Released on bail , Spence and Stilwell were re @-@ arrested October 13 by Marshal Virgil Earp for the Bisbee robbery on a new federal charge of interfering with a mail carrier . The newspapers , however , reported that they had been arrested for a different stage robbery that occurred on October 8 near Contention City . 
 Ike and other Cowboys believed the new arrest was further evidence that the Earps were illegally persecuting the Cowboys . They told the Earps that they could expect retaliation . While Virgil and Wyatt were in Tucson for the federal hearing on the charges against Spence and Stilwell , Frank McLaury confronted Morgan Earp . He told him that the McLaurys would kill the Earps if they tried to arrest Spence , Stilwell , or the McLaurys again . The Tombstone Epitaph reported " that since the arrest of Spence and Stilwell , veiled threats [ are ] being made that the friends of the accused will ' get the Earps . ' " 
 = = = = Cowboys accuse Holliday of robbery = = = = 
 Milt Joyce , a county supervisor and owner of the Oriental Saloon , had a contentious relationship with Doc Holliday . In October 1880 , Holliday had trouble with a gambler named Johnny Tyler in Milt Joyce 's Oriental Saloon . Tyler had been hired by a competing gambling establishment to drive customers from the Oriental Saloon . Holliday challenged Tyler to a fight , but Tyler ran . Joyce did not like Holliday or the Earps and he continued to argue with Holliday . Joyce ordered Holliday removed from the saloon but would not return Holliday 's revolver . But Holliday returned carrying a double @-@ action revolver . Milt brandished a pistol and threatened Holliday , but Holliday shot Joyce in the palm , disarming him , and then shot Joyce 's business partner William Parker in the big toe . Joyce then hit Holliday over the head with his revolver . Holliday was arrested and pleaded guilty to assault and battery . 
 Holliday and his on @-@ again , off @-@ again mistress Big Nose Kate had many fights . After a particularly nasty , drunken argument , Holliday kicked her out . County Sheriff John Behan and Milt Joyce saw an opportunity and exploited the situation . They plied Big Nose Kate with more booze and suggested to her a way to get even with Holliday . She signed an affidavit implicating Holliday in the attempted stagecoach robbery and murders . Holliday was a good friend of Bill Leonard , a former watchmaker from New York , one of three men implicated in the robbery . Judge Wells Spicer issued an arrest warrant for Holliday . The Earps found witnesses who could attest to Holliday 's location at the time of the murders and Kate sobered up , revealing that Behan and Joyce had influenced her to sign a document she didn 't understand . With the Cowboy plot revealed , Spicer freed Holliday . The district attorney threw out the charges , labeling them " ridiculous . " Doc gave Kate some money and put her on a stage out of town . 
 = = = Ike Clanton 's conflict with Doc Holliday = = = 
 Wyatt Earp testified after the gunfight that five or six weeks prior he had met Ike Clanton outside the Alhambra Hotel . Ike told Wyatt that Doc Holliday had told him he knew of Ike 's meetings with Wyatt and about Ike providing information on Head , Leonard , and Crane , as well as their attempted robbery of the stage . Ike now accused Earp of telling Holliday about these conversations . Earp testified that he told Ike he had not told Holliday anything . Wyatt Earp offered to prove this when Holliday and the Clantons next returned to town . 
 A month later , the weekend before the shootout , Morgan Earp , concerned about possible trouble with the Cowboys , brought Doc Holliday back from a fiesta celebration in Tucson where Holliday had been gambling . Upon his return , Wyatt Earp asked Holliday about Ike 's accusation . 
 On the morning of Tuesday , October 25 , 1881 , the day before the gunfight , Ike Clanton and Tom McLaury drove 10 miles ( 16 km ) in a spring wagon from Chandler 's Milk Ranch at the foot of the Dragoon Mountains to Tombstone . They were in town to sell a large number of beef stock , most of them owned by the McLaurys . 
 Seeing Ike Clanton in the Alhambra Saloon around midnight , Holliday confronted Ike , accusing him of lying about their previous conversations . They got into a heated argument . Wyatt Earp ( who was not wearing a badge ) encouraged his brother , Tombstone Deputy City Marshal Morgan Earp , to intervene . Morgan escorted Holliday out onto the street and Ike , who had been drinking steadily , followed them . City Marshal Virgil Earp arrived a few minutes later and threatened to arrest both Holliday and Clanton if they did not stop arguing . Ike and Wyatt talked again a few minutes later , and Ike threatened to confront Holliday in the morning . Ike told Earp that the fighting talk had been going on for a long time and that he intended to put an end to it . Ike told Earp , " I will be ready for you in the morning . " Wyatt Earp walked over to the Oriental Saloon and Ike followed him . Ike sat down to have another drink , his revolver in plain sight , and told Earp " You must not think I won 't be after you all in the morning . " 
 = = Morning of the shoot @-@ out = = 
 = = = Events leading up to the Ike Clanton court hearing = = = 
 After Holliday 's confrontation with Ike Clanton , Wyatt Earp took Holliday back to his room at Camillus Sidney " Buck " Fly 's Lodging House to sleep off his drinking , then went home and to bed . Tombstone Marshal Virgil Earp played cards with Ike Clanton , Tom McLaury , Cochise County Sheriff Johnny Behan and a fifth man ( unknown to Ike and to history ) , until morning . 
 At about dawn on October 26 , the card game broke up and Behan and Virgil Earp went home to bed . Ike Clanton testified later he saw Virgil take his six @-@ shooter out of his lap and stick it in his pants when the game ended . Not having rented a room , Tom McLaury and Ike Clanton had no place to go . Shortly after 8 : 00 am barkeeper E. F. Boyle spoke to Ike Clanton in front of the telegraph office . Clanton had been drinking all night and Boyle encouraged him to get some sleep , but Ike insisted he would not go to bed . Boyle later testified he noticed Ike was armed and covered his gun for him . Boyle later said that Ike told him , " ' As soon as the Earps and Doc Holliday showed themselves on the street , the ball would open — that they would have to fight ' ... I went down to Wyatt Earp 's house and told him that Ike Clanton had threatened that when him and his brothers and Doc Holliday showed themselves on the street that the ball would open . " Ike said in his testimony afterward that he remembered neither meeting Boyle nor making any such statements that day . 
 Later in the morning , Ike picked up his rifle and revolver from the West End Corral , where he had deposited his weapons and stabled his wagon and team after entering town . By noon that day , Ike was still drinking and once @-@ again armed in violation of the city ordinance against carrying firearms in the city . He told others he was looking for Holliday or an Earp . At about 1 : 00 pm , Virgil and Morgan Earp surprised Ike on 4th Street where Virgil pistol @-@ whipped him from behind . <unk> him , the Earps took Ike to appear before Judge Wallace for violating the ordinance . Wyatt waited with Clanton while Virgil went to find Judge Wallace so the court hearing could be held . 
 = = = Ike Clanton court hearing = = = 
 While Wyatt waited for Virgil to return with Judge Wallace , witnesses overheard Wyatt tell Clanton , " you cattle thieving son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch , and you know that I know you are a cattle thieving son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch , you 've threatened my life enough , and you 've got to fight ! " , and Ike Clanton made the remark , " Fight is my racket , and all I want is four feet of ground ! " 
 Ike reported in his testimony afterward that Wyatt Earp cursed him . He said Wyatt , Virgil and Morgan offered him his rifle and to fight him right there in the courthouse , which Ike declined . Ike also denied ever threatening the Earps . Ike was fined $ 25 plus court costs and after paying the fine left unarmed . Virgil told Ike he would leave Ike 's confiscated rifle and revolver at the Grand Hotel which was favored by Cowboys when in town . Ike testified that he picked up the weapons from William Soule , the jailer , a couple of days later . 
 = = = Tom McLaury 's concealed weapon = = = 
 Outside the court house where Ike was being fined , Wyatt almost walked into 28 year @-@ old Tom McLaury as the two men were brought up short nose @-@ to @-@ nose . Tom , who had arrived in town the day before , was required by the well @-@ known city ordinance to deposit his pistol when he first arrived in town . When Wyatt demanded , " Are you heeled or not ? " , McLaury said he was not armed . Wyatt testified that he saw a revolver in plain sight on the right hip of Tom 's pants . As an unpaid deputy marshal for Virgil , Wyatt habitually carried a pistol in his waistband , as was the custom of that time . Witnesses reported that Wyatt drew his revolver from his coat pocket and pistol whipped Tom McLaury with it twice , leaving him prostrate and bleeding on the street . Saloon @-@ keeper Andrew Mehan testified at the Spicer hearing afterward that he saw McLaury deposit a revolver at the Capital Saloon sometime between 1 @-@ 2 : 00 pm , after the confrontation with Wyatt , which Mehan also witnessed . 
 Wyatt said in his deposition afterward that he had been temporarily acting as city marshal for Virgil the week before while Virgil was in Tucson for the Pete Spence and Frank Stilwell trial . Wyatt said that he still considered himself a deputy city marshal , which Virgil later confirmed . Since Wyatt was an off @-@ duty officer , he could not legally search or arrest Tom for carrying a revolver within the city <unk> — a misdemeanor offense . Only Virgil or one of his city police deputies , including Morgan Earp and possibly Warren Earp , could search him and take any required action . Wyatt , a non @-@ drinker , testified at the Spicer hearing that he went to <unk> and bought a cigar and went outside to watch the Cowboys . At the time of the gunfight about two hours later , Wyatt could not know if Tom was still armed . 
 It was early afternoon by the time Ike and Tom had seen doctors for their head wounds . The day was chilly , with snow still on the ground in some places . Both Tom and Ike had spent the night gambling , drinking heavily , and without sleep . Now they were both out @-@ of @-@ doors , both wounded from head beatings , and at least Ike was still drunk . 
 = = = More Cowboys enter town = = = 
 At around 1 : 30 – 2 : 00 pm , after Tom had been pistol @-@ whipped by Wyatt , Ike 's 19 @-@ year @-@ old younger brother Billy Clanton and Tom 's older brother Frank McLaury arrived in town . They had heard from their neighbor , Ed " old man " Frink , that Ike had been stirring up trouble in town overnight , and they had ridden into town on horseback to back up their brothers . They arrived from Antelope Springs , 13 miles ( 21 km ) east of Tombstone , where they had been rounding up stock with their brothers and had breakfasted with Ike and Tom the day before . Both Frank and Billy were armed with a revolver and a rifle , as was the custom for riders in the country outside Tombstone . Apache warriors had engaged the U.S. Army near Tombstone just three weeks before the O.K. Corral gunfight , so the need for weapons outside of town was well established and accepted . 
 Billy and Frank stopped first at the Grand Hotel on Allen Street , and were greeted by Doc Holliday . They learned immediately after of their brothers ' beatings by the Earps within the previous two hours . The incidents had generated a lot of talk in town . Angrily , Frank said he would not drink , and he and Billy left the saloon immediately to seek Tom . By law , both Frank and Billy should have left their firearms at the Grand Hotel . Instead , they remained fully armed . 
 = = = Virgil and Wyatt Earp ’ s reactions = = = 
 Wyatt said that he saw Billy Clanton and Frank McLaury in <unk> 's gun and hardware store on 4th Street filling their gun belts with cartridges . Ike testified afterward that Tom was not there and that he had tried to buy a new revolver but the owner saw Ike 's bandaged head and refused to sell him one . Ike apparently had not heard Virgil tell him that his confiscated weapons were at the Grand Hotel around the corner from <unk> 's shop . 
 When Virgil Earp learned that Wyatt was talking to the Cowboys at Spangenberg 's gun shop , he went there himself . Virgil testified afterward that he thought he saw all four men , Ike Clanton , Billy Clanton , Frank McLaury , and Tom McLaury , buying cartridges . Virgil went around the corner on Allen Street to the Wells Fargo office , where he picked up a 10 @-@ gauge or 12 @-@ gauge , short , double @-@ barreled shotgun . It was an unusually cold and windy day in Tombstone , and Virgil was wearing a long overcoat . To avoid alarming Tombstone 's public , Virgil hid the shotgun under his overcoat when he returned to <unk> 's Saloon . 
 From Spangenberg 's , the Cowboys moved to the O.K. Corral where witnesses overheard them threatening to kill the Earps . For unknown reasons the Cowboys then walked out the back of the O.K. Corral and then west , stopping in a narrow , empty lot next to C. S. Fly 's boarding house . 
 Virgil initially avoided a confrontation with the newly arrived Frank McLaury and Billy Clanton , who had not yet deposited their weapons at a hotel or stable as the law required . The statute was not specific about how far a recently arrived visitor might " with good faith , and within reasonable time " travel into town while carrying a firearm . This permitted a traveler to keep his firearms if he was proceeding directly to a livery , hotel or saloon . The three main Tombstone corrals were all west of 4th street between Allen and Fremont , a block or two from where Wyatt saw the Cowboys buying cartridges . Miner Ruben F. Coleman later told The Tombstone Epitaph : 
 I was in the O.K. Corral at 2 : 30 p.m. when I saw the two Clantons and the two McLaurys in an earnest conversation across the street at Dunbar ’ s corral . I went up the street and notified Sheriff Behan and told them it was my opinion that they meant trouble , and it was his duty , as sheriff , to go and disarm them . I told him they had gone to the West End Corral . I then went and saw Marshal Virgil Earp and notified him to the same effect . 
 = = = Behan attempts to disarm Cowboys = = = 
 Cochise County Sheriff Johnny Behan , a friend of the Cowboys , later testified that he woke up about 1 : 30 pm after the late @-@ night card game , and went to get a shave at a barbershop . That 's where he first learned that the Cowboys were armed . Behan stated he quickly finished his shave and went to locate the Cowboys . At about 2 : 30 pm he found Frank McLaury holding a horse and talking to someone on Fourth Street near the corner of Fremont . When he saw Ike Clanton and Tom McLaury near C. S. Fly 's photography studio , he walked there with Frank . He told the Cowboys that they must give up their arms . Ike Clanton said he was not armed , and Tom McLaury pulled his coat open to show he was not carrying a weapon . 
 The Cowboys were located in a narrow 15 – 20 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 1 m ) lot between the Harwood house and Fly 's 12 @-@ room boarding house and photography studio at 312 Fremont Street , where Doc Holliday roomed . 
 Behan later said he attempted to persuade Frank McLaury to give up his weapons , but Frank insisted that he would only give up his guns after City Marshal Virgil Earp and his brothers were first disarmed . 
 The Cowboys were about a block and a half from the West End Corral at 2nd Street and Fremont , where Ike and Tom 's wagon and team were stabled . Virgil Earp later testified that he thought Ike and Tom were stabled at the O.K. Corral on Allen between 3rd and 4th , from which he thought they would be departing if they were leaving town . 
 While Ike Clanton later said he was planning to leave town , Frank McLaury reported that he had decided to remain behind to take care of some business . Will McLaury , Tom and Frank 's brother and a judge in Fort Worth , Texas , claimed in a letter he wrote during the preliminary hearing after the shoot out that Tom and Frank were still armed because they were planning to conduct business before leaving town to visit him in Texas . He wrote that Billy Clanton , who had arrived on horseback with Frank , intended to go with the McLaurys to Fort Worth . Will McLaury came to Tombstone after the gun fight and joined the prosecution team in an attempt to convict the Earps and Holliday for his brothers ' murder . Paul Johnson told a different story , that the McLaurys were about to leave for Iowa to attend the wedding of their sister , Sarah Caroline , in Iowa . Tom and Frank were especially close to Sarah , one of their 14 siblings and half @-@ siblings . Caroline married James Reed in Richland , Iowa at the end of November that year . 
 = = = Virgil decides to disarm Cowboys = = = 
 Citizens reported to Virgil on the Cowboys ' movements and their threats told him that Ike and Tom had left their livery stable and entered town while armed , in violation of the city ordinance . Virgil Earp was told by several citizens that the McLaurys and the Clantons had gathered on Fremont Street . Virgil decided he had to disarm the Cowboys . His decision to take action may have been influenced by the Cowboy 's repeated threats to the Earps , their proximity to Holliday 's room in Fly 's boarding house , and their location on the route the Earps usually took to their homes two blocks further west on Fremont Street . 
 Several members of the citizen 's vigilance committee offered to support him with arms , but Virgil said no . He had during the prior month appointed Morgan as a Special Policeman . He had also appointed Wyatt as a Special Policemen while Virgil had been in Prescott on business . He had also called on Doc Holliday that morning for help with disarming the Clantons and McLaurys . Wyatt spoke of his brothers Virgil and Morgan as the " marshals " while he acted as " deputy . " 
 Virgil Earp picked up the short , double @-@ barreled shotgun he had retrieved from the Wells Fargo office earlier . He gave the shotgun to Doc Holliday who hid it under his overcoat . He took Holliday 's walking @-@ stick in return . 
 As usual , the Earps carried their revolvers in their coat pockets or in their waistbands . Wyatt Earp was carrying a .44 caliber American 1869 Smith & Wesson revolver . Holliday was carrying a nickel @-@ plated pistol in a holster , but this was concealed by his long coat , as was the shotgun . The Earps and Holliday walked west , down the south side of Fremont Street past the rear entrance to the O.K. Corral , but out of visual range of the Cowboys ' last reported location . Near the corner of Fourth St. and Fremont St. , the Earps ran into Sheriff Behan . He had left the Cowboys and came toward them , though he looked nervously backward several times . Virgil testified afterward that Behan told them , " For God 's sake , don 't go down there or they will murder you ! " Wyatt said Behan told him and Morgan , " I have disarmed them . " Behan testified afterward that he 'd only said he 'd gone down to the Cowboys " for the purpose of disarming them , " not that he 'd actually disarmed them . 
 When Behan said he had disarmed them , Virgil attempted to avoid a fight . " I had a walking stick in my left hand and my hand was on my six @-@ shooter in my waist pants , and when he said he had disarmed them , I shoved it clean around to my left hip and changed my walking stick to my right hand . " Wyatt said I " took my pistol , which I had in my hand , under my coat , and put it in my overcoat pocket . " The Earps walked further down Fremont street and came into full view of the Cowboys in the lot . 
 Wyatt testified he saw " Frank McLaury , Tom McLaury , and Billy Clanton standing in a row against the east side of the building on the opposite side of the vacant space west of Fly 's photograph gallery . Ike Clanton and Billy Claiborne and a man I don 't know [ Wes Fuller ] were standing in the vacant space about halfway between the photograph gallery and the next building west . " Addie Bourland corroborated Wyatt 's testimony , stating that she saw " five men opposite my house , leaning against a small house west of Fly 's Gallery and one man was holding a horse , standing a little out from the house . " 
 = = The gunfight = = 
 In the preceding weeks and hours , Ike Clanton had repeatedly threatened Doc Holliday and the Earps . The Earps were tired of the threats . Martha J. King was in Bauer 's butcher shop on Fremont Street . She testified that when the Earp party passed by her location , one of the Earps on the outside of the group looked across and said to Doc Holliday nearest the store , " ... let them have it ! " to which Holliday replied , " All right . " 
 = = = Physical proximity = = = 
 When the Earps approached the lot , the four law men were initially facing five Cowboys : Frank McLaury , Tom McLaury , Billy Clanton , Wes Fuller , and Ike Clanton . The Cowboys stepped away from the Harwood house . 
 In testimony given by witnesses afterward , they disagreed about the precise location of the men and animals at the beginning of the gunfight and during . The coroner 's inquest and the Spicer hearing produced a sketch showing the Cowboys standing , from left to right facing Fremont Street , with Billy Clanton and then Frank McLaury near the Harwood house and Tom McLaury and Ike Clanton roughly in the middle of the lot . Opposite them and initially only about 6 to 10 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) away , Virgil Earp was on the left end of the Earp party , standing a few feet inside the vacant lot and nearest Ike Clanton . Behind him a few feet near the corner of C. S. Fly 's boarding house was Wyatt . Morgan Earp was standing on Fremont Street to Wyatt 's right , and Doc Holliday anchored the end of their line in Fremont Street , a few feet to Morgan 's right . 
 Wyatt Earp drew a sketch in 1924 and another with John Flood on September 15 , 1926 that depicted Billy Clanton near the middle of the lot , close to the Harwood house . Tom and Frank McLaury stood deeper in the lot . Frank was in the center between the two buildings , holding the reins of his horse . Tom was closer to C. S. Fly 's boarding house . According to Wyatt 's sketches , Morgan was on the right of the lawmen , close to the Harwood house , opposite Billy Clanton near the Harwood house and close to Fremont St. Virgil was deeper in the lot , opposite Frank and Ike Clanton . Wyatt was to Virgil 's left , opposite Tom . Doc Holliday hung back a step or two on Fremont Street . Neither of Wyatt 's sketches included Ike Clanton or Billy <unk> , who ran from the fight . 
 = = = <unk> begins = = = 
 Virgil Earp was not expecting a fight . Once Behan said that he 'd disarmed the Cowboys , Virgil traded the short , double @-@ barreled shotgun he was carrying for Holliday 's cane . Virgil carried the cane in his right hand and shifted the pistol in his waistband from the right side to his left . Holliday concealed the short shotgun under his long jacket . Wyatt too was not expecting a fight and put his pistol in his overcoat pocket . 
 Billy Clanton and Frank McLaury wore revolvers in holsters on their belts and stood alongside their saddled horses with rifles in their scabbards , possibly in violation of the city ordinance prohibiting carrying weapons in town . 
 When Virgil saw the Cowboys , he testified , he immediately commanded the Cowboys to " Throw up your hands , I want your guns ! " Wyatt said Virgil told the Cowboys , " Throw up your hands ; I have come to disarm you ! " Virgil and Wyatt both testified they saw Frank McLaury and Billy Clanton draw and cock their six @-@ shooters . Virgil yelled : " Hold ! I don 't mean that ! " or " Hold on , I don 't want that ! " The single @-@ action revolvers carried by both groups had to be cocked before firing . 
 Jeff Morey , who served as the historical consultant on the film Tombstone , compared testimony by partisan and neutral witnesses and came to the conclusion that the Earps described the situation accurately . 
 Who started shooting first is not certain ; accounts by both participants and eyewitnesses are contradictory . The smoke from the black powder used in the weapons added to the confusion of the gunfight in the narrow space . Those loyal to one side or the other told conflicting stories , and independent eyewitnesses who did not know the participants by sight were unable to say for certain who shot first . The six or seven men with guns fired about 30 shots in around 30 seconds . 
 First two shots 
 Virgil Earp reported afterward , " Two shots went off right together . Billy Clanton 's was one of them . " Wyatt testified , " Billy Clanton leveled his pistol at me , but I did not aim at him . I knew that Frank McLaury had the reputation of being a good shot and a dangerous man , and I aimed at Frank McLaury . " He said he shot Frank McLaury after both he and Billy Clanton went for their revolvers : " The first two shots were fired by Billy Clanton and myself , he shooting at me , and I shooting at Frank McLaury . " Morey agreed that Billy Clanton and Wyatt Earp fired first . Clanton missed , but Earp shot Frank McLaury in the stomach . 
 All witnesses generally agreed that the first two shots were almost indistinguishable from each other . General firing immediately broke out . Virgil and Wyatt thought Tom was armed . When shooting started , the horse that Tom McLaury held jumped to one side . Wyatt said he also saw Tom throw his hand to his right hip . Virgil said Tom followed the horse 's movement , hiding behind it , and fired once , if not twice , over the horse 's back . 
 Holliday shoots Tom 
 According to one witness , Holliday drew a " large bronze pistol " ( interpreted by some as Virgil 's coach gun ) from under his long coat , stepped around Tom McLaury 's horse , and shot him with the short , double @-@ barreled shotgun in the chest at close range . 
 Witness C. H. " Ham " Light saw Tom running or stumbling westward on Fremont Street towards Third Street , away from the gunfight , while Frank and Billy were still standing and shooting . Light testified that Tom fell at the foot of a telegraph pole on the corner of Fremont and 3rd Street and lay there , without moving , through the duration of the fight . After shooting Tom , Holliday tossed the shotgun aside , pulled out his nickel @-@ plated revolver , and continued to fire at Frank McLaury and Billy Clanton . 
 Ike Clanton runs 
 Wyatt told the court afterward that Ike Clanton had bragged that he would kill the Earps or Doc Holliday at his first opportunity . But when the gunfight broke out , Clanton ran forward and grabbed him , exclaiming that he was unarmed and did not want a fight . To this protest Wyatt said he responded , " Go to fighting or get away ! " Clanton ran through the front door of Fly 's boarding house and escaped , unwounded . Other accounts say that Ike drew a hidden pistol and fired at the Earps before disappearing . Billy Claiborne also ran from the fight . 
 Billy Clanton shot 
 According to The Tombstone Epitaph , " Wyatt Earp stood up and fired in rapid succession , as cool as a cucumber , and was not hit . " Morgan Earp fired almost immediately , as Billy Clanton drew his gun right @-@ handed . Morgan 's shot hit Billy in the right wrist , disabling his hand . Forced to shift the revolver to his left hand , Clanton continued shooting until he emptied the gun . Virgil and Wyatt were now firing . Morgan Earp tripped and fell over a newly buried waterline and fired from the ground . Wyatt shot Frank McLaury in the abdomen , and Frank took his horse by its reins and struggled across Fremont Street . He tried and failed to grab his rifle from the scabbard but lost control of the horse . Frank crossed Fremont Street firing his revolver instead . Frank and Holliday exchanged shots as Frank moved across Fremont Street , and Frank hit Holliday in his pistol pocket , grazing him . Holliday followed him , exclaiming , " That son of a bitch has shot me and I am going to kill him . " Morgan Earp picked himself up and also fired at Frank . Frank fell to the sidewalk on the east side of Fremont Street . 
 A number of witnesses observed a man leading a horse into the street and firing near it and Wyatt in his testimony thought this was Tom McLaury . Claiborne said only one man had a horse in the fight , and that this man was Frank , holding his own horse by the reins , then losing it and its cover , in the middle of the street . Wes Fuller also identified Frank as the man in the street leading the horse . 
 Morgan Earp wounded 
 Though wounded , Billy Clanton and Frank McLaury kept shooting . One of them , perhaps Billy , shot Morgan Earp across the back in a wound that struck both shoulder blades and a vertebra . Morgan went down for a minute before picking himself up . Either Frank or Billy shot Virgil Earp in the calf ( Virgil thought it was Billy ) . Virgil , though hit , fired his next shot at Billy Clanton . 
 Frank , now entirely across Fremont street and still walking at a good pace according to Claiborne 's testimony , fired twice more before he was shot in the head under his right ear . Both Morgan and Holliday apparently thought they had fired the shot that killed Frank , but since neither of them testified at the hearing , this information is only from second @-@ hand accounts . A passerby testified to having stopped to help Frank , and saw Frank try to speak , but he died where he fell , before he could be moved . 
 Billy Clanton was shot in the wrist , chest and abdomen , and after a minute or two slumped to a sitting position near his original position at the corner of the MacDonald house in the lot between the house and Fly 's Lodging House . Claiborne said Clanton was supported by a window initially after he was shot , and fired some shots after sitting , with the pistol supported on his leg . After he ran out of ammunition , he called for more cartridges , but C. S. Fly took his pistol at about the time the general shooting ended . 
 A few moments later , Tom McLaury was carried from the corner of Fremont and Third into the Harwood house on that corner , where he died without speaking . <unk> carried Billy Clanton to the Harwood house , where Tom had been taken . Billy was in considerable pain and asked for a doctor and some morphine . He told those near him , " They have murdered me . I have been murdered . Chase the crowd away and from the door and give me air . " Billy gasped for air , and someone else heard him say , " Go away and let me die . " Ike Clanton , who had repeatedly threatened the Earps with death , was still running . William Cuddy testified that Ike passed him on Allen Street and Johnny Behan saw him a few minutes later on Tough Nut Street . 
 = = Outcome of the battle = = 
 Ike Clanton , who had been threatening to kill the Earps for several months , including the day before , and Billy Claiborne were both unarmed . They ran from the fight unhurt . Wesley Fuller , a Cowboy who had been at the rear of the lot , left as soon as the firing began . Both Wyatt and Virgil believed Tom McLaury was armed and testified that he had fired at least one shot over the back of a horse . Billy Clanton and Frank McLaury exchanged gunfire with the lawmen . During the gunfight , Doc Holliday was bruised by a bullet fired by Frank that struck his holster and grazed his hip . Virgil Earp was shot through the calf , he thought by Billy Clanton . Morgan Earp was struck across both shoulder blades by a bullet that Morgan thought Frank McLaury had fired . Wyatt Earp was unhurt . Tom McLaury , his brother Frank , and Billy Clanton were killed . 
 As the wounded lawmen were carried to their homes , they passed in front of the Sheriff 's Office , and Johnny Behan told Wyatt Earp he was under arrest . Wyatt paused two or three seconds and replied very forcibly : " I won 't be arrested today . I am right here and am not going away . " Dr. George Goodfellow treated the Earps ' wounds . 
 = = = Cowboy wounds = = = 
 Dr. Henry M. Mathews examined the dead Cowboys late that night . He found Frank McLaury had two wounds : a gunshot beneath the right ear that horizontally penetrated his head , and a second entering his abdomen one inch to the left of his navel . Mathews stated that the wound beneath the ear was at the base of the brain and caused instant death . Sheriff Behan testified that he had heard Morgan Earp yell " I got him " after Frank was shot . However , during the gunfight , Frank moved across Fremont street , putting Holliday on Frank 's right and Morgan on his left . This makes it much more likely that Holliday shot the fatal round that killed Frank . 
 When he examined Tom McLaury 's body , Mathews found twelve buckshot wounds from a single shotgun round on the right side under his arm , between the third and fifth ribs . The wound was about four inches across . The nature and location of the wound indicated that it could not have been received if Tom 's hands were on his coat lapels as the Cowboys later testified . Both Virgil and Wyatt stated that Holliday had shot Tom , which the coroner 's exam supported . 
 Dr. George Goodfellow testified about Billy Clanton 's wounds at the Spicer hearing . He stated that the angle of the wrist wound indicated that Billy 's hand could not have been raised over his head as claimed by Cowboy witnesses . In his coroner 's report , Mathews did not mention Billy 's arm wound , but witness Keefe , who examined the arm closely , testified later that Clanton was shot through the right arm , close to the wrist joint and " the bullet passed through the arm from " inside to outside , " entering the arm close to the base of the thumb , and exiting " on the back of the wrist diagonally " with the latter wound larger . This indicated to the judge that Billy could not have been holding his coat 's lapels open , his arms raised , as the Cowboys testified . Dr. Mathews found two other wounds on Billy 's body . The first was two inches from Clanton 's left nipple , penetrated his lung . The other was in the abdomen beneath the twelfth rib , six inches to the right of the navel . Both were fired from the front . Neither passed completely through his body . The wound to Billy Clanton 's right wrist may have been inflicted by Morgan Earp or Doc Holliday immediately at the outset of the fight as Billy was drawing his gun . 
 = = = Weapons carried by the Cowboys = = = 
 Billy Clanton 
 Billy Clanton was armed with Colt Frontier 1873 revolvers which were identified by their serial numbers at the Spicer hearing . C.S. Fly found Billy Clanton 's empty revolver in his hand where he lay and took it from him . 
 Frank McLaury 
 Frank McLaury 's was also armed with a Colt Frontier 1873 revolver which was recovered by <unk> B. E. Fellehy on the street a few feet from his body with two rounds remaining in it . Fellehy placed it next to Frank 's body before he was moved to the Harwood house . Dr. Mathews laid Frank 's revolver on the floor while he examined Billy and Tom . Cowboy witness Wes Fuller said he saw Frank in the middle of the street shooting a revolver and trying to remove a Winchester rifle from the scabbard on his horse . The two Model 1873 rifles were still in the scabbards on Frank and Tom McLaury 's horses when they were found after the gunfight . If , as was customary , Frank carried only five rounds , then he had fired only three shots . 
 Tom McLaury 
 Witnesses differed about whether Tom McLaury was carrying a weapon during the shootout or not . No revolver or rifle was found near his body and he was not wearing a cartridge belt . Wyatt testified that he had arrested Tom earlier that day when he found him carrying a weapon earlier in violation of a city ordinance . He pistol @-@ whipped him and took him to the courthouse where he was fined . Saloon @-@ keeper Mehan testified that Tom had deposited his revolver at the Capital Saloon on 4th Street and Fremont after his arrest and before the fight , between 1 and 2 p.m. Several Cowboy witnesses testified that Tom was unarmed and claimed that the Earps had murdered a defenseless man . 
 Behan testified that when he searched Tom McLaury for a weapon prior to the gunfight , he was not thorough , and that Tom might have had a pistol hidden in his waistband . Behan 's testimony was significant , since he was a prime witness for the prosecution but had equivocated on this point . Behan 's sympathy to the Cowboys was well known , and during the trial he firmly denied he had contributed money to help Ike with his defense costs . However , documents were located in 1997 that showed Behan served as guarantor for a loan to Ike Clanton during the Spicer hearing . Since Wyatt planned to run against Behan for County Sheriff , Behan had an incentive to help convict Wyatt . 
 A story in the Cowboy @-@ friendly newspaper , the Nugget , stated without attribution that " The Sheriff stepped out and said [ to the Earps ] : ' Hold up boys , don 't go down there or there will be trouble ; I have been down there to disarm them . ' " In his testimony , Behan repeatedly insisted he told the Earps that he only intended to disarm the Cowboys , not that he had actually done so . The article said that Behan " was standing near by commanding the contestants to cease firing but was powerless to prevent it . " Given the Nugget 's close relationship to Behan ( it was owned by Behan 's deputy sheriff ) , it is likely they interviewed him . By Williams ' account , Behan told Virgil Earp immediately after the gunfight a story that corroborated the Nugget report , which the newspaper altered afterward to a version that matched the story Behan later told at the coroner 's inquest . 
 Though saloon @-@ keeper Andrew Mehan had seen Tom deposit his pistol after his beating by Earp and before the gunfight , none of the Earps had any way of knowing that Tom had left his revolver at the saloon . Hotel keeper Albert " Chris " <unk> , whose father Charles owned the Cosmopolitan Hotel , saw Tom McLaury enter Bauer 's butcher shop about 2 : 00 p.m. He testified that Tom 's right @-@ hand pants pocket was flat when he went in but protruded , as if it contained a pistol ( so he thought ) , when he emerged . Retired army surgeon Dr. J. W. Gardiner also testified that he saw the bulge in Tom 's pants . However , the bulge in Tom 's pants pocket may have been the nearly $ 3 @,@ 300 in cash and receipts found on his body , perhaps in payment for stolen Mexican beef purchased by the butcher . 
 Wyatt and Virgil Earp and Doc Holliday believed that Tom had a revolver at the time of the gunfight . Wyatt thought Tom fired a revolver under the horse 's neck and believed until he died that Tom 's revolver had been removed from the scene by Wesley Fuller . One eye witness , <unk> Peter H. Fellehy , stated that he saw Morgan Earp and Doc Holliday shooting at a man who was using a horse to barricade himself , and once shot the man fell . During that statement , Fellehy claimed the man still held his pistol in his hand . Although he never said he saw him shoot , he does indicate that Tom McLaury was armed . 
 Ruben F. Coleman also said afterward that he thought Tom was armed , though he later equivocated on this point . He was quoted in the October 27 issue of The Tombstone Epitaph in which he said , " Tom McLaury fell first , but raised and fired again before he died . " Coleman also testified at the coroner ’ s inquest one day later . Part @-@ time newspaper reporter Howell ' Pat ' Hayhurst transcribed all of the testimony from the hearing in the early 1930s as part of the Federal Writers ' Project , in the Works Progress Administration . When he transcribed Coleman 's second testimony , he quoted Coleman as saying , " Tom McLaury , after the first two shots were fired , ran down Fremont Street and fell ... I think that the report I gave to the Epitaph was pretty near correct as published . " However , it 's known that Hayhurst arbitrarily removed text that he decided was not relevant . Author Stuart N. Lake later said Hayhurst ‘ mutilated ’ the transcription . The documents were subsequently lost and are still unaccounted for . 
 Even if Tom wasn 't armed with a revolver , Virgil Earp testified Tom attempted to grab a rifle from the scabbard on the horse in front of him before he was killed . Judge Spicer ruled afterward that " if Thomas McLaury was one of a party who were thus armed and were making felonious resistance to an arrest , and in the melee that followed was shot , the fact of his being unarmed , if it be a fact , could not of itself [ in ] criminate the defendants [ Earps ] , if they were not otherwise <unk> . " [ sic ] 
 Ike Clanton and Billy Claiborne 
 Ike Clanton and Billy Claiborne both said they were unarmed when they fled the gunfight . 
 = = Public reaction = = 
 The bodies of the three dead Cowboys were displayed in a window at Ritter and Reams undertakers with a sign : " Murdered in the Streets of Tombstone . " The Daily Nugget proclaimed : 
 The 26th of October , 1881 , will always be marked as one of the crimson days in the annals of Tombstone , a day when blood flowed as water , and human life was held as a shuttle cock , a day to be remembered as witnessing the bloodiest and deadliest street fight that has ever occurred in this place , or probably in the Territory . 
 The Tombstone Epitaph was more restrained in its language : 
 The feeling among the best class of our citizens is that the Marshal was entirely justified in his efforts to disarm these men , and that being fired upon they had to defend themselves which they did most bravely . 
 Since The Tombstone Epitaph was the local Associated Press client , its story was the version of events that most readers across the United States read first . 
 The funerals for Billy Clanton ( age 19 ) , Tom McLaury ( age 28 ) and his older brother Frank ( age 33 ) were well attended . About 300 people joined in the procession to Boot Hill and as many as two thousand watched from the sidewalks . Both <unk> were buried in the same grave , and Billy Clanton was buried nearby . The story was widely printed in newspapers across the United States . Most versions favored the lawmen . The San Francisco Exchange headlines their story , " A Good Riddance " . 
 The Coroner 's Jury convened by Dr. Henry Matthews neither condemned nor exonerated the lawmen for shooting the Cowboys . " William Clanton , Frank and Thomas McLaury , came to their deaths in the town of Tombstone on October 26 , 1881 , from the effects of pistol and gunshot wounds inflicted by Virgil Earp , Morgan Earp , Wyatt Earp , and one — Holliday , commonly called ' Doc Holliday ' . " 
 The initial public reaction was largely favorable to the Earps , but began to change when rumors began to circulate that Ike Clanton and Tom McLaury were unarmed , and that Billy Clanton and Tom McLaury even threw up their hands before the shooting . Within a few days , Phineas " Fin " Clanton arrived in town , and some began to claim that the Earps and Holliday had committed murder , instead of enforcing the law . Clara Spalding Brown , the wife of mining engineer Theodore Brown , was a correspondent for the San Diego Union and other California newspapers . She wrote that Tombstone residents were divided about the justification for the killings . Referring to the initial testimony offered by Ike Clanton , she wrote , " Opinion is pretty divided as to the justification of the killing . You may meet one man who will support the Earps , and declare that no other course was possible to save their own lives , and the next man is just as likely to assert that there was no occasion whatever for bloodshed , and that this will be ' a warm place ' for the Earps hereafter . At the inquest yesterday , the damaging fact was ascertained that only two of the cowboys were armed , it thus being a most unequal fight . " 
 Even the Governor of the Arizona Territory , John C. Frémont , reported after the gunfight , " Many of the very best law @-@ abiding and peace @-@ loving citizens [ of Tombstone ] have no confidence in the willingness of the civil officers to pursue and bring to justice that element of out @-@ <unk> so largely disturbing the sense of security ... [ The opinion ] is quite prevalent that the civil officers are quite largely in league with the leaders of this disturbing and dangerous element . " 
 = = Spicer hearing = = 
 Four days after the shoot out , Ike Clanton filed murder charges against Doc Holliday and the Earps . Wyatt and Holliday were arrested and brought before Justice of the Peace , Wells Spicer . Morgan and Virgil were still recovering at home . Only Wyatt and Holliday were required to post $ 10 @,@ 000 bail , which was paid by their attorney Thomas Fitch , local mine owner E.B. Gage , Wells Fargo undercover agent Fred Dodge , and other business owners appreciative of the Earps ' efforts to maintain order . Virgil Earp was suspended as town marshal pending the outcome of the trial . Justice Spicer convened a preliminary hearing on October 31 to determine if there was enough evidence to go to trial . 
 The prosecution was led by Republican District Attorney Lyttleton Price , assisted by John M. Murphy , James Robinson , and Ben Goodrich . They were joined by William McLaury , Frank and Tom 's older brother , he also being an able attorney , who played a key role on the prosecutor 's team . The Earp 's attorney Thomas Fitch was an experienced trial lawyer and had earned a reputation as the " silver @-@ tongued orator of the Pacific . " 
 Spicer took written and oral testimony from a number of witnesses over more than a month . Accounts by both participants and eye @-@ witnesses were contradictory . Those loyal to one side or the other told conflicting stories and independent eyewitnesses who did not know the participants by sight were unable to say for certain who shot first . 
 Cochise County Sheriff Johnny Behan testified on the third day of the hearing . During two days on the stand , he gave strong testimony that the Cowboys had not resisted but either threw up their hands and turned out their coats to show they were not armed . Behan 's views turned public opinion against the Earps , who were free on bail . He and other prosecution witnesses testified that Tom McLaury was unarmed , that Billy Clanton had his hands in the air , and that neither of the McLaurys were troublemakers . They portrayed Ike Clanton and Tom McLaury as being unjustly bullied and beaten by the vengeful Earps on the day of the gunfight . On the strength of the prosecution case , Spicer revoked the bail for Doc and Wyatt Earp and had them jailed on November 7 . They spent the next 16 days in jail . 
 Defense accounts contradicted the testimony of Behan , Claiborne and Allen , who all said that a man had fired a nickel @-@ plated pistol first . Claiborne and Allen both said it was Holliday . Virgil , Wyatt and other witnesses testified that Holliday was carrying a shotgun . ( Morgan remained bedridden throughout the trial and did not testify . ) The prosecution 's scenario would have required Holliday to fire with his pistol first , switch to the shotgun to shoot Tom McLaury , then switch back again to his pistol to continue firing . 
 Three witnesses gave key evidence that swayed Justice Spicer to hold that Virgil had acted within his capacity as Sheriff and that there was insufficient evidence to indict the Earps and Doc Holliday for murder . 
 <unk> Sills was an AT & SF RR engineer who had just arrived in town and knew none of the parties involved . He testified that he saw " the marshal go up and speak to this other party . I ... saw them pull out their revolvers immediately . The marshal had a cane in his right hand at the time . He <unk> up his hand and spoke . I did not hear the words though . By that time Billy Clanton and Wyatt Earp had fired their guns off . " Grilled by the prosecution , he corroborated virtually all of the defense 's testimony . 
 Addie Bourland was a dressmaker whose residence was across Fremont Street from Fly 's Boarding House . She testified that she saw both sides facing each other , that none of the Cowboys had held their hands up , that the firing was general , and that she had not seen Billy Clanton fall immediately as the Cowboys had testified . 
 Judge J.H. Lucas of the Cochise County Probate Court had offices in the Mining Exchange Building about 200 feet ( 61 m ) from the shootout . Lucas ' corroborated Addie Bourland 's testimony that Billy Clanton was standing throughout the fight , which contradicted prosecution witnesses who maintained he went down immediately after being shot at close range in the belly . Spicer noted that no powder burns were found on his clothing . 
 These witnesses ' testimony , especially that of H.F. Sills , a disinterested party , discredited much of the testimony given by Sheriff Johnny Behan , Ike Clanton and the other Cowboy witnesses . 
 After hearing all the evidence , Justice Spicer ruled on November 30 that Virgil , as the lawman in charge that day , had acted within his office and that there was not enough evidence to indict the men . He described Frank McLaury 's insistence that he would not give up his weapons unless the marshal and his deputies also gave up their arms as a " proposition both monstrous and startling ! " He noted that the prosecution claimed that the Cowboys ' purpose was to leave town , yet Ike Clanton and Billy Claiborne did not have their weapons with them . Spicer noted that the doctor who examined the dead Cowboys established that the wounds they received could not have occurred if their hands and arms had been in the positions that prosecution witnesses described . Spicer did not condone all of the Earps ' actions and criticized Virgil Earp 's use of Wyatt and Holliday as deputies , but he concluded that no laws were broken . He said the evidence indicated that the Earps and Holliday acted within the law and that Holliday and Wyatt had been properly deputized by Virgil Earp . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The public perception of the Earp brothers ' actions , and especially those of Wyatt , were controversial . Even today , they have strongly opinionated admirers and detractors . 
 = = = Gunfight sketch = = = 
 A hand @-@ drawn sketch of the gunfight , made by John Flood with Wyatt Earp 's assistance on September 15 , 1921 , was sold at auction in October 2010 for $ 380 @,@ 000 . The map describes the position of a number of witnesses and all of the participants with the exception of Ike Clanton , who fled from the gunfight . 
 = = = Paintings = = = 
 In 1952 , Victor Clyde Forsythe , a popular painter of desert scenes and cowboy artist , painted " Gunfight at O.K. Corral " , a 43 by 60 inches ( 110 by 150 cm ) oil painting regarded by some as the most accurate depiction of the gunfight for many years . Forsythe ’ s father , William Bowen Forsyth and uncle , Ira Chandler owned a store , Chandler & Forsyth <unk> , at 328 Fremont Street , west of the back entrance to the O.K. Corral , and one @-@ half block from the site of the gunfight . They claimed that had been present and witnessed the shoot out . Newspaper accounts of the painting reported that Forsythe had interviewed Tombstone residents and examined many of the existing buildings before beginning to plan his painting . In May 1988 , his studio printed and sold a limited edition of 390 copies of the painting . 
 John Gilchriese became friends with John Flood , who had been Wyatt Earp ’ s secretary , confidante and best friend for many years . When Earp died , Flood inherited many of his personal belongings . Flood in turn willed them to Gilchriese , who amassed over a number of years one of the largest collections of personal items belonging to Wyatt and Virgil Earp along with many unpublished photos of them and their family . Gilchriese opened the Wyatt Earp Museum in Tombstone in 1966 and commissioned Western artist Don Perceval to paint the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral . The oil on masonite painting , titled The Street Fight , is 6 feet 4 inches by 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 93 m by 1 @.@ 22 m ) . It was the largest work ever executed by Perceval . He referred to original documents in Gilchriese 's collection , including Wyatt Earp 's own diagram of the shootout , and unpublished notes made by John Flood , to create what is regarded as the most accurate depiction of the shootout . <unk> had 500 lithographic prints reproduced from the original , which Perceval signed . The prints were sold by the museum for $ 10 . 
 After Gilchriese closed his museum , the painting along with other contents of the museum was sold at auction by John 's Western Gallery of San Francisco . The estimated auction price was $ 200 @,@ 000 to $ 300 @,@ 000 . The final sale price on June 25 , 2004 was $ 40 @,@ 250 . It was put up for auction again on June 14 , 2014 with an estimated selling price of $ 40 @,@ 000 - $ 60 @,@ 000 but failed to sell . 
 = = = Origin of the gunfight 's name = = = 
 The shootout was described by Breakenridge in his 1928 book <unk> : Bringing Law to the Mesquite as " The Incident Near the O.K. Corral . " In his popular book Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal , Stuart Lake titled his chapter about the conflict , " At the O.K. Corral . " But it was the popular movie Gunfight at the O.K. Corral that cemented the incident and its erroneous location in popular consciousness . The movie and accompanying mythologizing also altered the way the public thought of the Earps and the outlaws . Prior to the movie , the media often criticized the Earps ' actions in Tombstone . In the movies , they became the good guys , always ready to stand for what is right . 
 The incident has become a fixture in American history due to the personal nature of the feud between the Earps and the McLaury and Clanton brothers and the symbolism of the fight between lawmen and the outlaw Cowboys . When the Cowboys maimed Virgil and murdered Morgan , but escaped prosecution , Wyatt 's extra @-@ legal campaign for revenge captured people 's attention . The gunfight and its aftermath stand for the change overcoming America as the Western frontier ceased to exist , between a modern nation that was rapidly industrializing , pushing out what had been a largely agrarian economy . 
 The town of Tombstone has capitalized on widespread interest in the gunfight . Portions of the town are a historical district that has been designated a National Historic Landmark and is listed in the National Register of Historic Places by the U.S. National Park Service . A local company produces daily theatrical re @-@ enactments of the gunfight . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 With the widespread sales of televisions after World War II , producers spun out a large number of western @-@ oriented shows . At the height of their popularity in 1959 , there were more than two dozen " cowboy " programs on each week . At least six of them were directly or indirectly connected with Wyatt Earp : The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp , Bat Masterson , Tombstone Territory , Broken Arrow , Johnny Ringo , and Gunsmoke . Hugh O 'Brien portrayed Earp on the namesake show , Wyatt Earp , which ran for six seasons . 
 A 2003 episode of Discovery Channel 's Unsolved History used modern technology to attempt to re @-@ enact the gunfight . They utilized a movie set to recreate a space similar to the lot where the original gun fight took place . They confirmed that the front to back wrist wound suffered by Billy Clanton could only have occurred if his arm was raised in a manner like that when holding a pistol and that the black powder may have obscured the shooters ' view of each other . The episode concluded that the three eyewitnesses for the prosecution ( Sheriff Behan , Ike Clanton and Billy Clanton ) likely offered perjured testimony . They found that Tom McLaury may have been hit by the shotgun round under his armpit as he reached over his horse for a rifle in his scabbard , as the horse turned away from him at the same time . 
 The stories about the gunfight written in the 20th century affected American culture . Numerous dramatic , fictional , and documentary works have been produced about or referencing the event with varying degrees of accuracy . These works include : 
 Law and Order ( 1932 ) with Walter Huston 
 Frontier Marshal ( 1934 ) with George O 'Brien 
 Dodge City ( 1939 ) with Errol Flynn 
 Frontier Marshal ( 1939 ) with Randolph Scott 
 Tombstone , the Town Too Tough to Die ( 1942 ) with Richard Dix 
 My Darling Clementine ( 1946 ) with Henry Fonda 
 Angel and the Badman ( 1947 ) with John Wayne 
 The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp ( 1955 ) , TV series with Hugh O 'Brien 
 Wichita ( 1955 ) with Joel McCrea 
 Gunfight at the O.K. Corral ( 1957 ) with Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas 
 Cheyenne Autumn ( 1964 ) with James Stewart 
 Gunmen of the Rio Grande ( 1965 ) 
 The Gunfighters ( 1966 ) , a Doctor Who serial 
 Hour of the Gun ( 1967 ) with James Garner 
 " Spectre of the Gun " ( 1968 ) , an original Star Trek episode 
 Doc ( 1971 ) written by Pete Hamill 
 " Showdown at O.K. Corral " ( 1972 ) , an Appointment with Destiny episode , narrated by Lorne Greene 
 " Ghost Fight at the OK Corral " ( 1987 ) , The Real Ghostbusters episode 
 Tombstone ( 1993 ) with Kurt Russell 
 Wyatt Earp ( 1994 ) with Kevin Costner 
 " Shootout at Fly 's Photographic Studio " , a History Bites episode 
 Days That Shook the World ( 2004 ) in the episode Rule Of The Gun . 
 = = = In print = = = 
 ( Chronological ) 
 Warlock ( 1958 ) , a novel by Oakley Hall prominently features a fictionalized version of the gunfight , known as the " Shootout at the Acme Corral " . 
 Mister Blueberry ( 1995 – 2005 ) , a 5 @-@ volume story arc of the comics series Blueberry by French artist Jean Giraud combines multiple plots including one about the gunfight . 
 Frontier Earth ( 1999 ) , a sci @-@ fi / western novel by actor Bruce Boxleitner , about the events leading up to the gunfight . 
 The Return of Little Big Man ( 1999 ) , in which novelist Thomas Berger 's wandering protagonist Jack Crabb becomes a witness to the event . 
 Gunman 's Rhapsody ( 2001 ) by Robert B. Parker 
 Telegraph Days ( 2006 ) , a novel by Larry McMurtry , includes a representation of the gunfight , told by a fictional journalist and eyewitness 
 Territory ( July 2007 ) , a novel by Emma Bull offers a fantasy retelling of the events leading up to the fight . 
 The Buntline Special ( 2010 ) By Mike Resnick , a <unk> re @-@ imagining of the gunfight . 
 The Last Kind Words Saloon ( 2014 ) By Larry McMurtry , culminates with a version of the gunfight . 
 Epitaph : A Novel of the O.K. Corral ( 2015 ) by Mary Doria Russell tells Wyatt Earp 's story . 
 = = = In mathematics = = = 
 David Williams and Paul McIlroy introduced a mathematical model for the O.K. Corral gunfight , which they published in Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society ( 1998 ) . Later this model was analyzed by Sir John Kingman ( 1999 , 2002 ) , and Kingman and Volkov ( 2003 ) . They analyzed the probability of " survival of exactly S gunmen given an initially fair configuration . " 
 = South Dakota @-@ class battleship ( 1939 ) = 
 The South Dakota class was a group of four fast battleships built by the United States Navy . They were the second class of battleships to be named after the 40th State ; the first designed in the 1920s and canceled under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 The class comprised four ships : South Dakota , Indiana , Massachusetts , and Alabama . They were more compact and better protected than the preceding North Carolina class , but had the same main battery , nine 16 " / 45 caliber Mark 6 guns in three @-@ gun turrets . The ships can be visually distinguished from the earlier vessels by their single funnel , compared to twin funnels in the North Carolinas . According to authors William Garzke and Robert Dulin , the South Dakota design was the best " treaty battleship " ever built . 
 Construction began shortly before World War II , with Fiscal Year ( FY ) 1939 appropriations . Commissioning through the summer of 1942 , the four ships served in both the Atlantic , ready to intercept possible German capital ship sorties , and the Pacific , in carrier groups and shore bombardments . All four ships were retired post @-@ war ; South Dakota and Indiana were scrapped , Massachusetts and Alabama retained as museum ships . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The preceding two North Carolina @-@ class battleships had been assigned to the <unk> building program , and in 1936 , the General Board met to discuss the two battleships to be allocated to <unk> . The General Board argued for two more North Carolinas , but Admiral William H. Standley , the Chief of Naval Operations , wanted the ships to be of a new design . That meant construction could not begin by 1938 , so the ships were assigned to <unk> . Design work started in March 1937 and the draft for two battleships was formally approved by the Secretary of the Navy on 23 June . More specific characteristics for the two ships were ironed out , and those were approved on 4 January 1938 . The ships were formally ordered on 4 April 1938 . 
 Due to the deteriorating international situations in Europe and Asia , Congress authorized a further two battleships of the new design , for a total of four , under the Deficiency Authorization of 25 June 1938 . The " <unk> Clause " of the Second London Naval Treaty had been activated in the U.S. Navy so it could begin work on the follow @-@ on Iowa @-@ class battleships , but Congress was willing to approve only the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battleships . A number of deficiencies in the preceding North Carolinas were to be fixed in the South Dakotas ; these included insufficient underwater protection and turbine engines not of the most recent technology . 
 The North Carolinas also did not have sufficient space to act as fleet flagships , so the lead ship of the new class was designed with an extra deck on the conning tower specifically for this purpose , although the increase in space and weight from this necessitated removal of two twin 5 @-@ in DP mounts . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 There was a great deal of debate on the requirements for the new battleships . The design board drew up a number of proposals ; one called for a ship with nine 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns in three triple turrets , 5 @.@ 9 in @-@ thick deck armor that would have made the ship immune to plunging fire out to 30 @,@ 000 yards , and a top speed of at least 23 knots . The belt armor was a much more intractable problem ; the 16 @-@ inch gun could penetrate 13 @.@ 5 inches of plate , the thickest in an American battleship at the time , even at 25 @,@ 000 yards . To proof the ship against her own armament — a characteristic known as " balanced armor " — the main belt would have to be increased to 15 @.@ 5 inches , which would have increased the weight of the vessel to prohibitive levels . To mitigate this problem , sloped armor was proposed ; it was infeasible to use inclined armor in an external belt , because it would compromise stability to a dangerous degree . This had serious drawbacks , however ; it complicated the construction process , and if the armored belt was damaged , the external plating would have to be cut away first before the belt could be repaired . 
 To minimize the drawbacks of the inclined belt , it sloped outward from the keel , then back in towards the armored deck . This meant that shells fired at relatively close range would hit the upper portion of the belt at an angle , which maximized armor protection . However , the effectiveness of the upper portion of the belt was degraded at longer ranges , because plunging shells would strike it at an angle closer to the perpendicular , increasing their ability to penetrate the armor . It did reduce the area that needed to be covered by the armored deck , which saved additional weight . This enabled the upper belt to be thicker , which to an extent ameliorated the vulnerability to plunging fire . Because the belt was internal , it provided the opportunity to extend it to the inner portion of the double bottom , which gave the ship better underwater protection than the North Carolinas . Ultimately , the complex double incline belt armor was abandoned when it became apparent that a single slanted belt could provide similar protection , and save several hundred tons of weight . 
 The size of the hull was also a problem : a longer hull generally equates to a higher top speed , but requires more armor to protect it . In order to keep a higher top speed on a shorter hull , higher @-@ performance machinery is required . Since the South Dakota design was much shorter than the preceding North Carolinas — 680 ft ( 210 m ) compared to 729 ft ( 222 m ) , respectively — the new ships would need improved machinery than would otherwise have been used in shorter hulls in order to retain the same speed as the longer ships . The design initially called for a top speed of at least 22 @.@ 5 knots , which was deemed sufficient to keep up with opposing battleships and outrun surfaced submarines . However , in 1936 , decrypted reports from the Japanese navy revealed the battleship Nagato was capable of speeds in excess of 26 knots . 
 To counter this , it was determined a top speed of between 25 @.@ 8 – 26 @.@ 2 kn ( 29 @.@ 7 – 30 @.@ 2 mph ; 47 @.@ 8 – 48 @.@ 5 km / h ) was possible if the power plant from North Carolina could be reduced in size enough to fit in the tighter hull of South Dakota . In order to do so the boilers were positioned directly above the turbines in the same arrangement to have been used in the 1916 Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers . The boilers were then rearranged several times so they were staggered with the turbines , eventually ending directly alongside the turbines . The propulsion system was arranged as close together as possible , and the evaporators and distilling equipment were placed in the machinery rooms . This provided enough additional space behind the armored belt to add a second plotting room . 
 By this time , the design process had established that the hull was to be 666 ft long ( 203 m ) and incorporate the single internal sloped armor belt . However , in case of rejection by the General Board , naval architects produced a series of alternatives . Among these were longer , faster ships armed with 14 @-@ inch guns in triple turrets , slower ships with 14 @-@ inch guns in quadruple turrets , improved versions of the North Carolina class , and a ship of 27 knots armed with nine 16 @-@ in guns in a similar configuration to the North Carolinas . 
 Arguments arose , frequently over the issue of speed ; the Commander in Chief refused to allow the new ship to drop below 25 kn ( 29 mph ; 46 km / h ) , the Battle Force argued at least 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) was necessary to maintain homogeneity in the line of battle , and the president of the War College maintained a fast ship was optimal , but the navy would continue to operate the older 21 kn ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) battleships until the 1950s and so a higher speed was not strictly necessary — though it would mean the class would be too slow to act as escorts for fast carrier task forces . The primary 666 @-@ ft design was the only plan that could meet the specified requirements for speed , protection , and the nine 16 @-@ inch gun . By late 1937 a proposed design was agreed on , requiring only small modifications to save weight and increase the fields of fire . <unk> for the crew , even the staterooms for senior officers , along with mess halls were reduced in size , and ventilation ports were completely removed ; the ship would have to use artificial air circulation . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 = = = = Main battery = = = = 
 The South Dakota class battleships carried a main battery of nine 16 @-@ in ( 406 mm ) / 45 caliber Mark 6 guns in three three @-@ gun turrets . Two of these turrets were placed in a superfiring pair forward ; the third turret was mounted aft of the main superstructure . These guns fired a 2 @,@ 700 lb ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) Mark 8 armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) shell at a rate of two per minute per gun . The guns could either use a full propellant charge of 535 lb ( 243 kg ) , a reduced charge of 295 lb ( 134 kg ) , or a reduced flashless charge of 315 lb ( 143 kg ) . This provided a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 feet per second ( 700 meters per second ) for the AP shell with the full propellant charge , while the reduced version provided a correspondingly lower muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 800 ft / s ( 549 m / s ) . 130 shells were stowed for each gun , which came to a total of 1 @,@ 170 . The guns in all three turrets could elevate to 45 degrees , but only I and III turrets could depress to − 2 degrees ; the superfiring II turret was not able to depress . This enabled a maximum range of 36 @,@ 900 yards or 18 @.@ 2 nmi ( 20 @.@ 9 mi ; 33 @.@ 7 km ) with the Mark 8 projectile . The turrets were able to train 150 degrees in both directions from the centerline , which enabled a wide arc of fire . The guns could be elevated or depressed at a rate of 12 degrees per second , and the turrets could train at 4 degrees per second . 
 = = = = Secondary battery = = = = 
 South Dakota was built as a fleet flagship , with an extra deck on her conning tower for extra command space , so her secondary battery had sixteen 5 @-@ in ( 127 mm ) / 38 caliber Mark 12 guns in eight Mark 28 Mod 0 twin DP mounts , four on either side of the superstructure . This was two turrets fewer than her sister ships who had ten twin DP mounts of twenty guns , five on either side of the ship . These turrets weighed 156 @,@ 295 lb ( 70 @,@ 894 kg ) and could depress their guns to − 15 degrees and elevate them to 85 degrees . The guns fired a variety of different projectiles , including anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) , illumination , and white phosphorus ( WP ) shells , at a rate of fire of 15 to 22 rounds per minute . The AA shells were 20 @.@ 75 in long ( 52 @.@ 7 cm ) and weighed between 54 and 55 lb ( 24 – 25 kg ) , depending on the variant . The illumination and white phosphorus shells were slightly smaller , at 20 in ( 50 @.@ 8 cm ) long ; the illumination rounds weighed 54 @.@ 4 lb ( 24 @.@ 7 kg ) and the WP shells were 53 lb ( 24 kg ) . 
 The guns used three different charges , depending on the situation : a full charge , a full flashless charge , and a reduced charge . The standard full charge weighed 15 @.@ 2 – 15 @.@ 5 lb ( 6 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 0 kg ) , the flashless charge was slightly heavier at 16 lb ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) , and the reduced charge was significantly smaller , at 3 @.@ 6 lb ( 1 @.@ 6 kg ) . Both full charges provided a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 790 m / s ) in new guns , but as continued fire wore down the barrels , muzzle velocity degraded slightly , to 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) . The reduced charge 's muzzle velocity was correspondingly lower , at 1 @,@ 200 ft / s ( 370 m / s ) . Each gun was supplied with 450 rounds , and was expected to fire 4 @,@ 600 shells before it was worn enough to warrant replacement . At the maximum effective elevation to engage surface targets , 45 degrees , the guns could hit targets up to 17 @,@ 392 yards ( 15 @,@ 903 m ) away . The maximum height at which aircraft could be engaged was 37 @,@ 200 feet ( 11 @,@ 900 m ) . 
 = = = = Anti @-@ aircraft battery = = = = 
 The ships had a variety of anti @-@ aircraft weapons , and the weapons mounted changed over time . Initially , the ships were designed to mount twelve .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) and twelve 1 @.@ 1 in ( 27 @.@ 9 mm ) machine guns . By March 1942 , when South Dakota was completed , the anti @-@ aircraft battery was modified to eight .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) and twenty @-@ eight 1 @.@ 1 in ( 27 @.@ 9 mm ) machine guns and sixteen 20mm Oerlikon autocannon . In September of that year , the .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) guns were removed and the number of 1 @.@ 1 in ( 27 @.@ 9 mm ) guns reduced to 20 . In their place , the 20mm guns were increased to 16 weapons , and 16 Bofors 40mm guns were added , in four quadruple mounts . 
 In February 1943 , the 1 @.@ 1 in ( 27 @.@ 9 mm ) guns and one 20mm gun were replaced with an additional 52 40mm guns , for a total of 68 . In December 1944 , the battery was again upgraded , with 72 20mm and 72 Bofors . In March 1945 , the battery was modified for the last time : five 20mm were added and four 40mm removed . This provided the maximum number of anti @-@ aircraft guns , at 145 guns . The other three ships followed a similar pattern of upgrades to the anti @-@ aircraft armament . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The South Dakota 's internal armor belt was inclined 19 ° from the vertical , and was 12 @.@ 2 inches ( 310 mm ) thick , with 7 / 8 inch ( 22 mm ) thick STS plates behind the belt . This was equal to 17 @.@ 3 inches ( 440 mm ) of vertical belt armor , and was proof against the 2 @,@ 240 lb projectile fired by the 16 @-@ inch 45 cal. guns of the Colorado @-@ class from a distance of 17 @,@ 700 to 30 @,@ 900 yd ( 16 @.@ 2 to 28 @.@ 3 km ) . The immune zone against the super @-@ heavy 16 @-@ inch shells fired by the South Dakotas themselves was smaller ; the armor was effective only at ranges between 20 @,@ 500 and 26 @,@ 400 yd ( 18 @.@ 7 and 24 @.@ 1 km ) . 
 The side armor extended to the bottom of the ship , and tapered from its maximum thickness of 12 @.@ 2 inches down to 1 inch at the lowest portion . This feature was chosen to protect against penetration of heavy @-@ caliber gun projectiles that managed to hit the ship below the waterline . The underwater armor included four torpedo bulkheads , a multi @-@ layered system designed to absorb the energy from an underwater explosion equivalent to 700 pounds of TNT ( 1 @.@ 3 GJ ) . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = South Dakota = = = 
 South Dakota 's keel was laid on 5 July 1939 by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 7 June 1941 and commissioned on 20 March 1942 . She went on a shakedown cruise in June after her fitting out was complete . In August – September , the battleship voyaged from the Atlantic to the Pacific through the Panama Canal ; she struck a coral reef soon after arriving in the Tonga Islands and had to sail to the Pearl Harbor Navy Yard for repairs , which took about a month . South Dakota was then assigned to escort the aircraft carrier Enterprise as part of Task Force ( TF ) 16 ; joined by TF 17 soon after , the combined fleet — now known as TF 61 — was ordered to " make a sweep of the Santa Cruz Islands and then move southwest to block any Japanese forces approaching Guadalcanal . " This led to the Battle of Santa Cruz , where in escorting Enterprise , South Dakota was credited with shooting down 26 Japanese planes . The battleship was hit once by a 500 lb ( 230 kg ) <unk> on Turret I during the action . 
 On 30 October , South Dakota and the destroyer Mahan collided while the latter was investigating a sonar contact with a submarine . Both ships were able to continue to Noumea , where Vestal repaired them . The battleship joined the North Carolina @-@ class battleship Washington and four destroyers to form TF 64 . The ships intercepted a Japanese bombardment force on the night of 14 – 15 November , and , in a battle now known as the Second Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , they damaged the cruisers Takao and Atago in addition to forcing the battleship Kirishima and destroyer Ayanami to be scuttled . During the battle , a power failure incapacitated South Dakota and she received considerable topside damage — 42 shells hit the ship , knocking out radio communications and three fire control radars along with destroying the main radar set . 
 Partial repairs courtesy of Prometheus ' crew allowed South Dakota to sail for New York ; after the ship 's arrival on 18 December 1942 , she was given an overhaul and the battle damage was completely fixed . Departing the yard on 25 February 1943 , South Dakota underwent sea trials before escorting Ranger in North Atlantic operations until mid @-@ April , when she joined the British Home Fleet . This deployment lasted until 1 August ; the ship then traveled to Norfolk and then the Pacific , arriving at Efate on 14 September . Moving to Fiji on 7 November , she joined Battleship Divisions 8 and 9 , which supported Allied forces in the Battle of Tarawa , among other battles . 
 Along with five other battleships , she fired upon Nauru Island on 6 December . 29 January 1944 saw the ship bombard Roi @-@ Namur before she moved away to protect the carriers assigned to provide air support for multiple amphibious assaults on islands within Kwajalein Atoll . South Dakota provided anti @-@ aircraft support for various fast carrier task forces until June , when she bombarded Saipan and Tinian . The battleship took part in the so @-@ called " Marianas Turkey Shoot " , where more than 300 attacking Japanese aircraft were shot down , though she was hit by a 500 @-@ pound bomb on the main deck that killed 24 and wounded 27 . 
 For the rest of World War II , South Dakota operated in the Pacific mostly as a carrier escort ; the only times she did not was when she received an overhaul at the Puget Sound Navy Yard from July – August 1944 , when five tanks of gunpowder for the 16 @-@ inch guns exploded on 6 May ( putting the ship out of action until 1 June ) , and when she bombarded Okinawa ( 24 March 19 April ) , the Kamaishi Steel Works on Honshu ( 14 July and 9 August ) , and Hamamatsu on Honshū ( 29 – 30 July ) . South Dakota was present at the Surrender of Japan aboard Missouri on 2 September 1945 ; she left Tokyo Bay on 20 September for the west coast of the United States . The battleship set sail for Philadelphia on 3 January 1946 to be overhauled ; she was designated as part of the Atlantic Reserve Fleet there in June . Decommissioned on 31 January 1947 , South Dakota remained idle until she was stricken from the Naval Register on 1 June 1962 and sold for scrap to the Lipsett Division of Luria Brothers and Company , Inc. on 25 October . 
 The ship is memorialized at Sioux Falls , South Dakota , where memorabilia and parts of the battleship are displayed within an outline of the main deck . A screw from South Dakota is on display outside the U.S. Navy Museum in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Indiana = = = 
 Indiana 's keel was laid on 20 September 1939 at the Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company in Newport News , Virginia . She was launched on 21 November 1941 ; during the fitting out process , the former battleship Kearsarge , which had been rebuilt as a crane ship , lowered the 16 @-@ inch guns into their turret mountings . Indiana was commissioned into the fleet on 30 April 1942 . After shakedown operations , she was sent directly to the Solomon Islands ; Indiana arrived off Guadalcanal on 9 November 1942 and replaced her sister South Dakota , which was in need of repairs . Indiana 's operations off Guadalcanal consisted primarily of shore bombardment in support of the Marines fighting on the island . 
 In November 1943 , Indiana took part in the invasion of Tarawa , alongside her sister South Dakota . During this operation , Indiana shot down her first aircraft . The ship also participated in the invasion of the Marshall Islands ; on 1 February 1944 , the battleship Washington collided with Indiana on her starboard side . 13 of the voids between the torpedo protection system and 13 fuel tanks were flooded , and the longitudinal bulkheads were severely damaged . The starboard outboard propeller was damaged , along with the shaft upon which it was mounted . Two quad @-@ mount 40 mm guns and 9 20 mm guns were destroyed , along with two of the mounts for the 20 mm guns . Indiana 's starboard catapult was torn from the ship , along with the Kingfisher float plane that had been sitting on it . The ship suffered a list to starboard , which was corrected by flooding compartments on the port side . Indiana sailed to Majuro Lagoon to be repaired enough to make the voyage back to Pearl Harbor ; the resulting work was the largest single repair handled at Pearl Harbor other than the battleships damaged during the attack that started the war . 
 After Indiana returned to active duty , she participated in the invasion of Hollandia in western New Guinea . The ship then returned to the central Pacific and bombarded Truk , and subsequently took part in operations off the Marianas Islands . On 19 June 1944 a Japanese torpedo bomber attempted to attack the ship , but Indiana 's anti @-@ aircraft gunners managed to destroy both the aircraft and the torpedo it had dropped , with no damage to the ship . Shortly thereafter , a second Japanese plane was shot down , but a third managed to crash into the ship . The aircraft disintegrated upon striking the side armor plates and scattered pieces of the plane across the stern . Five men were injured , but the ship suffered only very slight damage . 
 Indiana returned to Puget Sound naval yard for a needed overhaul . The work lasted until January 1945 ; the ship returned to active duty on the 24th of that month . Indiana took part in the bombardment of Iwo Jima , as well as in attacks on the Japanese home islands . Following the shore bombardments , Indiana joined the task force that had assembled to invade Okinawa ; the ship provided ground support fire as well as anti @-@ aircraft defense against the increasing number of Kamikazes that were attacking the invasion fleet . Indiana continued in these duties until the end of the war in August 1945 . 
 In 1947 , Indiana was put into the reserve fleet at Puget Sound . She was finally struck from the Navy List on 1 June 1962 , and sold for scrapping on 6 September 1963 for $ 418 @,@ 387 . The ship breaking was finished in 1964 . The battleship 's mast was given to Indiana University at Bloomington , and her anchor is on display in Fort Wayne . 
 = = = Massachusetts = = = 
 Massachusetts , the third ship of the class , was laid down on 20 July 1939 at the Fore River Shipyard of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation in Quincy , Massachusetts . She was launched on 23 September 1941 and commissioned on 12 May 1942 . After a shakedown cruise , the battleship departed Casco Bay , Maine on 24 October 1942 to support the Allied invasion of Africa , Operation Torch , as flagship of the Western Naval Task Force . Along with the heavy cruisers Tuscaloosa and Wichita and four destroyers , Massachusetts sailed to Casablanca on the evening of 7 November . The incomplete French battleship Jean Bart , missing one of her quadruple 380 mm / 45 caliber gun turrets , was in the harbor , having traveled there in 1940 to escape the German invasion of France . American planes were fired upon and two French submarines were spotted leaving the harbor ; at 07 : 03 the coastal battery at El Hank opened fire on Massachusetts . It was mistakenly assumed that the gunfire had come from Jean Bart , so the order to neutralize the battleship was given . Massachusetts hit Jean Bart five times , and in the process disabled the one active main battery turret . Massachusetts also severely damaged the destroyer Milan , which subsequently had to be beached . Four merchant ships and a floating crane were also destroyed . 
 During this engagement , seven French destroyers managed to escape the harbor and attempted to make their way to the invasion beaches . At 08 : 55 , Massachusetts increased speed in order to attack the destroyers . The battery at El Hank continued to fire on the ship , and at 10 : 00 , one of the 7 @.@ 6 @-@ inch shells from the coastal battery struck her on the port side between the two forward main gun turrets . The shell penetrated the deck armor and started a small fire that was quickly extinguished . At this time , the French cruiser Primauguet and another two destroyers left the port . Massachusetts and Tuscaloosa sank the destroyer Fougueux , and at 10 : 05 a 16 @-@ inch shell from Massachusetts struck the destroyer Milan , and put her out of action . <unk> was forced to retire after she was hit by a 16 @-@ inch shell from Massachusetts and a number of smaller caliber shells from the American cruisers Brooklyn and Augusta . During the operations off the North African coast on 8 November , Massachusetts fired 786 main battery shells and 221 rounds from her 5 @-@ inch guns . 
 Following her successful operations off North Africa , Massachusetts was taken in for an overhaul in the Boston Navy Yard . After the refitting , the ship sailed for the Pacific theater , and arrived in Nouméa on 4 March . The battleship supported operations in the South Pacific over the next months , including guarding convoy lanes , escorting aircraft carriers , and bombarding Japanese positions on various islands , including Nauru ( 8 December 1943 ) and Kwajalein ( 30 January 1944 ) . Returning to carrier protection after the latter bombardment , Massachusetts provided anti @-@ aircraft defense while Allied air attacks were sent against Saipan , Tinian and Guam ; she also supported later invasions of the Caroline Islands and Hollandia . After bombarding Ponape Island on 1 May , the ship set course for the Puget Sound Navy Yard for an overhaul and to have her gun barrels relined , as they had worn out . 
 Back on active duty , Massachusetts departed Pearl Harbor on 1 August . Joining Task Force 38 , she supported forces landing around Leyte Gulf , and provided cover for task groups attacking Japanese warships in the Battle for Leyte Gulf , Okinawa , and Formosa . Moving to the Philippines , the battleship protected Allied ships and troops during the Battle of Mindoro and was part of a force that struck Manila . Massachusetts , along with the rest of TF 38 , ran into Typhoon Cobra , which had winds of around 120 kn ( 140 mph ; 220 km / h ) . She continued to operate with TF 38 from 30 December and 23 January 1945 ; the ships struck Formosa and Okinawa , provided cover for an amphibious assault on Lingayen , and made forays into the South China Sea to attack Japanese shipping . 
 In February – early March 1945 , Massachusetts provided anti @-@ aircraft cover for airborne raids on Honshū , Iwo Jima and Kyushu . On 24 March , the ship bombarded Okinawa ; for the remainder of that month and a majority of April , Massachusetts once again provided anti @-@ aircraft defense , this time for Allied ships massed near Okinawa . On 5 June , she suffered through another typhoon , Louise , this one with 100 kn ( 120 mph ; 190 km / h ) winds . Five days later , she bombarded Minamidaitō . 1 July saw the Third Fleet and Massachusetts set course for Japan ; the battleship protected carriers while they launched raids on Tokyo , then moved closer to land to hit targets with gunfire . Massachusetts attacked Japan 's second largest iron and steel center , Kamaishi on Honshū , on 14 July ; Hamamatsu on 28 July ; and Kamaishi on 9 August . The latter bombardment was probably the last 16 @-@ inch shell fired during World War II . 
 With the war over , Massachusetts voyaged to the Puget Sound Navy Yard once more for an overhaul ; once completed , she left on 28 January 1946 and operated off the California coast before setting course for Hampton Roads via the Panama Canal . After she arrived on 22 April , Massachusetts was decommissioned on 27 March 1947 and entered the Atlantic Reserve Fleet ; she was struck from the Naval Register on 1 June 1962 , but not scrapped . Instead , the battleship was given to the Massachusetts Memorial Committee on 8 June 1965 to become a museum ship in Fall River , Massachusetts ; she has been located in " Battleship Cove " ever since . 
