 = = = Alabama = = = 
 Construction work on Alabama , the fourth and final member of the South Dakota class , began on 1 February 1940 in the Norfolk Navy Yard with the keel laying . She was launched on 16 February 1942 and commissioned into service six months later , on 16 August . Alabama sailed on her shakedown cruise from the Chesapeake Bay on 11 November , which culminated in Casco Bay , Maine . Minor repairs were carried out in Norfolk , after which the big ship returned to Casco Bay to conduct training maneuvers with her sister , South Dakota . Beginning in March 1943 , Alabama was assigned to the British Home Fleet , and tasked with convoy escort duties on the route to the Soviet Union . She was relieved of these duties in July so that she could return to Norfolk for a brief overhaul in August . 
 Later in August , Alabama departed for the Pacific theater ; the ship was assigned to the US Third Fleet during the amphibious operations in the Gilbert islands , particularly Kwajalein in early 1944 . During the night of 21 February 1944 , Alabama 's 5 @-@ inch guns were firing upon Japanese aircraft in the area . The ship turned in the direction of the Japanese aircraft in order to better engage them , but the rearmost turret was masked behind the amidships mount . The gunner in the rearmost turret accidentally overrode the safety mechanism that prevented the gun from firing in that circumstance , and when the gun was fired , it hit the 5 @-@ inch turret in front of it . Five men were killed and 11 wounded in the incident ; an investigation revealed that the override switch was faulty and prone to accidental operation . 
 Alabama shot down her first Japanese aircraft the following month , in March 1944 . The ship conducted anti @-@ aircraft defense operations during the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 . After that , she joined other battleships that were providing gunfire support to the ground troops in the Marianas islands . She was assigned to Task Force 34 during the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 . In early 1945 , Alabama returned for repair and refit work at the Puget Sound naval yard ; the work consisted primarily of improvements to her guns and radar equipment . By early May the ship returned to fleet operations . She was tasked with providing anti @-@ aircraft support to the fast carrier groups that were launching air strikes on the Japanese main island of Kyushu . In July 1945 , she shelled a number of areas in Japan , including Kamaishi on the 14th , Hitachi on the 18th , and Hamamatsu on the 29th and 30th . These turned out to be her last offensive operations of the war . Her last duty in the Far East was to assist in the landing of occupation forces in Japan , after which she departed for the United States . 
 On 9 January 1947 , Alabama was placed into the reserve fleet in Bremerton , Washington , where she remained until 1 June 1962 , when she was removed from the Navy List . Alabama was transferred to the USS Alabama Battleship Commission , which had acquired the ship in order to turn her into a memorial . She was towed out of Bremerton on 2 July 1964 , to Mobile , Alabama , where she currently resides as a museum ship , the main attraction of Battleship Memorial Park . 
 = = = Conversion proposal = = = 
 On 26 July 1954 , a conversion proposal for the South Dakota class ships was ordered by the Chairman of the Ship Characteristics Board . The request was made for the ships ' speed to be increased to at least 31 knots . To do so , the design staff decided to remove the after turret and use the weight and space gained to install either a set of improved steam turbines or a set of gas turbines . Either system would have to produce at least 256 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 190 MW ) — the minimum requirement to achieve 31 knots on the South Dakota hull . Unfortunately , this would have necessitated alterations to the hull form , particularly in the rear of the ship . Larger propellers were also required , and all four shafts would have had to have been completely rebuilt to accommodate the changes . Estimates for the project ran as high as $ 40 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 per ship , and this did not include the cost of reactivating the ship and upgrades to its electrical and combat systems . As a result , the conversion program was halted . 
 = High Street ( IND Eighth Avenue Line ) = 
 High Street , also labeled as High Street – Brooklyn Bridge , and also referred to as " Brooklyn Bridge Plaza " and " Cranberry Street " , is a station on the IND Eighth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway . It is located at Cadman Plaza East near Red Cross Place and the Brooklyn Bridge approach in Brooklyn Heights , Brooklyn . Its name comes from older street names ; its original location was at the intersection of High Street and Washington Street . It is served by the A train at all times and the C train at all times except late nights . 
 = = History = = 
 The High Street station , which is alternatively referred to as " Brooklyn Bridge Plaza " and " Cranberry Street " , was part of a three @-@ stop extension of the IND Eighth Avenue Line from Chambers Street in Lower Manhattan to Jay Street – Borough Hall in Downtown Brooklyn . Construction of the extension began in June 1928 . Due to the station 's proximity to the Cranberry Street Tunnel under the East River , instead of typical cut @-@ and @-@ cover ( or open @-@ cut ) construction methods , the station site was constructed 70 feet ( 21 m ) below the street ( the tunnel is 90 feet ( 27 m ) below the surface at its lowest point ) using mining techniques . The station was built between the eastern ends of the cast @-@ iron river tubes reinforced with cement , leading to its tubular design . The depth of the station meant that few buildings in the area would be disturbed or demolished , except for two structures along Cranberry Street between Henry Street and Old Fulton Street . 
 The extension opened to Jay Street on February 1 , 1933 , but the High Street station remained closed for an additional five months . The trains ran through the station without stopping , because the escalators to the street had not been completed due to lack of funding . That month , the contract for four escalators in the station was awarded to Otis Elevator Company . The station opened on June 24 , 1933 . 
 The station was located below the sites of the Sands Street terminal for BMT elevated trains , some of which traveled over the Brooklyn Bridge . The BMT station closed in 1944 and was replaced by Cadman Plaza . Old Fulton Street ( now Cadman Plaza West ) and Cranberry Street was also the site of the printing shop where Walt Whitman 's Leaves of Grass was first published in 1855 . The area is now the site of the Whitman Close Apartments . 
 The High Street station was the site of an attempted robbery of subway revenue on June 18 , 1954 , in which the unarmed perpetrator was fatally shot by one of the two armed transit employees collecting fares and already @-@ used transfer slips from token booths . 
 In the 1970s , the escalators at the eastern end of the station to Adams Street were replaced . 
 = = Station layout = = 
 This underground station has two tracks and one island platform . It is the northernmost Brooklyn station for the A and C trains . To the north , the IND Eighth Avenue Line enters the Cranberry Street Tunnel and passes under the East River into Manhattan . As a result , the station was built in a tube design , and built with escalators between the upper fare control level and the lower mezzanine level to easier traverse the 70 foot ( 21 m ) drop below street level . The tile band at this station is a small " High " printed on the walls in a dark purple color scheme . 
 There are exits at both ends to the full length mezzanine along with evidence of removed center exits ; since this station was built , the area now known as Cadman Plaza was completely rebuilt . Cadman Plaza East , the short one @-@ block street outside the Red Cross Place exit , was previously called Washington Street ; the Washington Street moniker still applies to the road north of Prospect Street . High Street is not directly accessible from the station , as the short one @-@ block street is interrupted by a parking lot . However , Red Cross Place , which was once a part of High Street , is directly accessible . 
 The geographic western exit leads to Cadman Plaza West / Old Fulton Street ( formerly Fulton Street , as indicated on wall mosaic signs ) in Brooklyn Heights , a few hundred feet south of Cadman Plaza West 's intersection with <unk> Street . This was the original exit to the station . The eastern exits lead to Adams Street , on the border of Brooklyn Heights , <unk> and Downtown Brooklyn , adjacent to the central courthouse for the Federal Eastern District of New York . These exits were opened following an additional delay to complete the escalators . Adams Street was widened from 100 feet to 160 feet in the 1950s to accommodate new ramps to the Brooklyn Bridge , and now carries carries the secondary name " Brooklyn Bridge Boulevard " . The current exit staircases lead to ether side of Adams Street , acting as a pedestrian underpass . There are painted @-@ over mosaics pointing to former exits at Washington Street ( now Cadman Plaza East ) . 
 East ( railroad south ) of the station , the line curves south onto Jay Street and has three track switches with the IND Sixth Avenue Line . A power station for the line is located on the west side of Jay Street just north of Concord Street . A second substation is located at Red Cross Place and Cadman Plaza East . 
 = = Ridership = = 
 In 2015 , the station had 2 @,@ 656 @,@ 705 boardings , making it the 188th most used station in the 422 @-@ station system . This amounted to an average of 8 @,@ 479 passengers per weekday . In 2014 , the station had an average of 8 @,@ 870 daily weekday boardings , up from 5 @,@ 410 daily boardings in 2005 ; this represented a 64 % ridership increase over nine years . The station is the 26th busiest of all the stations served by the A / C routes . 
 = Bees and toxic chemicals = 
 Bees can suffer serious effects from toxic chemicals in their environments . These include various synthetic chemicals , such as insecticides and fertilizers , as well as a variety of naturally occurring chemicals from plants , such as ethanol resulting from the fermentation of organic material . Bee intoxication can result from exposure to ethanol from fermented nectar , ripe fruits , and manmade and natural chemicals in the environment . 
 The effects of alcohol on bees are sufficiently similar to the effects of alcohol on humans that honey bees have been used as models of human ethanol intoxication . However , the metabolism of bees and humans is sufficiently different that bees can safely collect <unk> from plants that contain compounds toxic to humans . The honey produced by bees from these toxic <unk> can be poisonous if consumed by humans . Many humans have eaten toxic honey and become seriously ill as a result . 
 Natural processes can also introduce toxic substances into nontoxic honey produced from nontoxic nectar . Microorganisms in honey can convert some of the sugars in honey to ethanol . This process of ethanol fermentation is intentionally harnessed to produce the alcoholic beverage called mead from fermented honey . 
 = = Ethanol = = 
 = = = Effects of intoxication = = = 
 The introduction of certain chemical substances — such as ethanol or pesticides or defensive toxic biochemicals produced by plants — to a bee 's environment can cause the bee to display abnormal or unusual behavior and disorientation . In sufficient quantities , such chemicals can poison and even kill the bee . The effects of alcohol on bees have long been recognized . For example , John Cumming described the effect in an 1864 publication on beekeeping . 
 When bees become intoxicated from ethanol consumption or poisoned with other chemicals , their balance is affected , and they are wobbly when they walk . Charles Abramson 's group at Oklahoma State University has put inebriated bees on running wheels , where they exhibit locomotion difficulties . They also put honey bees in shuttle @-@ boxes that used a stimulus to encourage the bees to move , and found that they were less mobile as they became more intoxicated . 
 A <unk> bee is more likely to stick out its tongue , or proboscis . Inebriated bees spend more time flying . If a bee is sufficiently intoxicated , it will just lie on its back and wiggle its legs . Inebriated bees typically have many more flying accidents as well . Some bees that consume ethanol become too inebriated to find their way back to the hive , and will die as a result . <unk> et al . ( 2006 ) found that alcohol consumption by honeybees disrupts foraging and social behaviors , and has some similar effects to poisoning with insecticides . Some bees become more aggressive after consuming alcohol . 
 Exposure to alcohol can have a prolonged effect on bees , lasting as long as 48 hours . This phenomenon is also observed in fruit flies and is connected to the neurotransmitter octopamine in fruit flies , which is also present in bees . 
 = = = Bees as ethanol inebriation models = = = 
 In 1999 , research by David Sandeman led to the realization that bee inebriation models are potentially valuable for understanding vertebrate and even human ethanol intoxication : 
 " Advances over the past three decades in our understanding of nervous systems are impressive and come from a multifaceted approach to the study of both vertebrate and invertebrate animals . An almost unexpected by @-@ product of the parallel investigation of vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems that is explored in this article is the emergent view of an intricate web of evolutionary homology and convergence exhibited in the structure and function of the nervous systems of these two large , paraphyletic groups of animals . " 
 The behavior of honey bees intoxicated by ethanol is being studied by scientists at The Ohio State University , Oklahoma State University , University of Ljubljana in Slovenia , and other sites as a potential model of the effects of alcohol on humans . At the Oklahoma State University , for example , Abramson 's research found significant correlations between the reactions of bees and other vertebrates to ethanol exposure : 
 " The purpose of this experiment was to test the feasibility of creating an animal model of ethanol consumption using social insects .... The experiments on consumption , locomotion , and learning suggest that exposure to ethanol influences behavior of honey bees similarly to that observed in experiments with analogous vertebrates . " 
 It has thus been found that " the honey bee nervous system is similar to that of vertebrates " . These similarities are pronounced enough to even make it possible to derive information on the functioning of human brains from how bees react to certain chemicals . Julie Mustard , a researcher at Ohio State , explained that : 
 " On the molecular level , the brains of honey bees and humans work the same . Knowing how chronic alcohol use affects genes and proteins in the honey bee brain may help us eventually understand how alcoholism affects memory and behavior in humans , as well as the molecular basis of addiction . " 
 The evaluation of a bee model for ethanol <unk> of vertebrates has just begun , but appears to be promising . The bees are fed ethanol solutions and their behavior observed . Researchers place the bees in tiny harnesses , and feed them varying concentrations of alcohol introduced into sugar solutions . Tests of locomotion , foraging , social interaction and aggressiveness are performed . Mustard has noted that " Alcohol affects bees and humans in similar ways — it impairs motor functioning along with learning and memory processing . " The interaction of bees with antabuse ( disulfiram , a common medication administered as a treatment for alcoholism ) has been tested as well . 
 = = Bee exposure to other toxic and <unk> chemicals = = 
 = = = Synthetic chemicals = = = 
 Bees can be severely and even fatally affected by pesticides , fertilizers , and other chemicals that man has introduced into the environment . They can appear inebriated and dizzy , and even die . This is serious because it has substantial economic consequences for agriculture . 
 This problem has been the object of growing concern . For example , researchers at the University of Hohenheim are studying how bees can be poisoned by exposure to seed disinfectants . In France , the Ministry of Agriculture commissioned an expert group , the Scientific and Technical Committee for the Multifactorial Study on Bees ( CST ) , to study the intoxicating and sometimes fatal effects of chemicals used in agriculture on bees . Researchers at the Bee Research Institute and the Department of Food Chemistry and Analysis in the Czech Republic have pondered the intoxicating effects of various chemicals used to treat winter rapeseed crops . Romania suffered a severe case of widespread bee intoxication and extensive bee mortality from deltamethrin in 2002 . The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) even has published standards for testing chemicals for bee intoxication . 
 = = = Natural compounds = = = 
 Bees and other Hymenoptera can also be substantially affected by natural compounds in the environment besides ethanol . For example , Dariusz L. <unk> of the Department of Plant Taxonomy and Nature Conservation , Gdańsk University observed wasps in Poland acting in a very sleepy ( possibly inebriated ) manner after eating nectar derived from the North American orchid <unk> . 
 <unk> and Wink ( 1993 ) published an extensive review of 63 types of plant allelochemicals ( alkaloids , terpenes , glycosides , etc . ) and their effects on bees when consumed . It was found that 39 chemical compounds repelled bees ( primarily alkaloids , coumarins , and saponins ) and three terpene compounds attracted bees . They report that 17 out of 29 allelochemicals are toxic at some levels ( especially alkaloids , saponins , cardiac glycosides and cyanogenic glycosides ) . 
 Various plants are known to have pollen which is toxic to honey bees , in some cases killing the adults ( e.g. , <unk> ) , in other cases creating a problem only when passed to the brood ( e.g. , <unk> ) . Other plants which have toxic pollen are <unk> <unk> and <unk> lagopus . Both the pollen and nectar of the California Buckeye ( <unk> californica ) are toxic to honeybees , and it is thought that other members of the Buckeye family are also . 
 = = = Bee inebriation in pollination = = = 
 Some plants reportedly rely on using intoxicating chemicals to produce inebriated bees , and use this inebriation as part of their reproductive strategy . One plant that some claim uses this mechanism is the South American bucket orchid ( <unk> sp . ) , an epiphyte . The bucket orchid attracts male euglossine bees with its scent , derived from a variety of aromatic compounds . The bees store these compounds in specialized spongy pouches inside their swollen hind legs , as they appear to use the scent ( or derivatives thereof ) in order to attract females . 
 However , the flower is constructed in such a way as to make the surface almost impossible to cling to , with smooth , downward @-@ pointing hairs ; the bees commonly slip and fall into the fluid in the bucket , and the only navigable route out is a narrow , constricting passage that either glues a " pollinium " ( a pollen sack ) on their body ( if the flower has not yet been visited ) or removes any pollinium that is there ( if the flower has already been visited ) . The passageway constricts after a bee has entered , and holds it there for a few minutes , allowing the glue to dry and securing the pollinium . It has been suggested that this process involves " inebriation " of the bees , but this effect has never been confirmed . 
 In this way , the bucket orchid passes its pollen from flower to flower . This mechanism is almost but not quite species specific , as it is possible for a few closely related bees to pollinate any given species of orchid , as long as the bees are similar in size and are attracted by the same compounds . 
 Van der Pijl and Dodson ( 1966 ) observed that bees of the genera <unk> and <unk> exhibit symptoms of inebriation after consuming nectar from the orchids <unk> violacea and <unk> rosea . The <unk> <unk> orchid was suspected by <unk> ( 1992 ) of producing pheromones like a female euglossine bee and even somewhat resembles a female euglossine bee shape , using these characteristics to spread its pollen : 
 " A hapless male bee , blind drunk with the flower 's overpowering pheromones , might well mistake a toadstool for a suitable mate , but the flower has made at least a modest attempt at recreating a <unk> gestalt . " 
 However , this seems unlikely , given that no one has ever documented that female <unk> produce pheromones ; male <unk> produce pheromones using the chemicals they collect from orchids , and these pheromones attract females , rather than the converse , as <unk> ( 2004 ) suggests . 
 = = Toxic honey = = 
 Some substances which are toxic to humans have no effect on bees . If bees obtain their nectar from certain flowers , the resulting honey can be psychoactive , or even toxic to humans , but innocuous to bees and their larvae . Poisoning from this honey is called mad honey disease . Even when honey is not produced from the nectar of toxic plants , it can still ferment to produce ethanol . Animals , such as birds , that have consumed honey fermented in the sun can be found incapable of flight or other normal movement . Sometimes honey is fermented intentionally to produce mead , an alcoholic beverage made of honey , water , and yeast . The word for " drunk " in classical Greek is even translated as " honey @-@ intoxicated " and indeed the shared Indo @-@ European antiquity of such a conception is enshrined in the names of at least two ( <unk> ) goddesses of personified intoxication : the Irish Medb ( see also Maeve ( Irish name ) ) and the Indian Madhavi of the Mahabharata ( - see page Yayati ) , cognate with the English word mead and the Russian word for bear <unk> ( - <unk> - literally ' honey @-@ eater ' ) . 
 Morphine @-@ containing honey has been reported in areas where opium poppy cultivation is widespread . 
 Accidental intoxication of humans by mad honey has been well documented by several Classical authors , notably Xenophon , while the deliberate use of such honey as a medicine and intoxicant ( even hallucinogen ) is still practiced by the Gurung tribe of Nepal , who have a long tradition of hazardous cliff @-@ climbing to wrest the precious commodity from the nests of Apis <unk> <unk> , the giant Himalayan honeybee . The honey thus collected by the Gurung owes its <unk> properties to the nectar which the giant bees gather from a deep red @-@ flowered species of Rhododendron , which , in turn , owes its toxicity to the compound <unk> , widespread in the plant family Ericaceae , to which the genus Rhododendron belongs . 
 = Transformers : Dark of the Moon = 
 Transformers : Dark of the Moon is a 2011 American science fiction action film directed by Michael Bay and based on the Transformers toy line . First released on June 23 , 2011 , it is the third installment of the live @-@ action Transformers film series and the sequel to 2009 's Revenge of the Fallen . The film 's story is set three years after the events of the 2009 film , and follows the warring Autobots and Decepticons as they battle to possess powerful technology from their homeworld that had crashed on Earth 's moon . 
 The film stars Shia LaBeouf , Josh Duhamel , John Turturro , Tyrese Gibson , Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley , Patrick Dempsey , Kevin Dunn , Julie White , John Malkovich and Frances McDormand . The script was written by Ehren Kruger , who also collaborated on the narrative of Revenge of the Fallen . Dark of the Moon employed both regular 35mm film cameras and specially @-@ developed 3 @-@ D cameras , with filming locations in Chicago , Florida , Indiana , Milwaukee , Moscow , and Washington , D.C .. The film was rendered specifically for 3 @-@ D , and the visual effects involved more complex robots which took longer to render . 
 In May 2011 , it was announced that Paramount would move Transformers : Dark of the Moon 's release date of July 1 to June 29 in order to monitor an early response to footage . Exclusive early premieres in select 3 @-@ D and IMAX theaters took place June 28 , 2011 , one night before worldwide release in 2 @-@ D and 3 @-@ D ( including IMAX 3D ) formats — each featuring Dolby Surround 7 @.@ 1 sound . 
 Critical reception of the film was mixed with several critics calling it better than Revenge of the Fallen and praising the film 's visuals , Steve Jablonsky 's musical score , and 3 @-@ D action sequences , while others criticizing its writing , acting , and length . But despite the reviews , Dark of the Moon grossed US $ 1 @.@ 12 billion worldwide , and is currently the 13th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time , the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 ( behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) , the highest @-@ grossing film in the Transformers series , and the 10th film to gross over $ 1 billion . Like the 2007 film , it was nominated for Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Visual Effects at the 84th Academy Awards . A sequel , Transformers : Age of Extinction was released on June 27 , 2014 . A fifth film Transformers : The Last Knight is set to be released in 2017 . A sixth film serving as a Bumblebee spin @-@ off is scheduled for a 2018 release . A seventh film , serving as the sixth main entry Transformers 6 is scheduled for a 2019 release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1961 , the Ark , a Cybertronian spacecraft carrying an invention capable of ending the war between the benevolent Autobots and the malevolent Decepticons , crash lands on the dark side of Earth 's Moon . The crash is detected on Earth by NASA , and President John F. Kennedy authorizes a mission to put a man on the Moon as a cover for investigating the craft . In 1969 , the crew of Apollo 11 lands on the Moon . 
 In the present , the Autobots assist the United States military in preventing conflicts around the globe . During a mission to Chernobyl to investigate suspected alien technology , Optimus Prime finds a fuel cell from the Ark , discovering that it had survived its journey from Cybertron . The Autobots are attacked by Shockwave , who manages to escape . After learning of the top @-@ secret mission to the Moon , the Autobots travel there to explore the Ark . They discover a comatose Sentinel Prime – Optimus ' predecessor as leader of the Autobots – and the Pillars he created as a means of establishing a Space Bridge between two points to teleport matter . After returning to Earth , Optimus uses the energy of his Matrix of Leadership to revive Sentinel Prime . 
 Meanwhile , Sam Witwicky is frustrated that he is unable to work with the Autobots or find a job . He also becomes envious of the close relationship between his new girlfriend , Carly Spencer , and her boss Dylan Gould . After finding work , Sam is provided information by his eccentric co @-@ worker Jerry Wang about the Ark , before Jerry is assassinated by the Decepticon Laserbeak . Sam contacts the now @-@ independently wealthy Seymour Simmons , and together they realize that the Decepticons and their leader , Megatron , are murdering people connected to the American and Russian space missions to the Ark . They locate two surviving Russian cosmonauts , who reveal satellite photos of hundreds of Pillars being stockpiled on the Moon . Sam realizes that the Decepticons raided the Ark long before the Autobots ' mission and intentionally left Sentinel and five Pillars behind to lure the Autobots into a trap – Sentinel being the key to activating the Pillars and the Decepticons lacking the means to revive him . The Autobots rush to return Sentinel to their base for protection but Sentinel betrays them and kills the Autobot Ironhide , revealing he had made a deal with Megatron to ensure the survival of the Cybertronian race . 
 Sentinel uses the Pillars to transport hundreds of concealed Decepticons from the Moon to Earth . Carly is captured by Gould , who is revealed to be in the service of the Decepticons . The Autobots are exiled from Earth at the demand of the Decepticons to avoid war , but as their ship leaves Earth it is destroyed by Megatron 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Starscream , seemingly killing the Autobots . The Decepticons , led by Megatron and Sentinel , seize Chicago as their agents place Pillars around the world . Gould reveals to Carly that the Decepticons plan to transport their homeworld of Cybertron to the Solar System , then to enslave humanity and use Earth 's resources to rebuild their world . Sam teams with USAF Chief Robert Epps to go into Chicago to save Carly , but they are nearly killed by Decepticon forces before the Autobots intervene , revealing they concealed themselves during the launch of their ship to convince the Decepticons they were destroyed as well as to prove to the humans that the Decepticons were untrustworthy . 
 Working together , the Autobots and human soldiers manage to rescue Carly and destroy Laserbeak , Starscream , Soundwave , Barricade , and Shockwave , with Optimus using Shockwave 's arm @-@ cannon to blast the Control Pillar , disabling the Space Bridge . Sam confronts Gould as he reactivates the Control Pillar , and knocks Gould into the Pillar , electrocuting him . Bumblebee and Ratchet arrive and destroy the Control Pillar , permanently disabling the Bridge and causing the partially transported Cybertron to implode . Optimus and Sentinel fight while Carly convinces Megatron rather easily that he will be replaced as leader of the Decepticons by Sentinel . During the fight , Sentinel severs Optimus ' right arm , and is about to execute him when Megatron intervenes , viciously incapacitating Sentinel . Megatron invokes Optimus for a truce , having the desire to become the one in charge again . Optimus replies by tearing Megatron 's head off . Sentinel attempts to justify his plan but Optimus executes him in the head for betraying his own principles . With the Decepticons defeated , Carly and Sam are reunited and the Autobots accept that , with Cybertron gone for good , Earth is now their home . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Humans = = = 
 Shia LaBeouf as Sam Witwicky , a recent college graduate who is once again tied to the fate of Earth 's survival . 
 Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley as Carly Spencer , Sam 's new girlfriend . 
 Josh Duhamel as Will Lennox , the commander of the classified strike team NEST , an international task @-@ force battling Decepticons with the Autobots . 
 John Turturro as Seymour Simmons , a former agent in charge of the terminated Sector 7 unit and now a successful professional writer . 
 Tyrese Gibson as Chief Master Sergeant Rob Epps , former <unk> of the NEST strike team who now works at Kennedy Space Center . 
 Patrick Dempsey as Dylan Gould , a wealthy car collector and Carly 's employer who is secretly in cahoots with the Decepticons . 
 Kevin Dunn as Ron Witwicky , Sam 's father . 
 Julie White as Judy Witwicky , Sam 's mother . 
 John Malkovich as Bruce Brazos , Sam 's employer and boss at <unk> Systems . 
 Frances McDormand as Charlotte <unk> , the Director of National Intelligence . 
 Keiko Agena as the assistant of Charlotte <unk> . 
 Lester Speight as " Hardcore " Eddie , a former member of NEST . 
 Josh Kelly as Stone , a former member of NEST . 
 Alan Tudyk as Dutch , Simmons ' personal assistant . 
 Ken Jeong as Jerry " Deep " Wang , a paranoid software programmer at Sam 's work . 
 Glenn Morshower as General Morshower , Director of NEST , who communicates with the squad from the Pentagon . 
 Buzz Aldrin appears as himself , meeting Optimus Prime at the NEST headquarters . 
 Bill O 'Reilly appears as himself , interviewing Simmons through his television program The O 'Reilly Factor . 
 <unk> Baskin as Cosmonaut Dimitri , one of the two surviving Russian cosmonauts who gives Sam information on the Moon missions . 
 Andy Daly - mailroom worker 
 Mindy Sterling - insurance agent 
 = = = Transformers = = = 
 = = = = Autobots = = = = 
 Peter Cullen as Optimus Prime , the leader of the Autobots and keeper of the Matrix of Leadership who transforms into a blue and red 1994 Peterbilt 379 semi @-@ trailer truck . 
 Leonard Nimoy as Sentinel Prime , Optimus 's predecessor as the leader of the Autobots and later a traitor who transforms into a red and black <unk> Panther Fire Truck . 
 Bumblebee , the Autobot scout and Sam Witwicky 's guardian who transforms into a yellow and black 2011 Chevrolet Camaro . 
 Jess Harnell as Ironhide , the Autobot weapons specialist who transforms into a black 2006 GMC <unk> <unk> . 
 Robert Foxworth as Ratchet , the Autobot medical officer who transforms into a white and green 2004 search and rescue Hummer H2 ambulance . 
 James Remar as Sideswipe , the Autobot combat instructor who transforms into a silver 2009 Chevrolet Corvette Stingray . 
 Francesco Quinn as Mirage , the Autobot spy who transforms into a red 2010 Ferrari 458 Italia . This was Quinn 's final role before his death shortly after the film was released . 
 George Coe as Wheeljack , the Autobot engineer who invents gadgets , equipment , and weapons and transforms into a blue 2009 Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> . 
 Tom Kenny as Wheelie , a former Decepticon drone turned Autobot who transforms into a blue radio @-@ controlled toy monster truck . 
 Reno Wilson as Brains , Wheelie 's partner and a fellow former Decepticon drone who transforms into a Lenovo <unk> Edge laptop computer . 
 Wreckers 
 Ron <unk> as <unk> , an Autobot Wrecker who transforms into a Hendrick Motorsports # 88 AMP Energy / National Guard Chevrolet Impala . 
 John DiMaggio as <unk> , the leader of the Autobot Wreckers who transforms into a Chip Ganassi Racing # 42 Target Chevrolet Impala . 
 Topspin , an Autobot Wrecker who transforms into a Hendrick Motorsports # 48 Lowe 's / Kobalt Chevrolet Impala . 
 = = = = Decepticons = = = = 
 Hugo Weaving as Megatron , the leader of the Decepticons who is still badly wounded of his half face and transforms into a rusty 10 @-@ wheeler Mack Titan tank @-@ truck . 
 Charlie Adler as Starscream , Megatron 's second @-@ in @-@ command who transforms into a Lockheed Martin F @-@ 22 Raptor . 
 Frank Welker as 
 Shockwave , the sadistic Decepticon scientist and assassin . 
 Soundwave , the Decepticon communications officer who transforms into a silver Mercedes @-@ Benz SLS AMG 
 Barricade ( uncredited ) , a Decepticon scout and interrogator from the first film . 
 Keith Szarabajka as Laserbeak , a condor @-@ like Decepticon who is fiercely loyal to Soundwave and frequently changes transformation modes . 
 Greg Berg as Igor , a deformed Decepticon who serves as a personal servant to Megatron in his exile . 
 Dreads 
 <unk> , the leader of the Decepticon Dreads who transforms into a black Police Chevrolet Suburban . 
 Jim Wood as Crowbar ( uncredited ) , a Decepticon Dread who transforms into a black Police Chevrolet Suburban . 
 Hatchet , a Decepticon Dread who transforms into a black Police Chevrolet Suburban . 
 Driller , a giant worm @-@ like Decepticon and Shockwave 's pet . 
 <unk> , a quadruped Decepticon . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As a preemptive measure before the release of Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen , Michael <unk> and Paramount Pictures announced on March 16 , 2009 , that a third film would be released in IMAX 3D on July 1 , 2011 , which earned a surprised response from director Michael Bay : 
 I said I was taking off a year from Transformers . Paramount made a mistake in dating Transformers 3 — they asked me on the phone — I said yes to July 1 — but for 2012 — whoops ! Not 2011 ! That would mean I would have to start prep in September . No way . My brain needs a break from fighting robots . 
 Screenwriters Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman , who had worked on the two previous Transformers films , declined to return for the third film , with Kurtzman declaring that " the franchise is so wonderful that it deserves to be fresh , all the time . We just felt like we ’ d given it a lot and didn ’ t have an insight for where to go with it next " . Revenge of the Fallen 's co @-@ writer Ehren Kruger became the sole screenwriter for Dark of the Moon . Kruger had frequent meetings with Industrial Light & Magic 's ( ILM ) visual effects producers , who suggested plot points such as the scenes in Chernobyl . 
 On October 1 , 2009 , Bay revealed that Transformers : Dark of the Moon had already gone into pre @-@ production , and its planned release was back to its originally intended date of July 1 , 2011 , rather than 2012 . Due to the revived interest in 3 @-@ D technology brought in by the success of Avatar , talks between Paramount , ILM , and Bay had considered the possibility of the next Transformers film being filmed in 3 @-@ D , and testing was performed to bring the technology into Bay 's work . Bay originally was not much interested in the format as he felt it did not fit his " aggressive style " of filmmaking , but he was convinced after talks with Avatar director James Cameron , who even offered the technical crew from that film . Cameron reportedly told Bay about 3 @-@ D , " You gotta look at it as a toy , it 's another fun tool to help get emotion and character and create an experience . " Bay was reluctant to film with 3 @-@ D cameras since in test he found them to be too cumbersome for his filming style , but he did not want to implement the technology in post production either since he was not pleased with the results . In addition to using the 3 @-@ D Fusion camera rigs developed by Cameron 's team , Bay and the team spent nine months developing a more portable 3 @-@ D camera that could be brought into location . 
 In a hidden extra for the Blu @-@ ray version of Revenge of the Fallen , Bay expressed his intention to make Transformers 3 not necessarily larger than Revenge of the Fallen , but instead deeper into the mythology , to give it more character development , and to make it darker and more emotional . <unk> is briefly shown in a secret Transformers 3 preview feature in the Revenge of the Fallen Blu @-@ ray disc . Ultimately , the producers decided to forgo a plot involving the planet @-@ eating transformer , and no further comments were ever made on the subject . Having been called Transformers 3 up to that point , the film 's final title was revealed to be Dark of the Moon in October 2010 . After Revenge of the Fallen was almost universally panned by critics , Bay acknowledged the general flaws of the script , having blamed the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike prior to the film for many problems . Bay promised to not have the " dorky comedy " from the last film . On March 19 , 2010 , the script was said to be finished . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Megan Fox was originally attached to the film , and Patrick Dempsey 's role as Dylan Gould was to be the employer of Fox 's character , Mikaela Banes . According to various published sources , Fox 's absence from the film was due to Bay ultimately choosing not to renew her role in light of her comparing him and his work ethics to Adolf Hitler , although representatives for the actress said that it was her decision to leave the film franchise . Bay later claimed that Fox was fired by executive producer Steven Spielberg , a claim which Spielberg denied . " I wasn 't hurt " , Bay stated , " because I know that 's just Megan . Megan loves to get a response . And she does it in kind of the wrong way . I 'm sorry , Megan . I 'm sorry I made you work twelve hours . I 'm sorry that I 'm making you show up on time . Movies are not always warm and fuzzy . " 
 With Fox not reprising her role , Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley was chosen to play Sam 's new love interest . Ramón Rodríguez was initially planned to be in the film , in a role bigger than the one he had in Revenge of the Fallen , but he was dropped during early production . Shia LaBeouf stated that this would be his last film in the series , also concluding that director Michael Bay will not return for a fourth installment , though it was later confirmed that Bay would return as director in the fourth film . A few well @-@ known actors such as John Malkovich and Frances McDormand also gained selected roles for the film . Malkovich explains : " I play a guy called Bruce Brazos , who 's just a loudmouth , kind of business man who 's Shia 's character 's boss . Who 's just a jerk , and a kind of a loud one . But a fun character . Nice . It was fun . Very , very enjoyable , just with Shia , Rosie a little bit , and with John Turturro . So , for me , it was a blast . " Another well @-@ known actor , Ken Jeong , was cast as an eccentric co @-@ worker and stalker . Jeong described the film , " Yeah , it 's a small role in Transformers but yeah . I had an out of body experience working on that one because I just couldn 't believe I was there . Still , that was not a thing where oh , I 'm going to be a part of a blockbuster franchise like Transformers 3 or even now Hangover 2 for that matter . So I can 't believe I 'm a part of these franchises in any way . It was amazing . Michael Bay is brilliant and it 'll blow your mind . " 
 = = = Themes and inspirations = = = 
 Unlike the two previous Transformers installments , which were based solely on the script writers ' endemic story , Transformers : Dark of the Moon was based on a novel called Transformers : Ghosts of Yesterday , written by Alan Dean Foster . The novel is a prequel to the 2007 film Transformers . It follows the same story structure as Dark of the Moon , being set in 1969 , the year of Apollo 11 . The story structure differs slightly , though , because the novel was written merely as prequel to the first film . 
 Due to the critically panned Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen , Bay decided to remove the characters called the Twins entirely from Dark of the Moon : " This one really builds to a final crescendo . It 's not three multiple endings . One thing we 're getting rid of is what I call the dorky comedy . [ The twins are ] basically gone . " Due to fan rumors that the Twins would actually be in the film , the director made a public $ 25 @,@ 000 " bet " that the Twins would not be seen in Dark of the Moon . However they were briefly seen in the <unk> headquarters in their vehicle modes in the film . 
 Bay acknowledged that Revenge of the Fallen was " disappointing to the fans " and stated that he " doesn 't want the third one to suck " . Bay stated that he wanted Dark of the Moon 's final battle to be more geographic and feature a " small group of heroes " like Ridley Scott 's war – drama Black Hawk Down , Joe Dante 's science fiction – action Small Soldiers and Hasbro 's G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra . Bay also decided to include Shockwave because he considers the character " bad " and " He 's got a much bigger gun [ than Megatron and is ] a little bit more vicious . " According to The A.V. Club , the film had several minor story inspirations from the 1980s cartoon The Transformers , including the usage of a Space Bridge , and the " kicking the Autobots out " . 
 Similar to the previous two installments , the film was told in the human point @-@ of @-@ view to engage the audience . Bay wanted Sam to have a girlfriend like in the first two films . Actor Shia LaBeouf said that Sam and Mikaela had become " one character " and , although he would " miss " Megan Fox , with this change " you have discovery again from a new perspective . " LaBeouf also stated that the additions of Huntington @-@ Whiteley and new characters allows Dark of the Moon to keep the " magic " of the first film . 
 Dark of the Moon also had numerous Star Trek references , partly because scriptwriter Ehren Kruger was a " big Star Trek geek " , but also as a nod to the fact that new character Sentinel Prime was voiced by Leonard Nimoy , who originated the iconic role of Spock on Star Trek and voiced Galvatron in The Transformers : The Movie . The first Star Trek reference is when refugee robots Brains and Wheelie , who live in Sam and Carly 's apartment complex , are watching TOS episode " Amok Time " ; Wheelie comments " I 've seen this one . It 's the one where Spock goes nuts . " The second reference is when Sam meets his girlfriend , Carly Spencer at work , and is being introduced to Carly 's employer , Dylan Gould , Sam marvels at their workplace : " It 's a beautiful building you guys have . Like the Starship Enterprise in here . " The third reference is when Bumblebee says goodbye to Sam at Cape Canaveral : the words " my friend " are sampled from Spock in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan ( " You are ... my friend . I am and always shall be yours . " ) . The fourth and final reference is when Sentinel Prime activates the Control Pillar , quoting Spock 's maxim in Star Trek II and Star Trek III : The Search for Spock , " The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Transformers : Dark of the Moon 's production cost was reported $ 195 million , with the cost of the 3 @-@ D filming accounting at $ 30 million of the budget . Preparation for filming began on April 7 , 2010 in Northwest Indiana , specifically around Gary , which portrayed Ukraine in the film . Principal photography commenced on May 18 , 2010 , with shooting locations including Chicago , Florida , and Moscow . The first six weeks were spent in Los Angeles : locations included Sherman Oaks , Fourth Avenue , and 5 . Main . The next four weeks were spent in Chicago . Locations filmed in Chicago included LaSalle Street , Michigan Avenue , <unk> 's of Lincoln Park at 2204 North Lincoln Avenue , and areas surrounding the Willis Tower . The scenes set in Michigan Ave featured a substantial amount of pyrotechnics and stunt work . Filming in Detroit was planned to take place in August but the Chicago shoot was extended until September 1 . In late @-@ September , the production moved to Florida , just before the launch of Space Shuttle mission STS @-@ 133 . 
 While filming in Washington , D.C. , the crew shot on the National Mall , and Bay stated that there would be a car race on the location . Two further locations announced were the Milwaukee Art Museum and the former Tower Automotive complex on Milwaukee 's north side , then under redevelopment for mixed use as well as the city 's equipment yard . Filming was scheduled to take place there after work was done in Chicago . On September 23 , scenes were filmed at the former city hall in Detroit . On October 16 , a scene in the later @-@ 1960s was shot at the Johnson Space Center in Houston , utilizing extras with period fashion and hairstyles . One day of shooting was also spent at the Angkor Wat temple complex in Cambodia . Other planned filming locations included Africa and China . Though about 70 % of the film 's live action footage was shot in 3 @-@ D using Arri Alexa and Sony F35 cameras , more than half of the film still had to be converted into 3 @-@ D in post production to fix technical flaws 3 @-@ D filming produces . Other footage that needed to be converted into 3 @-@ D in post production was either entirely computer generated or shot in the anamorphic format on 35mm film . 35mm film was used for scenes filmed in slow motion and scenes such as closeups of faces or shots of the sky which required higher image quality than the HD digital 3 @-@ D cameras could provide . 35mm cameras were also used for scenes where the 3 @-@ D cameras proved to be too heavy , or were subject to strobing or electrical damage from dust . Principal photography officially concluded on November 9 , 2010 . 
 Dark of the Moon has been found to contain recycled footage from an earlier film directed by Michael Bay — The Island ( 2005 ) . Bay similarly recycled footage from his film Pearl Harbor ( 2001 ) in the 2007 film Transformers . 
 = = = Accidents = = = 
 Filming was temporarily delayed on September 2 , 2010 , when an extra was seriously injured during a stunt in Hammond , Indiana . Due to a failed weld , a steel cable snapped from a car being towed and hit the extra 's car , damaging her skull . The extra , identified as Gabriela Cedillo , had to undergo brain surgery . The injury has left her permanently brain @-@ damaged , paralyzed on her left side and her left eye stitched shut . Paramount admitted responsibility for the accident and covered all of Cedillo 's medical costs . Nevertheless , Cedillo 's family filed a lawsuit on October 5 , citing seven counts of negligence against Paramount , and several other defendants ( not including Bay ) , with total damages sought in excess of $ 350 @,@ 000 . Cedillo 's attorney , Todd Smith , said , " This was an attractive 24 @-@ year old girl who had dreams and aspirations involving acting , and this kind of injury may well have a serious impact on her dreams . " The filed complaint reads that " Cedillo has endured and will in the future endure pain and suffering ; has become disfigured and disabled ; has suffered a loss of the enjoyment of a normal life ; has been damaged in her capacity to earn a living ; has incurred and will in the future incur expenses for medical services , all of which are permanent in nature . " In response to the suit , Paramount released the following statement : " We are all terribly sorry that this accident occurred . Our thoughts , prayers and best wishes are with Gabriela , her family and loved ones . The production will continue to provide all the help we can to Gabriela and her family during this difficult time . " On May 2012 , it was revealed that an $ 18 million settlement had been reached between Paramount and the Cedillo family . 
 A second accident occurred on October 11 , 2010 , in Washington , D.C. While filming a chase scene at 3rd Street and Maryland Avenue , SW , a Metropolitan Police K9 Unit SUV accidentally rammed the Camaro that portrays Bumblebee in the film . The area had been closed off by the Washington , D.C. , police , and it is unclear why the SUV was there . Both drivers were uninjured , but the Camaro was severely damaged . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 As with the previous Transformers installments , Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) was the main visual effects company for Dark of the Moon . ILM had been working on the pre @-@ visualization for six months before principal photography started , resulting in 20 minutes worth of footage . Digital Domain also rendered 350 shots , including the characters Laserbeak , Brains , Wheelie , and the Decepticon protoforms concealed on the moon , the space bridge , and a skydiving sequence . 
 ILM 's visual effects supervisor Scott Farrar said that " not only were the film 's effects ambitious , they also had to be designed for 3 @-@ D " , and explained the company 's solutions for the new perspective : " We did make sure things are as bright as possible ; Michael called up theatre owners to make sure they keep the lamps bright in the theatres ... make everything a little sharper , because we know that through the steps , no matter what , when you get to the final screening things tend to go less sharp . " On the last weekend of ILM 's work on Dark of the Moon , the company 's entire render farm was being used for the film , giving ILM more than 200 @,@ 000 hours of rendering power a day — or equivalent to 22 @.@ 8 years of rendering time in a 24 @-@ hour period . Farrar embraced the detail in creating giant robots for 3 @-@ D , making sure that in close @-@ ups of the Transformers ' faces " you see all the details in the nooks and crannies of these pieces . It 's totally unlike a plain surface subject like a human head or an animated head . " The supervisor said that Bay 's style of cinematography helped integrate the robots into the scenes , as " Michael is keen on having foreground / midground / background depth in his shots , even in normal live @-@ action shots . He 'll say , ’ Put some stuff hanging here ! ' It could be women 's stockings or forks and knives dangling from a string out of focus – it doesn 't matter , but it gives you depth , and focus depth , and makes it more interesting . " 
 The most complicated effects involved the " Driller " , a giant snake @-@ like creature with an eel @-@ like body and spinning rotator blades , knives and teeth . In Revenge of the Fallen , it took 72 hours per frame to fully render Devastator for the IMAX format , which is approximately a frame amount of 4 @,@ 000 . For the Driller , which required the entire render farm , it was up to 122 hours per frame . The most complex scene involved the Driller destroying a computer @-@ generated skyscraper , which took 288 hours per frame . For said sequence , ILM relied on its internal proprietary physics simulation engine to depict the destruction of the building , which included breaking concrete floors and walls , windows , columns and pieces of office furnishings . ILM digital production supervisor Nigel Sumner explained : " We did a lot of tests early on to figure out how to break the building apart exploring a lot of the procedural options . A building that 's 70 feet tall – to go in and hand @-@ score the geometry so when it fractures or falls apart – would be a time consuming laborious process . The floor of a building may be made of concrete . How does concrete fracture when it tears apart ? The pillars would be made of a similar material but made of rebar or other engineering components . We 'd look at how a building would blow apart and then choose the best tool to help achieve the properties of that during a simulation . " 
 The scenes in Chicago were mostly shot on location , as Bay believed the plates had to really be shot in the actual city . Farrar was always fascinated with the idea of shooting on location , and then blending the film with computer @-@ generated imagery . The visual effects team used aerial plates of the city 's actual buildings and added destruction elements such as smoke , fire , debris , fighter planes , war , battles , and torn up streets . Four ILM employees also travelled to Chicago and photographed buildings from top to bottom at six different times of the day in order to create a digital model of the city to be used in certain scenes . ILM 's crew designed many major action scenes , with many of the Chicago battle concepts coming from the helicopter shooting of the aerial plates . 
 Animator Scott <unk> said Sentinel Prime had a face " more human @-@ like than any of the other robots " , having a more complex frame and " a greater number of plates " so it could be more expressive . ILM had based most of Sentinel Prime 's features on Sean Connery , and after Leonard Nimoy was cast to voice the role , the effects were altered to incorporate Nimoy 's acting as well . Every robot would take approximately 30 weeks to build visually . Originally , the fight between Sentinel Prime , Optimus Prime , and Megatron was considered to be on water in the Chicago River , but the budget was cut and the ILM realized that they would not want to present that version of the final battle to Bay , so they decided to have the battle take place on the bridge over the river . For a sequence where Bumblebee catches Sam and Lennox while transforming in mid @-@ air , a digital double of Shia LaBeouf was combined with footage of the actor in high speed so that the effects team could time it for slow @-@ motion . 
 Since Bay shoots all his films in anamorphic format , Dark of the Moon 's representation would be " squeezed in " to distort the image , and ILM would add in the robots and " un @-@ distort " the image . The ample variety of filming formats used – single camera , 3 @-@ D stereo rigs with two cameras , anamorphic and spherical lenses – proved a challenge , specially as ILM had a deadline to deliver the 2 @-@ D plates to the companies responsible for the 3 @-@ D conversion . ILM made 600 3 @-@ D shots , and Digital Domain had under 200 , while <unk> @-@ D , the lead 3 @-@ D conversion company of the film , completed 78 minutes of work on the film and finalized the work of approximately 40 minutes of challenging non @-@ visual effects and 38 minutes of visual effects shots . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Steve Jablonsky , who had before collaborated with Bay on The Island and the first two Transformers films , returned to compose the Dark of the Moon score . Jablonsky 's musical score was lauded by critics and fans . The score was released on June 24 , 2011 , five days before the actual release of the film . 
 The album was originally set for release in June 28 , 2011 , but Amazon.com listed the album as unavailable while the album was still being listed for release during the week of the film 's global release . It was available for download on Amazon on June 30 , 2011 , and the score currently features 17 pre @-@ recorded tracks that are featured in the final film . The score 's length is approximately 59 : 47 . The album for the film was released on June 14 , 2011 . It consists of singles produced by different artists and bands , and rock and alternative tracks . American rock band Linkin Park composed the lead single for the film , " Iridescent " , as they did with the first two films : " What I 've Done " was used in the 2007 film and " New Divide " for the 2009 film . The music video for " Iridescent " was directed by Joe Hahn . Two other singles were released specifically for the soundtrack , " Monster " by Paramore and " All That You Are " by the Goo Goo Dolls . Several other unreleased songs make their debut on the album , including " The <unk> " by Stone Sour and " The Bottom " by Staind . My Chemical Romance 's song " The Only Hope for Me Is You " also appeared and can also be found on their fourth studio album Danger Days : The True Lives of the Fabulous <unk> and on the soundtrack . The song was not exclusively for the movie , and was featured in the credits . The Black Veil Brides ' song " Set The World on Fire " is also included . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Most of the characters returned for Hasbro 's new toyline , which was released on May 16 , 2011 . In October 2010 , Entertainment Tonight previewed the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes filming in Chicago . A two @-@ minute teaser trailer was announced on November 27 , and was posted to the Internet on December 9 , 2010 . A 30 @-@ second television advertisement for the film aired during Super Bowl XLV on Fox on February 6 , 2011 . The first full theatrical trailer was released on April 28 , 2011 . The very first clip was released on May 18 . A second clip was released the next day on May 19 . The North American promotional costs came to approximately $ 75 million . 
 = = = Novelizations = = = 
 In May 2011 , the novelization , junior novel , and graphic novel of Transformers : Dark of the Moon were released . Both the novel and the graphic novel featured Skids and Mudflap as supporting characters , but the characters were missing from the junior novel . The graphic novel made reference to several Autobots from the IDW Publishing tie @-@ in comics who died in the stories between Revenge of the Fallen and Dark of the Moon . Another novel , written by Peter David , was published on May 24 , 2011 , and was released only paperback . Though it is slightly different from the film , the novel still pertains to the topic and synopsis of the film it is based on in the outcome of the final battle . The novel features about 400 pages and is published by Del Rey Books . Its synopsis is : 
 All humankind was watching that day in 1969 . And yet only a handful knew the real mission behind America 's triumph in the space race : to explore the alien ship that has crashed on the far side of the moon . Decades later , scientists are still struggling to understand the technology found on board — though with the treacherous Decepticons after it , a powerful force must be at stake . The only hope of averting a crisis is to reawaken Sentinel Prime , the long @-@ lost leader of the Autobots — but who knows what else remains in the shadows , hidden from man and machine ? 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 On June 14 , 2011 , Activision published a video game based on Dark of the Moon for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , Wii , Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS . The versions for Nintendo 's consoles were developed by Behaviour Interactive , while the versions for the rest of the consoles were developed by High Moon Studios , who had previously developed Transformers : War for Cybertron . Electronic Arts released the game Transformers : Dark of the Moon on June 28 , 2011 for Nokia Symbian smartphones , Apple products iPod Touch , iPhones , and iPad and Research In Motion 's BlackBerry devices . 
 = = Release = = 
 Transformers : Dark of the Moon first premiered at the Moscow International Film Festival on June 23 , 2011 . Linkin Park performed a special outdoor concert in Red Square in Moscow on the same night in celebration of the event . Initially scheduled to be released on July 1 , 2011 , the release was brought forward to June 29 , 2011 . It was announced in November 2010 that unlike Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen , no scenes in the film were shot with IMAX cameras . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 While many critics praised the film 's visual effects and 3 @-@ D action sequences , criticism was directed towards the film 's running time , acting , and script . Several critics also felt that Dark of the Moon failed to live up to the first Transformers film . Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 35 % based on 244 reviews and a rating average of 4 @.@ 9 / 10 , saying " Its special effects and 3 @-@ D shots are undeniably impressive , but they aren 't enough to fill up its loud , bloated running time or mask its thin , indifferent script . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , gave the film a Metascore of 42 / 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " from 37 critics . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film one out of four stars , criticizing its visuals , plot , characters , and dialogue . Richard Roeper likewise panned the film , giving it a D and responded that " rarely has a movie had less of a soul and less interesting characters . " A.O. Scott in The New York Times wrote " I can 't decide if this movie is so spectacularly , breathtakingly dumb as to induce stupidity in anyone who watches , or so brutally brilliant that it disarms all reason . What 's the difference ? " 
 Several critics felt that Shia LaBeouf and Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley 's performances were ineffective . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 0 stars , the same rating that he had given to Revenge of the Fallen , and stated the two actors " couldn 't be duller . " Tirdad Derakhshani of The Philadelphia Inquirer stated that LaBeouf " plays Witwicky as if he had a ferocious case of attention deficit disorder . After two films , his fidgeting isn 't cute anymore . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews wrote that LaBeouf " has sunk to greater levels of incompetence here . It 's hard to call his posturing and screaming ' acting ' . " Jason Solomons of The Observer wrote " [ W ] e 're first introduced to [ Huntington @-@ Whiteley ] via a close @-@ up of her bum , segueing straight from the film 's opening sequence and titles on to the pert buttocks and underwear of our heroine " , and that her English posh girl accent " renders her practically unintelligible when surrounded by American accents and falling masonry . " Much of the criticism towards Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley compared her in an unfavorable light to Megan Fox . Lou Lumenick of the New York Post wrote that her " ' acting ' makes ... Megan Fox look like Meryl Streep in comparison . " Baz <unk> of the Daily Mail titled his review of the film , ' Come back Megan Fox , all is forgiven ... ' . Huntington @-@ <unk> was later nominated for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actress for her performance , but lost to David Spade for Jack and Jill . 
 In a more positive review , Steve <unk> of Ain 't It Cool News found the film to better than the first two . Jim Vejvoda of IGN gave the film a score of seven out of ten , also stating that it was the best of the franchise . E ! Online graded the film a B + while noting if this film is truly the end of a trilogy , its main antagonists should have played more of a part . Website Daily Bhaskar also praised the film , rating it three and a half out of five stars , citing it as an improvement on the previous film , and writing that it " gives fans something to cheer about " . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was an A on an F to A + scale . 
 Many reviews praised the film 's special effects and aggressive use of 3 @-@ D. After previewing a partial , unfinished cut of the film , Kofi Outlaw of Screen Rant declared that Bay had created the best 3 @-@ D experience since James Cameron 's Avatar . Neil Schneider of Meant to be Seen , a website focused on stereoscopic 3 @-@ D gaming and entertainment , remarked that " while Transformers : Dark of the Moon had the scrapings of a really good story , this 3 @-@ D movie was shot with a 2 @-@ D script . " On the topic of 3 @-@ D , Schneider said " Transformers 3 was a mix of native stereoscopic 3 @-@ D camera capturing and 2 @-@ D / 3 @-@ D conversion ( as a 3 @-@ D tool ) , and most was done very well . " He added , " At a minimum , Transformers 3 demonstrates that fast cutting sequences are indeed possible and practical in stereoscopic 3 @-@ D. More than that , it was a comfortable experience and helped exemplify great use of stereoscopic 3 @-@ D with live action and digital characters . That said , I think they still could have taken it much further . " 
 Charlie Jane Anders of io9 believed that some elements of the film were deliberate self @-@ references to Michael Bay 's own sense of under @-@ appreciation after the backlash to the second film : " After a few hours of seeing Shia get dissed , overlooked and mistreated , the message becomes clear : Shia , as always , is a stand @-@ in for Michael Bay . And Bay is showing us just what it felt like to deal with the ocean of <unk> — the <unk> , the Razzie Award , the mean reviews — that Revenge of the Fallen unleashed . " She went on to say that the film 's frequent , often jarring shifts in tone were an intentional endorsement of Michael Bay 's own filmmaking style . " Tone is for single @-@ purpose machines . Consistency is for Decepticons . Michael Bay 's ideal movie shifts from action movie to teen comedy to political drama with the same well @-@ lubricated ease that his cars become men . By the time you 've finished watching , you will speak Michael Bay 's cinematic language . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 = = = = Worldwide = = = = 
 Transformers : Dark of the Moon grossed $ 352 @,@ 390 @,@ 543 in North America , and $ 771 @,@ 403 @,@ 536 in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 1 @,@ 123 @,@ 794 @,@ 079 . Worldwide , it is the thirteenth highest @-@ grossing film , the second highest @-@ grossing 2011 film , the highest @-@ grossing film of the Transformers series , the second highest @-@ grossing film by Paramount ( behind Titanic ) , the third highest @-@ grossing <unk> ( behind Iron Man 3 and Captain America : Civil War ) , and the highest @-@ grossing Hasbro film as of 2013 . It is also the tenth film in cinematic history to earn more than $ 1 @,@ 000 million , and the fifth @-@ fastest film to achieve this . Its worldwide opening weekend ( $ 382 @.@ 4 million ) is the fourth @-@ largest ever and the largest for Paramount . It set an IMAX worldwide opening @-@ weekend record with $ 23 @.@ 1 million ( first surpassed by Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) . It reached $ <unk> ( 6 days ) , $ 500M ( 9 days ) , $ 600M ( 12 days ) and $ <unk> ( 16 days ) in record time , but lost all records to Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The film opened in 4 @,@ 088 theaters including a then @-@ record total of 2 @,@ 789 3D locations . It made $ 5 @.@ 5 million during Tuesday 9 p.m. showings , $ 8 million during midnight <unk> and $ 37 @.@ 7 million on its opening day ( Wednesday ) – including Tuesday showings . This was the sixth @-@ best opening Wednesday . However , all these figures were lower than Revenge of the Fallen . On Thursday , it earned $ 21 @.@ 5 million , falling 43 % , an improvement from its predecessor 's Wednesday @-@ to @-@ Thursday decline . It grossed $ 33 @.@ 0 million on Friday totaling $ 97 @.@ 8 million . Its 3D share accounted for 60 % of its gross , which was atypical due to the downturn in 3D attendance in North America . For its three @-@ day opening weekend ( Friday @-@ to @-@ Sunday ) , it grossed $ 97 @.@ 9 million . It achieved the third @-@ largest opening weekend of 2011 , the fourth @-@ largest opening weekend in July , the fifth @-@ largest opening weekend for a film not released on Friday and the second @-@ largest five @-@ day gross for a film opening on Wednesday . It set records for the 3 @-@ day ( $ 97 @.@ 9 million ) and 4 @-@ day ( $ 115 @.@ 9 million ) Independence Day weekend , surpassing Spider @-@ Man 2 's record in both cases ( $ 88 @.@ 2 million and $ 115 @.@ 8 million respectively ) . It retained first place on its second weekend , dropping 52 % to $ 47 @.@ 1 million . Closing on October 13 , 2011 with $ 352 @.@ 4 million , it is the second @-@ highest grossing film of 2011 and the second @-@ highest grossing film in the franchise . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 The film grossed $ 32 @.@ 5 million on its opening day , pacing 38 % ahead of its predecessor . Including some early Tuesday previews , it earned $ 36 @.@ 6 million in one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half days , and by Thursday its overseas total reached $ 66 million . By the end of its first weekend , it had earned $ 219 @.@ 8 million , which stands as the fifth @-@ largest opening weekend of all time overseas and the largest for Paramount . Its foreign launch was 57 % ahead of that of Revenge of the Fallen ( $ 139 @.@ 6 million ) . 70 % of its grosses came from 3 @-@ D ( a higher 3 @-@ D share than Pirates 4 's 66 % ) . Don Harris , general manager of distribution for Paramount , commented on the results of Dark of the Moon : " If we hadn 't chosen to debut the movie later in Japan and China , we probably would have had the all @-@ time record . " The film topped the box office outside North America for two weekends in a row . 
 In China , its highest @-@ grossing market after North America , the film set records for an opening day with $ 15 @.@ 9 million , a single day with $ 17 @.@ 4 million ( overtaken by Journey to the West : Conquering the Demons ) and an opening weekend with $ 46 @.@ 8 million ( $ 62 @.@ 7 million with previews ) . The latter was taken from Avatar ( $ 42 @.@ 0 million ) . The opening weekend record , when including previews , was surpassed by Titanic 3D ( $ 74 @.@ 2 million ) . Dark of the Moon ended its run with $ 167 @.@ 95 million , marking the highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 . Besides China , it broke the opening @-@ day record in Russia and South Korea ; the single @-@ day record in Hong Kong ; and the opening weekend record in South Korea , Hong Kong , Malaysia , Taiwan , Thailand , Singapore , the UAE , the Philippines and Peru ( the last three records were surpassed by Marvel 's The Avengers ) . Following China in total earnings were South Korea ( $ 69 @.@ 1 million ) and Japan ( $ 54 @.@ 2 million ) . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 During Hasbro Investor Day , it was announced that the DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc would be released in the fourth quarter of 2011 . The NTSC home release for the film was released on September 30 , 2011 , with a Blu @-@ ray 3D version of the film slated for release in " the coming months " . However , the first home release was criticized for the lack of bonus features . 
 A Walmart exclusive edition of Transformers : Dark of the Moon also was released on September 30 , 2011 . The PAL DVD and Blu @-@ ray Discs of Transformers : Dark of the Moon was released on November 28 , 2011 . 
 In North America , it sold 716 @,@ 218 DVD units ( equivalent of $ 13 @,@ 565 @,@ 169 ) in its first week , topping the weekly DVD chart . As of February 26 , 2012 , it has sold 2 @,@ 829 @,@ 285 DVD units ( equivalent of $ 48 @,@ 058 @,@ 979 ) . It also topped the Blu @-@ ray charts on the same week and it has sold 2 @,@ 381 @,@ 657 Blu @-@ ray units ( earning $ 50 @,@ 934 @,@ 911 ) by October 23 , 2011 . The Blu @-@ ray 3D release of the film was released on January 31 , 2012 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The fourth film in the Transformers film series , Age of Extinction , was released June 27 , 2014 . A fifth film , The Last Knight , is scheduled for release on June 23 , 2017 . 
 = Bravado ( song ) = 
 " Bravado " is a song by New Zealand singer Lorde , originally included on her debut EP The Love Club EP . It was later featured on her Tennis Court EP and the extended version of her debut album Pure Heroine ( 2013 ) . The song was written by Lorde and Joel Little and was produced by the latter . The track was released as a single on 6 September 2013 , via iTunes Stores , in a number of European countries and India . Characterised as a chamber pop and electropop song , " Bravado " addresses Lorde 's introverted nature and the need to feign confidence in the music industry . The single was well received by music critics and peaked at number five on the New Zealand Artist Singles chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Bravado " was written by Lorde ( credited under her birth @-@ name Ella Yelich @-@ O 'Connor ) and Joel Little , while production for the song was handled by the latter . The track was written and recorded in 2012 at Little 's Golden Age Studios in Auckland . Within a week , Lorde had finished recording " Bravado " alongside " Royals " and " Biting Down " during a school break . Chris Schulz , from The New Zealand Herald , described " Bravado " as a chamber pop piece , while The Village Voice 's Brittany Spanos called it an electropop song . Running for a duration of 3 : 41 ( three minutes and 41 seconds ) , the track is composed on electronic beats in the key of B minor and plays in common time at a moderate tempo of 88 beats per minute . Lorde 's vocal range on the song spans from F ♯ 3 to D5 . The lyrics of " Bravado " address the idea " of false confidence delivering real confidence " and of Lorde stepping into a line of work where , she said , " everyone would be watching me , and everyone would want to talk to me and confront me " . Lorde cited the line " Me found bravery in my bravado " from Kanye West 's song " Dark Fantasy " as an influence . Simon Collins , of The West Australian , called " Bravado " a particularly prescient song , preempting Lorde 's rise to prominence . At a point of the song , Lorde confesses " to a battle between shyness and show @-@ business aspirations " : 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 On 6 September 2013 , " Bravado " was released as a digital download single on iTunes Stores in India and various European countries . Lorde held a concert at Le Poisson Rouge in New York , which was her first U.S. live show , and performed the song among other tracks from The Love Club EP . On 3 October 2013 , the singer held a concert at the Warsaw Venue in Brooklyn and performed the song among other tracks from the album . In November 2013 , Lorde performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman to promote The Love Club EP and Pure Heroine . Throughout the show , she was only backed by a drummer and a keyboard player . " Bravado " was additionally performed during Lorde 's debut concert tour throughout 2013 and 2014 . In 2014 , she performed the track at Silo Park , Auckland on 29 January 2014 as part of her make @-@ up show for the 2014 Laneway Festival , and at the Brazil edition of the Lollapalooza . 
 " Bravado " was well received by music critics . Chris Schulz from The New Zealand Herald picked the song and " Million Dollar Bills " as the two best tracks from The Love Club EP . Jason Lipshutz , writing for Billboard , described the track as " delightfully spooky " . In a review published in The Dominion Post , Tom Cardy compared the track 's style to that of works by Florence Welch and Marina Diamandis , labelling it a " sharp , refreshing and smart " song . The song peaked at number five on the New Zealand National Singles and number twenty @-@ nine on the US Hot Rock Songs chart . 
 = = Weekly charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = A9 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A9 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A9 ) is a north – south motorway in Croatia , with a length of 78 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 48 @.@ 7 miles ) . Beginning in Pula , the largest city on the Istrian peninsula , it runs north to the Croatian motorway and expressway network at the Kanfanar interchange . Here it meets the A8 motorway , forming the Istrian Y road system . The A9 continues north from here to the Kaštel and Plovanija border crossings into Slovenia . The motorway represents a significant north – south transportation corridor in Croatia and is a part of the European route E751 . The motorway 's national significance is reflected in the positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects , as well as its importance to tourism in Croatia . Importance of the motorway for tourism is particularly high during summer tourist seasons , when traffic volume increases by more than 80 % . 
 The A9 motorway construction works began in 1988 with its first section opening in 1991 , the second one following the next year and extending the completed route to just 13 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 5 miles ) . Lack of funding caused delays in further development , and in 1995 , BINA Istra was awarded a 32 @-@ year build @-@ operate @-@ transfer concession to develop the Istrian Y , including the A9 . Construction soon resumed , and by 2006 the entire route was completed as a two @-@ lane expressway with grade separated intersections . In 2008 further construction works were initiated , aimed at upgrading the newly built road to a six @-@ lane motorway . By June 2011 the entire A9 route was brought up to motorway standard , except for the Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct . The motorway is planned to connect to the Slovenian H5 expressway . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction , separated by a central reservation , except at the two bridges . All intersections of the A9 motorway are grade separated , and as of September 2011 , there are 10 exits and 6 rest areas along the route . Since the motorway is tolled , using a ticket system , each exit includes a toll plaza ; and the A9 motorway and the A8 motorway have an integrated toll system in place . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A9 motorway spans the peninsula of Istria and is a significant north – south motorway in Croatia connecting Pula , the largest city in the south of the region , to the cities of Rovinj , Poreč , Novigrad , Umag ; and ending at Kaštel and Plovanija at the border crossings into Slovenia south of Koper . This part of the road network of Croatia is also a part of European route E751 ; Koper – Kanfanar – Pula and Kanfanar – Rijeka . The motorway is of major importance to Croatia in terms of economic development , especially for tourism and as a transit and transport route . The road carries significant transit and tourist traffic as it runs along Adriatic Sea coast linking a large number of tourist resorts . 
 The motorway runs for 78 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 48 @.@ 7 miles ) between the border crossing access roundabout — the junction of the D200 and D510 state roads — at its northern end and the D66 state road serving Pula and Pula Airport at its southern end . The route connects towns and resorts in the western , southern and central parts of Istria through a total of 9 interchanges and the state road network acting as feeder roads . The route largely runs about 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) inland relative to the west coast of Istria , serving a number of tourist resorts , such as <unk> and Umag via the eponymous interchange with the Ž5002 and <unk> county roads , and Novigrad via the <unk> . There is also an alternate , southern link to Umag via the D300 state road . This part of the route generally follows a north – south path as it approaches Lim valley . After crossing the valley , which is spanned by the Limska Draga Viaduct , the route turns southeast towards Višnjan . Thereafter , the A9 route resumes the original north – south orientation to Baderna interchange with the <unk> road serving Poreč and Medaki interchange with the D21 road . The D21 runs generally parallel to the A9 and it is accessible from all A9 interchanges directly or through short connectors . From there , the route again turns to the southeast to cross the Mirna River , until it reaches the Kanfanar interchange . The interchange is a junction of the A9 and the A8 routes forming the Istrian Y system , while providing access to Rovinj via the D303 road . Between Kanfanar and Pula , the route turns more to the south and gradually approaches the west coast of the peninsula , bypassing Vodnjan and providing access to Fažana and Brijuni National Park . The route terminates in Pula interchange with the D66 road and the Pula bypass road . 
 The A9 motorway has at least two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each direction along its entire length , except at the Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct where there are two traffic lanes instead . The motorway comprises several types of interchanges at the motorway exits : At Kanfanar and Pula there are cloverleaf interchanges ; Višnjan and both Vodnjan exits are trumpet interchanges ; Buje exit is a diamond interchange ; and the rest are partial cloverleaf interchanges . There are a number of rest areas along the motorway providing various types of services , ranging from simple parking spaces and restrooms to filling stations and other facilities . As of September 2011 the motorway has ten interchanges , in addition to the roundabout at the northern terminus , providing access to numerous towns and cities and the Croatian state road network . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control and signalling devices located in zones where driving conditions may vary ; such as at interchanges , viaducts , bridges and zones where fog and strong wind are known to occur . The system uses variable traffic signs to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions , and other information to motorway users . The A9 motorway mainly runs through the coastal plains and rolling hills of Istria , although the northern part of the route traverses two large valleys , requiring two large structures , the Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct , to carry the route across . 
 = = Toll = = 
 The A9 is a tolled motorway and uses a closed toll system based on the Croatian toll categories . The ticket system was introduced all along the Istrian Y system as of June 2011 . Tolls charged along the A9 motorway vary depending on the length of route travelled , and ranges from 3 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 0 @.@ 40 ) to 26 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 3 @.@ 51 ) for passenger cars and 15 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 2 @.@ 02 ) to 185 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 25 @.@ 00 ) for semi @-@ trailer trucks . The toll is payable in either Croatian kuna or euros using major credit cards , debit cards and a number of prepaid toll collection systems . The latter includes various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operator and " ENC " , an electronic toll collection ( ETC ) system which is shared at most motorways in Croatia and provides drivers with discounted toll rates for dedicated lanes at toll plazas . 
 The operator of the motorway , BINA Istra , reported 65 @.@ 8 million kuna ( 8 @.@ 9 million euro ) of income in the first half of 2011 ; an increase of 30 @.@ 8 percent compared to the same period in the previous year . The figure includes the entire Istrian Y system , i.e. the A9 motorway and the A8 motorway . A major factor causing the increase is attributed to the introduction of the closed toll system , where tolls are charged at every junction , which replaced an open toll system where the toll was charged at the Mirna Bridge and the Učka Tunnel only . 
 = = Notable structures = = 
 The Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct are the longest individual structures on the A9 motorway . The Mirna Bridge is the most significant structure built on the route , spanning the Mirna River to carry the motorway across the river and its valley , and has been in use since 2005 . The bridge is 1 @,@ 354 metres ( 4 @,@ 442 feet ) long , while the superstructure of the bridge is 10 @.@ 1 metres ( 33 feet ) wide . Prior to the introduction of the ticket system on the A9 , a toll was charged for using the bridge . As of September 2011 the bridge consists of a single carriageway . The Limska Draga Viaduct was built in 1991 to span the Limska Draga valley . The viaduct is 522 metres ( 1 @,@ 713 feet ) long , and 12 @.@ 1 metres ( 40 feet ) wide and , therefore , is the second longest structure of the motorway . It comprises continuous box girders of varying depth , across five spans with a maximum height of 125 metres ( 410 feet ) . The viaduct has been incorporated into the A9 motorway route since 1999 . Like the Mirna Bridge , as of December 2011 , the viaduct comprises a single carriageway . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of the A9 motorway , and the Istrian Y as a whole , began in 1968 when the Croatian Parliament endorsed a petition of its members from Istria to promote construction of a modern road between the Istria peninsula and the rest of Croatia . Subsequently , municipalities in Istria started a public loan to fund construction of the Učka Tunnel , which started in 1976 . The works were completed in 1981 and also included construction of a 22 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 14 @.@ 0 miles ) long two @-@ lane expressway section between Matulji and Lupoglav . The " Y " shape , formed by the A9 motorway and the A8 expressway , was originally defined by Rijeka and Istria spatial planning documents and later incorporated in the spatial planning documents of the Republic of Croatia in 1988 — defining the Kanfanar interchange as a junction between the A9 and A8 routes . 
 The first section of the A9 to be built was a 7 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) section between Medaki and Kanfanar . Its construction started in 1988 and was completed in 1991 , including the 552 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 811 ft ) viaduct across the Lim Valley . The 6 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 9 mi ) section between Buje and Nova Vas was built between 1990 and 1992 . Between 1997 and 1999 all sections between Medaki and Vodnjan were completed . The construction works on the section between Umag and Medaki started in 2003 and were completed by 2005 . Finally , construction of the southernmost section between Vodnjan and Pula started in 2005 , and was completed by the end of the 2006 ; marking completion of the Istrian Y as a two @-@ lane expressway with grade – separated intersections . 
 Upgrading the expressway to a four @-@ lane motorway started on October 6 , 2008 . The upgrade was scheduled to take place in two stages , designated by the BINA Istra as 2A and 2B . The 2A stage entailed construction of the second carriageway between Umag and Pula , except at the Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct . The upgrade of the Pula – Kanfanar interchange section of the A9 , approximately 30 kilometres ( 19 miles ) long , was completed on June 20 , 2010 . At that moment a ticket system was introduced at section as the first tolled portion of the motorway that included the Mirna Bridge . On June 28 , 2010 , the northern terminus of the A9 motorway was completed with an access roundabout where two connector roads to the border crossings of Kaštel and Plovanija on the Slovenian border intersected it . The upgrade construction works continued in the remaining part of the motorway encompassed by the 2A stage , and the 50 @-@ kilometre ( 31 mi ) section between the Kanfanar interchange and Umag was upgraded to a four @-@ lane motorway by June 14 , 2011 ; eight months ahead of schedule . Total costs of the upgrade to the A9 motorway were 228 million euros . 
 Since September 21 , 1995 , the motorway has been operated by the BINA Istra company , as part of a 32 @-@ year build @-@ operate @-@ transfer concession contract . The concession provided for the takeover of the existing 54 @-@ kilometre ( 34 mi ) section of the road , and a completed tube of the Učka Tunnel . The concession agreement also mandated construction , maintenance and management of the roads , and their upgrade to motorway standards ( dual carriageway ) , when the annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) reaches 10 @,@ 000 vehicles ; or when the average summer daily traffic reaches 16 @,@ 000 vehicles . The latter was achieved in 2005 , and the motorway upgrade works started in 2008 — even though the AADT at the time was only 8 @,@ 500 vehicles . 
 = = Further construction = = 
 The 2B stage of the upgrade to be carried out along the A9 includes construction of parallel structures at the Mirna Bridge and the Limska Draga Viaduct intended for each to carry an additional carriageway of the motorway . 
 The final section of the motorway , the northernmost section between the Umag interchange and the Slovenian border at Kaštel and Dragonja border crossing , is currently spanned by a two @-@ lane connector road via a roundabout located at the provisional northern terminus of the A9 . Since the Kaštel and Dragonja border crossing is the agreed contact point for the motorway link between Croatia and Slovenia , the section is expected to be built when Slovenia completes its H5 expressway ; connecting the border crossing to Koper and its motorway system . The Slovenian motorway development company <unk> made plans in 2010 to build the expressway . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted and reported by BINA Istra , operator of the motorway , and results are published by Hrvatske ceste . In 2015 the largest annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) volume was recorded in the Buje – Nova Vas section . 
 Variations between AADT and average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) traffic volumes are attributed to the fact that the motorway carries substantial tourist traffic to the Adriatic Sea resorts along the Istria peninsula . On average , the A9 motorway carries 218 % more ASDT than AADT . The largest increase of the ASDT relative to the AADT is observed on the Nova Vas – Višnjan section , at 229 % . BINA Istra expects the motorway to carry more than 20 @,@ 000 vehicles per day during peak tourist season periods . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 There are six rest areas along the A9 motorway . Legislation identifies four types of rest areas , designated as types A through D : A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities , including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café , but no restaurants or accommodations ; D @-@ type rest areas offer parking spaces , restrooms , and possibly picnicking tables and benches . Even though rest areas found along the A9 motorway generally follow this ranking system , there are considerable variations , as some of them offer extra services . The filling stations regularly have small convenience stores , and some of them may offer LPG fuel . 
 The primary motorway operator , BINA Istra , leases A , B and C type rest areas to various operators through public tenders . Rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease the fuel operations . As of September 2011 there are two type C rest areas , and only one operator present on the A9 motorway : INA . The rest areas are accessible from both directions of the motorway and are open 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Tyrone Garland = 
 Tyrone W. " Ty " Garland ( born August 13 , 1992 ) is an American professional basketball player who last played for the Mississauga Power of the National Basketball League of Canada ( NBL ) . A native of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , he joined the Power midway in the 2014 – 15 season , a few months after completing his senior year at La Salle University . He had several impactful performances with Mississauga in his rookie season and was awarded several starts . Garland primarily plays the point guard position , but is known as an all @-@ around guard . 
 Garland , whom Rivals.com and <unk> rated a three @-@ star recruit coming out of high school , started out his collegiate career with Virginia Tech after being recruited by a number of high major college basketball programs . However , after seeing very limited minutes from head coach Seth Greenberg during his first two seasons there , he transferred to La Salle and started competing for the Explorers in late 2012 . As a junior with his new team , he famously made a game @-@ winning floater in the 2013 NCAA Tournament . 
 Before playing college basketball , Garland starred for John Bartram High School in his hometown and was a first @-@ team All @-@ State selection and one of the top scorers in the history of the Philadelphia Public League ( PPL ) . In his time , he scored the third @-@ most points by any player in the Public League , only being exceeded by <unk> Rice and Wilt Chamberlain . Garland is currently the fourth @-@ best scorer in PPL history . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Garland was raised in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , by his mother , Audrey Tyler . He grew up on South <unk> Street , near 54th Street and Greenway Avenue in Southwest Philadelphia 's <unk> neighborhood . He attended middle school at Richard Allen Preparatory Charter School in the same area . His cousin Bernard Tyler , a former player at Overbrook High School in Philadelphia , helped him learn a basketball move known as the floater . Tyler told Garland to " just get it over the big man and leave it in God 's hands " . 
 Initially , Garland was enrolled at Delaware Valley Charter School , which was located only half a mile from his future college , La Salle University . However , his cousin Donnel Feaster , an alumnus of John Bartram High School , recommended that Garland attend his alma mater . The team 's head coach , James Brown , said , " I 'm always telling my ex @-@ players , ' If you see any good ones , send them my way ' ... Not that they listen . Don did , though . That 's how I got Ty " . 
 Garland ultimately enrolled at Bartram and played under Brown . A four @-@ year letter winner , he was promoted to team captain in his senior season and garnered several Philadelphia Public League ( PPL ) accolades . In both his junior and senior years , the Philadelphia Daily News named Garland first @-@ team All @-@ City and the Associated Press named him a first @-@ team All @-@ State selection . He led Bartram in his last two seasons there , averaging 28 @.@ 5 points and 25 @.@ 1 points per game as a junior and senior respectively . The team went 73 – 35 in the years that Garland was with them , and he led them to a PPL championship appearance against Imhotep Institute Charter High School , where Bartram lost 48 – 56 . He scored 32 points and 6 three @-@ pointers , but his teammates were only 5 @-@ for @-@ 37 in their shot attempts . 
 In an earlier 2009 Class AAAA playoff contest vs Pocono Mountain East High School , Garland scored eight consecutive points in the final 44 seconds of regulation . He capped the streak by making a 30 @-@ foot shot with 3 @.@ 3 seconds remaining , and his 40 total points helped Bartram win , 72 – 67 . Garland scored a total of 2 @,@ 198 points , making him the top scorer in school history and the third @-@ leading scorer in Public League history . <unk> Rice , who scored 2 @,@ 681 , and Wilt Chamberlain , who scored 2 @,@ 206 , were the only players who had accumulated more points in their high school careers in the league . Maurice Watson , from the Boys ' Latin of Philadelphia Charter School , broke both Chamberlain 's and Garland 's records in 2012 , pushing Garland to fourth on the list . 
 = = = AAU = = = 
 While in high school , Garland also played Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) basketball with the Philly Pride . <unk> Austin , a statistician for the Philadelphia Daily News , directed the program while Garland was there . Austin commented , " Everybody liked Ty . Not one person didn 't . He was loyal , honest ; just a solid @-@ gold individual . He didn 't have a malicious bone in his body " . Garland often slept during the day and stayed awake at night , leading his peers to think of him as a vampire . Before becoming a senior , he led the Pride to sixth place at the under @-@ 17 national AAU tournament in Orlando , Florida . The team finished with an 8 – 1 record due largely to Garland 's contributions . 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 On July 9 , 2009 , Garland committed to play college basketball for the Hokies of Virginia Tech . He announced his decision to attend the school at a press conference at the Reebok All @-@ American Camp . Garland had also considered joining the programs at La Salle , Nebraska , Temple , St. Bonaventure , Maryland , Seton Hall , Providence , and Butler . La Salle University is based in Garland 's hometown of Philadelphia and its head coach , John Giannini , recruited him especially hard out of high school . His old coach at John Bartram High School , James Brown , supported his commitment to Virginia Tech . Assistant coach James Johnson was the man primarily responsible for recruiting Garland . Rivals.com rated the point guard a three @-@ star recruit , and ESPN ranked him as the 31st @-@ best player of his position in the Class of 2010 . Garland officially signed a National Letter of Intent with the team on February 3 , 2010 and enrolled at Virginia Tech on June 30 . Garland would play his freshman season for a Virginia Tech Hokies team that had a large part of its scoring coming from Malcolm Delaney , Jeff Allen , and <unk> Hudson in the 2009 – 10 season . Delaney , their leading scorer , chose to withdraw from the 2010 NBA draft in May 2010 and returned for another season with the Hokies . Garland weighed approximately 170 lbs ( 77 kg ) entering college , and because of his shooting guard qualities , he was not as highly rated as some of the team 's other 2010 recruits , like <unk> Eddie . 
 On November 12 , 2010 , Garland made his career debut with Virginia Tech against the Campbell Fighting Camels , seeing one minute of playing time on the court and going 0 @-@ of @-@ 1 from the field . However , the Hokies easily won the game , 70 – 60 . Garland scored his first points as a Hokie on November 26 , vs Oklahoma State , putting up 6 in spite of very limited playing time . He was allowed to play more than 20 minutes for the first time in his collegiate career against Mount St. Mary 's . The opposing team was easily defeated , 99 – 34 . Seven of the ten Hokies that appeared throughout the contest played more than 20 minutes , and Garland – who recorded 16 points – was one of five to score double digits . It would be his season @-@ high performance and also the only time he scored more than 10 points as a freshman . On March 16 , 2011 , Garland played a career @-@ high 23 minutes vs Bethune @-@ Cookman in the first round of the 2011 National Invitational Tournament ( NIT ) , recording seven points and having perfect free throw shooting . In 6 @.@ 8 minutes per game in his first season , he averaged 2 @.@ 8 points , 0 @.@ 3 rebounds , and 0 @.@ 5 assists . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 Entering the 2011 – 12 season , the Hokies lost star Malcolm Delaney , who signed a conditional one @-@ year contract with the French professional basketball team <unk> Chalon following his senior year . Garland debuted as a sophomore on November 12 , 2011 against East Tennessee State , making his first @-@ ever start at the collegiate level due to the absence of Erick Green . He played 24 minutes throughout the game , recording 13 points , 3 assists , and 2 steals . In Tech 's next contest with Monmouth , Garland scored a career @-@ high 18 points off the bench , shooting 7 @-@ for @-@ 7 from the field . 
 However , as the season progressed , head coach Seth Greenberg began giving Garland fewer minutes . Following the recovery of freshman Marquis Rankin from a torn meniscus , Garland played a total of one minute in three games . He also scored a combined six points following his initial two performances that season . On December 11 , 2011 , Garland did not even remove his warm @-@ up shirt in his team 's game vs Norfolk State . When Greenberg was asked about Garland 's playing time , the coach said , " Marquis [ Rankin ] is right now a good play @-@ starter and good on ball defender . We 've got to get other guys more minutes " . When asked a similar question the day before , he said that " you can 't play 13 guys " . On December 16 , 2011 , Garland announced on Twitter that he was planning to transfer out of Virginia Tech . Following his exams , he returned to his hometown of Philadelphia . Garland became the third men 's basketball player to transfer out of the Hokies ' team in the past academic year , following the footsteps of Ben Boggs , who moved to Valparaiso , and Manny Atkins , who would end up with Georgia State . Garland finished his sophomore year at Virginia Tech averaging 4 @.@ 6 points , 1 @.@ 3 assists , and 1 @.@ 3 turnovers in eight appearances . In late December 2011 , he began competing for La Salle . Explorers head coach John Giannini said , " We recruited Tyrone extremely hard out of high school . He is known as a scorer and can also be a very good passer and defender . He is the type of all @-@ around guard , talent and person that will make our team better . He gives us an experienced player to continue our growth over the next 2 years . With his addition we will have tremendous team quickness and depth . " Several of the team 's top scorers in 2011 – 12 had experience playing high school basketball in the Philadelphia Public and Catholic Leagues . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Following his transfer , Garland opened his stint with La Salle on December 15 , 2012 in a road game against Bucknell , scoring 9 points in 22 minutes off the bench and recording 2 turnovers and 4 personal fouls . He did not take part in the team 's earlier games because he was ineligible due to NCAA regulations regarding player transfers . In the game that followed , he posted a career @-@ best 26 points as a bench player in a win over Iona . He also added 3 rebounds , an assist , and a steal in the 23 minutes he was on the court . In a seven @-@ minute stretch in the second half , Garland scored 14 straight points . He said after the game , " I used to do it in high school . It kind of felt like high school when I was out there ; it just felt good " . Garland , who led the Explorers in scoring , also received praise from head coach John Giannini . On December 22 , 2012 , he had another impactful performance vs Sacred Heart , with six assists in 31 minutes of play . This was also his first @-@ ever start under Giannini . The coach commented about Garland , " He 's a very underrated passer . People think because he scored all those points in high school he 's a scorer first and foremost . I think he 's a very good passer " . However , this would be his sole start in his junior year at La Salle . Garland was effective in the opening , First Four round of the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament against Boise State , finishing with a team @-@ high 22 points and , in turn , scoring 20 or more points for the second time as a junior . After the game , Giannini told Garland , " This is why I chased you all over the place , to win NCAA tournament games and see if you could be a great player " . On March 23 , 2014 , against the Ole Miss Rebels , Garland made a scooping layup off the backboard with 2 @.@ 5 seconds left in regulation to send La Salle into the Sweet 16 round of the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . The game @-@ winner was known as the " Southwest Philly Floater , " following Garland 's post @-@ game comments , in which he said , " That 's the Southwest Philly Floater , man . <unk> to my Cousin Bern , shoutout to my Mom " . He made the shot in spite of defensive efforts from the Rebels ' 6 ft 9 in ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) center Reginald Buckner , who had blocked the Explorer multiple times in the game . Garland recalled the play , saying , " Time was running out , and I felt like I could get the drive . When I cut , I just saw an opening and took the ball up ... I went in there and knew if I could get an open shot , I could make it " . Following a defeat to Wichita State that ended the team 's tournament run and their season , Garland was averaging 13 @.@ 1 points , 2 @.@ 1 rebounds , and 2 assists . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Garland entered the season as one of four seniors on La Salle 's men 's basketball roster . Ramon Galloway , who led the team in scoring in 2012 – 13 , graduated the previous year . Garland debuted as a senior in an exhibition game vs Indiana University of Pennsylvania on November 2 , 2013 , scoring 16 points on .500 shooting . He made his first official appearance in a double @-@ overtime home contest against Manhattan . Garland led a 13 – 3 run , highlighted by two key shots , that forced overtime . He made a three @-@ pointer with minutes left in the game , but his team ran out of time before they could rally . Nevertheless , Garland scored a career @-@ high 28 points , hitting 12 free throws . He had an effective second game as well . Against Quinnipiac at the ESPN Tip @-@ Off Marathon , despite scoring far fewer points , his last @-@ minute rebound was instrumental to the Explorers ' victory . Head coach John Giannini said , " He had zero rebounds in 44 minutes against Manhattan . The rebound that really iced the game today was a defensive rebound by Tyrone . Sometimes you don 't play well , you don 't do something , and then you learn from it and do better , so I am pleased with him " . The guard had another notable performance on November 22 , 2013 , against Morgan State , when he led both teams with 25 points . He also added four three @-@ pointers . On January 25 , 2014 , Garland notched a career @-@ best 30 points vs VCU . His team 's 10 @-@ point 2014 Atlantic 10 Tournament loss to St. Bonaventure , in which he contributed 0 points in 30 minutes , marked the end of his collegiate career . He finished the season averaging 12 @.@ 6 points , 2 @.@ 3 rebounds , 2 @.@ 6 assists , and 0 @.@ 7 steals . Garland , Sam Mills , <unk> Duren , and Taylor Dunn , recorded the most wins for a single senior class at La Salle in 22 years . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Cited from <unk> . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Following his graduation from La Salle University , Garland signed with the sports agent Gilad Berkowitz from Berkowitz Career Ventures . Berkowitz , a law student at Duke University , was certified with the National Basketball Players Association but was only two years older than his client . The agent said , " What he has to overcome is his size and range and I have to overcome my age . We are going to market ourselves to NBA teams " . Garland 's connections with Berkowitz helped him get to know trainer Kendrick Williams and get an endorsement deal with Under Armour . He had hopes of playing in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , regardless of whether he had to compete in Europe before reaching that level . In mid @-@ October 2014 , Garland planned on entering the 2014 NBA Development League Draft . However , on November 16 , he agreed to terms with Michelin <unk> <unk> Nicosia of the Cyprus Basketball Division 1 , but would not make an official appearance for them . 
 On January 14 , 2015 , after placing one of their players , Mike Allison , on the injury reserve list , the Mississauga Power of the National Basketball League of Canada ( NBL ) signed and activated Garland . On January 15 , 2015 , he made his professional debut for the Power against the Brampton A 's , recording 18 points , 6 rebounds , and 6 assists and being named Peak Performer of the Game . The opposing team won the game with a score of 101 – 90 . Garland had another impact performance on January 22 , 2015 against the Halifax Rainmen , as he scored 26 points , grabbed 5 rebounds , and recorded 7 assists , leading Mississauga to a victory . In an overtime loss to the Windsor Express on February 17 , he scored 20 or more points for the second time that season , notching 23 . He made two key three @-@ pointers in the closing minutes . On February 28 , in Mississauga 's regular season finale vs the London Lightning , Garland recorded a season @-@ high 31 points . He finished his rookie season averaging 12 @.@ 9 points , 4 @.@ 1 assists , and 1 @.@ 3 steals . He started in 12 of his 16 appearances . In late June 2015 , the Mississauga Power folded after the creation of the NBA Development League affiliate for the Toronto Raptors , known as Raptors 905 . The Power 's rights were purchased by Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment ( MLSE ) and their home court , the Hershey Centre , became the venue for Raptors 905 games . The move ended Garland 's stint with Mississauga . He would not join Raptors 905 , as it had no connections with the Power players and was merely a development team for the Toronto Raptors . As of late 2015 , Garland is not signed to any team . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Cited from <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As a freshman at Virginia Tech , Garland was named to the 2011 All @-@ Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) Academic Team along with Kyle Singler , Mason Plumlee , Ryan Kelly , and Tyler Zeller . He earned a grade @-@ point average of above 3 @.@ 00 for the previous semester and maintained it as a cumulative average through his academic career . He was also one of 2 @,@ 835 student @-@ athletes recognized by the ACC on its 2010 – 11 Academic Honor Roll . Garland majored in university studies at Virginia Tech , but majored in sociology at La Salle University . He recalled the final months of his senior year at La Salle , saying , " I was really focused on graduating school and locking down my grades for graduation . I was focused on the next step , but I had to graduate school . That degree is very big to me . I told my mom I was going to graduate college and I just wanted to put that smile on her face " . 
 In the summer of 2015 , Garland participated in The Basketball Tournament ( TBT ) , a five @-@ on @-@ five , single @-@ elimination basketball tournament in which the winner out of the 96 teams wins a total of $ 1 million . He competed for a team made up of former La Salle men 's basketball players , called 20th & Olney , reuniting with Ramon Galloway , Steve Zack , and <unk> Duren . Explorers video coordinator Andrew McGlynn , who acted as the team 's general manager and coach , said , " The main reason [ for entering ] is how close the program is here . [ Coach Dr. John Giannini ] has done such a good job of making it a family atmosphere around here " . Garland was one of 50 players with NBL Canada experience that were playing in TBT . On July 18 , 2015 at Philadelphia University , he debuted with 22 points in a win over Max 's All Stars , a team led by Dominique Jones . 20th & Olney lost in the next round to Boeheim 's Army , which was led by Hakim Warrick and Olu <unk> , as Garland notched 21 points . 
 = Polikarpov I @-@ 3 = 
 The Polikarpov I @-@ 3 ( Russian : <unk> И @-@ 3 ) was a Soviet fighter designed during the late 1920s . It entered service in 1929 , but was retired in 1935 with the advent of fighters with higher performance . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Development of the I @-@ 3 began in mid @-@ 1926 after investigations into the loss of the Polikarpov DI @-@ 1 were completed . Although the new biplane shared many of the characteristics of the earlier design , including the staggered sesquiplane layout of the wings , it was a new design . It was designed by the OSS ( Russian : Otdel <unk> <unk> — <unk> Department ) of <unk> ( Aviation Trust ) under the supervision of Nikolai Nikolaevich Polikarpov , head designer of the department . There was much debate within the OSS about the proper powerplant for the new fighter , but Polikarpov rejected the Wright Tornado radial engine and decided in favor of the BMW VI liquid @-@ cooled V12 engine . A wooden mock @-@ up was completed in April 1927 , but formal approval of the design did not come until 3 June 1927 . Static tests of a full @-@ sized model began in October at the same time as negotiations for a license for the BMW engine were finished . 
 The I @-@ 3 had an oval @-@ section semi @-@ monocoque fuselage covered with ' shpon ' , molded birch plywood , with a small headrest faired into the fuselage , although the engine was enclosed in a metal cowling . The two @-@ spar wings were covered in plywood and fabric and had a Clark Y profile . Internal bracing wires were fitted to reinforce the wings . The control surfaces were framed in duralumin , but covered in fabric . It was provided with differential Frise @-@ type ailerons . The duralumin N @-@ type struts that separated the wings , and attached the upper wing to the fuselage , had a teardrop profile . They were reinforced with steel bracing wires . The conventional undercarriage was fixed with rubber shock absorbers and the tailskid was made from duralumin . The main gear could be replaced by skis like those fitted to the Polikarpov R @-@ 1 . The engine 's semi @-@ retractable radiator extended below the fuselage behind the rear main gear struts . Two fuel tanks were fitted , the main one in the fuselage , but a small 2 @.@ 5 @-@ litre ( 0 @.@ 55 imp gal ; 0 @.@ 66 US gal ) tank , mainly used to start the engine , was in the center section of the upper wing , along with the engine coolant tank . A total of 210 kg ( 460 lb ) of fuel was carried . Initially the I @-@ 3 was fitted with two fixed 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) synchronized Vickers machine guns , but these were later replaced by PV @-@ 1 machine guns . A central OP @-@ 1 optical gunsight was provided with a KP @-@ 5 ring sight offset to starboard . Some aircraft had bomb racks to carry two 11 @.@ 5 kg ( 25 lb ) bombs . 
 The first prototype was completed in early 1928 and made its first flight on 21 February . Its manufacturer 's trials were finished by 10 March and the state acceptance trials by 14 April . The pilots of the NII VVS ( Russian : Naoochno @-@ Issledovatel 'skiy Institoot Voyenno @-@ Vozdooshnykh Seel – Air Force Scientific Test Institute ) criticized the lack of directional stability at high speeds and a slight problem in control response between maneuvers . The area of the vertical tail was increased and the elevators were given horn balances to alleviate the first problem while split ailerons addressed the second problem . Since production had begun before the aircraft was actually approved for service use , the first forty aircraft were completed with the smaller tailplane . A second prototype was completed in August 1928 and tested a different propeller optimized for high speed which increased the top speed to 283 km / h ( 176 mph ) , although it lengthened the take @-@ off run . The first 39 aircraft completed , plus the two prototypes , used imported engines , but the remainder used the license @-@ built Mikulin M @-@ 17 . 
 Approximately 400 were built , with Gordon and Dexter citing sources that state 389 or 399 . They also provide a yearly production table that lists 35 built in 1928 , 47 in 1929 , 250 in 1930 and 55 in 1931 , which add up to 389 when the two prototypes are included . 
 = = Operational use = = 
 Initial deliveries in 1929 were to units in the Belorussian Military District where they replaced the Grigorovich I @-@ 2 . They equipped the 4th and 7th Squadrons ( Russian : <unk> 'ya – Air Squadron ) , later the 106th and 107th Fighter Squadrons ( Russian : Istrebitel <unk> <unk> 'ya — Fighter Air Squadrons ) at Smolensk ; the 13th and 5th Squadrons , later the 108th and 7th Fighter Squadrons , at Bryansk , the 9th Squadron , and the 17th and 19th Squadrons , which later became the 116th and 117th Fighter Squadrons . Units based in the Ukraine began to receive theirs the following year . They equipped the 3rd Squadron , later the 109th Fighter Squadron , and the 73rd Air Detachment ( <unk> ) at Kiev and the 91st Squadron , later the 33rd Fighter Squadron , at Bobruisk . Others were delivered to the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Schools of Military Pilots . 
 By 1 October 1930 252 I @-@ 3s were in service and 282 a year later . 297 were on hand on 1 January 1932 , although it fell to 249 a year later and 239 towards the end of 1933 . It was relegated to secondary roles in 1935 as newer and more powerful Polikarpov fighters entered service . Notably the I @-@ 5 , I @-@ 15 , and the I @-@ 16 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The DI @-@ 2 ( Russian : <unk> @-@ 2 ) was an enlarged two @-@ seat variant . It had an extra frame added to the fuselage , an extended wingspan and an enlarged rudder . Two 7 @.@ 62 mm DA machine guns were mounted on a <unk> ring in the observer 's cockpit . A prototype was completed in early 1929 and made its first flight in May of that year . However the prototype crashed due to stabilizer failure in a dive later in 1929 , killing the pilot . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Force 
 = = Specifications ( I @-@ 3 ) = = 
 Data from Shavrov , Istoriia konstruktskii samoletov v SSSR do 1938 g . 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : One 
 Length : 8 @.@ 08 m ( 26 ft 6 in ) 
 Wingspan : 11 m ( 36 ft 1 in ) 
 Height : ( ) 
 Wing area : 27 @.@ 85 m ² ( 299 @.@ 8 ft ² ) 
 Airfoil : Clark Y 
 Empty weight : 1 @,@ 400 kg ( 3 @,@ 086 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 1 @,@ 846 kg ( 4 @,@ 070 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × BMW VI V12 engine , 545 kW ( 730 hp ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 278 km / h ( 150 kn , 173 mph ) 
 Range : 585 km ( 316 nmi , 364 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 200 m ( 23 @,@ 620 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 66 kg / m ² ( 14 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 295 W / kg ( 0 @.@ 18 hp / lb ) 
 Time to altitude : 12 @.@ 6 min to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) 
 Horizontal turn time : 14 sec 
 Armament 
 2 × 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) PV @-@ 1 machine guns 
 = Polish cochineal = 
 Polish cochineal ( Porphyrophora polonica ) , also known as Polish carmine scales , is a scale insect formerly used to produce a crimson dye of the same name , colloquially known as " Saint John 's blood " . The larvae of P. polonica are sessile parasites living on the roots of various herbs — especially those of the perennial knawel — growing on the sandy soils of Central Europe and other parts of Eurasia . Before the development of aniline , <unk> , and other synthetic dyes , the insect was of great economic importance , although its use was in decline after the introduction of Mexican cochineal to Europe in the 16th century . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 In mid @-@ July , the female Polish cochineal lays approximately 600 @-@ 700 eggs , encased with a white waxy ootheca , in the ground . When the larvae hatch in late August or early September , they do not leave the egg case but remain inside until the end of winter . In late March or early April , the larvae emerge from the ground to feed for a short time on the low @-@ growing leaves of the host plant before returning underground to feed on the plant 's roots . At this point , the larvae undergo ecdysis , shedding their exoskeletons together with their legs and antennae , and they <unk> by forming outer protective coatings ( cysts ) within the root tissues . 
 The cysts are small dark red or violet bubbles clustered on the host plant 's roots . Female cysts are 3 – 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 16 in ) in diameter . Males are half the size of their female counterparts and smaller in number , with only one male per 500 females . The cysts undergo ecdysis a number of times . When the male larva reaches the third @-@ instar developmental stage , it forms a delicate white cocoon and transforms into a pupa in early June . In late June or early July , females , which are neotenous and retain their larval form , re @-@ emerge from the ground and slowly climb to the top of the host plant , where they wait until winged adult males , with characteristic plumes at the end of their abdomens , leave the cocoons and join them a few days later . Male imagines ( adult insects ) do not feed and die shortly after mating , while their female counterparts return underground to lay eggs . After oviposition , the female insects shrink and die . 
 = = = Host plants and geographic distribution = = = 
 The Polish cochineal lives on herbaceous plants growing in sandy and arid , infertile soils . Its primary host plant is the perennial knawel ( <unk> perennis ) , but it has also been known to feed on plants of 20 other genera , including mouse @-@ ear hawkweed ( <unk> pilosella ) , bladder campion ( Silene inflata ) , velvet bent ( Agrostis canina ) , <unk> , smooth <unk> ( <unk> glabra ) , strawberry ( <unk> ) , and cinquefoil ( Potentilla ) . 
 The insect was once commonly found throughout the Palearctic and was recognised across Eurasia , from France and England to China , but it was mainly in Central Europe where it was common enough to make its industrial use economically viable . Excessive economic exploitation as well as the shrinking and degradation of its habitat have made the Polish cochineal a rare species . In 1994 , it was included in the Ukrainian Red Book of endangered species . In Poland , where it was still common in the 1960s , there is insufficient data to determine its conservation status , and no protective measures are in place . 
 = = History = = 
 Ancient Slavs developed a method of obtaining red dye from the larvae of the Polish cochineal . Despite the labor @-@ intensive process of harvesting the cochineal and a relatively modest yield , the dye continued to be a highly sought @-@ after commodity and a popular alternative to kermes throughout the Middle Ages until it was superseded by Mexican cochineal in the 16th century . 
 = = = Dye production = = = 
 Similar to some other red dyes obtained from scale insects , the red coloring is derived from carminic acid with traces of <unk> acid . The Polish cochineal carminic acid content is approximately 0 @.@ 6 % of the insect 's dried body weight . The insects were harvested shortly before the female larvae reached maturity , i.e. in late June , usually around Saint John the Baptist 's day ( June 24 ) , hence the dye 's folk name , Saint John 's blood . The harvesting process involved uprooting the host plant and picking the female larvae , averaging approximately ten insects from each plant . In Poland , including present @-@ day Ukraine , and elsewhere in Europe , plantations were operated in order to deal with the high toll on the host plants . The larvae were killed with boiling water or vinegar and dried in the sun or in an oven , ground , and dissolved in sourdough or in light rye beer called kvass in order to remove fat . The extract could then be used for dyeing silk , wool , cotton , or linen . The dyeing process requires roughly 3 @-@ 4 oz of dye per pound ( 180 @-@ 250 g per kilogram ) of silk and one pound of dye to color almost 20 pounds ( 50 g per kilogram ) of wool . 
 = = = Trade = = = 
 Polish cochineal was widely traded in Europe during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance . In the 15th and 16th centuries , along with grain , timber , and salt , it was one of Poland 's chief exports , mainly to southern Germany and northern Italy as well as to France , England , the Ottoman Empire , and Armenia . In Poland , the cochineal trade was mostly monopolized by Jewish merchants , who bought the dye from peasants in Red Ruthenia and other regions of Poland and Lithuania . The merchants shipped the dye to major Polish cities such as Kraków , Gdańsk ( Danzig ) , and Poznań . From there , the merchandise was exported to wholesalers in Breslau ( Wrocław ) , Nuremberg , Frankfurt , Augsburg , Venice , and other destinations . The Polish cochineal trade was a lucrative business for the intermediaries ; according to Marcin of Urzędów ( 1595 ) , one pound of Polish cochineal cost between four and five Venetian pounds . In terms of quantities , the trade reached its peak in the 1530s . In 1534 , 1963 stones ( about 30 metric tons ) of the dye were sold in Poznań alone . 
 The advent of cheaper Mexican cochineal led to an abrupt slump in the Polish cochineal trade , and the 1540s saw a steep decline in quantities of the red dye exported from Poland . In 1547 , Polish cochineal disappeared from the Poznań customs registry ; a Volhynian clerk noted in 1566 that the dye no longer paid in Gdańsk . Perennial knawel plantations were replaced with cereal fields or pastures for raising cattle . Polish cochineal , which until then was mostly an export product , continued to be used locally by the peasants who collected it ; it was employed not only for dyeing fabric but also as a vodka colorant , an ingredient in folk medicine , or even for decorative coloring of horses ' tails . 
 With the partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century , vast markets in Russia and Central Asia opened to Polish cochineal , which became an export product again — this time , to the East . In the 19th century , Bukhara , Uzbekistan , became the principal Polish cochineal trading center in Central Asia ; from there the dye was shipped to Kashgar in Xinjiang , and Kabul and Herat in Afghanistan . It is possible that the Polish dye was used to manufacture some of the famous oriental rugs . 
 = = = Studies = = = 
 The earliest known scientific study of the Polish cochineal is found in the <unk> Polski ( Polish Herbal ) by Marcin of Urzędów ( 1595 ) , where it was described as " small red seeds " that grow under plant roots , becoming " ripe " in April and from which a little " bug " emerges in June . The first scientific comments by non @-@ Polish authors were written by <unk> ( 1670 ) and von <unk> ( 1672 ) . In 1731 , Johann Philipp Breyne , wrote Historia naturalis <unk> <unk> <unk> quod <unk> <unk> audit ( translated into English during the same century ) , the first major treatise about the insect , including the results of his research on its physiology and life cycle . In 1934 , Polish biologist Antoni <unk> wrote <unk> polski ( Polish cochineal ) , a monograph taking into account both the insect 's biology and historical role . 
 = = Linguistics = = 
 The historical importance of the Polish cochineal is still reflected in most modern Slavic languages where the words for the color red and for the month of June both derive from the Proto @-@ Slavic * <unk> ( probably pronounced [ t ͡ <unk> ] ) , meaning " a worm " or " larva " . ( See examples in the table below . ) In the Czech language , as well as old Bulgarian , this is true for both June and July , the two months when harvest of the insect 's larvae was possible . In modern Polish , czerwiec is a word for June , as well as for the Polish cochineal ( czerwiec polski ) and its host plant , the perennial knawel ( czerwiec <unk> ) . 
 = Madhouse on Castle Street = 
 Madhouse on Castle Street is a British television play , broadcast by BBC Television on the evening of 13 January 1963 , as part of the Sunday Night Play strand . It was written by Evan Jones and directed by Philip Saville . The production featured the young American folk music singer Bob Dylan , who soon became a major musical star . 
 The play was made with electronic video cameras , although recorded onto film rather than tape . The only known copy of the play was junked in 1968 , as was the standard practice of the time , despite the fact that Dylan and lead actor David Warner were by then famous . Although extensive searches have been made by the BBC , only partial audio recordings of four songs sung by Dylan survive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The play is set in an English boarding house . One of the lodgers locks himself in his room , leaving a note stating that he has decided to retire from the world until the world has changed . Other lodgers and his sister try to coax him out and establish what the problem is . The action is punctuated by songs performed by Bob Dylan . 
 = = Production = = 
 Madhouse on Castle Street was commissioned as part of the Sunday Night Play strand which had been running on BBC Television since 1960 . The play was written by Evan Jones , who wrote the screenplays for films such as Modesty Blaise and Funeral in Berlin , and directed by Philip Saville . Saville had seen Bob Dylan performing in New York City in 1962 , and in December that year he contracted Dylan to come to London for three weeks to star in Madhouse on Castle Street , in spite of Dylan 's complete lack of acting training or experience . This was the performer 's first trip outside of North America . Dylan was originally supposed to have played the leading role in the play , but during rehearsals it became apparent that he lacked the ability to learn lines – stating that he would rather " express himself in song " – was lax in his time keeping , and would often wander off to smoke cannabis . 
 Saville was still keen to include Dylan , so – together with Jones – re @-@ structured the play to create two characters out of the original one that Dylan had been hired to perform . Actor David Warner was hired to play the main acting role of Lennie , while Dylan performed songs commenting on the action in the manner of a Greek chorus as the new character Bobby , essentially playing himself . At the conclusion of the play , Dylan performed " Blowin ' in the Wind " , one of the first major public performances of the song . The play was planned to be recorded in one session on 30 December 1962 , but it overran and the Technical Operating Manager told cast and crew to go home , even though they were willing to complete the filming . London was in the grip of a major blizzard and it was not possible to arrange a further session until 4 January 1963 , when the play was completed , and it was transmitted on 13 January 1963 . 
 = = Cast information = = 
 David Warner as Lennie 
 Bob Dylan as Bobby 
 Maureen Pryor as Mrs Griggs 
 Ursula Howells as Martha Tompkins 
 Reg Lye as Walter Tompkins 
 James Mellor as Bernard 
 Georgina Ward as Susan Taylor 
 Ian Dallas as Reverend Spooner 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Blowin ' in the Wind " was used in the opening and closing credits , replacing a song written by Evan Jones , " Cut Me Down , My Love " . Dylan also performed " Hang Me , O Hang Me " , " Cuckoo Bird " , and " Ballad of the Gliding Swan " . Philip Saville had heard Dylan singing " Blowin ' in the Wind " to two Spanish au pairs , early one morning whilst the singer was staying in his house . " Hang Me , O Hang Me " and " Cuckoo Bird " were traditional folk songs but Dylan altered the words . Jones provided the original lyrics for " Ballad of the Gliding Swan " which Dylan rewrote in performance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The play was described by The Times as a " strange free @-@ wheeling piece about a man who has said goodbye to the world and simply shut himself up in his room . " The reviewer added " It is a strange unpredictable world Mr. Jones conjures up and Mr. Saville , with the aid of an excellent cast ( Miss Maureen Pryor and Miss Ursula Howells were particularly good ) and some haunting songs by Mr. Bob Dylan , brought it powerfully to life . " The Observer , in 2005 , reports that the play " got stinking reviews " according to folk singer Martin Carthy , adding that the Western Daily Mail reviewer was " baffled " and The Listener had " noted that Dylan had ' sat around playing and singing attractively , if a little incomprehensibly ' " . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 As was the usual method of BBC television drama production at the time , the play was produced in a multi @-@ camera electronic studio on video cameras , although it was recorded as a 35 mm film telerecording rather than on videotape . This 35mm master was released for junking in 1968 , and no copy of the play is known to exist . 
 Still photographs and scripts for the production survive , as do some amateur off @-@ air reel @-@ to @-@ reel audio tape recordings of four of Dylan 's songs . In 2005 the BBC launched a search for a video recording of the play , uncovering some audio recordings of the songs , but it seems that a full off @-@ air audio copy does not exist . In April 2007 , BBC Four broadcast a documentary about the making of the play in the Arena strand , featuring interviews with Saville , Jones , Martin Carthy , Peggy Seeger , Dylan collector Ian Woodward , and the first re @-@ broadcast of the songs from the play . In November 2008 , BBC Radio 2 broadcast a documentary , narrated by Bob Harris , about Dylan 's visit to London and the making of the play . 
 = Masters Tournament = 
 The Masters Tournament , also known as The Masters or The US Masters , is one of the four major championships in professional golf . The Masters is scheduled for the first full week of April , and it is the first of the majors to be played each year . Unlike the other major championships , the Masters is held each year at the same location , Augusta National Golf Club , a private golf club in the city of Augusta , Georgia , USA . The Masters was started by Clifford Roberts and Bobby Jones . Jones designed Augusta National with course architect Alister MacKenzie . The tournament is an official money event on the PGA Tour , the European Tour , and the Japan Golf Tour . The field of players is smaller than those of the other major championships because it is an invitational event , held by the Augusta National Golf Club . 
 The tournament has a number of traditions . Since 1949 , a green jacket has been awarded to the champion , who must return it to the clubhouse one year after his victory , although it remains his personal property and is stored with other champions ' jackets in a specially designated cloakroom . In most instances , only a first @-@ time and currently reigning champion may remove his jacket from the club grounds . A golfer who wins the event multiple times uses the same green jacket awarded upon his initial win ( unless he needs to be re @-@ fitted with a new jacket ) . The Champions Dinner , inaugurated by Ben Hogan in 1952 , is held on the Tuesday before each tournament , and is open only to past champions and certain board members of the Augusta National Golf Club . Beginning in 1963 , legendary golfers , usually past champions , have hit an honorary tee shot on the morning of the first round to commence play . These have included Fred McLeod , Jock Hutchinson , Gene Sarazen , Sam Snead , Byron Nelson , Arnold Palmer , Jack Nicklaus , and Gary Player . Since 1960 , a semi @-@ social contest at the par @-@ 3 course has been played on Wednesday , the day before the first round . 
 Nicklaus has the most Masters wins , with six between 1963 and 1986 . Palmer and Tiger Woods won four each , and five have won three titles at Augusta : Jimmy Demaret , Sam Snead , Gary Player , Nick Faldo , and Phil Mickelson . Gary Player , from South Africa , was the first non @-@ American player to win the tournament , in 1961 ; the second was Seve Ballesteros of Spain , the champion in 1980 and 1983 . 
 The Augusta National course first opened 83 years ago in 1933 and has been modified many times by different architects . Among the changes : greens have been reshaped and , on occasion , entirely re @-@ designed , bunkers have been added , water hazards have been extended , new tee boxes have been built , hundreds of trees have been planted , and several mounds have been installed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Augusta National Golf Club = = = 
 The idea for Augusta National originated with Bobby Jones , who wanted to build a golf course after his retirement from the game . He sought advice from Clifford Roberts , who later became the chairman of the club . They came across a piece of land in Augusta , Georgia , of which Jones said : " Perfect ! And to think this ground has been lying here all these years waiting for someone to come along and lay a golf course upon it . " The land had been an indigo plantation in the early nineteenth century and a plant nursery since 1857 . Jones hired Alister MacKenzie to help design the course , and work began in 1931 . The course formally opened in 1933 , but MacKenzie died before the first Masters Tournament was played . 
 = = = Early tournament years = = = 
 The first " Augusta National Invitational " Tournament , as the Masters was originally known , began on March 22 , 1934 , and was won by Horton Smith . The present name was adopted in 1939 . The first tournament was played with current holes 10 through 18 played as the first nine , and 1 through 9 as the second nine then reversed permanently to its present layout for the 1935 tournament . 
 Initially the Augusta National Invitational field was composed of Bobby Jones ' close associates . Jones had petitioned the USGA to hold the U.S. Open at Augusta but the USGA denied the petition , noting that the hot Georgia summers would create difficult playing conditions . 
 Gene Sarazen hit the " shot heard ' round the world " in 1935 , holing a shot from the fairway on the par 5 15th for a double eagle ( albatross ) . This tied Sarazen with Craig Wood , and in the ensuing 36 @-@ hole playoff Sarazen was the victor by five strokes . The tournament was not played from 1943 to 1945 , due to World War II . To assist the war effort , cattle and turkeys were raised on the Augusta National grounds . 
 = = = 1960s – 1970s = = = 
 The Big Three of Arnold Palmer , Gary Player , and Jack Nicklaus dominated the Masters from 1960 through 1978 , winning the event 11 times among them during that span . After winning by one stroke in 1958 , Palmer won by one stroke again in 1960 in memorable circumstances . Trailing Ken Venturi by one shot in the 1960 event , Palmer made birdies on the last two holes to prevail . Palmer would go on to win another two Masters in 1962 and 1964 . 
 Jack Nicklaus emerged in the early 1960s , and served as a rival to the popular Palmer . Nicklaus won his first green jacket in 1963 , defeating Tony Lema by one stroke . Two years later , he shot a then @-@ course record of 271 ( 17 under par ) for his second Masters win , leading Bobby Jones to say that Nicklaus played " a game with which I am not familiar . " The next year , Nicklaus won his third green jacket in a grueling 18 @-@ hole playoff against Tommy Jacobs and Gay Brewer . This made Nicklaus the first player to win consecutive Masters . He won again in 1972 by three strokes . In 1975 , Nicklaus won by one stroke in a close contest with Tom <unk> and Johnny Miller in one of the most exciting Masters to date . 
 Gary Player became the first non @-@ American to win the Masters in 1961 , beating Palmer , the defending champion . In 1974 , he won again by two strokes . After not winning a tournament on the U.S. PGA tour for nearly four years , and at the age of 42 , Player won his third and final Masters in 1978 by one stroke over three players . Player currently shares ( with Fred Couples ) the record of making 23 consecutive cuts , and has played in a record 52 Masters . 
 A controversial ending to the Masters occurred in 1968 . Roberto De Vicenzo signed a scorecard ( scored by playing partner Tommy Aaron ) which incorrectly showed him as making a par 4 instead of a birdie 3 on the 17th hole of the final round . By the rules of golf , if a player signs a scorecard ( thereby attesting to its veracity ) that records a score on a hole higher than what he actually made on the hole , the player receives the higher score for that hole . This extra stroke cost De Vicenzo a chance to be in an 18 @-@ hole Monday playoff with Bob <unk> , who won the green jacket . De Vicenzo 's mistake led to the famous quote , " What a stupid I am . " 
 In 1975 , Lee Elder became the first African American to play in the Masters , doing so 15 years before Augusta National admitted its first black member , Ron Townsend , as a result of the Shoal Creek Controversy . 
 = = = 1980s – 2000s = = = 
 Non @-@ Americans collected 11 victories in 20 years in the 1980s and 1990s , by far the strongest run they have had in any of the three majors played in the United States since the early days of the U.S. Open . The first European to win the Masters was Seve Ballesteros in 1980 . Nicklaus became the oldest player to win the Masters in 1986 when he won for the sixth time at age 46 . 
 During this period , no golfer suffered from the pressure of competing at Augusta more than Greg Norman . In 1987 , Norman lost a sudden @-@ death playoff to Larry Mize when Mize holed out a remarkable 45 @-@ yard pitch shot to birdie the second playoff hole and win the Masters . In 1996 , Norman tied the course record with an opening round 63 , and had a six @-@ stroke lead over Nick Faldo entering the final round . Norman shot a 78 while Faldo scored a 67 to win by five shots ( for his third Masters championship ) . Norman also suffered in 1986 when after <unk> four straight holes , and needing only a par to tie Nicklaus for the lead and force a Monday playoff , he badly pushed his 4 @-@ iron approach on 18 and missed his par putt for a closing bogey . 
 In 1997 , Tiger Woods won the Masters by twelve shots at age 21 , in the process breaking the tournament four @-@ day scoring record that had stood for 32 years . Woods completed his " Tiger Slam " by winning his fourth straight major championship at the Masters in 2001 . He won again the following year , making him only the third player in history to win the tournament in consecutive years , as well as in 2005 when he defeated Chris DiMarco in a playoff for his first major championship win in almost three years . 
 The club was targeted by Martha Burk , who organized a failed protest at the 2003 Masters to pressure the club into accepting female members . Burk planned to protest at the front gates of Augusta National during the third day of the tournament , but her application for a permit to do so was denied . A court appeal was dismissed . In 2004 , Burk stated that she had no further plans to protest against the club . 
 Augusta National Chairman Billy Payne himself made headlines in April 2010 , however , when he commented ( at the annual pre @-@ Masters press conference ) on Tiger Woods ' off @-@ the @-@ course behavior . " It 's not simply the degree of his conduct that is so egregious here , " Payne said , in his opening speech . " It is the fact he disappointed all of us and more importantly our kids and grandkids . " 
 The 2003 tournament was won by Mike Weir , who became the first Canadian to win a men 's major championship , and the first left @-@ hander to win the Masters . The following year , another left @-@ hander , Phil Mickelson , won his first major championship by making a birdie on the final hole to beat Ernie Els by a stroke . Mickelson also won the tournament in 2006 and 2010 . In 2011 , the tournament was won by South African Charl <unk> , who <unk> the final four holes to win by two strokes . In 2012 , Bubba Watson won the tournament on the second playoff hole . Watson 's win marked the fifth time that a left @-@ hander won the Masters in the previous ten tournaments . Prior to 2003 , no left @-@ hander had ever won the Masters . The 2013 Masters was won by Adam Scott , the first Australian to win the tournament . Watson won the 2014 Masters by three strokes over Jordan Spieth and Jonas <unk> . It was his second Masters victory in three years . In 2015 , Spieth would become the second @-@ youngest winner in just his second Masters . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The total prize money for the 2014 tournament was $ 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , with $ 1 @,@ 620 @,@ 000 going to the winner . In the inaugural year of 1934 , the winner Horton Smith received $ 1 @,@ 500 out of a $ 5 @,@ 000 purse . After Nicklaus 's first win in 1963 , he received $ 20 @,@ 000 , while after his final victory in 1986 he won $ 144 @,@ 000 . In recent years the purse has grown quickly . Between 2001 and 2014 , the winner 's share grew by $ 612 @,@ 000 , and the purse grew by $ 3 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 In addition to a cash prize , the winner of the tournament is presented with a distinctive green jacket , formally awarded since 1949 , and informally acquired by the champions for many years before that . The green sport coat is the official attire worn by members of Augusta National while on the club grounds ; each Masters winner becomes an honorary member of the club . The recipient of the green jacket has it presented to him inside the Butler Cabin soon after the end of the tournament , and the presentation is then repeated outside near the 18th green in front of the spectators . Winners keep their jacket for the first year after their first victory , then return it to the club to wear whenever they visit . The tradition began in 1949 , when Sam Snead won his first of three Masters titles . 
 The green jacket is only allowed to be removed from Augusta National by the reigning champion , after which it must remain at the club . Exceptions to this rule include Gary Player , who in his joy of winning mistakenly took his jacket home to South Africa after his 1961 victory ( although he has always followed the spirit of the rule and has never worn the jacket ) ; Seve Ballesteros who , in an interview with Peter <unk> from his home in <unk> , showed one of his two green jackets in his trophy room ; and Henry Picard , whose jacket was removed from the club before the tradition was well established , remained in his closet for a number of years , and is now on display at Canterbury Golf Club in Beachwood , Ohio , where he was the club professional for many years . 
 By tradition , the winner of the previous year 's Masters Tournament puts the jacket on the current winner at the end of the tournament . In 1966 , Jack Nicklaus became the first player to win in consecutive years and he donned the jacket himself . When Nick Faldo ( in 1990 ) and Tiger Woods ( in 2002 ) repeated as champions , the chairman of Augusta National put the jacket on them . 
 There are several awards presented to players who perform exceptional feats during the tournament . The player who has the daily lowest score receives a crystal vase , while players who score a hole @-@ in @-@ one or a double eagle win a large crystal bowl . For each eagle a player makes he receives a pair of crystal goblets . 
 In addition to the green jacket , winners of the tournament receive a gold medal . They have their names engraved on the actual silver Masters trophy , introduced in 1961 , which depicts the clubhouse . This trophy remains at Augusta National ; since 1993 winners have received a sterling silver replica . The runner @-@ up receives a silver medal , introduced in 1951 . Beginning in 1978 , a silver salver was added as an award for the runner @-@ up . 
 In 1952 the Masters began presenting an award , known as the Silver Cup , to the lowest scoring amateur to make the cut . In 1954 they began presenting an amateur silver medal to the low amateur runner @-@ up . 
 = = = Par 3 Contest = = = 
 The Par 3 Contest was first introduced in 1960 , and was won that year by Snead . Since then it has traditionally been played on the Wednesday before the tournament starts . The par 3 course was built in 1958 . It is a nine @-@ hole course , with a par of 27 , and measures 1 @,@ 060 yards ( 970 m ) in length . 
 There have been 94 holes @-@ in @-@ one in the history of the contest , with a record nine occurring in 2016 . Camilo Villegas became the first player to card two holes @-@ in @-@ one in the same round during the 2015 Par 3 Contest . No par 3 contest winner has also won the Masters in the same year . There have been several repeat winners , including Pádraig Harrington , Sandy Lyle and Sam Snead . The former two won in successive years . 
 In this event , golfers may use their children as caddies , which helps to create a family @-@ friendly atmosphere . In 2008 , the event was televised for the first time by ESPN . 
 The winner of the par 3 competition , which is played the day before the tournament begins , wins a crystal bowl . 
 = = = Player invitations = = = 
 As with the other majors , winning the Masters gives a golfer several privileges which make his career more secure . Masters champions are automatically invited to play in the other three majors ( the U.S. Open , The Open Championship , and the PGA Championship ( except for amateur winners unless they turn pro within the five @-@ year period ) ) for the next five years , and earn a lifetime invitation to the Masters . They also receive membership on the PGA Tour for the following five seasons and invitations to The Players Championship for five years . 
 Because the tournament was established by an amateur golfer , Bobby Jones , the Masters has a tradition of honoring amateur golf . It invites winners of the most prestigious amateur tournaments in the world . Also , the current U.S. Amateur champion always plays in the same group as the defending Masters champion for the first two days of the tournament . 
 Amateurs in the field are welcome to stay in the " Crow 's Nest " atop the Augusta National clubhouse during the tournament . The Crow 's Nest is 1 @,@ 200 square feet and there is space for five people to lodge there during the competition . 
 = = = Opening tee shot = = = 
 Since 1963 the custom in most years has been to start the tournament with an honorary opening tee shot at the first hole , typically by one of golf 's greatest players . The original honorary starters were Jock Hutchison and Fred McLeod ; this twosome led off every tournament from 1963 until 1973 , when poor health prevented Hutchison from swinging a club . McLeod continued on until his death in 1976 . Byron Nelson and Gene Sarazen started in 1981 , and were then joined by Sam Snead in 1984 . This trio continued until 1999 when Sarazen died , while Nelson stopped in 2001 . Snead hit his final opening tee shot in 2002 , a little over a month before he died . 
 In 2007 , Arnold Palmer took over as the honorary starter . Palmer also had the honor in 2008 and 2009 . At the 2010 and 2011 Masters Tournaments , Jack Nicklaus joined Palmer as an honorary co @-@ starter for the event . In 2012 , Gary Player joined them . Palmer announced in March 2016 that a lingering shoulder issue would prevent him from partaking in the 2016 tee shot . 
 = = = Champions ' Dinner = = = 
 The Champions ' Dinner is held each year on the Tuesday evening preceding Thursday 's first round . The dinner was first held in 1952 , hosted by defending champion Ben Hogan , to honor the past champions of the tournament . At that time 15 tournaments had been played , and the number of past champions was 11 . Officially known as the " Masters Club " , it includes only past winners of the Masters , although selected members of the Augusta National Golf Club have been included as honorary members , usually the chairman . 
 The defending champion , as host , selects the menu for the dinner . Frequently , Masters champions have served finely prepared cuisine by the Masters chef from their home regions . Notable examples have included haggis , served by Scotsman Sandy Lyle in 1989 , and <unk> , a South African dish , served at the behest of 2008 champion Trevor <unk> . Other examples include German Bernhard Langer 's 1986 Wiener schnitzel , Britain 's Nick Faldo 's fish and chips , Canadian Mike Weir 's elk and wild boar , and Vijay Singh 's seafood tom kah and chicken <unk> curry . In 1997 , 1979 champion Fuzzy Zoeller created a media storm when he suggested that Tiger Woods refrain from serving collard greens and fried chicken , dishes commonly associated with Afro @-@ American culture , at the dinner . 
 = = = Caddies = = = 
 Until 1983 , all players in the Masters were required to use the services of an Augusta National Club caddy , who by club tradition was always an African American man . Indeed , club co @-@ founder Clifford Roberts is reputed to have said , " As long as I 'm alive , golfers will be white , and caddies will be black . " Since 1983 , players have been allowed the option of using their own caddy . 
 The Masters requires caddies to wear a uniform consisting of a white jumpsuit , a green Masters cap , and white tennis shoes . The surname , and sometimes first initial , of each player is found on the back of his caddie 's uniform . The defending champion always receives caddy number " 1 " : other golfers get their caddy numbers from the order in which they register for the tournament . The other majors and some PGA Tour events formerly had a similar policy concerning caddies well into the 1970s ; the U.S. Open first allowed players to use their own caddies in 1976 . 
 = = = Other traditions = = = 
 The day after the tournament closes , The Bobby Jones Scholars from The University of St Andrews in Scotland play a four @-@ ball round on the course - the last people to do so before the <unk> start the process of repairing and restoring the course to pre @-@ tournament standard . 
 = = Format = = 
 The Masters is the first major championship of the year . Since 1948 , its final round has been scheduled for the second Sunday of April , with several exceptions . It ended on the first Sunday four times ( 1952 , 1957 , 1958 , 1959 ) and the 1979 and 1984 tournaments ended on April 15 , the month 's third Sunday . The first edition in 1934 was held in late March and the next ten were in early April , with only the 1942 event scheduled to end on the second Sunday . 
 Similar to the other majors , the tournament consists of four rounds at 18 holes each , Thursday through Sunday ( when there are no delays ) . The Masters has a relatively small field of contenders , when compared with other golf tournaments , so the competitors play in groups of three for the first two rounds ( 36 holes ) and the field is not split to start on the 1st and 10th tees , unless weather shortens the available playing time . The tournament is unique in that it is the only major tournament conducted by a private club rather than a national golf organization like the PGA . 
 After 36 holes of play , a cut @-@ off score is calculated to reduce the size of the field for the weekend rounds . To " make the cut " , players must be either in the top 50 places ( ties counting ) , or within 10 strokes of the leader 's score . These criteria have applied since 2013 . From 1957 to 1960 , the top 40 scores ( including ties ) and those within 10 strokes of the leader made the cut . From 1961 to 2012 , it was the top 44 ( and ties ) or within 10 strokes of the lead . Before 1957 , there was no 36 @-@ hole cut and all of the invitees played four rounds , if desired . 
 Following the cut , an additional 36 holes are played over the final two days . Should the fourth round fail to produce a winner , all players tied for the lead enter a sudden @-@ death playoff . Play begins on the 18th hole , followed by the adjacent 10th , repeating until one player remains . Adopted in 1976 , the sudden @-@ death playoff was originally formatted to start on the first hole , but was not needed for the first three years . It was changed for 1979 to the inward ( final ) nine holes , starting at the tenth tee , where the television coverage began . First employed that same year , the Masters ' first sudden @-@ death playoff ended on the eleventh green . The current arrangement , beginning at the 18th tee , was amended for 2004 and first used the following year . Through 2016 , the ten sudden @-@ death playoffs have yet to advance past the second extra hole . Earlier playoffs were 18 holes on the following day , except for the first in 1935 , which was 36 holes ; the last 18 hole playoff was in 1970 , and none of the full @-@ round playoffs went to additional holes . 
 = = Course = = 
 The golf course was formerly a plant nursery and each hole is named after the tree or shrub with which it has become associated . 
 The course layout in 2014 : 
 Lengths of the course for the Masters at the start of each decade : 
 The course was lengthened to 7 @,@ 445 yards ( 6 @,@ 808 m ) in 2006 . The first hole was shortened 
 by 10 yards ( 9 m ) in 2009 , resulting in the current length of 7 @,@ 435 yards ( 6 @,@ 799 m ) . 
 = = = Course adjustments = = = 
 As with many other courses , Augusta National 's championship setup was lengthened in recent years . In 2001 , the course measured 6 @,@ 925 yards ( 6 @,@ 332 m ) and was extended to 7 @,@ 270 yards ( 6 @,@ 648 m ) for 2002 , and again in 2006 to 7 @,@ 445 yards ( 6 @,@ 808 m ) ; 520 yards ( 475 m ) longer than the 2001 course . The changes attracted many critics , including the most successful players in Masters history , Jack Nicklaus , Arnold Palmer , Gary Player and Tiger Woods . Woods claimed that the " shorter hitters are going to struggle . " Augusta National chairman Hootie Johnson was unperturbed , stating , " We are comfortable with what we are doing with the golf course . " After a practice round , Gary Player defended the changes , saying , " There have been a lot of criticisms , but I think unjustly so , now I 've played it .... The guys are basically having to hit the same second shots that Jack Nicklaus had to hit ( in his prime ) " . 
 Originally , the grass on the putting greens was the wide @-@ bladed Bermuda . The greens lost speed , especially during the late 1970s , after the introduction of a healthier strain of narrow @-@ bladed Bermuda , which thrived and grew thicker . In 1978 , the greens on the par 3 course were reconstructed with bentgrass , a narrow @-@ bladed species that could be mowed shorter , eliminating grain . After this test run , the greens on the main course were replaced with bentgrass in time for the 1981 Masters . The bentgrass resulted in significantly faster putting surfaces , which has required a reduction in some of the contours of the greens over time . 
 Just before the 1975 tournament , the common beige sand in the bunkers was replaced with the now @-@ signature white feldspar . It is a quartz derivative of the mining of feldspar and is shipped in from North Carolina . 
 = = Field = = 
 The Masters has the smallest field out of the major championships at 90 – 100 players . Unlike other majors , there are no alternates or qualifying tournaments . It is an invitational event , with invitations largely issued on an automatic basis to players who meet published criteria . The top 50 players in the Official World Golf Ranking are all invited . 
 Past champions are always eligible , but since 2002 the Augusta National Golf Club has discouraged them from continuing to participate at an advanced age . Some will later become honorary starters . 
 Invitation categories : Categories 6 – 10 are honored provided the participants maintain their amateur status prior to the tournament . 
 Masters Tournament Champions ( lifetime ) 
 U.S. Open champions ( five years ) 
 The Open champions ( five years ) 
 PGA champions ( five years ) 
 Winners of the Players Championship ( three years ) 
 Current U.S. Amateur champion and runner @-@ up 
 Current British Amateur champion 
 Current Asia @-@ Pacific Amateur champion 
 Current U.S. Mid @-@ Amateur champion 
 Current Latin America Amateur champion 
 The first 12 players , including ties , in the previous year 's Masters Tournament 
 The first 4 players , including ties , in the previous year 's U.S. Open 
 The first 4 players , including ties , in the previous year 's Open Championship 
 The first 4 players , including ties , in the previous year 's PGA Championship 
 Winners of PGA Tour regular season and playoff events that award at least a full @-@ point allocation for the FedEx Cup , starting with the RBC Heritage the week after the Masters to the Shell Houston Open the week beforehand . 
 Those qualifying for the previous year 's season @-@ ending Tour Championship ( top 30 in FedEx Cup prior to tournament ) 
 The 50 leaders on the Final Official World Golf Ranking for the previous calendar year 
 The 50 leaders on the Official World Golf Ranking published during the week prior to the current Masters Tournament 
 Most of the top current players will meet the criteria of multiple categories for invitation . The Masters Committee , at its discretion , can also invite any golfer not otherwise qualified , although in practice these invitations are currently reserved for international players . 
 Changes for the 2014 tournament include invitations now being awarded to the autumn events in the PGA Tour , which now begin the wraparound season , tightening of qualifications ( top 12 plus ties from the Masters , top 4 from the U.S. Open , Open Championship , and PGA Championship ) , and the top 30 on the PGA Tour now referencing the season @-@ ending points before the Tour Championship , not the former annual money list . The 2015 Masters added the winner of the newly established Latin America Amateur Championship , which effectively replaced the exemption for the United States Amateur Public Links Championship , which ended after the 2014 tournament . ( The final Public Links champion played in the 2015 Masters . ) 
 = = Winners = = 
 The first winner of the Masters Tournament was Horton Smith in 1934 . He repeated his win in 1936 . The player with the most Masters victories is Jack Nicklaus , who won six times between 1963 and 1986 . Arnold Palmer and Tiger Woods have each won four , and Jimmy Demaret , Gary Player , Sam Snead , Nick Faldo and Phil Mickelson have three titles to their name . Player also became the tournament 's first overseas winner with his first victory in 1961 . Other notable winners include Byron Nelson , Ben Hogan , Tom Watson , Seve Ballesteros , Bernhard Langer , Ben Crenshaw , José María <unk> and Bubba Watson , who have all won the Masters twice . 
 The sudden @-@ death format was adopted in 1976 , first used in 1979 , and revised in <unk> of the 10 sudden @-@ death playoffs has advanced past the second hole ; three were decided at the first hole , seven at the second . 
 Playoffs prior to 1976 were full 18 @-@ hole rounds , except for 1935 , which was 36 holes . 
 None of the 6 full @-@ round playoffs were tied at the end of the round ; the closest margin was one stroke in 1942 and 1954 . 
 The 1962 playoff included three players Arnold Palmer , Gary Player and Dow <unk> . Palmer won the playoff with a round of 68 , Player finished 2nd with a 71 and <unk> finished 3rd with a 77 . 
 The 1966 playoff included three players Jack Nicklaus , Tommy Jacobs and Gay Brewer . Nicklaus won the playoff with a round of 70 , Jacobs finished 2nd with a 72 and Brewer finished 3rd with a 78 . 
 = = Low amateurs = = 
 In 1952 the Masters began presenting an award , known as the Silver Cup , to the lowest scoring amateur to make the cut . In 1954 they began presenting an amateur silver medal to the low amateur runner @-@ up . 
 = = Records = = 
 Jack Nicklaus has won the most Masters ( six ) and was 46 years , 82 days old when he won in 1986 , making him the oldest winner of the Masters . Nicklaus is the record holder for the most top tens , with 22 , and the most cuts made , with 37 . The youngest winner of the Masters is Tiger Woods , who was 21 years , 104 days old when he won in 1997 . In that year Woods also broke the records for the widest winning margin ( 12 strokes ) , and the lowest winning score , with 270 ( − 18 ) . Jordan Spieth tied his score record in 2015 . 
 In 2013 , Guan <unk> became the youngest player ever to compete in the Masters , at age 14 years , 168 days on the opening day of the tournament ; the following day , he became the youngest ever to make the cut at the Masters or any men 's major championship . 
 Gary Player holds the record for most appearances , with 52 . Player also holds the record for the number of consecutive cuts made , with 23 between 1959 and 1982 ( Player did not compete in 1973 as he was recovering from recent surgery ) . He shares this record with Fred Couples , who made his consecutive cuts between 1983 and 2007 , not competing in 1987 and 1994 . 
 Nick Price and Greg Norman share the course record of 63 , with their rounds coming in 1986 and 1996 respectively . This score is also a record for all men 's major championships . 
 The highest winning score of 289 ( + 1 ) has occurred three times : Sam Snead in 1954 , Jack Burke , Jr. in 1956 , and Zach Johnson in 2007 . Anthony Kim holds the record for most birdies in a round with 11 in 2009 during his second round . 
 There have been only four double eagles carded in the history of the Masters ; the latest occurring in 2012 when South Africa 's Louis Oosthuizen , using a 4 iron , holed a reported 260 @-@ yard shot on the course 's second hole , called Pink Dogwood . The other two rare occurrences of this feat after Sarazen 's double eagle on the fabled course 's Fire Thorn hole in 1935 : Bruce Devlin made double eagle from 248 yards out with a 4 wood at the eighth hole ( Yellow Jasmine ) in the first round of the 1967 tournament , while Jeff <unk> hit a 3 @-@ iron 222 yards at the 13th hole ( Azalea ) in the fourth round of the 1994 event . 
 Three players share the record for most runner @-@ up finishes with four : Ben Hogan ( 1942 , 1946 , 1954 , 1955 ) , Tom <unk> ( 1969 , 1972 , 1974 , 1975 ) , Jack Nicklaus ( 1964 , 1971 , 1977 , 1981 ) 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 = = = United States television = = = 
 CBS has televised the Masters in the United States every year since 1956 , when it used six cameras and covered only the final four holes . Tournament coverage of the first eight holes did not begin until 1993 because of resistance from the tournament organizers , but by 2006 , more than 50 cameras were used . In 1997 , chairmen Jack Stephens stated that the organizers were worried that broadcasting the front nine of the course on television would cut down on attendance for the tournament . USA Network added first- and second @-@ round coverage in 1982 , which was also produced by the CBS production team . The Masters has been broadcast every year in high @-@ definition television since 2000 , one of the first golf tournaments to ever hold that distinction , and the early round coverage previously aired in that format on USA 's sister network , Universal HD . In 2008 , ESPN replaced USA and Universal as the weekday coverage provider . 
 In 2005 , CBS broadcast the tournament with high @-@ definition fixed and handheld wired cameras , as well as standard @-@ definition wireless handheld cameras . In 2006 , a <unk> called " Amen Corner Live " began providing coverage of all players passing through holes 11 , 12 , and 13 through all four rounds . This was the first full tournament multi @-@ hole webcast from a major championship . In 2007 , CBS added " Masters Extra , " an extra hour of full @-@ field bonus coverage daily on the internet , preceding the television broadcasts . In 2008 , CBS added full coverage of holes 15 and 16 live on the web . In 2011 , " Masters Extra " was dropped after officials gave ESPN an extra hour each day on Thursday and Friday . In 2016 , the Amen Corner feed was broadcast in 4K ultra high definition exclusively on DirecTV — as one of the first live U.S. sports telecasts in the format . 
 While Augusta National Golf Club has consistently chosen CBS as its U.S. broadcast partner , it has done so in successive one @-@ year contracts . Due to the lack of long @-@ term contractual security , as well as the club 's limited dependence on broadcast rights fees ( owing to its affluent membership ) , it is widely held that CBS allows Augusta National greater control over the content of the broadcast , or at least performs some form of self @-@ censorship , in order to maintain future rights . The club , however , has insisted it does not make any demands with respect to the content of the broadcast . Despite this , announcers who have been deemed not to have acted with the decorum expected by the club have been removed , notably Jack Whitaker and Gary McCord , and there also tends to be a lack of discussion of any controversy involving Augusta National , such as the 2003 Martha Burk protests . 
 Coverage itself carries a more formal style than other golf telecasts ; announcers refer to the gallery as patrons rather than as spectators or fans . Gallery itself is also used . The club also disallows promotions for other network programs , with the sole exception of an on @-@ screen mention of 60 Minutes should the final round run long or right before the coverage ends , nor does it allow sponsored graphics or blimps . Significant restrictions have been placed on the tournament 's broadcast hours compared to other major championships . Only in the 21st century did the tournament allow CBS to air 18 @-@ hole coverage of the leaders , a standard at the other three majors . Since 1982 , CBS has used " Augusta " by Dave Loggins as the event telecast 's distinctive theme music . Loggins originally came up with the song during his first trip to the Augusta course in 1981 . 
 The club mandates minimal commercial interruption , currently limited to four minutes per hour ( as opposed to the usual 12 or more ) ; this is subsidized by selling exclusive sponsorship packages to three companies — in 2013 , these " global sponsors " were IBM , ExxonMobil and AT & T. In 2014 , ExxonMobil was replaced as a global sponsor by Mercedes @-@ Benz . The club also sells separate sponsorship packages , which do not provide rights to air commercials on the U.S. telecasts , to two " international partners " ; in 2014 , those companies will be Rolex and UPS ( the latter of which replaced Mercedes @-@ Benz upon that company 's elevation to " global sponsor " status ) . In the immediate aftermath of the Martha Burk controversy , there were no commercials during the 2003 and 2004 U.S. broadcasts . 
 = = = Radio coverage = = = 
 <unk> ( previously Dial Global and CBS Radio ) has provided live radio play @-@ by @-@ play coverage in the United States since 1956 . This coverage can also be heard on the official Masters website . The network provides short two- or three @-@ minute updates throughout the tournament , as well as longer three- and four @-@ hour segments towards the end of the day . 
 = = = International television = = = 
 The BBC has broadcast the Masters in the UK since 1986 , and it also provides live radio commentary on the closing stages on Radio Five Live . With the 2007 launch of BBC HD , UK viewers can now watch the championship in that format . BBC Sport held the TV and radio rights through to 2010 . The BBC 's coverage airs without commercials because it is financed by a licence fee . From the 2011 Masters , Sky Sports began broadcasting all four days , as well as the par 3 contest in HD and , for the first time ever , in 3D . The BBC will only have highlights of the first two days ' play but will go head to head with Sky Sports , with full live coverage on the final two days of play . In Ireland , from 2008 Setanta Ireland will broadcast all four rounds live having previously broadcast the opening two rounds with RTÉ broadcasting the weekend coverage . 
 In Canada , broadcast rights to the Masters are held by Bell Media , with coverage divided between TSN ( cable ) , which carries live simulcasts and primetime encores of CBS and ESPN coverage for all four rounds , CTV ( broadcast ) , which simulcasts CBS 's coverage of the weekend rounds , and RDS , which carries French @-@ language coverage . Prior to 2013 , Canadian broadcast rights were held by a marketing company , Graham Sanborn Media , which in turn bought time on the Global Television Network , TSN , and RDS ( except for 2012 when French @-@ language coverage aired on TVA and TVA Sports ) to air the broadcasts , also selling all of the advertising for the Canadian broadcasts . This was an unusual arrangement in Canadian sports broadcasting , as in most cases broadcasters acquire their rights directly from the event organizers or through partnerships with international rightsholders , such as ESPN International ( ESPN owns a minority stake in TSN ) . In 2013 , Global and TSN began selling advertising directly , and jointly produced their own preview and highlights shows for Canadian audiences ( while still carrying ESPN / CBS coverage for the tournament itself ) . 
 On December 15 , 2015 , TSN parent company Bell Media announced that it had acquired exclusive Canadian rights to The Masters beginning 2016 under a multi @-@ year deal . Broadcast television coverage will move to co @-@ owned broadcast network CTV , while TSN uses its expanded five @-@ channel service to carry supplemental feeds ( including the Amen Corner feed and early coverage of each round ) that were previously exclusive to digital platforms . 
 In most other countries , including much of Asia , Latin America , northern Africa , and the Middle East , broadcast rights for the entire tournament are held by the ESPN International networks . 
 = = Ticketing = = 
 Although tickets for the Masters are not expensive , they are very difficult to come by . Even the practice rounds can be difficult to get into . Applications for practice round tickets have to be made nearly a year in advance and the successful applicants are chosen by random ballot . Tickets to the actual tournament are sold only to members of a patrons list , which is closed . A waiting list for the patrons list was opened in 1972 and closed in 1978 . It was reopened in 2000 and subsequently closed once again . In 2008 , the Masters also began allowing children ( between the ages of 8 and 16 ) to enter on tournament days free if they are accompanied by the patron who is the owner of his or her badge . The difficulty in acquiring Masters badges has made the tournament one of the largest events on the secondary ticket market . A majority of the badges for the Masters are delivered to the same group of patrons , fans , and members each year , and these perennial ticket holders sometimes decide to sell their badges through large ticket marketplaces such as StubHub , <unk> , and <unk> . Some of these marketplaces will allow fans to purchase a Masters badge for a single day , as opposed to the traditional 4 @-@ day pass . 
 = Haraldskær Woman = 
 The Haraldskær Woman ( or <unk> Woman ) is a bog body of a woman found naturally preserved in a bog in Jutland , Denmark , and dating from about 490 BCE ( pre @-@ Roman Iron Age ) . Workers found the body in 1835 while excavating peat on the Haraldskær Estate . The anaerobic conditions and acids of the peat bog contributed to the body 's excellent preservation . Not only was the intact skeleton found , but so were the skin and internal organs . Scientists settled disputes about the age and identity of this well preserved body in 1977 , when radiocarbon dating determined conclusively that the woman 's death occurred around the 5th century BCE . 
 The Haraldskær Woman 's body is on permanent display in an ornate glass @-@ covered sarcophagus inside St. Nicolai Church in central Vejle , Denmark . 
 = = Mistaken identity = = 
 After discovery of the body , early theories of her identity centered on the persona of Queen Gunnhild of Norway , who lived around 1000 CE . Most of the bog bodies recovered indicate the victim died from a violent murder or ritualistic sacrifice . These theories are consistent with the body being put into a bog as opposed to burial in dry earth . 
 According to the <unk> Saga , Harald Bluetooth of Denmark ordered Queen Gunnhild be drowned in a bog . Based upon the belief of her royal personage , King Frederick VI of Denmark @-@ Norway commanded an elaborately carved sarcophagus to hold her body . 
 This careful treatment of the Haraldskær Woman 's remains explains the excellent state of conservation of the corpse ; conversely , Tollund Man , a later discovery , was not properly conserved and most of the body has been lost , leaving only the head as original remains in his display . 
 In 1842 , the young Danish archaeologist J. J. A. Worsaae disagreed the Haraldskær Woman was Gunnhild . A pioneer in archaeological stratigraphy , Worsaae presented evidence the Haraldskær Woman dated from the Iron Age . Later radiocarbon dating confirmed the body was not Gunnhild , but rather a woman of the early Iron Age who lived about 490 BCE . Though no one proved the Haraldskær Woman has any royal lineage , her body lies in state in a display in the north transept of Saint Nicolai Church . 
 = = Details = = 
 <unk> found the body of the Haraldskær Woman in a supine position in an excellent state of preservation . She was naked and her clothes , consisting of a leather cape and three woolen garments , had been placed on top of her . Hurdles of branches and wooden poles pinned the body down . The complete skin envelope and the internal organs were both intact . The body had a lancing wound to the knee joint area , where some object ( possibly one of the sharp poles ) penetrated to some depth . Her skin was deeply bronzed with a robust skin tone due to tannins in the peat , and all the body joints were preserved with overlying skin in a state as if she had died only recently . Doctors determined she had been about 50 years old when she died and in good health without signs of degenerative diseases ( such as arthritis ) which are typically found in human remains of that age . 
 In 1979 , doctors at Århus Hospital undertook a further forensic examination of the Haraldskær Woman . By this time , the body had desiccated , shrunken , and the skin was leathery , severely wrinkled and folded . A CT @-@ scan of the cranium more accurately determined her age to be about 40 years old at the time of her death . The body height now measured only 1 @.@ 33 m ( 4 ft 4 in ) , but doctors used the original 1835 descriptions to estimate she would have stood about 1 @.@ 50 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . 
 In 2000 , Lone <unk> of the Elsinore Museum , Miranda <unk> @-@ Green of Cardiff University , and the Department of Forensic Science at the University of Århus performed a re @-@ examination of the Haraldskær Woman . Forensic analysis revealed stomach contents of unhusked millet and blackberries . Her neck had a faint groove as if someone applied a rope for torture or strangulation . The scientists concluded bog acids caused the swelling of the knee joint and that the woman was probably already dead before the branches pinned her down . Because of her careful placement , and since cremation was the prevailing mode of interment during that period in Jutland , the examiners determined the Haraldskær Woman was a victim of ritual sacrifice . 
 = = Relation to other bog bodies = = 
 The principal locations where bog bodies have been discovered are the Northern European countries of Germany , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom , Ireland , and especially Denmark . The oldest of these bodies dates to about 8000 BCE , although the majority of specimens in Denmark are from the Pre @-@ Roman Iron Age to Roman Iron Age era ( about 500 BCE to 400 CE ) . As of 2006 , more than 700 ancient bodies have been discovered in these sites , although other estimates have placed the number in the thousands . It is difficult for scientists to ascertain a precise number because many of the bodies have been lost or destroyed . Before archaeologists began actively searching for bog bodies , the bodies were discovered mostly during the routine extraction of peat , and then reburied or discarded . After the discovery that systematic conservation of Iron Age bodies was attributable to the acidic anaerobic environs , major excavations have occurred in Jutland . Other bog bodies recovered on the Jutland peninsula which have undergone as extensive an analysis as the Haraldskær Woman include Tollund Man , Grauballe Man , <unk> Woman , <unk> Woman and the <unk> Woman . 
 = = Literary references = = 
 Danish author Steen <unk> <unk> , an amateur archaeologist and one of the first to visit the site , made the first literary reference to the Haraldskær Woman . In 1836 , he published his novella <unk> which was a parody about a mistaken archaeological find . However , by 1841 <unk> seemed to have changed his mind about the Haraldskær Woman 's identity when he wrote the poem Dronning <unk> , a lament for the dead queen in the bog . In 1846 , the Danish playwright Jens Christian <unk> wrote his comedy , A Sparrow Doing a Crane Dance , ( En <unk> i <unk> ) , in which the ghost of Queen Gunnhild gives a magical ring to a scheming tailor and makes everyone blind to his actions . <unk> 's play indirectly satirized the theory that the Haraldskær Woman was Queen Gunnhild , and became the first major public endorsement of Worsaae ’ s hypothesis . 
 = Sélestat = 
 Sélestat ( pronounced : [ <unk> ] ; Alsatian : <unk> ; German : Schlettstadt ) is a commune in the north @-@ east region of France . An administrative division ( sous @-@ <unk> ) of the Bas @-@ Rhin department , the town lies on the Ill river , 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from the Rhine and the German border . Sélestat is located between the largest communes of Alsace , Strasbourg and Mulhouse . 
 In 2013 , Sélestat had a total population of 19 @,@ 332 , which makes it the eighth most populous town in Alsace . During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance it was the third largest city in the region , after Strasbourg and Colmar , and it is ranked the third commune in Alsace for cultural heritage . Sélestat was founded in the 8th century as a port on the Ill and it experienced a long period of prosperity thanks to the trade in wine and a thriving religious and cultural life . It gradually declined after the Reformation and the French conquest in the 17th century . The town eventually experienced a new demographic growth in the second half of the 20th century when it became a small industrial and cultural centre . 
 Thanks to its rich heritage , which includes the renowned Humanist Library and an imposing pair of medieval churches , Sélestat is an important tourist destination in Alsace . It also benefits from its location on the Alsace wine road and its proximity to Haut @-@ <unk> castle . Aside from the medieval old town , the commune of Sélestat encompasses a nature reserve including one of the largest riparian forests of France . 
 = = Name = = 
 The present name of the town is a <unk> of the original Germanic name . It appeared soon after the French conquest in the 17th century . The town is called <unk> ( [ <unk> ̥ <unk> ̥ <unk> ̥ ] ) in Alsatian and Schlettstadt ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ) in German . 
 Sélestat was first mentioned in 727 as <unk> . It was mentioned as <unk> in 775 , as <unk> in 881 , as <unk> in 884 and as <unk> in 1095 . The current German name , Schlettstadt , appeared in 1310 , although various spellings can be noticed on posterior documents , such as <unk> , <unk> ( t ) stat and <unk> . The French administration used various forms from the 17th to the 19th century , such as <unk> ( Sélestat , <unk> ) and Germanic ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The town was officially known as Schlettstadt between 1871 and 1919 , when Alsace was part of the German Empire . Since 1920 , the town 's French name is fixed as Sélestat . 
 The origin of the name " Schlettstadt " is unclear . It probably derives from Germanic words <unk> or <unk> meaning " marshes " , and stat for " city " . Sélestat would then be a " city in the marshes " , a reference to its position in the Grand <unk> , a vast area subject to flooding that stretches over the centre of Alsace . Stat could also mean " area " rather than " city " . 
 A popular myth explains that the town takes its name from a dragon called <unk> that founded the settlement after opening up the nearby <unk> valley in the Vosges mountains . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Birth of the town = = = 
 Sélestat was first mentioned in 727 AD but the town probably has an earlier Celtic or Roman origin . Archaeological findings provide evidence of human settlement during the Mesolithic , the Neolithic and the Bronze Age . A large number of wood piles dating from the 1st and 2nd centuries AD were discovered around St. Quirin chapel , suggesting a Roman settlement . At that time Sélestat might have already been a port on the river Ill . 
 When Sélestat started to appear in written documents in the 8th century , it may have been a market town or simply a village populated by fishermen and farmers . The area was part of the estate of Eberhard , a member of the Alsatian ducal family , who donated it to <unk> Abbey at the end of his life . In 775 , Charlemagne spent Christmas in Sélestat , which indicates that the town must have had enough appropriate buildings and population to accommodate his court and troops . 
 In the 1080s , Sélestat was the property of Hildegard von <unk> , mother of Frederick I , Duke of Swabia , the first member of the House of Hohenstaufen . Hildegard transformed the place into a religious centre when she founded St. Faith 's Church , which she gave to the Benedictines of <unk> Abbey . Monks from <unk> opened a priory next to the church in 1092 . The House of Hohenstaufen quickly became the leading dynasty of the Holy Roman Empire , which came to the imperial throne in 1152 . Being under their protection , the priory of Sélestat strongly influenced local life . Even though Sélestat constituted a distinct parish , its priest had only limited power and the Benedictine prior was the true head of the municipality . At the end of the 12th century , the Hohenstaufen dynasty gradually lost power and as a result the priory started to decline . The citizens used this opportunity to reduce the prior 's dominance and secure the power of their parish . They started to build a new parish church in the 1220s . St. George 's Church was designed in Gothic style and was significantly larger than St. Faith 's Church , another way to signify the end of Benedictine hegemony . 
 = = = Free imperial city = = = 
 Frederick II , ruler of the Holy Roman Empire in the 13th century , realised that his dynasty was losing its power and granted freedoms to many cities in order to keep their allegiance . These cities became Free imperial cities and Sélestat became one of them in 1217 . Under the new status Sélestat was able to build city walls and collect taxes on its own . Its serfs and settlers were freed . The German monarch Adolf of Nassau granted Sélestat a constitution in 1292 . It was amended many times but it regulated local politics until 1789 . Although the new status favoured trade and prosperity , free cities in Alsace were afraid that they would not be defended by imperial forces if a conflict was to occur . So they decided to form an alliance called the Decapolis in 1354 , which comprised ten cities : ( Haguenau , Colmar , Wissembourg , <unk> , Obernai , <unk> , <unk> , Munster , Sélestat and Mulhouse ) . The seat of the alliance was in Haguenau but its archives were kept in Sélestat . Because the town was the most centrally located , it often hosted meetings of the association . 
 The Benedictine priory was closed in 1424 after many years of decline . It had long lost its power to the local nobility that were gradually replaced by the bourgeoisie in the mid @-@ 14th century . Nevertheless , Sélestat remained a religious centre even after the closing of the priory . <unk> were established in the 13th century by Dominicans , Knights Hospitaller and Franciscans . Several abbeys located outside of the town also had a residence in town . At the beginning of the 16th century , Sélestat was a noted centre of Renaissance humanism thanks to its celebrated Latin school . Reformers Beatus Rhenanus and Martin Bucer were among the school 's alumni . This school helped spread Protestant ideas among the population , although the local authorities remained faithful to Rome . Erasmus of Rotterdam visited Sélestat four times between 1515 and 1522 . 
 Being a free city , Sélestat attracted settlers from the region who sought protection , freedom and a thriving economic environment . The first city wall , which had become too constricting , was replaced in 1280 , and a third wall had to be erected in the 16th century as the city grew . At the end of the Middle Ages , the population was estimated at between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 . It was then the fourth largest Alsatian town after Strasbourg ( 18 @,@ 000 ) , Colmar and Haguenau ( 6 @,@ 000 each ) . The local economy reached its zenith around 1500 . It was centered on shipping and trade ( mainly hay , cereals , wine , fish , glass , iron and salt ) . As the road network was poor and dangerous , goods transited via the Ill river . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The decline of the town started in the 1520s , when the humanist school lost its former influence . The troubles surrounding the Protestant Reformation brought instability and unrest to the region . The town experienced the German Peasants ' War in 1525 and its convents were sacked by a mob in 1534 . During the same period Sélestat lost its pre @-@ eminence in the Decapolis because the city of Mulhouse left the alliance in 1515 and was replaced by Landau in 1521 , moving the geographical centre of the alliance to the north . 
 During the 17th century , Alsace was one of the main battlefields of the Thirty Years War . Sélestat was seized by the Swedes in 1632 after a month @-@ long siege . They surrendered the town to their French allies two years later . The local population long remained predominantly faithful to the House of Habsburg . The Peace of Westphalia ( 1648 ) formalised the annexation of the Decapolis by France . Sélestat was briefly occupied by the Germans during the Franco @-@ Dutch War in 1674 . The Treaties of Nijmegen ( 1679 ) that ended the war also abolished the Decapolis . 
 At first , Sélestat was a major strategic stronghold for the French . Located near the Rhine , it controlled the access to the Vosges mountains and the rest of France . Vauban , the foremost military architect at that time , rebuilt the town walls between 1675 and 1691 . However , after the conquest of Strasbourg in 1681 Sélestat lost much of its strategic importance , as Strasbourg was better located . But it remained a garrison town , and the troops stationed there helped to improve the faltering local economy . Although Protestantism was not forbidden in Alsace , French authorities largely encouraged Catholicism and opened three new convents in Sélestat . Jews were expelled from the town in 1642 . During the French Revolution the population was extremely conservative and opposed to change . The new territorial organisation confirmed the decline of the town , which did not become a prefecture and was not distinguished as a subprefecture until 1806 , when it replaced Barr in that capacity . Sélestat suffered from the Napoleonic wars as it was besieged and bombed by the Bavarians in 1814 and blockaded by a German coalition in 1815 . 
 = = = Since 1815 = = = 
 Industry appeared very early in Sélestat . The town had already several factories at the beginning of the 19th century : a <unk> , a sawmill , 12 tanneries and 11 mills . Sélestat quickly became specialised in wire gauze making but it never became a large industrial centre , remaining a small town with limited influence . The completion of the Strasbourg @-@ Basel railway ( 1840 ) , one of the first to be built in France , did not lead to significant urban development . The town walls that still encircled the town were a significant factor in its economic and demographic stagnation . After the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 , Alsace and a part of Lorraine were annexed by the new German Empire . The German authorities demolished the city walls in 1874 and built new spacious neighbourhoods around the old town , as they did in Strasbourg and Metz . 
 Sélestat became French again after the First World War , during which almost a thousand inhabitants died . It was part of the Third Reich during the Second World War . Its liberation took three months and ended in February 1945 . The town is a recipient of the War Cross 1914 – 1918 and War Cross 1939 – 1945 . Sélestat has experienced steady demographic and economic growth since 1945 . Its population almost doubled between 1946 and 1999 and two industrial parks were built to accommodate new large factories . The service industry has enriched the town 's economy since the 1970s with a large number of small businesses . 
 South of the town , at 48 ° 15 ′ 4 ″ N 7 ° 25 ′ 28 ″ E , a large broadcasting facility was used for transmitting on 1161 kHz and 1278 kHz in the medium @-@ wave range . It was opened in 1948 and ceased to emit on 1 January 2016 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Sélestat is one of the six subprefectures of the Bas @-@ Rhin <unk> . As such it is at the head of the Sélestat @-@ <unk> arrondissement . Sélestat is also the administrative centre of a canton including 28 other communes which primarily serve as a constituency for local elections . Sélestat is part of the 5th Bas @-@ Rhin constituency for national elections . Since 2002 , the Member of the National Assembly for the constituency has been the Republican Antoine <unk> . 
 Sélestat is a member of a federation of communes with shared competencies : the Communauté de communes de Sélestat . Sélestat is its main town , and it includes 11 neighbouring villages . It was created in 1995 to replace an older but similar structure founded in 1969 . Sélestat is also the seat of the Central Alsace pays , a structure aiming at developing the area . 
 The town has had a council since 1292 , when it was granted a constitution under the Holy Roman Empire . The constitution shaped the local political system until the French Revolution of 1789 . Since then , the town has been administered as all the other communes of France . Its council currently comprises 33 councillors , whose number is defined by law according to the size of the population . The town also has a mayor elected by the councillors . 
 Alsace in general is a stronghold of the French right . The main French right @-@ wing party , The Republicans , currently holds a large majority in the council ( 26 councillors ) . Marcel Bauer , who has been mayor since 2001 , is also a member of that party . Voters in Sélestat generally favour right @-@ wing candidates at other elections as well , although Sélestat was governed by the Socialist Party between 1989 and 2001 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sélestat is located at the very centre of Alsace , near the limit separating the Bas @-@ Rhin and Haut @-@ Rhin departments , which traditionally correspond to Lower and Upper Alsace , respectively . The town is located between Strasbourg and Mulhouse , the first being 42 kilometres ( 26 mi ) north and the latter 57 kilometres ( 35 mi ) south of the city . Sélestat is also located between Obernai ( 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) ) and Colmar ( 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) ) . On the other side of the Rhine , Freiburg im Breisgau is around 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) distant . 
 Sélestat lies on the Alsace plains , a narrow , very fertile area that stretches between the Rhine and the Vosges mountains . The Ill flows parallel to the Rhine and crosses Sélestat . This river frequently branches and swells , making the area very wet and subject to flooding . Sélestat is only 4 kilometres ( 2 mi ) from the Vosges , at the opening of one of the rare valleys crossing the mountain range and providing a connection to the rest of France . This valley corresponds to the course of the Giessen , a 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) long tributary of the Ill . In contrast to the Ill , which has a constant annual flow , the Giessen is a mountain river subject to sudden increases in the water level , especially during the spring thaw period . The Giessen passes north of the town and meets the Ill several kilometers to the east , in <unk> . 
 The town itself is built on the Giessen alluvial fan so it is slightly higher than the rest of the Alsace plains . Much of its territory is however located on areas liable to flooding . Such areas are mostly located inside the Illwald natural reserve and comprise both forests and meadows . There the Ill forms more than 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) of waterways . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Despite its small size , Sélestat is well connected to transport networks . Alsace as a whole , being part of the economic heart of Europe , has a high road and railway density . 
 The town is served by the A35 autoroute , a motorway that crosses Alsace north to south , connecting Strasbourg , Colmar and Mulhouse . Further south it connects to the Swiss A3 motorway , and further north to the German B9 highway . Taken together , these three roads connect the Netherlands to Austria . Sélestat is also located at one of the seven crossings of the Vosges mountains , connecting Lorraine to Alsace and Germany . 
 Sélestat train station was opened in 1840 , which makes it one of the oldest in France . It lies on the Strasbourg – Basel railway , which also serves Colmar , Mulhouse and Saint @-@ Louis . Sélestat is at the terminus of two local railways that are partly closed : Sélestat @-@ <unk> , now ending in <unk> , and Sélestat @-@ Saverne , now ending in Molsheim . The former railway runs towards the west through the Vosges , while the latter runs towards the northwest . A third local line , Sélestat @-@ <unk> , closed in 1953 . Although one of the oldest in France , the Strasbourg @-@ Basel railway allows high speed travel of ( 200 kilometres per hour ( 120 mph ) ) because it is very rectilinear and crosses a very flat landscape . Sélestat is served by all regional trains between Strasbourg and Basel ( one train in each direction every hour on weekdays ) . Local trains also run between Sélestat and Molsheim , Sélestat and Strasbourg and Sélestat and Barr . Sélestat is served by a Paris @-@ Colmar TGV every day in each direction , by Strasbourg @-@ Nice and Strasbourg @-@ <unk> <unk> in the summer , and by EuroCity trains connecting Zurich to Brussels and Basel to Luxembourg City . 
 SNCF and the Bas @-@ Rhin council operate coach lines between Sélestat and Sainte @-@ Marie @-@ aux @-@ Mines , Saint @-@ Dié @-@ des @-@ Vosges , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The council also arranges for seasonal connections with Haut @-@ <unk> castle and Europa Park . 
 Sélestat and its <unk> de communes have their own local bus network , the " Transport intercommunal de Sélestat " ( TIS ) . It comprises two lines , one connecting <unk> to <unk> , and the other <unk> to <unk> . These two lines make several stops in Sélestat proper , which is at the centre of the network . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the 2013 census , Sélestat had 19 @,@ 332 inhabitants . It is the 8th most populated commune in Alsace , having reached its maximum population in 2006 , with 19 @,@ 459 inhabitants . The oldest preserved birth registries of the town 's Catholic parish go back to the year 1608 ; the oldest vital records ( état civil ) go back to the year 1793 . 
 Sélestat was one of the largest towns in the region from the Middle Ages until the beginning of the 19th century . In 1801 , it was still the third most populous in Alsace behind Strasbourg and Colmar . It then had 7 @,@ 375 inhabitants , a slightly higher figure than for Mulhouse ( 7 @,@ 197 ) and Haguenau ( 7 @,@ 009 ) . Through the 19th century , Sélestat did not take advantage of industrialisation and rural exodus because its city wall and military function prevented urban growth . It reached its overpopulation <unk> around 1830 , with around 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants living on only 32 hectares ( 79 acres ) . Only after the Second World War did Sélestat experience significant demographic growth , almost doubling its population in 50 years . However , this growth was not strong enough for Sélestat to recover its previous rank . 
 The demographic growth that occurred in Sélestat after 1945 was primarily due to a relatively high birth rate ( 20 @.@ 1 ‰ in Sélestat over the period 1968 – 1975 , compared to 16 @.@ 9 ‰ in France ) . After 1975 , this rate progressively declined to match the national figure . Net migration figures remained slightly negative until 1990 because Sélestat and Central Alsace were on the margins of the metropolitan areas of Strasbourg and Colmar and lacked <unk> . Since 1990 , the Strasbourg area greatly expanded to gradually reach Sélestat . The town has thus become more attractive to newcomers . 
 The population of Sélestat is relatively young , 39 @.@ 7 % of the population were under 30 in 2009 ( France : 37 @.@ 2 % ) and the <unk> of people over 60 years old ( 19 % ) was lower than the national ( 21 @.@ 8 % ) figure . Sélestat has a significant proportion of people between 15 and 44 ( 42 @.@ 7 % , compared to 38 @.@ 9 % for all of France ) because it attracts a large number of young actives and couples starting a family . As other towns in the region , such as Saverne , Haguenau and Molsheim , it welcomes young adults and encourages them to settle in the surrounding villages . 
 = = Economy = = 
 At the end of 2010 , Sélestat had 1 @,@ 823 businesses , most of them ( 1 @,@ 240 ) in the tertiary sector . A large share were small businesses ; only 10 % had more than 10 employees . Sélestat is a retail and services centre for the whole Central Alsace , with a large shopping park and administrative and educational institutions . Industry is nonetheless represented by some large firms , such as the Société <unk> de <unk> , which builds kitchens and bathrooms under a Schmidt and <unk> franchise , <unk> ( aluminium packaging ) , <unk> ( battery separators ) , Albany ( <unk> for the printing industry ) , <unk> ( warehouse material ) , and <unk> ( textiles ) . 
 Most of the large factories are in an industrial estate located south of the town centre . Created in the 1930s , it covers a site of 67 hectares ( 166 acres ) . The newer commercial estate north of the town was developed in the 1970s and is dedicated to retail and cottage industry . It covers 134 hectares ( 331 acres ) . The town centre is also an important shopping area with more than 200 businesses . 
 = = Sights and culture = = 
 In terms of architecture the city is one of the richest and most varied among the smaller cities of Alsace . Although it is only the 8th most populous town in the region , it has the third largest cultural heritage after Strasbourg and Colmar . Sélestat has 35 listed buildings and 119 additional sites that are indexed in the French list of cultural heritage monuments . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The Humanist Library displays one of the oldest and most homogeneous collections of medieval manuscripts and Renaissance books in Europe . Its core is the still almost intact library of Beatus Rhenanus , which was bequeathed to the city and has been maintained by it ever since . The institution also holds the books that belonged to the Latin school of Sélestat , at which Rhenanus and many other reformers were educated around 1500 . In 2011 , the library has been inscribed in the Unesco 's Memory of the World Register . 
 The library is open to both researchers and tourists , with an exhibition displaying some of its most noteworthy items : an 8th @-@ century lectionary , the first books printed in Alsace , a copy of the Cosmographiae Introductio where the oldest mention of America can be found , and a 1521 document which contains the oldest record of a Christmas tree . 
 Sélestat also has a museum dedicated to bread and baking and it is the seat of the FRAC d 'Alsace , a regional institution whose aim is to collect contemporary works of art ( see below , Cultural institutions and events ) . These works are regularly part of temporary exhibits in Sélestat and other places in Alsace . FRAC possesses works by Aurélie Nemours , Olivier Debré , Mario Merz and <unk> , among other artists . 
 = = = Religious architecture = = = 
 Sélestat has two large and remarkable churches from the Middle Ages . St. Faith 's Church is the oldest and a prime example of Romanesque architecture . Its design is related to similar buildings both in the Rhine region and in Lorraine . It was built during the second half of the 12th century to replace an earlier building . The church was renovated in the 19th century and a medieval death mask was found during this work . It is often attributed to Hildegard of <unk> , founder of the church , and is now displayed in a crypt . 
 St. George 's Church has always served as the main parish church . It is often referred to as " the cathedral " because of its size , but it has never been the seat of a diocese . Its construction started soon after 1200 and was completed at the beginning of the 15th century . Its design is pure Gothic , save for a Romanesque side portal . The choir , the last part to be completed , is the most remarkable element . It is illuminated by 288 stained glass panels , of which 55 date from the 15th century . 
 Most of the convents of the town have disappeared ; the Dominican convent is the only one to have retained much of its original appearance . It was built in the 13th century and still has its church and cloister . The Franciscan convent was completely destroyed , apart from the choir of its church , which now serves as a Protestant church . Sélestat also has an old granary that belonged to the Benedictine priory , and a 16th @-@ century commandery built by the Knights Hospitaller . 
 The synagogue was built in 1890 . Its architecture is typical of the region , with a square shape and discreet neo @-@ romanesque ornaments . Its cupola was destroyed in 1940 by the Nazis and never rebuilt . The Jewish cemetery , located outside the old town , was opened in 1622 . It has several 18th century gravestones showing a Christian artistic influence . 
 = = = Civil and military architecture = = = 
 The old town comprises a large number of medieval and Renaissance buildings . The quai des <unk> ( " tanners ' quay " ) is one of the most picturesque streets in Alsace . A stream used to flow in the middle of the street until the beginning of the 20th century , the relic of a former noxious @-@ smelling trade , since tanning required large amounts of flowing water for treating and washing animal skins . Most of the old tanner houses date back to the Middle Ages and have a tall attic to provide a ventilated space for drying leather . In the neighbouring streets , rue des <unk> ( " geese street " ) and rue des Veaux ( " calf street " ) , many houses were covered with a coat of plaster in the 19th century in order to hide the timbering , which was considered too rustic . 
 Several hôtels <unk> ( large townhouses ) date from the Renaissance . Most of them have oriel windows that are characteristic of German Renaissance architecture . The grandest of these hôtels belonged to the <unk> abbey and it has a large three @-@ story granary . The Ziegler house has a beautiful oriel that shows the interest of the elite of that time in Antiquity . The oriel partly reflects Vitruvius 's architectural legacy and displays the portraits of four key figures of Antiquity . Baroque architecture is visible on some later hôtels dating from the 17th and 18th century . French classical architecture and its main feature , the mansard roof , were largely employed in the 18th century . To reduce costs , buildings were still built with timber framing , but as this technique was considered too Germanic and rustic , they were often covered with a rendering imitating stone . 
 The German period ( 1870 – 1918 ) left some examples of <unk> in the city 's architecture . This prestige @-@ oriented style is a mixture of various earlier styles , including Romanesque , Gothic and neoclassical . Noteworthy are the post office ( 1884 ) , the courthouse ( 1900 ) , the lycée <unk> ( 1913 ) and the water tower ( 1906 ) . The latter ( height : 50 m ( 160 ft ) ) was largely inspired by the water tower in Deventer , Netherlands . 
 The medieval city walls , built in several stages between the 13th and the 16th century , were torn down after the French annexation in the 17th century . However , four towers escaped destruction . The Tour des <unk> ( " witches ' tower " ) , which served as a gate and a jail , is the tallest . The Tour de l <unk> ( " clock tower " ) was also originally part of a gate . The clock and the elaborate roof were added in 1614 . Two much smaller towers can also be seen , one near the Ill river and another integrated into a later house . All these remains date from the 13th century . 
 New walls were built by <unk> and Vauban in the 17th century . They were in their turn destroyed in 1874 . Only small portions survive : two bastions and the Porte de Strasbourg ( " Strasbourg gate " ) , a good example of French architecture under Louis XIV . Sélestat still has two old arsenals , Sainte @-@ Barbe on the main square ( 1470 ) and Saint @-@ Hilaire ( 1518 ) . The first , with a large crenelated gable , is a fine example of Gothic architecture . 
 = = = Illwald forest = = = 
 The Illwald forest was designated a regional nature reserve in 2013 . It covers 1 @,@ 855 hectares ( 4 @,@ 584 acres ) , almost half of the territory of Sélestat , and is one of the largest riparian forests in France . It lies on the Ill , which forms a complex hydrographic network there . The site is subject to flooding and it is characteristic of the Grand <unk> , a flat region located between the Ill and the Rhine that serves as a natural spillway for the two rivers . 
 Common trees are oaks , willows and alders , which tolerate wet soils . Because the phreatic table is very close to the surface , soils hardly freeze in winter and drought rarely occurs in summer . The nature reserve also has meadows and reed beds . Common animals include a large variety of birds ( storks , curlews , harriers ) , amphibians and mammals ( beavers ) . The reserve is home to the largest fallow deer population in France . This animal was introduced to the area in 1854 . 
 The Illwald contains three chapels that were originally pilgrimage destinations . The <unk> chapel was built by Jesuits in 1683 ; Our Lady of the Oaks dates back to the 15th century but it was rebuilt after a fire in 1920 ; Our Lady of Peace was built in 1960 , and St. Anthony was founded in 1280 but rebuilt in 1930 . 
 = = = Cultural institutions and events = = = 
 Sélestat is the seat of the Agence <unk> d 'Alsace ( " cultural agency of Alsace " , ACA ) since 1976 . Since 1982 , Sélestat is the seat of the FRAC Alsace , the Alsace branch of the Fonds régional d 'art <unk> ( " Regional Contemporary art fund " ) , administered by the ACA . A <unk> dedicated to contemporary art takes place every two year in autumn since 1984 . It has welcomed artists like Daniel Buren , Ben <unk> , Sarkis <unk> and Agnès Varda . Since 2006 , Sélestat is the seat of the Pôle <unk> d <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , the " Rhenish inter @-@ départemental center for archaeology " , which conducts and documents archaeological field surveys and excavations in Alsace . 
 Every year since 1927 , Sélestat has organised a large flower procession through its old town . The " <unk> <unk> " is one of the biggest floral shows in eastern France . New floats are made each year around a theme and decorated with dahlias only . A carnaval procession is also held in March . It is the remnant of a very old tradition started by the town 's butchers . Sélestat also has festivals dedicated to electronic music ( Epidemic Experience ) , satirical cartoons ( <unk> <unk> ) , a spring fun fair , and a summer <unk> reenactment with a market and a procession . 
 The cultural complex Les <unk> , built by Rudy <unk> , was inaugurated in 2000 . It serves as the town 's concert and performances hall , as well as for exhibitions , commercial fairs and weddings . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Sélestat Alsace Handball is a noted French handball club . It was founded in 1967 . FC Sélestat , the football club , was founded in 1906 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Born in Sélestat = = = 
 Martin Bucer , German Protestant reformer 
 Fabienne Keller , French politician 
 Eugène <unk> , French surgeon 
 Heinrich Kramer , German inquisitor 
 Johannes <unk> , German printer 
 Beatus Rhenanus , German humanist 
 Jakob <unk> , German humanist 
 = = = Connected to Sélestat = = = 
 Ludwig Dringenberg ( died in Sélestat ) 
 Thierry <unk> ( played professionally for Sélestat ) 
 François Ignace Schaal ( died in Sélestat ) 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Sélestat is twinned with four European towns . 
 <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Sambre , Belgium , since 1959 ( merged with Charleroi in 1977 ) 
 Waldkirch , Germany , since 1966 
 <unk> , Switzerland , since 1988 
 <unk> , Austria , since 2006 
 = Symphonic poems ( Liszt ) = 
 The symphonic poems of the Hungarian composer Franz Liszt are a series of 13 orchestral works , numbered <unk> – 107 . The first 12 were composed between 1848 and 1858 ( though some use material conceived earlier ) ; the last , Von der <unk> bis zum Grabe ( From the Cradle to the Grave ) , followed in 1882 . These works helped establish the genre of orchestral program music — compositions written to illustrate an extra @-@ musical plan derived from a play , poem , painting or work of nature . They inspired the symphonic poems of Bedřich Smetana , Antonín Dvořák , Richard Strauss and others . 
 Liszt 's intent , according to musicologist Hugh MacDonald , was for these single @-@ movement works " to display the traditional logic of symphonic thought . " In other words , Liszt wanted these works to display a complexity in their interplay of themes similar to that usually reserved for the opening movement of the Classical symphony ; this principal self @-@ contained section was normally considered the most important in the larger whole of the symphony in terms of academic achievement and musical architecture . At the same time , Liszt wanted to incorporate the abilities of program music to inspire listeners to imagine scenes , images , or moods . To capture these dramatic and evocative qualities while achieving the scale of an opening movement , he combined elements of overture and symphony in a modified sonata design . The composition of the symphonic poems proved daunting . They underwent a continual process of creative experimentation that included many stages of composition , rehearsal and revision to reach a balance of musical form . 
 Aware that the public appreciated instrumental music with context , Liszt provided written prefaces for nine of his symphonic poems . However , Liszt 's view of the symphonic poem tended to be evocative , using music to create a general mood or atmosphere rather than to illustrate a narrative or describe something literally . In this regard , Liszt authority Humphrey Searle suggests that he may have been closer to his contemporary Hector Berlioz than to many who would follow him in writing symphonic poems . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to cultural historian Hannu Salmi , classical music began to gain public prominence in Western Europe in the latter 18th century through the establishment of concerts by musical societies in cities such as Leipzig and the subsequent press coverage of these events . This was a consequence of the Industrial Revolution , according to music critic and historian Harold C. Schonberg , which brought changes to the early 19th @-@ century lifestyles of the working masses . The lower and middle classes began to take an interest in the arts , which previously had been enjoyed mostly by the clergy and aristocracy . In the 1830s , concert halls were few , and orchestras served mainly in the production of operas — symphonic works were considered far lower in importance . However , the European music scene underwent a transformation in the 1840s . As the role of religion diminished , Salmi asserts , 19th @-@ century culture remained a religious one and the attendance of the arts in historical or similarly impressive surroundings " may still have generated a rapture akin to experiencing the sacred . " Schonberg , cultural historian Peter Cay and musicologist Alan Walker add that , while aristocrats still held private musical events , public concerts grew as institutions for the middle class , which was growing prosperous and could now afford to attend . As interest burgeoned , these concerts were performed at a rapidly increasing number of venues . Programs often ran over three hours , " even if the content was thin : two or more symphonies , two overtures , vocal and instrumental numbers , duets , a concerto . " Roughly half of the presented music was vocal in nature . Symphonies by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , Joseph Haydn or Ludwig van Beethoven usually opened or concluded concerts , and " while these works were revered as models of great music , they were ultimately less popular than the arias and scenes from operas and oratorios that stood prominently in the middle of these concerts . " 
 Meanwhile , the future of the symphony genre was coming into doubt . Musicologist Mark Evan Bonds writes , " Even symphonies by [ such ] well @-@ known composers of the early 19th century as <unk> , Rossini , Cherubini , <unk> , Czerny , Clementi , Weber and Moscheles were perceived in their own time as standing in the symphonic shadow of Haydn , Mozart , Beethoven , or some combination of the three . " While many composers continued to write symphonies during the 1820s and 30s , " there was a growing sense that these works were aesthetically far inferior to Beethoven 's .... The real question was not so much whether symphonies could still be written , but whether the genre could continue to flourish and grow as it had over the previous half @-@ century in the hands of Haydn , Mozart and Beethoven . On this count , there were varying degrees of skepticism but virtually no real optimism . " 
 The crux of the issue , Bonds asserts , " was never really one of style ... but rather of generic conception . " Between his Third and Seventh Symphonies , Beethoven had pushed the symphony well beyond the boundaries of entertainment into those of moral , political and philosophical statement . By adding text and voices in his Ninth Symphony , he not only redefined the genre but also called into question whether instrumental music could truly be superior to vocal music . The Ninth , Bonds says , in fact became the catalyst that fueled debate about the symphony genre . Hector Berlioz was the only composer " able to grapple successfully with Beethoven 's legacy . " However , Felix Mendelssohn , Robert Schumann and Niels Gade also achieved successes with their symphonies , putting at least a temporary stop to the debate as to whether the genre was dead . Regardless , composers increasingly turned to the " more compact form " of the concert overture " as a vehicle within which to blend musical , narrative and pictoral ideas " ; examples included Mendelssohn 's overtures A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1826 ) and The Hebrides ( 1830 ) . 
 Franz Liszt , a Hungarian composer , had attempted to write a Revolutionary Symphony as early as 1830 ; however , his focus for the early part of his adult life was mostly on his performing career . By 1847 , Liszt was famous throughout Europe as a virtuoso pianist . " Lisztomania " swept across Europe , the emotional charge of his recitals making them " more like séances than serious musical events " , and the reaction of many of his listeners could be characterized as hysterical . Musicologist Alan Walker says , " Liszt was a natural phenomenon , and people were swayed by him .... With his mesmeric personality and long mane of flowing hair , he created a striking stage presence . And there were many witnesses to testify that his playing did indeed raise the mood of an audience to a level of mystical ecstasy . " The demands of concert life " reached exponential proportions " and " every public appearance led to demands for a dozen others . " Liszt desired to compose music , such as large @-@ scale orchestral works , but lacked the time to do so as a travelling virtuoso . In September 1847 , Liszt gave his last public recital as a paid artist and announced his retirement from the concert platform . He settled in Weimar , where he had been made its honorary music director in 1842 , to work on his compositions . 
 Weimar was a small town that held many attractions for Liszt . Two of Germany 's greatest men of letters , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schiller , had both lived there . As one of the cultural centers of Germany , Weimar boasted a theater and an orchestra plus its own painters , poets and scientists . The University of Jena was also nearby . Most importantly , the town 's patroness was the Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna , the sister of Tsar Nicholas I of Russia . " This triple alliance of court , theater and academia was difficult to resist . " The town also received its first railway line in 1848 , which gave Liszt relatively quick access from there to the rest of Germany . 
 = = Inventing the symphonic poem = = 
 Liszt desired to expand single @-@ movement works beyond the concert overture form . As he himself said , " New wine demands new bottles , " and as Alan Walker points out , the " language of music was changing ; it seemed pointless to Liszt to contain it in forms that were almost 100 years old . " The music of overtures is to inspire listeners to imagine scenes , images , or moods ; Liszt intended to combine those programmatic qualities with a scale and musical complexity normally reserved for the opening movement of Classical symphonies . The opening movement , with its interplay of contrasting themes under sonata form , was normally considered the most important part of the symphony . To achieve his objectives , he needed a more flexible method of developing musical themes than sonata form would allow , but one that would preserve the overall unity of a musical composition . 
 Liszt found his method through two compositional practices , which he used in his symphonic poems . The first practice was cyclic form , a procedure established by Beethoven in which certain movements are not only linked but actually reflect one another 's content . Liszt took Beethoven 's practice one step further , combining separate movements into a single @-@ movement cyclic structure . Many of Liszt 's mature works follow this pattern , of which Les préludes is one of the best @-@ known examples . The second practice was thematic transformation , a type of variation in which one theme is changed , not into a related or subsidiary theme but into something new , separate and independent . Thematic transformation , like cyclic form , was nothing new in itself ; it had already been used by Mozart and Haydn . In the final movement of his Ninth Symphony , Beethoven had transformed the theme of the " Ode to Joy " into a Turkish march . Weber and Berlioz had also transformed themes , and Schubert used thematic transformation to bind together the movements of his Wanderer Fantasy , a work that had a tremendous influence on Liszt . However , Liszt perfected the creation of significantly longer formal structures solely through thematic transformation , not only in the symphonic poems but in other works such as his Second Piano Concerto and his Piano Sonata in B minor . In fact , when a work had to be shortened , Liszt tended to cut sections of conventional musical development and preserve sections of thematic transformation . 
 Between 1845 and 1847 , Belgian @-@ French composer César Franck wrote an orchestral piece based on Victor Hugo 's poem Ce qu 'on <unk> sur la montagne . The work exhibits characteristics of a symphonic poem , and some musicologists , such as Norman Demuth and Julien <unk> , consider it the first of its genre , preceding Liszt 's compositions . However , Franck did not publish or perform his piece ; neither did he set about defining the genre . Liszt 's determination to explore and promote the symphonic poem gained him recognition as the genre 's inventor . 
 Until he coined the term " symphonic poem " , Liszt introduced several of these new orchestral works as overtures ; in fact , some of the poems were initially overtures or preludes for other works , only later being expanded or rewritten past the confines of the overture form . The first version of Tasso , Liszt stated , was an incidental overture for Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's 1790 drama Torquato Tasso , performed for the Weimar Goethe Centenary Festival . Orpheus was first performed in Weimar on February 16 , 1854 as a prelude to Christoph Willibald Gluck 's opera Orfeo ed Euridice . Likewise , Hamlet started out in 1858 as a prelude to the Shakespearean tragedy . Liszt first used the term " <unk> Dichtung " ( symphonic poem ) in public at a concert in Weimar on April 19 , 1854 to describe Tasso . Five days later , he used the term " poèmes <unk> " in a letter to Hans von Bülow to describe Les preludes and Orpheus . 
 = = Composition process = = 
 Particularly striking in his symphonic poems is Liszt 's approach to musical form . As purely musical structures , they do not follow a strict presentation and development of musical themes as they would under sonata form . Instead , they follow a loose episodic pattern , in which motifs — recurring melodies associated with a subject — are thematically transformed in a manner similar to that later made famous by Richard Wagner . <unk> , where themes are normally restated after they are combined and contrasted in development , are foreshortened , while codas , where pieces of music generally wind to a close , are greatly enlarged to a size and scope that can affect the listener 's concept of the themes . Themes shuffle into new and unexpected patterns of order , and three- or four @-@ movement structures roll into one in a continual process of creative experimentation . 
 Part of this creative experimentation was a trial @-@ and @-@ error approach . Liszt constructed compositions with varying sections of music not necessarily having distinct beginnings and ends . He sketched sections , sometimes without fully completing them , on a small number of staves with some indication of the orchestration . After an assistant — August Conradi from 1848 to 1849 , Joachim Raff from 1850 to 1853 — had realized Liszt 's ideas and provided a score of an acceptable standard , Liszt would then make further revisions ; he moved sections to form different structural relationships , and modified connective materials or composed them anew , completing the piece of music . The score was copied , then tried out in rehearsals with the <unk> Court orchestra and further changes made in the light of practical experience . Many years later , Liszt reminisced how his compositional development hinged on hearing an orchestra perform his works : " I needed to hear them in order to get an idea of them . " He added that it was much more for this reason , and not simply for securing a public for his own works , that he promoted them in Weimar and elsewhere . After many such stages of composition , rehearsal and revision , Liszt might reach a version where the musical form seemed balanced and he was satisfied . However , it was his habit to write modifications to already printed scores . From his perspective , his compositions remained " works in progress " as he continued to reshape , rework , or add and subtract material . In some instances , a composition could exist in four or five versions simultaneously . 
 Tasso , based on the life of sixteenth @-@ century Italian poet , Torquato Tasso , is a perfect example of both Liszt 's working method and his achievements based on restless experimentation . The 1849 version following a conventional overture layout , divided into a slow section ( " Lament " ) and a fast one ( " Triumph " ) . Even with this division , the entire work was actually a set of variations on a single melody — a folk hymn sung to Liszt by a gondolier in Venice in the late 1830s . Among the most significant revisions Liszt made was the addition of a middle section in the vein of a minuet . The theme of the minuet was , again , a variant of the gondolier 's folk hymn , thus becoming another example of thematic transformation . Calmer than either of the outer sections , it was intended to depict Tasso 's more stable years in the employment of the Este family in Ferrara . In a margin note , Liszt informs the conductor that the orchestra " assumes a dual role " in this section ; strings play a self @-@ contained piece based on the original version of the gondolier 's hymn while woodwinds play another based on the variation used in the minuet . This was very much in the manner of Italian composer Pietro Raimondi , whose contrapuntal mastery was such that he had written three oratorios — Joseph , <unk> and Jacob — which could be performed either individually or together . Liszt made a study of Raimondi 's work but the Italian composer died before Liszt could meet him personally . While the minuet section was probably added to act as a musical bridge between the opening lament and final triumphal sections , it along with other modifications " rendered the ' Tasso Overture ' an overture no longer " . The piece became " far too long and developed " to be considered an overture and was redesignated a symphonic poem . 
 = = Raff 's role = = 
 When Liszt started writing symphonic poems , " he had very little experience in handling an orchestra ... his knowledge of the technique of instrumentation was defective and he had as yet composed hardly anything for the orchestra . " For these reasons he relied first on his assistants August Conradi and Joachim Raff to fill the gaps in his knowledge and find his " orchestral voice " . Raff , " a gifted composer with an imaginative grasp of the orchestra " , offered close assistance to Liszt . Also helpful were the virtuosi present at that time in the <unk> Court orchestra , such as trombonist Moritz <unk> , harpist Jeanne Pohl , concertmaster Joseph Joachim and violinist Edmund Singer . " [ Liszt ] mixed daily with these musicians , and their discussions must have been filled with ' shop talk . ' " Both Singer and cellist Bernhard Cossmann were widely experienced orchestral players who probably knew the different instrumental effects a string section could produce — knowledge that Liszt would have found invaluable , and about which he might have had many discussions with the two men . With such a range of talent from which to learn , Liszt may have actually mastered orchestration reasonably quickly . By 1853 , he felt he no longer needed Raff 's assistance and their professional association ended in 1856 . Also , in 1854 Liszt received a specially designed instrument called a " piano @-@ organ " from the firm of Alexandre and fils in Paris . This huge instrument , a combination of piano and organ , was basically a one @-@ piece orchestra that contained three keyboards , eight registers , a pedal board and a set of pipes that reproduced the sounds of all the wind instruments . With it , Liszt could try out various instrumental combinations at his leisure as a further aid for his orchestration . 
 While Raff was able to offer " practical suggestions [ in orchestration ] which were of great value to Liszt " , there may have been " a basic misunderstanding " of the nature of their collaboration . Liszt wanted to learn more about instrumentation and acknowledged Raff 's greater expertise in this area . Hence , he gave Raff piano sketches to orchestrate , just as he had done earlier with Conradi — " so that he might rehearse them , reflect on them , and then , as his confidence in the orchestra grew , change them . " Raff disagreed , having the impression that Liszt wanted him on equal terms as a full collaborator . While attending an 1850 rehearsal of Prometheus , he told Bernhard Cossmann , who sat next to him , " Listen to the instrumentation . It is by me . " 
 Raff continued making such claims about his role in Liszt 's compositional process . Some of these accounts , published posthumously by Die Musik in 1902 and 1903 , suggest that he was an equal collaborator with Liszt . Raff 's assertions were supported by Joachim , who had been active in Weimar at approximately the same time as Raff . Walker writes that Joachim later recalled to Raff 's widow " that he had seen Raff ' produce full orchestral scores from piano sketches . ' " Joachim also told Raff 's biographer Andreas Moser that " the E @-@ flat @-@ major Piano Concerto was orchestrated from beginning to end by Raff . " Raff 's and Joachim 's statements effectively questioned the authorship of Liszt 's orchestral music , especially the symphonic poems . This speculation was debased when composer and Liszt scholar Peter Raabe carefully compared all sketches then known of Liszt 's orchestral works with the published versions of the same works . Raabe demonstrated that , regardless of the position with first drafts , or of how much assistance Liszt may have received from Raff or Conradi at that point , every note of the final versions represents Liszt 's intentions . 
 = = <unk> content = = 
 Liszt provided written prefaces for nine of his symphonic poems . His doing so , Alan Walker states , " was a reflection of the historical position in which he found himself . " Liszt was aware these musical works would be experienced not just by select connoisseurs , as might have been the case in previous generations , but also by the general public . In addition , he knew about the public 's fondness for attaching stories to instrumental music , regardless of their source , their relevance to a musical composition or whether the composer had actually sanctioned them . Therefore , in a pre @-@ emptive gesture , Liszt provided context before others could invent one to take its place . Liszt may have also felt that since many of these works were written in new forms , some sort of verbal or written explanation would be welcome to explain their shape . 
 These prefaces have proven atypical in a couple of ways . For one , they do not spell out a specific , step @-@ by @-@ step scenario that the music would follow but rather a general context . Some of them , in fact , are little more than autobiographical asides on what inspired Liszt to compose a piece or what feelings he was trying to inspire through it . While these insights could prove " both useful and interesting " in themselves , Walker admits , will they aid listeners to " <unk> the music that follows ? " For Liszt , Walker concludes , the " <unk> of a detailed program is simply not an issue . " Moreover , Liszt wrote these prefaces long after he had composed the music . This was the complete opposite of other composers , who wrote their music to fit a pre @-@ existing program . For both these reasons , Walker suggests , Liszt 's prefaces could be called " programmes about music " with equal logic or validity . He adds that the prefaces might not have entirely been of Liszt 's idea or doing , since evidence exists that his then @-@ companion Princess Carolyne zu Sayn @-@ Wittgenstein helped shape or create them . 
 Overall , Walker concludes , " Posterity may have overestimated the importance of extra @-@ musical thought in Liszt 's symphonic poems . We would not want to be without his prefaces , of course , nor any other that he made about the origins of his music ; but we should not follow them slavishly , for the simple reason that the symphonic poems do not follow them slavishly either . " Hugh MacDonald concurs that Liszt " held an idealized view of the symphonic poem " as being evocative rather than representational . " He only rarely achieved in his symphonic poems the directness and subtle timing that narrative requires , " MacDonald explains ; he generally focused more on expressing poetic ideas by setting a mood or atmosphere , refraining on the whole from narrative description or pictorial realism . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Liszt composed his symphonic poems during a period of great debate among musicians in central Europe and Germany , known as the War of the Romantics . While Beethoven 's work was admired universally , conservatives that included Johannes Brahms and members of the Leipzig Conservatory considered it unsurpassable . Liberals such as Liszt , Wagner and others of the New German School saw Beethoven 's innovations as a beginning in music , not an end . In this climate , Liszt had emerged as a lightning @-@ rod for the avant @-@ garde . Even with the innovative music being written by Wagner and Berlioz , it was Liszt , Walker says , " who was making all the noise and attracting the most attention " through his musical compositions , polemic writings , conducting and teaching . 
 Aware of the potential for controversy , Liszt wrote , " The barometer is hardly set on praise for me at the moment . I expect quite a hard downpour of rain when the symphonic poems appear . " Joseph Joachim , who in his time in Weimar had found Liszt 's workshop rehearsals and the trial @-@ and @-@ error process practiced in them to be wearisome , was dismayed at what he considered their lack of creativity . Vienna music critic Eduard Hanslick found even the term " <unk> Dichtung " contradictory and offensive ; he wrote against them with vehemence after he had heard only one , Les préludes . Surgeon Theodor <unk> , who was also a musical friend of Brahms , wrote of them , " This morning [ Brahms ] and Kirchner played the Symphonic Poems ( sic ) of Liszt on two pianos ... music of hell , and can 't even be called music — toilet paper music ! I finally vetoed Liszt on medical grounds and we purged ourselves with Brahms 's [ piano arrangement of the ] G Major String Sextet . " Wagner was more receptive ; he agreed with the idea of the unity of the arts that Liszt espoused and wrote as much in his " Open Letter on Liszt 's Symphonic Poems " . Walker considers this letter seminal in the War of the Romantics : 
 It is filled with penetrating observations about the true nature of " programme music " , about the mysterious relationship between " form " and " content " and about the historical links that bind the symphonic poem to the classical symphony .... The symphonic poems , Wagner assured his readers , were first and foremost music . Their importance for history ... lay in the fact that Liszt had discovered a way of creating his material from the potential essence of the other arts .... Wagner 's central observations are so accurate ... that we can only assume that there had been a number of discussions between [ Liszt and Wagner ] as to what exactly a " symphonic poem " really was . 
 Such was the controversy over these works that two points were overlooked by the critics . First , Liszt 's own attitude toward program music was derived from Beethoven 's Pastoral Symphony , and he would have likely argued that his music , like the Pastoral , was " more the expression of feeling than painting . " Second , more conservative composers such as Felix Mendelssohn and Brahms had also written program music . Mendelssohn 's The Hebrides Overture could be considered a musical seascape based on autobiographical experience but indistinguishable in musical intent from Liszt 's symphonic poems . By titling the first of his Op. 10 <unk> as " Edward " , Brahms nominated it as the musical counterpart of its old Scottish saga and namesake . This was not the only time Brahms would write program music . 
 Liszt 's new works did not find guaranteed success in their audiences , especially in cities where listeners were accustomed to more conservative music programming . While Liszt had " a solid success " with Prometheus and Orpheus in 1855 when he conducted in Brunswick , the climate for Les Préludes and Tasso that December in Berlin was cooler . His performance of Mazeppa two years later in Leipzig was almost stopped due to hissing from the audience . A similar incident occurred when Hans von Bülow conducted Der Ideale in Berlin in 1859 ; after the performance , the conductor turned on the audience and ordered the demonstrators to leave , " as it is not customary to hiss in this hall . " Matters improved somewhat in the following decades , thanks to the efforts of Liszt disciples such as Bülow , Carl <unk> , Leopold Damrosch and Karl Klindworth . Nevertheless , audiences at the time found the compositions puzzling . 
 The audiences may have been challenged by the works ' complexity , which have also caused problems for musicians . Written in new forms , the symphonic poems used unorthodox time signatures , producing an unusual beat at times . The irregular rhythm proved difficult to play and sounded erratic to listeners . Compared to the mellower harmonies of Mozart 's or Haydn 's symphonies , or many operatic arias of the time , the symphonic poem 's advanced harmonies could produce harsh or awkward music . Due to its use of unusual key signatures , the symphonic poem had many sharp and flat notes , more than a standard musical work . The greater number of notes posed a challenge to musicians , who have to vary the pitch of the notes in accordance with the score . The quick fluctuations in the speed of the music were another factor in the symphonic poem 's complexity . The constant use of chamber @-@ music textures , which are produced by having single players perform extended solo passages or having small groups play ensemble passages , put a stress on the orchestra ; the mistakes of the solo artist or small groups would not be " covered up " by the mass sound of the orchestra and were obvious to everyone . 
 These aspects of the symphonic poem demanded players to have superior caliber , perfect intonation , keen ears and knowledge of the roles of their orchestra members . The complexity of the symphonic poems may have been one reason that Liszt urged other conductors to " hold aloof " from the works until they were prepared to deal with the challenges . Most orchestras of small towns at that time were not capable of meeting the demands of this music . Contemporary orchestras also faced another challenge when playing Liszt 's symphonic poems for the first time . Liszt kept his works on manuscripts , distributing them to the orchestra on his tour . Some parts of the manuscripts were so heavily corrected that players found it difficult to decipher them , let alone play them well . The symphonic poems were considered such a financial risk that orchestral parts for many of them were not published until the 1880s . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With the exception of Les préludes , none of the symphonic poems have entered the standard repertoire , though critics suggest that the best of them — Prometheus , Hamlet and Orpheus — are worth further listening . Musicologist Hugh MacDonald writes , " Unequal in scope and achievement though they are , they looked forward at times to more modern developments and sowed the seeds of a rich crop of music in the two succeeding generations . " Speaking of the genre itself , MacDonald adds that , although the symphonic poem is related to opera in its aesthetics , it effectively supplanted opera and sung music by becoming " the most sophisticated development of programme music in the history of the genre . " Liszt authority Humphrey Searle essentially concurs with MacDonald , writing that Liszt " wished to expound philosophical and humanistic ideas which were of the greatest importance to him . " These ideas were not only connected with Liszt 's personal problems as an artist , but they also coincided with explicit problems being addressed by writers and painters of the era . 
 In developing the symphonic poem , Liszt " satisfied three of the principal aspirations of 19th century music : to relate music to the world outside , to integrate multi @-@ movement forms ... and to elevate instrumental programme music to a level higher than that of opera , the genre previously regarded as the highest mode of musical expression . " In fulfilling these needs , the symphonic poems played a major role , widening the scope and expressive power of the advanced music of its time . According to music historian Alan Walker , " Their historical importance is undeniable ; both Sibelius and Richard Strauss were influenced by them , and adapted and developed the genre in their own way . For all their faults , these pieces offer many examples of the pioneering spirit for which Liszt is celebrated . " 
 = = List of works = = 
 In chronological order the symphonic poems are as follows , though the published numbering differs as shown : 
 No. 1 Ce qu 'on <unk> sur la montagne , after Victor Hugo ( 1848 – 49 ; originally orchestrated by Joachim Raff , third orchestral version by Liszt , 1854 ) 
 No. 3 Les préludes , after Lamartine ( 1848 ) based on the prelude to the cantata Les quatre elements ( 1845 ) 
 No. 2 Tasso , Lamento e <unk> , after Byron ( 1849 from earlier sketches , orchestrated by August Conradi and Raff ; expanded and orchestrated by Liszt , 1854 ) 
 No. 5 Prometheus ( 1850 , originally overture to Choruses from Herder 's Prometheus Unbound ) 
 No. 8 <unk> funèbre ( 1849 – 50 ) ( based on the first movement of the unfinished Revolutionary Symphony of 1830 ) 
 No. 6 Mazeppa , after Victor Hugo ( 1851 ) 
 No. 7 <unk> ( <unk> Sounds ) ( 1853 ) 
 No. 4 Orpheus ( 1853 – 4 ) 
 No. 9 Hungaria ( 1854 ) 
 No. 11 <unk> ( Battle of the Huns ) , after the painting by Kaulbach ( 1856 – 7 ) 
 No. 12 Die Ideale , after the poem by Schiller ( 1857 ) 
 No. 10 Hamlet , after the drama by Shakespeare ( 1858 ) 
 No. 13 Von der <unk> bis zum Grabe ( From the Cradle to the Grave ) ( 1881 – 2 ) 
 = = Related works = = 
 Liszt 's Faust and Dante symphonies share the same aesthetic stance as the symphonic poems , though they are multi @-@ movement works that employ a chorus , their compositional methods and aims are alike . Two Episodes from Lenau 's Faust should also be considered with the symphonic poems . The first , " Der <unk> Zug " , is closely descriptive of Faust as he watches a passing procession of pilgrims by night . The second , " Der Tanz in der <unk> " , which is also known as the First Mephisto Waltz , tells of Mephistopheles seizing a violin at a village dance . 
 = Mary Jo Kilroy = 
 Mary Jo Kilroy ( born April 30 , 1949 ) is the former U.S. Representative for Ohio 's 15th congressional district , serving from 2009 until 2011 . She is a member of the Democratic Party from Ohio . In her first term she introduced a bill to lend $ 20 million per year to small businesses ( <unk> ) and an amendment to assign liability to credit reporting agencies . She also contributed to legislation on executive pay . She was defeated in her November 2 , 2010 re @-@ election bid . In 2012 she ran in the newly redrawn , Columbus @-@ based 3rd congressional district but lost in the primary . 
 She is an attorney and a former two @-@ term County Commissioner of Franklin County , Ohio , which includes the capital city of Columbus and some of its surrounding suburban and rural areas . Previously , she served two four @-@ year terms on the Columbus School Board after working in private practice . 
 In both the 2008 and 2006 United States House of Representatives elections , Kilroy was involved in close elections for Ohio 's 15th congressional district . She lost in 2006 after an election that required the counting of absentee ballots and election recounts . However , after the incumbent retired , she won a similarly close election in 2008 . In both cases , she was behind after the Election Day vote tabulations , but made up significant ground with belated absentee ballot voting results . The 2010 election race was widely followed in the mainstream press as a race that the Republicans were targeting . 
 = = Early life , education , and legal career = = 
 Born in Euclid , Ohio , Kilroy grew up in Cleveland . The daughter of a pipe fitter , she paid her way through college by working at hospitals , as a waitress and as a counselor . She earned her bachelor 's degree in political science from Cleveland State University in 1977 and her J.D. from The Ohio State University in 1980 . 
 Prior to practicing law as a partner with her husband at the plaintiffs law firm of Handelman and Kilroy , Kilroy was a social worker , hospital technician and tutor . In 1988 , as chairman of her local branch of the National Lawyers Guild , Kilroy signed a letter urging Columbus Mayor Dana G. Rinehart to support an order in favor of creating an equal employment opportunity chief to handle race relations issues in the Columbus Division of Police . 
 = = Local politics = = 
 In 1991 , she ran for an eighteen @-@ person contest for four Columbus School Board seats on a platform that included proposing to lengthen the scholastic day from six and a half hours to eight . Kilroy was one of four candidates to receive the endorsement of the Franklin County Democratic Party . On November 5 , 1991 , she placed behind incumbent Columbus School Board President , Sharlene Morgan , natural resources expert Robert Teater , past board member Bill Moss , which made her the fourth among the eighteen candidates and the final elected member . 
 By her second year on the seven member board , she was a unanimous selection to be second in command as Columbus School Board Vice President . She was unanimously re @-@ elected the following year . In her fourth year of service on the board beginning on January 3 , 1995 , she lost a 4 – 3 election for Columbus School Board President when the incumbent , Robert W. Teater , cast a tie @-@ breaking vote for himself . She subsequently declined the vice presidency . During her fourth year , she unsuccessfully attempted to include a sexual orientation policy in the school district 's nondiscrimination policy that would protect homosexuals . She was reelected in 1995 . In 1996 , she contested Ohio 's 16th district seat in the Ohio State Senate with Eugene Watts , but she lost by a 51 @.@ 80 – 37 @.@ 46 % margin in a five @-@ way contest . 
 Still on the school board , she resumed her vice presidency on January 5 , 1998 . She ascended to the Columbus School Board President position for her eighth year of service to the board on January 4 , 1999 . During this eighth year , she decided not to run for re @-@ election to a third term in order to spend more time with her family . 
 On January 6 , 2000 , she won one of the Franklin County Democratic Party 's two nominations for one of two seats to the three member Board of County Commissioners . The board oversees the Franklin County government 's $ 1 @.@ 3 billion budget and programs that range from child welfare to job training to minor league baseball . On November 7 , 2000 , she became the first Democrat elected as a Franklin County Commissioner in eight years . She won by a 48 – 47 % margin by capturing 55 of 74 wards and 90 % of the vote in six inner @-@ city wards . She served as the Board 's lone Democrat until she was re @-@ elected to a second four @-@ year term and Paula Brooks was elected on November 2 , 2004 , to give Democrats the majority for the first time in twenty years . In her re @-@ election she won by a 28 @,@ 500 vote margin , which was substantially more than the 4 @,@ 300 vote margin in 2000 . During both elections , she won despite being widely outspent . She assumed the role of Board President on January 10 , 2005 . 
 Governing magazine named Franklin County as being among the five best @-@ managed counties in the country during Kilroy 's tenure . Also , Kilroy was named the Public Official of the Year by the Central Ohio Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers as a result of her role in creating the Columbus / Franklin County Affordable Housing Trust . Her term as commissioner was not without controversy , however . Kilroy came under fire during the awarding of contracts for the construction of Huntington Park because the lowest bid for the concrete was rejected in favor of a higher bid by a union shop . Eventually , the issue went to court and the commissioners decided to award the contract to the low bidder . She lost the 2006 race for U.S. Representative from Ohio 's 15th congressional district to Deborah Pryce , 50 @.@ 2 % – 49 @.@ 7 % . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 2006 
 Franklin County , which has elected Kilroy twice , makes up 87 % of the 15th Congressional district . The 2006 race in Ohio 's 15th district gained significant national attention as it was seen as one of a handful of seats that Democrats had an opportunity to gain from Republicans . As of mid @-@ October , the race was generally considered to be a toss @-@ up largely due to incumbent Representative Pryce 's leadership in the Republican Party . Pryce had not had a close contest since her first election in 1992 and had garnered 10 % more of the vote than George W. Bush in 2004 . However , Pryce was vulnerable due to Ohio Republican Party ( Bob Taft and Bob Ney ) scandals , the lagging Ohio economy , her association with controversial Dennis Hastert and Mark Foley , and backlash to Republican support of the Iraq War . Another Ohio Republican scandal in the minds of Ohio voters during the 2006 campaign was the <unk> scandal . Pryce and the Republicans had to keep conservative independent , Charles Morrison , off the ballot to have their best shot at success . A month before the election , Pryce was 12 points behind Kilroy . On the eve of the election , some experts , such as Time , considered Pryce the underdog . Kilroy was expected to be the beneficiary of the decade @-@ long migration of conservative voters to suburbs outside of the district . 
 Kilroy made an issue of Pryce 's knowledge of the Foley scandal and the need for Hastert to resign . Kilroy also linked her opponent to the unpopular Republican administration and congressional majority . After Foley resigned following the page scandal , Kilroy attacked Pryce with the conservative religious voters . Kilroy ran radio commercials on Christian and conservative radio stations in an attempt to appeal to family @-@ values @-@ oriented listeners . 
 Two debates were held for this race during the 2006 election cycle . The first took place September 18 , and the second was on October 12 . In the first debate Kilroy and incumbent U.S. Representative , Pryce discussed the war in Iraq , the War on Terror , taxes , social security , the federal deficit and President Bush . In the final week before the election , Pryce attempted to demand another debate . 
 The second debate was marked by a more heated exchange on behalf of both participants . Kilroy referred to Pryce as a " right @-@ wing apologist " and said that " Deborah Pryce continues to distort my record . " Meanwhile , Pryce described her opponent as a " far left fringe Democrat " and said that Kilroy " spews lies and misinformation . " The debate was attended by 400 people at the Ohio State University Fawcett Center and reporters from as far away as Ireland . 
 After regular ballots were counted , Pryce led Kilroy by over 3 @,@ 500 votes with about 19 @,@ 000 provisional ballots outstanding . The Franklin county absentee and provisional ballots were not counted until approximately two weeks after the election . On Monday November 27 , nearly three weeks after Election Day , Pryce was declared the winner by a 1 @,@ 054 vote margin that mandated a recount . After two recounts and all of the votes were counted , Congresswoman Deborah Pryce ( R ) prevailed over Democratic challenger Mary Jo Kilroy . The Franklin County Board of Elections announced the results Monday morning December 11 , 2006 . Pryce ( R ) gained 25 votes and Kilroy ( D ) gained 18 votes in the recount of votes in Franklin , Union , and Madison Counties in Ohio . Pryce won with 50 @.@ 20 % of the vote by a 110 @,@ 739 – 109 @,@ 677 margin . Kilroy felt her campaign was slowed by the early candidacy of fellow Franklin County Commissioner Paula Brooks , who eventually withdrew . Immediately after losing in 2006 , she announced she would recontest the seat in 2008 . 
 2008 
 In August 2007 , incumbent Pryce announced her retirement at the end of her elected term . The Democrats felt that the seat continued to be vulnerable . Kilroy announced her intention to again seek the 15th District seat in 2008 . She ran against Republican Steve Stivers , a State Senator from the 16th District , Libertarian Mark M. Noble , and Independent candidate Don Elijah Eckhart . The race was considered to be one of the most important U.S. House of Representatives races to watch in the country . The last Democrat to hold the 15th district was Robert T. Secrest in the mid @-@ 1960s , but with Republican voters moving out of the district into the northern suburbs of Columbus , Ohio since the 1990s , the district became more evenly matched . 
 In April 2008 , the Sierra Club again endorsed Kilroy 's candidacy due to her history of environmental advocacy and Stivers ' contributions from energy and tobacco companies . During the campaign , Kilroy linked Stivers to big business , bank lobbyists , predatory lending and the financial crisis . Stivers countered by linking Kilroy to liberal media and influence peddling . 
 Stivers led Kilroy by a 129 @,@ 852 – 129 @,@ 703 margin with 100 % of the Election Day precincts counted , but before the provisional ballots were counted . On November 25 , 2008 , Madison and Union counties concluded their absentee , military , and provisional ballot counting and Stivers claimed a net gain resulting in a 594 @-@ vote lead . On December 5 , 2008 , Stivers ' supporters won a ruling in the Ohio Supreme Court that the 1 @,@ 000 provisional ballots that lacked signatures or had names and signatures in the wrong places be thrown out . On December 7 , 2008 , Franklin County Election <unk> completed their final ballot count , which included absentee , military , and provisional ballots received within ten days of Election Day , giving Kilroy a victory margin of 2 @,@ 311 votes over Stivers . This margin exceeds the automatic recount margin of 0 @.@ 5 % . Stivers conceded the race to Kilroy later on Sunday . The late ballots that weighed on the election were of three types : military and overseas absentee ballots postmarked by the time the polls closed Tuesday November 4 and received by November 14 ; domestic absentee ballots postmarked by Monday November 3 that are received by November 14 ; absentee ballots with errors that voters correct by November 14 . 
 Kilroy became the first Democrat to represent the district in 42 years ( since Secrest ) . She is only the second Democrat to represent a significant portion of Columbus since 1967 . The last Democrat to represent the city , Bob <unk> , represented the neighboring 12th District from 1981 to 1983 . 
 2010 
 In June 2009 , Stivers announced his candidacy for a rematch in 2010 . According to an op @-@ ed article in The New York Times , one issue that Stivers and Kilroy have both been vocal about is the prospective repeal of the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which provides direct election of United States Senators . Stivers had <unk> on his support of the repeal after Kilroy made an issue of his stance . The race is one of the most closely watched in the United States House of Representatives elections , 2010 , and it will include a third party candidate . The Republican Party has marked it as one of their targeted races according to a U.S. News & World Report article . Time notes that she may have trouble in her historically Republican district if there is an electoral backlash to spending by the Obama Administration because of her short history of voting along party lines . On November 2 , Stivers won the rematch . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Congresswoman Kilroy introduced legislation including a bill to start a three @-@ year pilot program to lend $ 20 million per year to small businesses ( <unk> ) and introduced an amendment to assign liability to credit reporting agencies which passed . She voted with the Democratic majority for the federal stimulus package , the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 , the cap and trade carbon emissions legislation , and the federal health insurance reform legislation . 
 Kilroy helped shape the Congressional Bill on executive pay that eventually became law by proposing an amendment requiring large institutional investors to reveal how they vote the shares that they own on pay proposals affecting companies that issued those shares . While serving her first term , she felt attached to the cause of health care reform because it had been an emphasis in her electoral platform . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
